{"id": "1164", "revid": "19675780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1164", "title": "Artificial intelligence", "text": "Intelligence of machines\nArtificial intelligence (AI) is the capability of computational systems to perform tasks typically associated with human intelligence, such as learning, reasoning, problem-solving, perception, and decision-making. It is a field of research in computer science that develops and studies methods and software that enable machines to perceive their environment and use learning and intelligence to take actions that maximize their chances of achieving defined goals.\nHigh-profile applications of AI include advanced web search engines (e.g., Google Search); recommendation systems (used by YouTube, Amazon, and Netflix); virtual assistants (e.g., Google Assistant, Siri, and Alexa); autonomous vehicles (e.g., Waymo); generative and creative tools (e.g., language models and AI art); and superhuman play and analysis in strategy games (e.g., chess and Go). However, many AI applications are not perceived as AI: \"A lot of cutting edge AI has filtered into general applications, often without being called AI because once something becomes useful enough and common enough it's not labeled AI anymore.\"\nVarious subfields of AI research are centered around particular goals and the use of particular tools. The traditional goals of AI research include learning, reasoning, knowledge representation, planning, natural language processing, perception, and support for robotics. To reach these goals, AI researchers have adapted and integrated a wide range of techniques, including search and mathematical optimization, formal logic, artificial neural networks, and methods based on statistics, operations research, and economics. AI also draws upon psychology, linguistics, philosophy, neuroscience, and other fields. Some companies, such as OpenAI, Google DeepMind and Meta, aim to create artificial general intelligence (AGI)\u2014AI that can complete virtually any cognitive task at least as well as a human.\nArtificial intelligence was founded as an academic discipline in 1956, and the field went through multiple cycles of optimism throughout its history, followed by periods of disappointment and loss of funding, known as AI winters. Funding and interest vastly increased after 2012 when graphics processing units started being used to accelerate neural networks, and deep learning outperformed previous AI techniques. This growth accelerated further after 2017 with the transformer architecture. In the 2020s, an ongoing period of rapid progress in advanced generative AI became known as the AI boom. Generative AI's ability to create and modify content has led to several unintended consequences and harms. Ethical concerns have been raised about AI's long-term effects and potential existential risks, prompting discussions about regulatory policies to ensure the safety and benefits of the technology.\nGoals.\nThe general problem of simulating (or creating) intelligence has been broken into subproblems. These consist of particular traits or capabilities that researchers expect an intelligent system to display. The traits described below have received the most attention and cover the scope of AI research.\nReasoning and problem-solving.\nEarly researchers developed algorithms that imitated step-by-step reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical deductions. By the late 1980s and 1990s, methods were developed for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics.\nMany of these algorithms are insufficient for solving large reasoning problems because they experience a \"combinatorial explosion\": They become exponentially slower as the problems grow. Even humans rarely use the step-by-step deduction that early AI research could model. They solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgments. Accurate and efficient reasoning is an unsolved problem.\nKnowledge representation.\nKnowledge representation and knowledge engineering allow AI programs to answer questions intelligently and make deductions about real-world facts. Formal knowledge representations are used in content-based indexing and retrieval, scene interpretation, clinical decision support, knowledge discovery (mining \"interesting\" and actionable inferences from large databases), and other areas.\nA knowledge base is a body of knowledge represented in a form that can be used by a program. An ontology is the set of objects, relations, concepts, and properties used by a particular domain of knowledge. Knowledge bases need to represent things such as objects, properties, categories, and relations between objects; situations, events, states, and time; causes and effects; knowledge about knowledge (what we know about what other people know); default reasoning (things that humans assume are true until they are told differently and will remain true even when other facts are changing); and many other aspects and domains of knowledge.\nAmong the most difficult problems in knowledge representation are the breadth of commonsense knowledge (the set of atomic facts that the average person knows is enormous); and the sub-symbolic form of most commonsense knowledge (much of what people know is not represented as \"facts\" or \"statements\" that they could express verbally). There is also the difficulty of knowledge acquisition, the problem of obtaining knowledge for AI applications.\nPlanning and decision-making.\nAn \"agent\" is anything that perceives and takes actions in the world. A rational agent has goals or preferences and takes actions to make them happen. In automated planning, the agent has a specific goal. In automated decision-making, the agent has preferences\u2014there are some situations it would prefer to be in, and some situations it is trying to avoid. The decision-making agent assigns a number to each situation (called the \"utility\") that measures how much the agent prefers it. For each possible action, it can calculate the \"expected utility\": the utility of all possible outcomes of the action, weighted by the probability that the outcome will occur. It can then choose the action with the maximum expected utility.\nIn classical planning, the agent knows exactly what the effect of any action will be. In most real-world problems, however, the agent may not be certain about the situation they are in (it is \"unknown\" or \"unobservable\") and it may not know for certain what will happen after each possible action (it is not \"deterministic\"). It must choose an action by making a probabilistic guess and then reassess the situation to see if the action worked.\nIn some problems, the agent's preferences may be uncertain, especially if there are other agents or humans involved. These can be learned (e.g., with inverse reinforcement learning), or the agent can seek information to improve its preferences. Information value theory can be used to weigh the value of exploratory or experimental actions. The space of possible future actions and situations is typically intractably large, so the agents must take actions and evaluate situations while being uncertain of what the outcome will be.\nA Markov decision process has a transition model that describes the probability that a particular action will change the state in a particular way and a reward function that supplies the utility of each state and the cost of each action. A policy associates a decision with each possible state. The policy could be calculated (e.g., by iteration), be heuristic, or it can be learned.\nGame theory describes the rational behavior of multiple interacting agents and is used in AI programs that make decisions that involve other agents.\nLearning.\nMachine learning is the study of programs that can improve their performance on a given task automatically. It has been a part of AI from the beginning.\nThere are several kinds of machine learning. Unsupervised learning analyzes a stream of data and finds patterns and makes predictions without any other guidance. Supervised learning requires labeling the training data with the expected answers, and comes in two main varieties: classification (where the program must learn to predict what category the input belongs in) and regression (where the program must deduce a numeric function based on numeric input).\nIn reinforcement learning, the agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones. The agent learns to choose responses that are classified as \"good\". Transfer learning is when the knowledge gained from one problem is applied to a new problem. Deep learning is a type of machine learning that runs inputs through biologically inspired artificial neural networks for all of these types of learning.\nComputational learning theory can assess learners by computational complexity, by sample complexity (how much data is required), or by other notions of optimization.\nNatural language processing.\nNatural language processing (NLP) allows programs to read, write and communicate in human languages. Specific problems include speech recognition, speech synthesis, machine translation, information extraction, information retrieval and question answering.\nEarly work, based on Noam Chomsky's generative grammar and semantic networks, had difficulty with word-sense disambiguation unless restricted to small domains called \"micro-worlds\" (due to the common sense knowledge problem). Margaret Masterman believed that it was meaning and not grammar that was the key to understanding languages, and that thesauri and not dictionaries should be the basis of computational language structure.\nModern deep learning techniques for NLP include word embedding (representing words, typically as vectors encoding their meaning), transformers (a deep learning architecture using an attention mechanism), and others. In 2019, generative pre-trained transformer (or \"GPT\") language models began to generate coherent text, and by 2023, these models were able to get human-level scores on the bar exam, SAT test, GRE test, and many other real-world applications.\nPerception.\nMachine perception is the ability to use input from sensors (such as cameras, microphones, wireless signals, active lidar, sonar, radar, and tactile sensors) to deduce aspects of the world. Computer vision is the ability to analyze visual input.\nThe field includes speech recognition, image classification, facial recognition, object recognition, object tracking, and robotic perception.\nSocial intelligence.\nAffective computing is a field that comprises systems that recognize, interpret, process, or simulate human feeling, emotion, and mood. For example, some virtual assistants are programmed to speak conversationally or even to banter humorously; it makes them appear more sensitive to the emotional dynamics of human interaction, or to otherwise facilitate human\u2013computer interaction.\nHowever, this tends to give na\u00efve users an unrealistic conception of the intelligence of existing computer agents. Moderate successes related to affective computing include textual sentiment analysis and, more recently, multimodal sentiment analysis, wherein AI classifies the effects displayed by a videotaped subject.\nGeneral intelligence.\nA machine with artificial general intelligence would be able to solve a wide variety of problems with breadth and versatility similar to human intelligence.\nTechniques.\nAI research uses a wide variety of techniques to accomplish the goals above.\nSearch and optimization.\nAI can solve many problems by intelligently searching through many possible solutions. There are two very different kinds of search used in AI: state space search and local search.\nState space search.\nState space search searches through a tree of possible states to try to find a goal state. For example, planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called means-ends analysis.\nSimple exhaustive searches are rarely sufficient for most real-world problems: the search space (the number of places to search) quickly grows to astronomical numbers. The result is a search that is too slow or never completes. \"Heuristics\" or \"rules of thumb\" can help prioritize choices that are more likely to reach a goal.\nAdversarial search is used for game-playing programs, such as chess or Go. It searches through a tree of possible moves and countermoves, looking for a winning position.\nLocal search.\n Local search uses mathematical optimization to find a solution to a problem. It begins with some form of guess and refines it incrementally.\nGradient descent is a type of local search that optimizes a set of numerical parameters by incrementally adjusting them to minimize a loss function. Variants of gradient descent are commonly used to train neural networks, through the backpropagation algorithm.\nAnother type of local search is evolutionary computation, which aims to iteratively improve a set of candidate solutions by \"mutating\" and \"recombining\" them, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation.\nDistributed search processes can coordinate via swarm intelligence algorithms. Two popular swarm algorithms used in search are particle swarm optimization (inspired by bird flocking) and ant colony optimization (inspired by ant trails).\nLogic.\nFormal logic is used for reasoning and knowledge representation.\nFormal logic comes in two main forms: propositional logic (which operates on statements that are true or false and uses logical connectives such as \"and\", \"or\", \"not\" and \"implies\") and predicate logic (which also operates on objects, predicates and relations and uses quantifiers such as \"\"Every\" \"X\" is a \"Y\"\" and \"There are \"some\" \"X\"s that are \"Y\"s\").\nDeductive reasoning in logic is the process of proving a new statement (conclusion) from other statements that are given and assumed to be true (the premises). Proofs can be structured as proof trees, in which nodes are labelled by sentences, and children nodes are connected to parent nodes by inference rules.\nGiven a problem and a set of premises, problem-solving reduces to searching for a proof tree whose root node is labelled by a solution of the problem and whose leaf nodes are labelled by premises or axioms. In the case of Horn clauses, problem-solving search can be performed by reasoning forwards from the premises or backwards from the problem. In the more general case of the clausal form of first-order logic, resolution is a single, axiom-free rule of inference, in which a problem is solved by proving a contradiction from premises that include the negation of the problem to be solved.\nInference in both Horn clause logic and first-order logic is undecidable, and therefore intractable. However, backward reasoning with Horn clauses, which underpins computation in the logic programming language Prolog, is Turing complete. Moreover, its efficiency is competitive with computation in other symbolic programming languages.\nFuzzy logic assigns a \"degree of truth\" between 0 and 1. It can therefore handle propositions that are vague and partially true.\nNon-monotonic logics, including logic programming with negation as failure, are designed to handle default reasoning. Other specialized versions of logic have been developed to describe many complex domains.\nProbabilistic methods for uncertain reasoning.\nMany problems in AI (including reasoning, planning, learning, perception, and robotics) require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics. Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can make choices and plan, using decision theory, decision analysis, and information value theory. These tools include models such as Markov decision processes, dynamic decision networks, game theory and mechanism design.\nBayesian networks are a tool that can be used for reasoning (using the Bayesian inference algorithm), learning (using the expectation\u2013maximization algorithm), planning (using decision networks) and perception (using dynamic Bayesian networks).\nProbabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing, and finding explanations for streams of data, thus helping perception systems analyze processes that occur over time (e.g., hidden Markov models or Kalman filters).\nClassifiers and statistical learning methods.\nThe simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers (e.g., \"if shiny then diamond\"), on one hand, and controllers (e.g., \"if diamond then pick up\"), on the other hand. Classifiers are functions that use pattern matching to determine the closest match. They can be fine-tuned based on chosen examples using supervised learning. Each pattern (also called an \"observation\") is labeled with a certain predefined class. All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set. When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience.\nThere are many kinds of classifiers in use. The decision tree is the simplest and most widely used symbolic machine learning algorithm. K-nearest neighbor algorithm was the most widely used analogical AI until the mid-1990s, and Kernel methods such as the support vector machine (SVM) displaced k-nearest neighbor in the 1990s.\nThe naive Bayes classifier is reportedly the \"most widely used learner\" at Google, due in part to its scalability.\nNeural networks are also used as classifiers.\nArtificial neural networks.\nAn artificial neural network is based on a collection of nodes also known as artificial neurons, which loosely model the neurons in a biological brain. It is trained to recognise patterns; once trained, it can recognise those patterns in fresh data. There is an input, at least one hidden layer of nodes and an output. Each node applies a function and once the weight crosses its specified threshold, the data is transmitted to the next layer. A network is typically called a deep neural network if it has at least 2 hidden layers.\nLearning algorithms for neural networks use local search to choose the weights that will get the right output for each input during training. The most common training technique is the backpropagation algorithm. Neural networks learn to model complex relationships between inputs and outputs and find patterns in data. In theory, a neural network can learn any function.\nIn feedforward neural networks the signal passes in only one direction. The term perceptron typically refers to a single-layer neural network. In contrast, deep learning uses many layers. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) feed the output signal back into the input, which allows short-term memories of previous input events. Long short-term memory networks (LSTMs) are recurrent neural networks that better preserve longterm dependencies and are less sensitive to the vanishing gradient problem. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) use layers of kernels to more efficiently process local patterns. This local processing is especially important in image processing, where the early CNN layers typically identify simple local patterns such as edges and curves, with subsequent layers detecting more complex patterns like textures, and eventually whole objects.\nDeep learning.\nDeep learning uses several layers of neurons between the network's inputs and outputs. The multiple layers can progressively extract higher-level features from the raw input. For example, in image processing, lower layers may identify edges, while higher layers may identify the concepts relevant to a human such as digits, letters, or faces.\nDeep learning has profoundly improved the performance of programs in many important subfields of artificial intelligence, including computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, image classification, and others. The reason that deep learning performs so well in so many applications is not known as of 2021. The sudden success of deep learning in 2012\u20132015 did not occur because of some new discovery or theoretical breakthrough (deep neural networks and backpropagation had been described by many people, as far back as the 1950s) but because of two factors: the incredible increase in computer power (including the hundred-fold increase in speed by switching to GPUs) and the availability of vast amounts of training data, especially the giant curated datasets used for benchmark testing, such as ImageNet.\nGPT.\nGenerative pre-trained transformers (GPT) are large language models (LLMs) that generate text based on the semantic relationships between words in sentences. Text-based GPT models are pre-trained on a large corpus of text that can be from the Internet. The pretraining consists of predicting the next token (a token being usually a word, subword, or punctuation). Throughout this pretraining, GPT models accumulate knowledge about the world and can then generate human-like text by repeatedly predicting the next token. Typically, a subsequent training phase makes the model more truthful, useful, and harmless, usually with a technique called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). Current GPT models are prone to generating falsehoods called \"hallucinations\". These can be reduced with RLHF and quality data, but the problem has been getting worse for reasoning systems. Such systems are used in chatbots, which allow people to ask a question or request a task in simple text.\nCurrent models and services include ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, Copilot, and Meta AI. Multimodal GPT models can process different types of data (modalities) such as images, videos, sound, and text.\nHardware and software.\nIn the late 2010s, graphics processing units (GPUs) that were increasingly designed with AI-specific enhancements and used with specialized TensorFlow software had replaced previously used central processing unit (CPUs) as the dominant means for large-scale (commercial and academic) machine learning models' training. Specialized programming languages such as Prolog were used in early AI research, but general-purpose programming languages like Python have become predominant.\nThe transistor density in integrated circuits has been observed to roughly double every 18 months\u2014a trend known as Moore's law, named after the Intel co-founder Gordon Moore, who first identified it. Improvements in GPUs have been even faster, a trend sometimes called Huang's law, named after Nvidia co-founder and CEO Jensen Huang.\nApplications.\nAI and machine learning technology is used in most of the essential applications of the 2020s, including: search engines (such as Google Search), targeting online advertisements, recommendation systems (offered by Netflix, YouTube or Amazon), driving internet traffic, targeted advertising (AdSense, Facebook), virtual assistants (such as Siri or Alexa), autonomous vehicles (including drones, ADAS and self-driving cars), automatic language translation (Microsoft Translator, Google Translate), facial recognition (Apple's FaceID or Microsoft's DeepFace and Google's FaceNet) and image labeling (used by Facebook, Apple's Photos and TikTok). The deployment of AI may be overseen by a chief automation officer (CAO).\nHealth and medicine.\nIt has been suggested that AI can overcome discrepancies in funding allocated to different fields of research. \nAlphaFold 2 (2021) demonstrated the ability to approximate, in hours rather than months, the 3D structure of a protein. In 2023, it was reported that AI-guided drug discovery helped find a class of antibiotics capable of killing two different types of drug-resistant bacteria. In 2024, researchers used machine learning to accelerate the search for Parkinson's disease drug treatments. Their aim was to identify compounds that block the clumping, or aggregation, of alpha-synuclein (the protein that characterises Parkinson's disease). They were able to speed up the initial screening process ten-fold and reduce the cost by a thousand-fold.\nGames.\nGame playing programs have been used since the 1950s to demonstrate and test AI's most advanced techniques. Deep Blue became the first computer chess-playing system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Garry Kasparov, on 11 May 1997. In 2011, in a \"Jeopardy!\" quiz show exhibition match, IBM's question answering system, Watson, defeated the two greatest \"Jeopardy!\" champions, Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings, by a significant margin. In March 2016, AlphaGo won 4 out of 5 games of Go in a match with Go champion Lee Sedol, becoming the first computer Go-playing system to beat a professional Go player without handicaps. Then, in 2017, it defeated Ke Jie, who was the best Go player in the world. Other programs handle imperfect-information games, such as the poker-playing program Pluribus. DeepMind developed increasingly generalistic reinforcement learning models, such as with MuZero, which could be trained to play chess, Go, or Atari games. In 2019, DeepMind's AlphaStar achieved grandmaster level in StarCraft II, a particularly challenging real-time strategy game that involves incomplete knowledge of what happens on the map. In 2021, an AI agent competed in a PlayStation Gran Turismo competition, winning against four of the world's best Gran Turismo drivers using deep reinforcement learning. In 2024, Google DeepMind introduced SIMA, a type of AI capable of autonomously playing nine previously unseen open-world video games by observing screen output, as well as executing short, specific tasks in response to natural language instructions.\nMathematics.\nLarge language models, such as GPT-4, Gemini, Claude, Llama or Mistral, are increasingly used in mathematics. These probabilistic models are versatile, but can also produce wrong answers in the form of hallucinations. They sometimes need a large database of mathematical problems to learn from, but also methods such as supervised fine-tuning or trained classifiers with human-annotated data to improve answers for new problems and learn from corrections. A February 2024 study showed that the performance of some language models for reasoning capabilities in solving math problems not included in their training data was low, even for problems with only minor deviations from trained data. One technique to improve their performance involves training the models to produce correct reasoning steps, rather than just the correct result. The Alibaba Group developed a version of its \"Qwen\" models called \"Qwen2-Math\", that achieved state-of-the-art performance on several mathematical benchmarks, including 84% accuracy on the MATH dataset of competition mathematics problems. In January 2025, Microsoft proposed the technique \"rStar-Math\" that leverages Monte Carlo tree search and step-by-step reasoning, enabling a relatively small language model like \"Qwen-7B\" to solve 53% of the AIME 2024 and 90% of the MATH benchmark problems.\nAlternatively, dedicated models for mathematical problem solving with higher precision for the outcome including proof of theorems have been developed such as \"AlphaTensor\", \"AlphaGeometry\", \"AlphaProof\" and \"AlphaEvolve\" all from Google DeepMind, \"Llemma\" from EleutherAI or \"Julius\".\nWhen natural language is used to describe mathematical problems, converters can transform such prompts into a formal language such as Lean to define mathematical tasks. The experimental model \"Gemini Deep Think\" accepts natural language prompts directly and achieved gold medal results in the International Math Olympiad of 2025. \nSome models have been developed to solve challenging problems and reach good results in benchmark tests, others to serve as educational tools in mathematics.\nTopological deep learning integrates various topological approaches.\nFinance.\nFinance is one of the fastest growing sectors where applied AI tools are being deployed: from retail online banking to investment advice and insurance, where automated \"robot advisers\" have been in use for some years.\nAccording to Nicolas Firzli, director of the World Pensions &amp; Investments Forum, it may be too early to see the emergence of highly innovative AI-informed financial products and services. He argues that \"the deployment of AI tools will simply further automatise things: destroying tens of thousands of jobs in banking, financial planning, and pension advice in the process, but I'm not sure it will unleash a new wave of [e.g., sophisticated] pension innovation.\"\nMilitary.\nVarious countries are deploying AI military applications. The main applications enhance command and control, communications, sensors, integration and interoperability. Research is targeting intelligence collection and analysis, logistics, cyber operations, information operations, and semiautonomous and autonomous vehicles. AI technologies enable coordination of sensors and effectors, threat detection and identification, marking of enemy positions, target acquisition, coordination and deconfliction of distributed Joint Fires between networked combat vehicles, both human-operated and autonomous.\nAI has been used in military operations in Iraq, Syria, Israel and Ukraine.\nAgents.\nAI agents are software entities designed to perceive their environment, make decisions, and take actions autonomously to achieve specific goals. These agents can interact with users, their environment, or other agents. AI agents are used in various applications, including virtual assistants, chatbots, autonomous vehicles, game-playing systems, and industrial robotics. AI agents operate within the constraints of their programming, available computational resources, and hardware limitations. This means they are restricted to performing tasks within their defined scope and have finite memory and processing capabilities. In real-world applications, AI agents often face time constraints for decision-making and action execution. Many AI agents incorporate learning algorithms, enabling them to improve their performance over time through experience or training. Using machine learning, AI agents can adapt to new situations and optimise their behaviour for their designated tasks.\nWeb search.\nMicrosoft introduced Copilot Search in February 2023 under the name Bing Chat, as a built-in feature for Microsoft Edge and Bing mobile app. Copilot Search provides AI-generated summaries and step-by-step reasoning based of information from web publishers, ranked in Bing Search. \nFor safety, Copilot uses AI-based classifiers and filters to reduce potentially harmful content.\nGoogle officially pushed its AI Search at its Google I/O event on 20 May 2025. It keeps people looking at Google instead of clicking on a search result. AI Overviews uses Gemini 2.5 to provide contextual answers to user queries based on web content.\nSexuality.\nApplications of AI in this domain include AI-enabled menstruation and fertility trackers that analyze user data to offer predictions, AI-integrated sex toys (e.g., teledildonics), AI-generated sexual education content, and AI agents that simulate sexual and romantic partners (e.g., Replika). AI is also used for the production of non-consensual deepfake pornography, raising significant ethical and legal concerns.\nAI technologies have also been used to attempt to identify online gender-based violence and online sexual grooming of minors.\nOther industry-specific tasks.\nThere are also thousands of successful AI applications used to solve specific problems for specific industries or institutions. In a 2017 survey, one in five companies reported having incorporated \"AI\" in some offerings or processes. A few examples are energy storage, medical diagnosis, military logistics, applications that predict the result of judicial decisions, foreign policy, or supply chain management.\nAI applications for evacuation and disaster management are growing. AI has been used to investigate patterns in large-scale and small-scale evacuations using historical data from GPS, videos or social media. Furthermore, AI can provide real-time information on the evacuation conditions.\nIn agriculture, AI has helped farmers to increase yield and identify areas that need irrigation, fertilization, pesticide treatments. Agronomists use AI to conduct research and development. AI has been used to predict the ripening time for crops such as tomatoes, monitor soil moisture, operate agricultural robots, conduct predictive analytics, classify livestock pig call emotions, automate greenhouses, detect diseases and pests, and save water.\nArtificial intelligence is used in astronomy to analyze increasing amounts of available data and applications, mainly for \"classification, regression, clustering, forecasting, generation, discovery, and the development of new scientific insights.\" For example, it is used for discovering exoplanets, forecasting solar activity, and distinguishing between signals and instrumental effects in gravitational wave astronomy. Additionally, it could be used for activities in space, such as space exploration, including the analysis of data from space missions, real-time science decisions of spacecraft, space debris avoidance, and more autonomous operation.\nDuring the 2024 Indian elections, US$50 million was spent on authorized AI-generated content, notably by creating deepfakes of allied (including sometimes deceased) politicians to better engage with voters, and by translating speeches to various local languages.\nEthics.\nAI has potential benefits and potential risks. AI may be able to advance science and find solutions for serious problems: Demis Hassabis of DeepMind hopes to \"solve intelligence, and then use that to solve everything else\". However, as the use of AI has become widespread, several unintended consequences and risks have been identified. In-production systems can sometimes not factor ethics and bias into their AI training processes, especially when the AI algorithms are inherently unexplainable in deep learning.\nRisks and harm.\nPrivacy and copyright.\nMachine learning algorithms require large amounts of data. The techniques used to acquire this data have raised concerns about privacy, surveillance and copyright.\nAI-powered devices and services, such as virtual assistants and IoT products, continuously collect personal information, raising concerns about intrusive data gathering and unauthorized access by third parties. The loss of privacy is further exacerbated by AI's ability to process and combine vast amounts of data, potentially leading to a surveillance society where individual activities are constantly monitored and analyzed without adequate safeguards or transparency.\nSensitive user data collected may include online activity records, geolocation data, video, or audio. For example, in order to build speech recognition algorithms, Amazon has recorded millions of private conversations and allowed temporary workers to listen to and transcribe some of them. Opinions about this widespread surveillance range from those who see it as a necessary evil to those for whom it is clearly unethical and a violation of the right to privacy.\nAI developers argue that this is the only way to deliver valuable applications and have developed several techniques that attempt to preserve privacy while still obtaining the data, such as data aggregation, de-identification and differential privacy. Since 2016, some privacy experts, such as Cynthia Dwork, have begun to view privacy in terms of fairness. Brian Christian wrote that experts have pivoted \"from the question of 'what they know' to the question of 'what they're doing with it'.\"\nGenerative AI is often trained on unlicensed copyrighted works, including in domains such as images or computer code; the output is then used under the rationale of \"fair use\". Experts disagree about how well and under what circumstances this rationale will hold up in courts of law; relevant factors may include \"the purpose and character of the use of the copyrighted work\" and \"the effect upon the potential market for the copyrighted work\". Website owners can indicate that they do not want their content scraped via a \"robots.txt\" file. However, some companies will scrape content regardless because the robots.txt file has no real authority. In 2023, leading authors (including John Grisham and Jonathan Franzen) sued AI companies for using their work to train generative AI. Another discussed approach is to envision a separate \"sui generis\" system of protection for creations generated by AI to ensure fair attribution and compensation for human authors.\nDominance by tech giants.\nThe commercial AI scene is dominated by Big Tech companies such as Alphabet Inc., Amazon, Apple Inc., Meta Platforms, and Microsoft. Some of these players already own the vast majority of existing cloud infrastructure and computing power from data centers, allowing them to entrench further in the marketplace.\nPower needs and environmental impacts.\nIn January 2024, the International Energy Agency (IEA) released \"Electricity 2024, Analysis and Forecast to 2026\", forecasting electric power use. This is the first IEA report to make projections for data centers and power consumption for artificial intelligence and cryptocurrency. The report states that power demand for these uses might double by 2026, with additional electric power usage equal to electricity used by the whole Japanese nation.\nProdigious power consumption by AI is responsible for the growth of fossil fuel use, and might delay closings of obsolete, carbon-emitting coal energy facilities. There is a feverish rise in the construction of data centers throughout the US, making large technology firms (e.g., Microsoft, Meta, Google, Amazon) into voracious consumers of electric power. Projected electric consumption is so immense that there is concern that it will be fulfilled no matter the source. A ChatGPT search involves the use of 10 times the electrical energy as a Google search. The large firms are in haste to find power sources \u2013 from nuclear energy to geothermal to fusion. The tech firms argue that \u2013 in the long view \u2013 AI will be eventually kinder to the environment, but they need the energy now. AI makes the power grid more efficient and \"intelligent\", will assist in the growth of nuclear power, and track overall carbon emissions, according to technology firms.\nA 2024 Goldman Sachs Research Paper, \"AI Data Centers and the Coming US Power Demand Surge\", found \"US power demand (is) likely to experience growth not seen in a generation...\" and forecasts that, by 2030, US data centers will consume 8% of US power, as opposed to 3% in 2022, presaging growth for the electrical power generation industry by a variety of means. Data centers' need for more and more electrical power is such that they might max out the electrical grid. The Big Tech companies counter that AI can be used to maximize the utilization of the grid by all.\nIn 2024, the \"Wall Street Journal\" reported that big AI companies have begun negotiations with the US nuclear power providers to provide electricity to the data centers. In March 2024 Amazon purchased a Pennsylvania nuclear-powered data center for US$650 million. Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang said nuclear power is a good option for the data centers.\nIn September 2024, Microsoft announced an agreement with Constellation Energy to re-open the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant to provide Microsoft with 100% of all electric power produced by the plant for 20 years. Reopening the plant, which suffered a partial nuclear meltdown of its Unit 2 reactor in 1979, will require Constellation to get through strict regulatory processes which will include extensive safety scrutiny from the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission. If approved (this will be the first ever US re-commissioning of a nuclear plant), over 835 megawatts of power \u2013 enough for 800,000 homes \u2013 of energy will be produced. The cost for re-opening and upgrading is estimated at US$1.6 billion and is dependent on tax breaks for nuclear power contained in the 2022 US Inflation Reduction Act. The US government and the state of Michigan are investing almost US$2 billion to reopen the Palisades Nuclear reactor on Lake Michigan. Closed since 2022, the plant is planned to be reopened in October 2025. The Three Mile Island facility will be renamed the Crane Clean Energy Center after Chris Crane, a nuclear proponent and former CEO of Exelon who was responsible for Exelon's spinoff of Constellation.\nAfter the last approval in September 2023, Taiwan suspended the approval of data centers north of Taoyuan with a capacity of more than 5 MW in 2024, due to power supply shortages. Taiwan aims to phase out nuclear power by 2025. On the other hand, Singapore imposed a ban on the opening of data centers in 2019 due to electric power, but in 2022, lifted this ban.\nAlthough most nuclear plants in Japan have been shut down after the 2011 Fukushima nuclear accident, according to an October 2024 \"Bloomberg\" article in Japanese, cloud gaming services company Ubitus, in which Nvidia has a stake, is looking for land in Japan near a nuclear power plant for a new data center for generative AI. Ubitus CEO Wesley Kuo said nuclear power plants are the most efficient, cheap and stable power for AI.\nOn 1 November 2024, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) rejected an application submitted by Talen Energy for approval to supply some electricity from the nuclear power station Susquehanna to Amazon's data center. \nAccording to the Commission Chairman Willie L. Phillips, it is a burden on the electricity grid as well as a significant cost shifting concern to households and other business sectors.\nIn 2025, a report prepared by the International Energy Agency estimated the greenhouse gas emissions from the energy consumption of AI at 180 million tons. By 2035, these emissions could rise to 300\u2013500 million tonnes depending on what measures will be taken. This is below 1.5% of the energy sector emissions. The emissions reduction potential of AI was estimated at 5% of the energy sector emissions, but rebound effects (for example if people switch from public transport to autonomous cars) can reduce it.\nMisinformation.\nYouTube, Facebook and others use recommender systems to guide users to more content. These AI programs were given the goal of maximizing user engagement (that is, the only goal was to keep people watching). The AI learned that users tended to choose misinformation, conspiracy theories, and extreme partisan content, and, to keep them watching, the AI recommended more of it. Users also tended to watch more content on the same subject, so the AI led people into filter bubbles where they received multiple versions of the same misinformation. This convinced many users that the misinformation was true, and ultimately undermined trust in institutions, the media and the government. The AI program had correctly learned to maximize its goal, but the result was harmful to society. After the U.S. election in 2016, major technology companies took some steps to mitigate the problem.\nIn the early 2020s, generative AI began to create images, audio, and texts that are virtually indistinguishable from real photographs, recordings, or human writing, while realistic AI-generated videos became feasible in the mid-2020s. It is possible for bad actors to use this technology to create massive amounts of misinformation or propaganda; one such potential malicious use is deepfakes for computational propaganda. AI pioneer Geoffrey Hinton expressed concern about AI enabling \"authoritarian leaders to manipulate their electorates\" on a large scale, among other risks.\nAI researchers at Microsoft, OpenAI, universities and other organisations have suggested using \"personhood credentials\" as a way to overcome online deception enabled by AI models.\nAlgorithmic bias and fairness.\nMachine learning applications can be biased if they learn from biased data. The developers may not be aware that the bias exists. Discriminatory behavior by some LLMs can be observed in their output. Bias can be introduced by the way training data is selected and by the way a model is deployed. If a biased algorithm is used to make decisions that can seriously harm people (as it can in medicine, finance, recruitment, housing or policing) then the algorithm may cause discrimination. The field of fairness studies how to prevent harms from algorithmic biases.\nOn 28 June 2015, Google Photos's new image labeling feature mistakenly identified Jacky Alcine and a friend as \"gorillas\" because they were black. The system was trained on a dataset that contained very few images of black people, a problem called \"sample size disparity\". Google \"fixed\" this problem by preventing the system from labelling \"anything\" as a \"gorilla\". Eight years later, in 2023, Google Photos still could not identify a gorilla, and neither could similar products from Apple, Facebook, Microsoft and Amazon.\nCOMPAS is a commercial program widely used by U.S. courts to assess the likelihood of a defendant becoming a recidivist. In 2016, Julia Angwin at ProPublica discovered that COMPAS exhibited racial bias, despite the fact that the program was not told the races of the defendants. Although the error rate for both whites and blacks was calibrated equal at exactly 61%, the errors for each race were different\u2014the system consistently overestimated the chance that a black person would re-offend and would underestimate the chance that a white person would not re-offend. In 2017, several researchers showed that it was mathematically impossible for COMPAS to accommodate all possible measures of fairness when the base rates of re-offense were different for whites and blacks in the data.\nA program can make biased decisions even if the data does not explicitly mention a problematic feature (such as \"race\" or \"gender\"). The feature will correlate with other features (like \"address\", \"shopping history\" or \"first name\"), and the program will make the same decisions based on these features as it would on \"race\" or \"gender\". Moritz Hardt said \"the most robust fact in this research area is that fairness through blindness doesn't work.\"\nCriticism of COMPAS highlighted that machine learning models are designed to make \"predictions\" that are only valid if we assume that the future will resemble the past. If they are trained on data that includes the results of racist decisions in the past, machine learning models must predict that racist decisions will be made in the future. If an application then uses these predictions as \"recommendations\", some of these \"recommendations\" will likely be racist. Thus, machine learning is not well suited to help make decisions in areas where there is hope that the future will be \"better\" than the past. It is descriptive rather than prescriptive.\nBias and unfairness may go undetected because the developers are overwhelmingly white and male: among AI engineers, about 4% are black and 20% are women.\nThere are various conflicting definitions and mathematical models of fairness. These notions depend on ethical assumptions, and are influenced by beliefs about society. One broad category is distributive fairness, which focuses on the outcomes, often identifying groups and seeking to compensate for statistical disparities. Representational fairness tries to ensure that AI systems do not reinforce negative stereotypes or render certain groups invisible. Procedural fairness focuses on the decision process rather than the outcome. The most relevant notions of fairness may depend on the context, notably the type of AI application and the stakeholders. The subjectivity in the notions of bias and fairness makes it difficult for companies to operationalize them. Having access to sensitive attributes such as race or gender is also considered by many AI ethicists to be necessary in order to compensate for biases, but it may conflict with anti-discrimination laws.\nAt its 2022 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (ACM FAccT 2022), the Association for Computing Machinery, in Seoul, South Korea, presented and published findings that recommend that until AI and robotics systems are demonstrated to be free of bias mistakes, they are unsafe, and the use of self-learning neural networks trained on vast, unregulated sources of flawed internet data should be curtailed.\nLack of transparency.\nMany AI systems are so complex that their designers cannot explain how they reach their decisions. Particularly with deep neural networks, in which there are many non-linear relationships between inputs and outputs. But some popular explainability techniques exist.\nIt is impossible to be certain that a program is operating correctly if no one knows how exactly it works. There have been many cases where a machine learning program passed rigorous tests, but nevertheless learned something different than what the programmers intended. For example, a system that could identify skin diseases better than medical professionals was found to actually have a strong tendency to classify images with a ruler as \"cancerous\", because pictures of malignancies typically include a ruler to show the scale. Another machine learning system designed to help effectively allocate medical resources was found to classify patients with asthma as being at \"low risk\" of dying from pneumonia. Having asthma is actually a severe risk factor, but since the patients having asthma would usually get much more medical care, they were relatively unlikely to die according to the training data. The correlation between asthma and low risk of dying from pneumonia was real, but misleading.\nPeople who have been harmed by an algorithm's decision have a right to an explanation. Doctors, for example, are expected to clearly and completely explain to their colleagues the reasoning behind any decision they make. Early drafts of the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation in 2016 included an explicit statement that this right exists. Industry experts noted that this is an unsolved problem with no solution in sight. Regulators argued that nevertheless the harm is real: if the problem has no solution, the tools should not be used.\nDARPA established the XAI (\"Explainable Artificial Intelligence\") program in 2014 to try to solve these problems.\nSeveral approaches aim to address the transparency problem. SHAP enables to visualise the contribution of each feature to the output. LIME can locally approximate a model's outputs with a simpler, interpretable model. Multitask learning provides a large number of outputs in addition to the target classification. These other outputs can help developers deduce what the network has learned. Deconvolution, DeepDream and other generative methods can allow developers to see what different layers of a deep network for computer vision have learned, and produce output that can suggest what the network is learning. For generative pre-trained transformers, Anthropic developed a technique based on dictionary learning that associates patterns of neuron activations with human-understandable concepts.\nBad actors and weaponized AI.\nArtificial intelligence provides a number of tools that are useful to bad actors, such as authoritarian governments, terrorists, criminals or rogue states.\nA lethal autonomous weapon is a machine that locates, selects and engages human targets without human supervision. Widely available AI tools can be used by bad actors to develop inexpensive autonomous weapons and, if produced at scale, they are potentially weapons of mass destruction. Even when used in conventional warfare, they currently cannot reliably choose targets and could potentially kill an innocent person. In 2014, 30 nations (including China) supported a ban on autonomous weapons under the United Nations' Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, however the United States and others disagreed. By 2015, over fifty countries were reported to be researching battlefield robots.\nAI tools make it easier for authoritarian governments to efficiently control their citizens in several ways. Face and voice recognition allow widespread surveillance. Machine learning, operating this data, can classify potential enemies of the state and prevent them from hiding. Recommendation systems can precisely target propaganda and misinformation for maximum effect. Deepfakes and generative AI aid in producing misinformation. Advanced AI can make authoritarian centralized decision-making more competitive than liberal and decentralized systems such as markets. It lowers the cost and difficulty of digital warfare and advanced spyware. All these technologies have been available since 2020 or earlier\u2014AI facial recognition systems are already being used for mass surveillance in China.\nThere are many other ways in which AI is expected to help bad actors, some of which can not be foreseen. For example, machine-learning AI is able to design tens of thousands of toxic molecules in a matter of hours.\nTechnological unemployment.\nEconomists have frequently highlighted the risks of redundancies from AI, and speculated about unemployment if there is no adequate social policy for full employment.\nIn the past, technology has tended to increase rather than reduce total employment, but economists acknowledge that \"we're in uncharted territory\" with AI. A survey of economists showed disagreement about whether the increasing use of robots and AI will cause a substantial increase in long-term unemployment, but they generally agree that it could be a net benefit if productivity gains are redistributed. Risk estimates vary; for example, in the 2010s, Michael Osborne and Carl Benedikt Frey estimated 47% of U.S. jobs are at \"high risk\" of potential automation, while an OECD report classified only 9% of U.S. jobs as \"high risk\". The methodology of speculating about future employment levels has been criticised as lacking evidential foundation, and for implying that technology, rather than social policy, creates unemployment, as opposed to redundancies. In April 2023, it was reported that 70% of the jobs for Chinese video game illustrators had been eliminated by generative artificial intelligence.\nUnlike previous waves of automation, many middle-class jobs may be eliminated by artificial intelligence; \"The Economist\" stated in 2015 that \"the worry that AI could do to white-collar jobs what steam power did to blue-collar ones during the Industrial Revolution\" is \"worth taking seriously\". Jobs at extreme risk range from paralegals to fast food cooks, while job demand is likely to increase for care-related professions ranging from personal healthcare to the clergy. In July 2025, Ford CEO Jim Farley predicted that \"artificial intelligence is going to replace literally half of all white-collar workers in the U.S.\"\nFrom the early days of the development of artificial intelligence, there have been arguments, for example, those put forward by Joseph Weizenbaum, about whether tasks that can be done by computers actually should be done by them, given the difference between computers and humans, and between quantitative calculation and qualitative, value-based judgement.\nExistential risk.\nIt has been argued AI will become so powerful that humanity may irreversibly lose control of it. This could, as physicist Stephen Hawking stated, \"spell the end of the human race\". This scenario has been common in science fiction, when a computer or robot suddenly develops a human-like \"self-awareness\" (or \"sentience\" or \"consciousness\") and becomes a malevolent character. These sci-fi scenarios are misleading in several ways.\nFirst, AI does not require human-like sentience to be an existential risk. Modern AI programs are given specific goals and use learning and intelligence to achieve them. Philosopher Nick Bostrom argued that if one gives \"almost any\" goal to a sufficiently powerful AI, it may choose to destroy humanity to achieve it (he used the example of an automated paperclip factory that destroys the world to get more iron for paperclips). Stuart Russell gives the example of household robot that tries to find a way to kill its owner to prevent it from being unplugged, reasoning that \"you can't fetch the coffee if you're dead.\" In order to be safe for humanity, a superintelligence would have to be genuinely aligned with humanity's morality and values so that it is \"fundamentally on our side\". \nSecond, Yuval Noah Harari argues that AI does not require a robot body or physical control to pose an existential risk. The essential parts of civilization are not physical. Things like ideologies, law, government, money and the economy are built on language; they exist because there are stories that billions of people believe. The current prevalence of misinformation suggests that an AI could use language to convince people to believe anything, even to take actions that are destructive. Geoffrey Hinton said in 2025 that modern AI is particularly \"good at persuasion\" and getting better all the time. He asks \"Suppose you wanted to invade the capital of the US. Do you have to go there and do it yourself? No. You just have to be good at persuasion.\" \nThe opinions amongst experts and industry insiders are mixed, with sizable fractions both concerned and unconcerned by risk from eventual superintelligent AI. Personalities such as Stephen Hawking, Bill Gates, and Elon Musk, as well as AI pioneers such as Yoshua Bengio, Stuart Russell, Demis Hassabis, and Sam Altman, have expressed concerns about existential risk from AI.\nIn May 2023, Geoffrey Hinton announced his resignation from Google in order to be able to \"freely speak out about the risks of AI\" without \"considering how this impacts Google\". He notably mentioned risks of an AI takeover, and stressed that in order to avoid the worst outcomes, establishing safety guidelines will require cooperation among those competing in use of AI.\nIn 2023, many leading AI experts endorsed the joint statement that \"Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war\".\nSome other researchers were more optimistic. AI pioneer J\u00fcrgen Schmidhuber did not sign the joint statement, emphasising that in 95% of all cases, AI research is about making \"human lives longer and healthier and easier.\" While the tools that are now being used to improve lives can also be used by bad actors, \"they can also be used against the bad actors.\" Andrew Ng also argued that \"it's a mistake to fall for the doomsday hype on AI\u2014and that regulators who do will only benefit vested interests.\" Yann LeCun \"scoffs at his peers' dystopian scenarios of supercharged misinformation and even, eventually, human extinction.\" In the early 2010s, experts argued that the risks are too distant in the future to warrant research or that humans will be valuable from the perspective of a superintelligent machine. However, after 2016, the study of current and future risks and possible solutions became a serious area of research.\nEthical machines and alignment.\nFriendly AI are machines that have been designed from the beginning to minimize risks and to make choices that benefit humans. Eliezer Yudkowsky, who coined the term, argues that developing friendly AI should be a higher research priority: it may require a large investment and it must be completed before AI becomes an existential risk.\nMachines with intelligence have the potential to use their intelligence to make ethical decisions. The field of machine ethics provides machines with ethical principles and procedures for resolving ethical dilemmas.\nThe field of machine ethics is also called computational morality,\nand was founded at an AAAI symposium in 2005.\nOther approaches include Wendell Wallach's \"artificial moral agents\" and Stuart J. Russell's three principles for developing provably beneficial machines.\nOpen source.\nActive organizations in the AI open-source community include Hugging Face, Google, EleutherAI and Meta. Various AI models, such as Llama 2, Mistral or Stable Diffusion, have been made open-weight, meaning that their architecture and trained parameters (the \"weights\") are publicly available. Open-weight models can be freely fine-tuned, which allows companies to specialize them with their own data and for their own use-case. Open-weight models are useful for research and innovation but can also be misused. Since they can be fine-tuned, any built-in security measure, such as objecting to harmful requests, can be trained away until it becomes ineffective. Some researchers warn that future AI models may develop dangerous capabilities (such as the potential to drastically facilitate bioterrorism) and that once released on the Internet, they cannot be deleted everywhere if needed. They recommend pre-release audits and cost-benefit analyses.\nFrameworks.\nArtificial intelligence projects can be guided by ethical considerations during the design, development, and implementation of an AI system. An AI framework such as the Care and Act Framework, developed by the Alan Turing Institute and based on the SUM values, outlines four main ethical dimensions, defined as follows:\nOther developments in ethical frameworks include those decided upon during the Asilomar Conference, the Montreal Declaration for Responsible AI, and the IEEE's Ethics of Autonomous Systems initiative, among others; however, these principles are not without criticism, especially regarding the people chosen to contribute to these frameworks.\nPromotion of the wellbeing of the people and communities that these technologies affect requires consideration of the social and ethical implications at all stages of AI system design, development and implementation, and collaboration between job roles such as data scientists, product managers, data engineers, domain experts, and delivery managers.\nThe UK AI Safety Institute released in 2024 a testing toolset called 'Inspect' for AI safety evaluations available under an MIT open-source licence which is freely available on GitHub and can be improved with third-party packages. It can be used to evaluate AI models in a range of areas including core knowledge, ability to reason, and autonomous capabilities.\nRegulation.\nThe regulation of artificial intelligence is the development of public sector policies and laws for promoting and regulating AI; it is therefore related to the broader regulation of algorithms. The regulatory and policy landscape for AI is an emerging issue in jurisdictions globally. According to AI Index at Stanford, the annual number of AI-related laws passed in the 127 survey countries jumped from one passed in 2016 to 37 passed in 2022 alone. Between 2016 and 2020, more than 30 countries adopted dedicated strategies for AI. Most EU member states had released national AI strategies, as had Canada, China, India, Japan, Mauritius, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, U.S., and Vietnam. Others were in the process of elaborating their own AI strategy, including Bangladesh, Malaysia and Tunisia. The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence was launched in June 2020, stating a need for AI to be developed in accordance with human rights and democratic values, to ensure public confidence and trust in the technology. Henry Kissinger, Eric Schmidt, and Daniel Huttenlocher published a joint statement in November 2021 calling for a government commission to regulate AI. In 2023, OpenAI leaders published recommendations for the governance of superintelligence, which they believe may happen in less than 10 years. In 2023, the United Nations also launched an advisory body to provide recommendations on AI governance; the body comprises technology company executives, government officials and academics. On 1 August 2024, the EU Artificial Intelligence Act entered into force, establishing the first comprehensive EU-wide AI regulation. In 2024, the Council of Europe created the first international legally binding treaty on AI, called the \"Framework Convention on Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights, Democracy and the Rule of Law\". It was adopted by the European Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, and other signatories.\nIn a 2022 Ipsos survey, attitudes towards AI varied greatly by country; 78% of Chinese citizens, but only 35% of Americans, agreed that \"products and services using AI have more benefits than drawbacks\". A 2023 Reuters/Ipsos poll found that 61% of Americans agree, and 22% disagree, that AI poses risks to humanity. In a 2023 Fox News poll, 35% of Americans thought it \"very important\", and an additional 41% thought it \"somewhat important\", for the federal government to regulate AI, versus 13% responding \"not very important\" and 8% responding \"not at all important\".\nIn November 2023, the first global AI Safety Summit was held in Bletchley Park in the UK to discuss the near and far term risks of AI and the possibility of mandatory and voluntary regulatory frameworks. 28 countries including the United States, China, and the European Union issued a declaration at the start of the summit, calling for international co-operation to manage the challenges and risks of artificial intelligence. In May 2024 at the AI Seoul Summit, 16 global AI tech companies agreed to safety commitments on the development of AI.\nHistory.\nThe study of mechanical or \"formal\" reasoning began with philosophers and mathematicians in antiquity. The study of logic led directly to Alan Turing's theory of computation, which suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as \"0\" and \"1\", could simulate any conceivable form of mathematical reasoning. This, along with concurrent discoveries in cybernetics, information theory and neurobiology, led researchers to consider the possibility of building an \"electronic brain\". They developed several areas of research that would become part of AI, such as McCulloch and Pitts design for \"artificial neurons\" in 1943, and Turing's influential 1950 paper 'Computing Machinery and Intelligence', which introduced the Turing test and showed that \"machine intelligence\" was plausible. \nThe field of AI research was founded at a workshop at Dartmouth College in 1956. The attendees became the leaders of AI research in the 1960s. They and their students produced programs that the press described as \"astonishing\": computers were learning checkers strategies, solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems and speaking English. Artificial intelligence laboratories were set up at a number of British and U.S. universities in the latter 1950s and early 1960s.\nResearchers in the 1960s and the 1970s were convinced that their methods would eventually succeed in creating a machine with general intelligence and considered this the goal of their field. In 1965 Herbert Simon predicted, \"machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do\". In 1967 Marvin Minsky agreed, writing that \"within a generation\u00a0... the problem of creating 'artificial intelligence' will substantially be solved\". They had, however, underestimated the difficulty of the problem. In 1974, both the U.S. and British governments cut off exploratory research in response to the criticism of Sir James Lighthill and ongoing pressure from the U.S. Congress to fund more productive projects. Minsky and Papert's book \"Perceptrons\" was understood as proving that artificial neural networks would never be useful for solving real-world tasks, thus discrediting the approach altogether. The \"AI winter\", a period when obtaining funding for AI projects was difficult, followed.\nIn the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of expert systems, a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of human experts. By 1985, the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same time, Japan's fifth generation computer project inspired the U.S. and British governments to restore funding for academic research. However, beginning with the collapse of the Lisp Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer-lasting winter began.\nUp to this point, most of AI's funding had gone to projects that used high-level symbols to represent mental objects like plans, goals, beliefs, and known facts. In the 1980s, some researchers began to doubt that this approach would be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception, robotics, learning and pattern recognition, and began to look into \"sub-symbolic\" approaches. Rodney Brooks rejected \"representation\" in general and focussed directly on engineering machines that move and survive. Judea Pearl, Lotfi Zadeh, and others developed methods that handled incomplete and uncertain information by making reasonable guesses rather than precise logic. But the most important development was the revival of \"connectionism\", including neural network research, by Geoffrey Hinton and others. In 1990, Yann LeCun successfully showed that convolutional neural networks can recognize handwritten digits, the first of many successful applications of neural networks.\nAI gradually restored its reputation in the late 1990s and early 21st century by exploiting formal mathematical methods and by finding specific solutions to specific problems. This \"narrow\" and \"formal\" focus allowed researchers to produce verifiable results and collaborate with other fields (such as statistics, economics and mathematics). By 2000, solutions developed by AI researchers were being widely used, although in the 1990s they were rarely described as \"artificial intelligence\" (a tendency known as the AI effect).\nHowever, several academic researchers became concerned that AI was no longer pursuing its original goal of creating versatile, fully intelligent machines. Beginning around 2002, they founded the subfield of artificial general intelligence (or \"AGI\"), which had several well-funded institutions by the 2010s.\nDeep learning began to dominate industry benchmarks in 2012 and was adopted throughout the field.\nFor many specific tasks, other methods were abandoned.\nDeep learning's success was based on both hardware improvements (faster computers, graphics processing units, cloud computing) and access to large amounts of data (including curated datasets, such as ImageNet). Deep learning's success led to an enormous increase in interest and funding in AI. The amount of machine learning research (measured by total publications) increased by 50% in the years 2015\u20132019.\nIn 2016, issues of fairness and the misuse of technology were catapulted into center stage at machine learning conferences, publications vastly increased, funding became available, and many researchers re-focussed their careers on these issues. The alignment problem became a serious field of academic study.\nIn the late 2010s and early 2020s, AGI companies began to deliver programs that created enormous interest. In 2015, AlphaGo, developed by DeepMind, beat the world champion Go player. The program taught only the game's rules and developed a strategy by itself. GPT-3 is a large language model that was released in 2020 by OpenAI and is capable of generating high-quality human-like text. ChatGPT, launched on 30 November 2022, became the fastest-growing consumer software application in history, gaining over 100 million users in two months. It marked what is widely regarded as AI's breakout year, bringing it into the public consciousness. These programs, and others, inspired an aggressive AI boom, where large companies began investing billions of dollars in AI research. According to AI Impacts, about US$50 billion annually was invested in \"AI\" around 2022 in the U.S. alone and about 20% of the new U.S. Computer Science PhD graduates have specialized in \"AI\". About 800,000 \"AI\"-related U.S. job openings existed in 2022. According to PitchBook research, 22% of newly funded startups in 2024 claimed to be AI companies.\nPhilosophy.\nPhilosophical debates have historically sought to determine the nature of intelligence and how to make intelligent machines. Another major focus has been whether machines can be conscious, and the associated ethical implications. Many other topics in philosophy are relevant to AI, such as epistemology and free will. Rapid advancements have intensified public discussions on the philosophy and ethics of AI.\nDefining artificial intelligence.\nAlan Turing wrote in 1950 \"I propose to consider the question 'can machines think'?\" He advised changing the question from whether a machine \"thinks\", to \"whether or not it is possible for machinery to show intelligent behaviour\". He devised the Turing test, which measures the ability of a machine to simulate human conversation. Since we can only observe the behavior of the machine, it does not matter if it is \"actually\" thinking or literally has a \"mind\". Turing notes that we can not determine these things about other people but \"it is usual to have a polite convention that everyone thinks.\"\nRussell and Norvig agree with Turing that intelligence must be defined in terms of external behavior, not internal structure. However, they are critical that the test requires the machine to imitate humans. \"Aeronautical engineering texts\", they wrote, \"do not define the goal of their field as making 'machines that fly so exactly like pigeons that they can fool other pigeons.'\" AI founder John McCarthy agreed, writing that \"Artificial intelligence is not, by definition, simulation of human intelligence\".\nMcCarthy defines intelligence as \"the computational part of the ability to achieve goals in the world\". Another AI founder, Marvin Minsky, similarly describes it as \"the ability to solve hard problems\". The leading AI textbook defines it as the study of agents that perceive their environment and take actions that maximize their chances of achieving defined goals. These definitions view intelligence in terms of well-defined problems with well-defined solutions, where both the difficulty of the problem and the performance of the program are direct measures of the \"intelligence\" of the machine\u2014and no other philosophical discussion is required, or may not even be possible.\nAnother definition has been adopted by Google, a major practitioner in the field of AI. This definition stipulates the ability of systems to synthesize information as the manifestation of intelligence, similar to the way it is defined in biological intelligence.\nAs a result of the many circulating definitions scholars have started to critically analyze and order the AI discourse itself including discussing the many AI narratives and myths to be found within societal, political and academic discourses. Similarly, in practice, some authors have suggested that the term 'AI' is often used too broadly and vaguely. This raises the question of where the line should be drawn between AI and classical algorithms, with many companies during the early 2020s AI boom using the term as a marketing buzzword, often even if they did \"not actually use AI in a material way\".\nThere has been debate over whether large language models exhibit genuine intelligence or merely simulate it by imitating human text.\nEvaluating approaches to AI.\nNo established unifying theory or paradigm has guided AI research for most of its history. The unprecedented success of statistical machine learning in the 2010s eclipsed all other approaches (so much so that some sources, especially in the business world, use the term \"artificial intelligence\" to mean \"machine learning with neural networks\"). This approach is mostly sub-symbolic, soft and narrow. Critics argue that these questions may have to be revisited by future generations of AI researchers.\nSymbolic AI and its limits.\nSymbolic AI (or \"GOFAI\") simulated the high-level conscious reasoning that people use when they solve puzzles, express legal reasoning and do mathematics. They were highly successful at \"intelligent\" tasks such as algebra or IQ tests. In the 1960s, Newell and Simon proposed the physical symbol systems hypothesis: \"A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action.\"\nHowever, the symbolic approach failed on many tasks that humans solve easily, such as learning, recognizing an object or commonsense reasoning. Moravec's paradox is the discovery that high-level \"intelligent\" tasks were easy for AI, but low level \"instinctive\" tasks were extremely difficult. Philosopher Hubert Dreyfus had argued since the 1960s that human expertise depends on unconscious instinct rather than conscious symbol manipulation, and on having a \"feel\" for the situation, rather than explicit symbolic knowledge. Although his arguments had been ridiculed and ignored when they were first presented, eventually, AI research came to agree with him.\nThe issue is not resolved: sub-symbolic reasoning can make many of the same inscrutable mistakes that human intuition does, such as algorithmic bias. Critics such as Noam Chomsky argue continuing research into symbolic AI will still be necessary to attain general intelligence, in part because sub-symbolic AI is a move away from explainable AI: it can be difficult or impossible to understand why a modern statistical AI program made a particular decision. The emerging field of neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence attempts to bridge the two approaches.\nNeat vs. scruffy.\n\"Neats\" hope that intelligent behavior is described using simple, elegant principles (such as logic, optimization, or neural networks). \"Scruffies\" expect that it necessarily requires solving a large number of unrelated problems. Neats defend their programs with theoretical rigor, scruffies rely mainly on incremental testing to see if they work. This issue was actively discussed in the 1970s and 1980s, but eventually was seen as irrelevant. Modern AI has elements of both.\nSoft vs. hard computing.\nFinding a provably correct or optimal solution is intractable for many important problems. Soft computing is a set of techniques, including genetic algorithms, fuzzy logic and neural networks, that are tolerant of imprecision, uncertainty, partial truth and approximation. Soft computing was introduced in the late 1980s and most successful AI programs in the 21st century are examples of soft computing with neural networks.\nNarrow vs. general AI.\nAI researchers are divided as to whether to pursue the goals of artificial general intelligence and superintelligence directly or to solve as many specific problems as possible (narrow AI) in hopes these solutions will lead indirectly to the field's long-term goals. General intelligence is difficult to define and difficult to measure, and modern AI has had more verifiable successes by focusing on specific problems with specific solutions. The sub-field of artificial general intelligence studies this area exclusively.\nMachine consciousness, sentience, and mind.\nThere is no settled consensus in philosophy of mind on whether a machine can have a mind, consciousness and mental states in the same sense that human beings do. This issue considers the internal experiences of the machine, rather than its external behavior. Mainstream AI research considers this issue irrelevant because it does not affect the goals of the field: to build machines that can solve problems using intelligence. Russell and Norvig add that \"[t]he additional project of making a machine conscious in exactly the way humans are is not one that we are equipped to take on.\" However, the question has become central to the philosophy of mind. It is also typically the central question at issue in artificial intelligence in fiction.\nConsciousness.\nDavid Chalmers identified two problems in understanding the mind, which he named the \"hard\" and \"easy\" problems of consciousness. The easy problem is understanding how the brain processes signals, makes plans and controls behavior. The hard problem is explaining how this \"feels\" or why it should feel like anything at all, assuming we are right in thinking that it truly does feel like something (Dennett's consciousness illusionism says this is an illusion). While human information processing is easy to explain, human subjective experience is difficult to explain. For example, it is easy to imagine a color-blind person who has learned to identify which objects in their field of view are red, but it is not clear what would be required for the person to \"know what red looks like\".\nComputationalism and functionalism.\nComputationalism is the position in the philosophy of mind that the human mind is an information processing system and that thinking is a form of computing. Computationalism argues that the relationship between mind and body is similar or identical to the relationship between software and hardware and thus may be a solution to the mind\u2013body problem. This philosophical position was inspired by the work of AI researchers and cognitive scientists in the 1960s and was originally proposed by philosophers Jerry Fodor and Hilary Putnam.\nPhilosopher John Searle characterized this position as \"strong AI\": \"The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds.\" Searle challenges this claim with his Chinese room argument, which attempts to show that even a computer capable of perfectly simulating human behavior would not have a mind.\nAI welfare and rights.\nIt is difficult or impossible to reliably evaluate whether an advanced AI is sentient (has the ability to feel), and if so, to what degree. But if there is a significant chance that a given machine can feel and suffer, then it may be entitled to certain rights or welfare protection measures, similarly to animals. Sapience (a set of capacities related to high intelligence, such as discernment or self-awareness) may provide another moral basis for AI rights. Robot rights are also sometimes proposed as a practical way to integrate autonomous agents into society.\nIn 2017, the European Union considered granting \"electronic personhood\" to some of the most capable AI systems. Similarly to the legal status of companies, it would have conferred rights but also responsibilities. Critics argued in 2018 that granting rights to AI systems would downplay the importance of human rights, and that legislation should focus on user needs rather than speculative futuristic scenarios. They also noted that robots lacked the autonomy to take part in society on their own.\nProgress in AI increased interest in the topic. Proponents of AI welfare and rights often argue that AI sentience, if it emerges, would be particularly easy to deny. They warn that this may be a moral blind spot analogous to slavery or factory farming, which could lead to large-scale suffering if sentient AI is created and carelessly exploited.\nFuture.\nSuperintelligence and the singularity.\nA superintelligence is a hypothetical agent that would possess intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted human mind. If research into artificial general intelligence produced sufficiently intelligent software, it might be able to reprogram and improve itself. The improved software would be even better at improving itself, leading to what I. J. Good called an \"intelligence explosion\" and Vernor Vinge called a \"singularity\".\nHowever, technologies cannot improve exponentially indefinitely, and typically follow an S-shaped curve, slowing when they reach the physical limits of what the technology can do.\nTranshumanism.\nRobot designer Hans Moravec, cyberneticist Kevin Warwick and inventor Ray Kurzweil have predicted that humans and machines may merge in the future into cyborgs that are more capable and powerful than either. This idea, called transhumanism, has roots in the writings of Aldous Huxley and Robert Ettinger.\nEdward Fredkin argues that \"artificial intelligence is the next step in evolution\", an idea first proposed by Samuel Butler's \"Darwin among the Machines\" as far back as 1863, and expanded upon by George Dyson in his 1998 book \"Darwin Among the Machines: The Evolution of Global Intelligence\".\nIn fiction.\nThought-capable artificial beings have appeared as storytelling devices since antiquity, and have been a persistent theme in science fiction.\nA common trope in these works began with Mary Shelley's \"Frankenstein\", where a human creation becomes a threat to its masters. This includes such works as and \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" (both 1968), with HAL 9000, the murderous computer in charge of the \"Discovery One\" spaceship, as well as \"The Terminator\" (1984) and \"The Matrix\" (1999). In contrast, the rare loyal robots such as Gort from \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" (1951) and Bishop from \"Aliens\" (1986) are less prominent in popular culture.\nIsaac Asimov introduced the Three Laws of Robotics in many stories, most notably with the \"Multivac\" super-intelligent computer. Asimov's laws are often brought up during lay discussions of machine ethics; while almost all artificial intelligence researchers are familiar with Asimov's laws through popular culture, they generally consider the laws useless for many reasons, one of which is their ambiguity.\nSeveral works use AI to force us to confront the fundamental question of what makes us human, showing us artificial beings that have the ability to feel, and thus to suffer. This appears in Karel \u010capek's \"R.U.R.\", the films \"A.I. Artificial Intelligence\" and \"Ex Machina\", as well as the novel \"Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?\", by Philip K. Dick. Dick considers the idea that our understanding of human subjectivity is altered by technology created with artificial intelligence.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAI textbooks.\nThe two most widely used textbooks in 2023 (see the https://):\nThe four most widely used AI textbooks in 2008:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther textbooks:\nHistory of AI.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1166", "revid": "41559835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1166", "title": "Afro Celt Sound System", "text": "British world music band\n Afro Celt Sound System are a folk rock group who fuse electronic music with traditional Gaelic and West African music. Afro Celt Sound System was formed in 1995 by producer-guitarist Simon Emmerson, and feature a wide range of guest artists. In 2003, they temporarily changed their name to Afrocelts before reverting to their original name.\nTheir albums have been released through Peter Gabriel's Real World Records, and they have frequently performed at WOMAD festivals worldwide. Their sales on the label are exceeded only by Gabriel himself. Their recording contract with Real World was for five albums, of which \"Volume 5: Anatomic\" was the last.\nAfter a number of festival dates in 2007, the band went on hiatus. In 2010, they regrouped to play a number of shows (including a return to WOMAD), and released a remastered retrospective titled \"Capture\".\nOn 20 May 2014, Afro Celt Sound System announced the release of the album \"Born\". In January 2016, a posting on their website revealed that due to a dispute with Emmerson, who announced his departure from the band in 2015, there were two active versions of the band, one led by Emmerson and another with a separate line-up headed by James McNally and Martin Russell. Emmerson's version of the band released the album \"The Source\" in 2016. The dispute ended on 21 December 2016, with an announcement on social media.\nThe band released their seventh studio album, \"Flight\", on 23 November 2018.\nFormation.\nThe inspiration behind the project dates back to 1991, when Simon Emmerson, a Grammy Award-nominated British producer and guitarist, collaborated with Afro-pop star Baaba Maal. While making an album with Maal in Senegal, Emmerson was struck by the similarity between one African melody and a traditional Irish air. Back in London, Irish musician Davy Spillane told Emmerson about a belief that nomadic Celts lived in Africa or India before they migrated to Western Europe. Whether or not the theory was true, Emmerson was intrigued by the two regions' musical affinities.\nIn an experiment that would prove successful, Emmerson brought two members of Baaba Maal's band together with traditional Irish musicians to see what kind of music the two groups would create. Adding a dash of modern sound, Emmerson also brought in English dance mixers for an electronic beat. \"People thought I was mad when I touted the idea,\" Emmerson told Jim Carroll of \"The Irish Times\". \"At the time, I was out of favour with the London club scene. I was broke and on income support but the success was extraordinary\".\nCareer.\nJamming in the studios at Real World, musician Peter Gabriel's recording facilities in Wiltshire, England, the group of musicians recorded the basis of their first album in one week. This album, \"\", was released by Real World Records in 1996, and marked the debut of the Afro Celt Sound System.\n\"Prior to that first album being made, none of us knew if it would work,\" musician James McNally told Larry Katz of the Boston Herald. \"We were strangers who didn't even speak the same language. But we were bowled over by this communication that took place beyond language.\" McNally, who grew up second-generation Irish in London, played whistles, keyboards, piano, bodhran, and bamboo flute.\n\"Sound Magic\" has now sold over 300,000 copies. The band performed at festivals, raves, and dance clubs and regularly included two African musicians, Moussa Sissokho on talking drum and djembe and N'Faly Kouyate on vocals, kora and balafon.\nJust as the second album was getting off the ground, one of the group's core musicians, 27-year-old keyboardist Jo Bruce, (son of Cream bass player Jack Bruce), died suddenly of an asthma attack. The band was devastated, and the album was put on hold. Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor then collaborated with the band and helped them cope with their loss. \"[O'Connor] blew into the studio on a windy November night and blew away again leaving us something incredibly emotional and powerful,\" McNally told Katz. \"We had this track we didn't know what to do with. Sin\u00e9ad scribbled a few lyrics and bang! She left us completely choked up.\" The band used the name of O'Connor's song, \"Release\", for the title of their album. \"\" was released in 1999, and by the spring of 2000 it had sold more than half a million copies worldwide. \"Release\" is also used as one of the GCSE music set works in the UK that students are required to study for their exam.\nIn 2000, the group was nominated for a Grammy Award in the Best World Music category. The band, composed at the time of eight members from six countries (the UK, Senegal, Guinea, Ireland, France and Kenya), took pride in its ability to bring people together through music. \"We can communicate anywhere at any corner of the planet and feel that we're at home,\" McNally told Patrick MacDonald of \"The Seattle Times\". \"We're breaking down categories of world music and rock music and black music. We leave a door open to communicate with each other's traditions. And it's changed our lives\".\nIn 2001, the group released \"\", which climbed to number one on \"Billboard\"'s Top World Music Albums chart. Featuring guest spots by Peter Gabriel and Robert Plant, the album also incorporated a heightened African sound. \"On the first two records, the pendulum swung more toward the Celtic, London club side of the equation,\" Emmerson told \"The Irish Times\"' Carroll. \"For this one, we wanted to have more African vocals and input than we'd done before.\" Again the Afro Celt Sound System met with success. Chuck Taylor of \"Billboard\" praised the album as \"a cultural phenomenon that bursts past the traditional boundaries of contemporary music.\" The single \"When You're Falling\", with vocals by Gabriel, became a radio hit in the United States.\nIn 2003, for the \"Seed\" album, they changed their name to Afrocelts. They reverted to the longer band name for their subsequent albums, \"Pod\", a compilation of new mixes of songs from the first four albums, \"Volume 5: Anatomic\" (their fifth studio album), and \"Capture (1995\u20132010)\".\nThey played a number of shows to promote \"Volume 5: Anatomic\" in 2006 and summer 2007, ending with a gig in Korea, before taking an extended break to work on side projects, amongst them \"The Imagined Village\" featuring Simon Emmerson and Johnny Kalsi. Starting in the summer of 2010, the band performed a series of live shows to promote \"Capture (1995\u20132010)\", released on 6 September 2010 on Real World Records. Further performances continue to the present day, and a new album-in-progress titled \"Born\" was announced on their website in 2014. Following the split (see below), Emmerson's version of the band released the album The Source in 2016.\nIn late 2024, it was announced that Johnny Kalsi had left the band. In December 2024, the band stated on their Facebook page that henceforth they would be known as Afro-Bard Electronic.\nSplit.\nDuring 2015, the band had split into two formations, one of them including Simon Emmerson, N'Faly Kouyate and Johnny Kalsi, the other featuring James McNally and Martin Russell. The split was announced on the band's website in January 2016. The dispute officially ended with an announcement on social media on 21 December 2016. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Simon Emmerson, James McNally and Martin Russell are pleased to announce that they have been able to set aside their differences and come to an amicable agreement to bring their dispute to an end. Going forward, McNally, Russell and Emmerson have agreed that Emmerson will continue to perform as Afro Celt Sound System and McNally and Russell will work under a new name to be announced in due course. While McNally, Russell and Emmerson will no longer be performing or working together they recognise, and are grateful for each other's contribution to Afro Celt Sound System over the past two decades and will be working with the extensive community of musicians that make up the long standing Afro Celt Sound System family.\nMembers.\nWhen Afro Celt Sound System formed in the mid-1990s during the Real World Recording Week, the difference between a guest artist and a band member was virtually non-existent. However, over time, a combination of people became most often associated with the name Afro Celt Sound System (while \"Volume 5: Anatomic\" only lists Emmerson, McNally, \u00d3 Lion\u00e1ird and Russell as regulars). The divided grouping of the band into two versions, both operating under the name Afro Celt Sound System, began in January 2016 and was resolved in December 2016 after McNally and Russell agreed to work under a different name from Emmerson.\nRussell/McNally version\nOther musicians who have performed or recorded with Afro Celt Sound System include: Jimmy Mahon, Demba Barry, Babara Bangoura, Iarla \u00d3 Lion\u00e1ird, Peter Gabriel, Robert Plant, Pete Lockett, Sin\u00e9ad O'Connor, Pina Kollar, Dorothee Munyaneza, Sevara Nazarkhan, Simon Massey, Jesse Cook, Martin Hayes, Eileen Ivers, Mundy, Mair\u00e9ad N\u00ed Mhaonaigh and Ciar\u00e1n Tourish of Altan, Ronan Browne, Michael McGoldrick, Ste\u00e1f\u00e1n Hannigan, Myrdhin, Shooglenifty, Mairead Nesbitt, Nigel Eaton, Davy Spillane, Jonas Bruce, Heather Nova, Julie Murphy, Ayub Ogada, Caroline Lavelle, Ross Ainslie, Ged Lynch and Robbie Harris\nDiscography.\nOther albums.\nThey also recorded the soundtrack for the PC game \"Magic and Mayhem\", released in 1998.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1167", "revid": "45832270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1167", "title": "Ancient philosophy", "text": "Philosophy in the ancient world\nThis page lists some links to ancient philosophy, namely philosophical thought extending as far as early post-classical history (c.\u2009600 CE).\nOverview.\nGenuine philosophical thought, depending upon original individual insights, arose in many cultures roughly contemporaneously. Karl Jaspers termed the intense period of philosophical development beginning around the 7th century BCE and concluding around the 3rd century BCE an Axial Age in human thought.\nIn Western philosophy, the spread of Christianity in the Roman Empire marked the ending of Hellenistic philosophy and ushered in the beginnings of medieval philosophy, whereas in the Middle East, the spread of Islam through the Arab Empire marked the end of Old Iranian philosophy and ushered in the beginnings of early Islamic philosophy.\nThales (624 \u2013 c 546 BCE)\nAnaximander (610 \u2013 546 BCE)\nAnaximenes of Miletus (c. 585 \u2013 c. 525 BCE)\nPythagoras (582 \u2013 496 BCE)\nPhilolaus (470 \u2013 380 BCE)\nAlcmaeon of Croton\nArchytas (428 \u2013 347 BCE)\nXenophanes (570 \u2013 470 BCE)\nParmenides (510 \u2013 440 BCE)\nZeno of Elea (490 \u2013 430 BCE)\nMelissus of Samos (c. 470 BCE \u2013 ?)\nEmpedocles (490 \u2013 430 BCE)\nAnaxagoras (500 \u2013 428 BCE)\nLeucippus (first half of 5th century BCE)\nDemocritus (460 \u2013 370 BCE)\nMetrodorus of Chios (4th century BCE)\nProtagoras (490 \u2013 420 BCE)\nGorgias (487 \u2013 376 BCE)\nAntiphon (480 \u2013 411 BCE)\nProdicus (465/450 \u2013 after 399 BCE)\nHippias (middle of the 5th century BCE)\nThrasymachus (459 \u2013 400 BCE)\nCallicles\nCritias\nLycophron\nAncient Iranian philosophy.\nSee also: \"Dualism, Dualism (philosophy of mind)\"\nWhile there are ancient relations between the Indian Vedas and the Iranian Avesta, the two main families of the Indo-Iranian philosophical traditions were characterized by fundamental differences in their implications for the human being's position in society and their view of man's role in the universe. The first charter of human rights by Cyrus the Great as understood in the Cyrus cylinder is often seen as a reflection of the questions and thoughts expressed by Zarathustra and developed in Zoroastrian schools of thought of the Achaemenid Era of Iranian history.\nSchools of thought.\nIdeas and tenets of Zoroastrian schools of Early Persian philosophy are part of many works written in Middle Persian and of the extant scriptures of the Zoroastrian religion in Avestan language. Among these are treatises such as the Shikand-gumanic Vichar by Mardan-Farrux Ohrmazddadan, selections of Denkard, Wizidag\u012bh\u0101-\u012b Z\u0101tspram (\"Selections of Z\u0101tspram\") as well as older passages of the book Avesta, the Gathas which are attributed to Zarathustra himself and regarded as his \"direct teachings\".\nZoroastrianism.\nAnacharsis\nAncient Indian philosophy.\nThe ancient Indian philosophy is a fusion of two ancient traditions: the Vedic tradition and the \u015brama\u1e47a tradition.\nVedic philosophy.\nIndian philosophy begins with the \"Vedas\" wherein questions pertaining to laws of nature, the origin of the universe, and the place of man in it are asked. In the famous Rigvedic \"Hymn of Creation\" (Nasadiya Sukta) the poet asks:\n \"Whence all creation had its origin,\n he, whether he fashioned it or whether he did not,\n he, who surveys it all from highest heaven,\n he knows\u2014or maybe even he does not know.\"\nIn the Vedic view, creation is ascribed to the self-consciousness of the primeval being (\"Purusha\"). This leads to the inquiry into \"the one being\" that underlies the diversity of empirical phenomena and the origin of all things. Cosmic order is termed \"rta\" and causal law by \"karma\". Nature (\"prakriti\") is taken to have three qualities (\"sattva\", \"rajas\", and \"tamas\").\nSramana philosophy.\nJainism and Buddhism are a continuation of the Sramana school of thought. The Sramanas cultivated a pessimistic worldview of the samsara as full of suffering and advocated renunciation and austerities. They laid stress on philosophical concepts like Ahimsa, Karma, Jnana, Samsara and Moksa. C\u0101rv\u0101ka (Sanskrit: \u091a\u093e\u0930\u094d\u0935\u093e\u0915) (atheist) philosophy, also known as Lok\u0101yata, it is a system of Hindu philosophy that assumes various forms of philosophical skepticism and religious indifference. It is named after its founder, C\u0101rv\u0101ka, author of the B\u0101rhaspatya-s\u016btras.\nClassical Indian philosophy.\nIn classical times, these inquiries were systematized in six schools of philosophy. Some of the questions asked were:\nThe six schools of Indian philosophy are:\nAncient Chinese philosophy.\nChinese philosophy is the dominant philosophical thought in China and other countries within the East Asian cultural sphere that share a common language, including Japan, Korea, and Vietnam.\nSchools of thought.\nHundred Schools of Thought.\nThe Hundred Schools of Thought were philosophers and schools that flourished from the 6th century to 221 BCE, an era of significant cultural and intellectual expansion in China. Even though this period \u2013 known in its earlier part as the Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States period \u2013 in its latter part was fraught with chaos and bloody battles, it is also known as the Golden Age of Chinese philosophy because a broad range of thoughts and ideas were developed and discussed freely. The thoughts and ideas discussed and refined during this period have profoundly influenced lifestyles and social consciousness up to the present day in East Asian countries. The intellectual society of this era was characterized by itinerant scholars, who were often employed by various state rulers as advisers on the methods of government, war, and diplomacy. This period ended with the rise of the Qin dynasty and the subsequent purge of dissent. The Book of Han lists ten major schools, they are:\nEarly Imperial China.\nThe founder of the Qin dynasty, who implemented Legalism as the official philosophy, quashed Mohist and Confucianist schools. Legalism remained influential until the emperors of the Han dynasty adopted Daoism and later Confucianism as official doctrine. These latter two became the determining forces of Chinese thought until the introduction of Buddhism.\nConfucianism was particularly strong during the Han dynasty, whose greatest thinker was Dong Zhongshu, who integrated Confucianism with the thoughts of the Zhongshu School and the theory of the Five Elements. He also was a promoter of the New Text school, which considered Confucius as a divine figure and a spiritual ruler of China, who foresaw and started the evolution of the world towards the Universal Peace. In contrast, there was an Old Text school that advocated the use of Confucian works written in ancient language (from this comes the denomination \"Old Text\") that were so much more reliable. In particular, they refuted the assumption of Confucius as a godlike figure and considered him as the greatest sage, but simply a human and mortal.\nThe 3rd and 4th centuries saw the rise of the \"Xuanxue\" (mysterious learning), also called \"Neo-Taoism\". The most influential philosophers of this movement were Wang Bi, Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang. The main question of this school was whether Being came before Not-Being (in Chinese, \"ming\" and \"wuming\"). A peculiar feature of these Taoist thinkers, like the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, was the concept of \"feng liu\" (lit. wind and flow), a sort of romantic spirit which encouraged following the natural and instinctive impulse.\nBuddhism arrived in China around the 1st century AD, but it was not until the Northern and Southern, Sui and Tang dynasties that it gained considerable influence and acknowledgement. In the beginning, it was considered a sort of Taoist sect, and there was even a theory about Laozi, founder of Taoism, who went to India and taught his philosophy to Buddha. Mahayana Buddhism was far more successful in China than its rival Hinayana, and both Indian schools and local Chinese sects arose from the 5th century. Two chiefly important monk philosophers were Sengzhao and Daosheng. But probably the most influential and original of these schools was the Chan sect, which had an even stronger impact in Japan as the Zen sect.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1168", "revid": "34975998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1168", "title": "Anaximander", "text": "Ancient Greek philosopher (c. 610 \u2013 c. 546 BC)\nAnaximander ( ; \"Anaximandros\"; ) was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher who lived in Miletus, a city of Ionia (in modern-day Turkey). He belonged to the Milesian school and learned the teachings of his master Thales. He succeeded Thales and became the second master of that school, where he counted Anaximenes and, arguably, Pythagoras amongst his pupils.\nLittle of his life and work is known today. According to available historical documents, he is the first philosopher known to have written down his studies, although only one fragment of his work remains. Fragmentary testimonies found in documents after his death provide a portrait of the man.\nAnaximander was an early proponent of science and tried to observe and explain different aspects of the universe, with a particular interest in its origins, claiming that nature is ruled by laws, just like human societies, and anything that disturbs the balance of nature does not last long. Like many thinkers of his time, Anaximander's philosophy included contributions to many disciplines. In astronomy, he attempted to describe the mechanics of celestial bodies in relation to the Earth. In physics, his postulation that the infinite (or apeiron) was the source of all things, led Greek philosophy to a new level of conceptual abstraction. His knowledge of geometry allowed him to introduce the gnomon in Greece. He created a map of the world that contributed greatly to the advancement of geography. Anaximander was involved in the politics of Miletus and was sent as a leader to one of its colonies.\nBiography.\nAnaximander, son of Praxiades, was born in the third year of the 42nd Olympiad (610 BC). According to Apollodorus of Athens, Greek grammarian of the 2nd century BC, he was sixty-four years old during the second year of the 58th Olympiad (547\u2013546\u00a0BC) and died shortly afterwards.\nEstablishing a timeline of his work is impossible, since no document provides chronological references. Themistius, a 4th-century Byzantine rhetorician, mentions that he was the \"first of the known Greeks to publish a written document on nature.\" Therefore, his texts would be amongst the earliest written in prose, at least in the Western world. By the time of Plato, his philosophy was almost forgotten, and Aristotle, his successor Theophrastus, and a few doxographers provide us with the little information that remains. However, we know from Aristotle that Thales, also from Miletus, precedes Anaximander. It is debatable whether Thales actually was the teacher of Anaximander, but there is no doubt that Anaximander was influenced by Thales' theory that everything is derived from water. One thing that is not debatable is that even the ancient Greeks considered Anaximander to be from the Monist school which began in Miletus, with Thales followed by Anaximander and which ended with Anaximenes. 3rd-century Roman rhetorician Aelian depicts Anaximander as leader of the Milesian colony to Apollonia on the Black Sea coast, and hence some have inferred that he was a prominent citizen. Indeed, \"Various History\" (III, 17) explains that philosophers sometimes also dealt with political matters. It is very likely that leaders of Miletus sent him there as a legislator to create a constitution or simply to maintain the colony's allegiance.\nAnaximander lived the final few years of his life as a subject of the Persian Achaemenid Empire.\nTheories.\nAnaximander's theories were influenced by the Greek mythical tradition, and by some ideas of Thales\u00a0\u2013 the father of Western philosophy\u00a0\u2013 as well as by observations made by older civilizations in the Near East, especially Babylon. All these were developed rationally. In his desire to find some universal principle, he assumed, like traditional religion, the existence of a cosmic order; and his ideas on this used the old language of myths which ascribed divine control to various spheres of reality. This was a common practice for the Greek philosophers in a society which saw gods everywhere, and therefore could fit their ideas into a tolerably elastic system.\nSome scholars see a gap between the existing mythical and the new rational way of thought which is the main characteristic of the archaic period (8th to 6th century BC) in the Greek city-states. This has given rise to the phrase \"Greek miracle\". But there may not have been such an abrupt break as initially appears. The basic elements of nature (water, air, fire, earth) which the first Greek philosophers believed made up the universe in fact represent the primordial forces imagined in earlier ways of thinking. Their collision produced what the mythical tradition had called cosmic harmony. In the old cosmogonies\u00a0\u2013 Hesiod (8th\u00a0\u2013 7th century\u00a0BC) and Pherecydes (6th century BC)\u00a0\u2013 Zeus establishes his order in the world by destroying the powers which were threatening this harmony (the Titans). Anaximander claimed that the cosmic order is not monarchic but geometric, and that this causes the equilibrium of the Earth, which is lying in the centre of the universe. This is the projection on nature of a new political order and a new space organized around a centre which is the static point of the system in the society as in nature. In this space there is \"isonomy\" (equal rights) and all the forces are symmetrical and transferable. The decisions are now taken by the assembly of \"\" in the \"agora\" which is lying in the middle of the city.\nThe same \"rational\" way of thought led him to introduce the abstract \"apeiron\" (indefinite, infinite, boundless, unlimited) as an origin of the universe, a concept that is probably influenced by the original Chaos (gaping void, abyss, formless state) from which everything else appeared in the mythical Greek cosmogony. It also takes notice of the mutual changes between the four elements. Origin, then, must be something else unlimited in its source, that could create without experiencing decay, so that genesis would never stop.\nApeiron.\nThe \"Refutation\" attributed to Hippolytus of Rome (I, 5), and the later 6th century Byzantine philosopher Simplicius of Cilicia, attribute to Anaximander the earliest use of the word \"apeiron\" ( \"infinite\" or \"limitless\") to designate the original principle. He was the first philosopher to employ, in a philosophical context, the term \"arch\u0113\" (), which until then had meant beginning or origin.\n\"That Anaximander called this something by the name of is the natural interpretation of what Theophrastos says; the current statement that the term was introduced by him appears to be due to a misunderstanding.\"\nAnd \"Hippolytos, however, is not an independent authority, and the only question is what Theophrastos wrote.\"\nFor him, it became no longer a mere point in time, but a source that could perpetually give birth to whatever will be. The indefiniteness is spatial in early usages as in Homer (indefinite sea) and as in Xenophanes (6th century BC) who said that the Earth went down indefinitely (to \"apeiron\") i.e. beyond the imagination or concept of men.\nBurnet (1930) in \"Early Greek Philosophy\" says:\n\"Nearly all we know of Anaximander's system is derived in the last resort from Theophrastos, who certainly knew his book. He seems once at least to have quoted Anaximander's own words, and he criticised his style. Here are the remains of what he said of him in the First Book:\n\"Anaximander of Miletos, son of Praxiades, a fellow-citizen and associate of Thales, said that the material cause and first element of things was the Infinite, he being the first to introduce this name of the material cause. He says it is neither water nor any other of the so-called elements, but a substance different from them which is infinite\" [apeiron, or ] \"from which arise all the heavens and the worlds within them.\u2014Phys, Op. fr. 2 (Dox. p. 476; R. P. 16).\"\nBurnet's quote from the \"First Book\" is his translation of Theophrastos' \"Physic Opinion\" fragment 2 as it appears in p.\u00a0476 of \"Historia Philosophiae Graecae\" (1898) by Ritter and Preller and section 16 of \"Doxographi Graeci\" (1879) by Diels.\nBy ascribing the \"Infinite\" with a \"material cause\", Theophrastos is following the Aristotelian tradition of \"nearly always discussing the facts from the point of view of his own system\".\nAristotle writes (\"Metaphysics\", I.III 3\u20134) that the Pre-Socratics were searching for the element that constitutes all things. While each pre-Socratic philosopher gave a different answer as to the identity of this element (water for Thales and air for Anaximenes), Anaximander understood the beginning or first principle to be an endless, unlimited primordial mass (\"apeiron\"), subject to neither old age nor decay, that perpetually yielded fresh materials from which everything we perceive is derived. He proposed the theory of the \"apeiron\" in direct response to the earlier theory of his teacher, Thales, who had claimed that the primary substance was water. The notion of temporal infinity was familiar to the Greek mind from remote antiquity in the religious concept of immortality, and Anaximander's description was in terms appropriate to this conception. This \"arch\u0113\" is called \"eternal and ageless\". (Hippolytus (?), \"Refutation\", I,6,I;DK B2)\n\"\"Aristotle puts things in his own way regardless of historical considerations, and it is difficult to see that it is more of an anachronism to call the Boundless \" intermediate between the elements \" than to say that it is \" distinct from the elements.\" Indeed, if once we introduce the elements at all, the former description is the more adequate of the two. At any rate, if we refuse to understand these passages as referring to Anaximander, we shall have to say that Aristotle paid a great deal of attention to some one whose very name has been lost, and who not only agreed with some of Anaximander's views, but also used some of his most characteristic expressions. We may add that in one or two places Aristotle certainly seems to identify the \" intermediate \" with the something \" distinct from \" the elements\".\"\n\"It is certain that he [Anaximander] cannot have said anything about elements, which no one thought of before Empedokles, and no one could think of before Parmenides. The question has only been mentioned because it has given rise to a lengthy controversy, and because it throws light on the historical value of Aristotle's statements. From the point of view of his own system, these may be justified; but we shall have to remember in other cases that, when he seems to attribute an idea to some earlier thinker, we are not bound to take what he says in an historical sense.\"\nFor Anaximander, the principle of things, the constituent of all substances, is nothing determined and not an element such as water in Thales' view. Neither is it something halfway between air and water, or between air and fire, thicker than air and fire, or more subtle than water and earth. Anaximander argues that water cannot embrace all of the opposites found in nature \u2013 for example, water can only be wet, never dry \u2013 and therefore cannot be the one primary substance; nor could any of the other candidates. He postulated the \"apeiron\" as a substance that, although not directly perceptible to us, could explain the opposites he saw around him.\n\"If Thales had been right in saying that water was the fundamental reality, it would not be easy to see how anything else could ever have existed. One side of the opposition, the cold and moist, would have had its way unchecked, and the warm and dry would have been driven from the field long ago. We must, then, have something not itself one of the warring opposites, something more primitive, out of which they arise, and into which they once more pass away.\"\nAnaximander explains how the four elements of ancient physics (air, earth, water and fire) are formed, and how Earth and terrestrial beings are formed through their interactions. Unlike other Pre-Socratics, he never defines this principle precisely, and it has generally been understood (e.g., by Aristotle and by Saint Augustine) as a sort of primal chaos. According to him, the Universe originates in the separation of opposites in the primordial matter. It embraces the opposites of hot and cold, wet and dry, and directs the movement of things; an entire host of shapes and differences then grow that are found in \"all the worlds\" (for he believed there were many).\n\"Anaximander taught, then, that there was an eternal. The indestructible something out of which everything arises, and into which everything returns; a boundless stock from which the waste of existence is continually made good, \"elements.\". That is only the natural development of the thought we have ascribed to Thales, and there can be no doubt that Anaximander at least formulated it distinctly. Indeed, we can still follow to some extent the reasoning which led him to do so. Thales had regarded water as the most likely thing to be that of which all others are forms; Anaximander appears to have asked how the primary substance could be one of these particular things. His argument seems to be preserved by Aristotle, who has the following passage in his discussion of the Infinite: \"Further, there cannot be a single, simple body which is infinite, either, as some hold, one distinct from the elements, which they then derive from it, or without this qualification. For there are some who make this. (i.e. a body distinct from the elements). the infinite, and not air or water, in order that the other things may not be destroyed by their infinity. They are in opposition one to another. air is cold, water moist, and fire hot. and therefore, if any one of them were infinite, the rest would have ceased to be by this time. Accordingly they say that what is infinite is something other than the elements, and from it the elements arise.'\u2060\u2014Aristotle Physics. F, 5 204 b 22 (Ritter and Preller (1898) Historia Philosophiae Graecae, section 16 b).\"\nAnaximander maintains that all dying things are returning to the element from which they came (\"apeiron\"). The one surviving fragment of Anaximander's writing deals with this matter. Simplicius transmitted it as a quotation, which describes the balanced and mutual changes of the elements:\nWhence things have their origin,\nThence also their destruction happens,\nAccording to necessity;\nFor they give to each other justice and recompense\nFor their injustice\nIn conformity with the ordinance of Time.\nSimplicius mentions that Anaximander said all these \"in poetic terms\", meaning that he used the old mythical language. The goddess Justice (Dike) keeps the cosmic order. This concept of returning to the element of origin was often revisited afterwards, notably by Aristotle, and by the Greek tragedian Euripides: \"what comes from earth must return to earth.\" Friedrich Nietzsche, in his \"Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks\", stated that Anaximander viewed \"... all coming-to-be as though it were an illegitimate emancipation from eternal being, a wrong for which destruction is the only penance.\" Physicist Max Born, in commenting upon Werner Heisenberg's arriving at the idea that the elementary particles of quantum mechanics are to be seen as different manifestations, different quantum states, of one and the same \"primordial substance,\"' proposed that this primordial substance be called \"apeiron\".\nA free-floating Earth.\nAnaximander was the first to conceive a mechanical model of the world. In his model, the Earth floats very still in the centre of the infinite, not supported by anything. It remains \"in the same place because of its indifference\", a point of view that Aristotle considered ingenious, in \"On the Heavens\". Its curious shape is that of a cylinder with a height one-third of its diameter. The flat top forms the inhabited world.\nCarlo Rovelli suggests that Anaximander took the idea of the Earth's shape as a floating disk from Thales, who had imagined the Earth floating in water, the \"immense ocean from which everything is born and upon which the Earth floats.\" Anaximander was then able to envisage the Earth at the centre of an infinite space, in which case it required no support as there was nowhere \"down\" to fall. In Rovelli's view, the shape \u2013 a cylinder or a sphere \u2013 is unimportant compared to the appreciation of a \"finite body that floats free in space.\"\nAnaximander's realization that the Earth floats free without falling and does not need to be resting on something has been indicated by many as the first cosmological revolution and the starting point of scientific thinking. Karl Popper calls this idea \"one of the boldest, most revolutionary, and most portentous ideas in the whole history of human thinking.\" Such a model allowed the concept that celestial bodies could pass under the Earth, opening the way to Greek astronomy. Rovelli suggests that seeing the stars circling the Pole star, and both vanishing below the horizon on one side and reappearing above it on the other, would suggest to the astronomer that there was a void both above and below the Earth.\nCosmology.\nAnaximander's bold use of non-mythological explanatory hypotheses considerably distinguishes him from previous cosmology writers such as Hesiod. It indicates a pre-Socratic effort to demystify physical processes. His major contribution to history was writing the oldest prose document about the Universe and the origins of life; for this he is often called the \"Father of Cosmology\" and founder of astronomy. However, pseudo-Plutarch states that he still viewed celestial bodies as deities. He placed the celestial bodies in the wrong order. He thought that the stars were nearest to the Earth, then the Moon, and the Sun farthest away. His scheme is compatible with the Indo-Iranian philosophical traditions contained in the Iranian Avesta and the Indian Upanishads.\nAt the origin, after the separation of hot and cold, a ball of flame appeared that surrounded Earth like bark on a tree. This ball broke apart to form the rest of the Universe. It resembled a system of hollow concentric wheels, filled with fire, with the rims pierced by holes like those of a flute. Consequently, the Sun was the fire that one could see through a hole the same size as the Earth on the farthest wheel, and an eclipse corresponded with the occlusion of that hole. The diameter of the solar wheel was twenty-seven times that of the Earth (or twenty-eight, depending on the sources) and the lunar wheel, whose fire was less intense, eighteen (or nineteen) times. Its hole could change shape, thus explaining lunar phases. The stars and the planets, located closer, followed the same model.\nAnaximander was the first astronomer to consider the Sun as a huge mass, and consequently, to realize how far from Earth it might be, and the first to present a system where the celestial bodies turned at different distances. Furthermore, according to Diogenes Laertius (II, 2), he built a celestial sphere. This invention undoubtedly made him the first to realize the obliquity of the Zodiac as the Roman philosopher Pliny the Elder reports in \"Natural History\" (II, 8). It is a little early to use the term ecliptic, but his knowledge and work on astronomy confirm that he must have observed the inclination of the celestial sphere in relation to the plane of the Earth to explain the seasons. The doxographer and theologian Aetius attributes to Pythagoras the exact measurement of the obliquity.\nMultiple worlds.\nAccording to Simplicius, Anaximander already speculated on the plurality of worlds, similar to atomists Leucippus and Democritus, and later philosopher Epicurus. These thinkers supposed that worlds appeared and disappeared for a while, and that some were born when others perished. They claimed that this movement was eternal, \"for without movement, there can be no generation, no destruction\".\nIn addition to Simplicius, Hippolytus reports Anaximander's claim that from the infinite comes the principle of beings, which themselves come from the heavens and the worlds (several doxographers use the plural when this philosopher is referring to the worlds within, which are often infinite in quantity). Cicero writes that he attributes different gods to the countless worlds.\nThis theory places Anaximander close to the Atomists and the Epicureans who, more than a century later, also claimed that an infinity of worlds appeared and disappeared. In the timeline of the Greek history of thought, some thinkers conceptualized a single world (Plato, Aristotle, Anaxagoras and Archelaus), while others instead speculated on the existence of a series of worlds, continuous or non-continuous (Anaximenes, Heraclitus, Empedocles and Diogenes).\nMeteorological phenomena.\nAnaximander attributed some phenomena, such as thunder and lightning, to the intervention of elements, rather than to divine causes. In his system, thunder results from the shock of clouds hitting each other; the loudness of the sound is proportionate with that of the shock. Thunder without lightning is the result of the wind being too weak to emit any flame, but strong enough to produce a sound. A flash of lightning without thunder is a jolt of the air that disperses and falls, allowing a less active fire to break free. Thunderbolts are the result of a thicker and more violent air flow.\nHe saw the sea as a remnant of the mass of humidity that once surrounded Earth. A part of that mass evaporated under the Sun's action, thus causing the winds and even the rotation of the celestial bodies, which he believed were attracted to places where water is more abundant. He explained rain as a product of the humidity pumped up from Earth by the sun. For him, the Earth was slowly drying up and water only remained in the deepest regions, which someday would go dry as well. According to Aristotle's \"Meteorology\" (II, 3), Democritus also shared this opinion.\nOrigin of mankind.\nAnaximander speculated about the beginnings and origin of animal life, and that humans came from other animals in waters. According to his evolutionary theory, animals sprang out of the sea long ago, born trapped in a spiny bark, but as they got older, the bark would dry up and animals would be able to break it. The 3rd century Roman writer Censorinus reports:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Anaximander of Miletus considered that from warmed up water and earth emerged either fish or entirely fishlike animals. Inside these animals, men took form and embryos were held prisoners until puberty; only then, after these animals burst open, could men and women come out, now able to feed themselves.\nAnaximander put forward the idea that humans had to spend part of this transition inside the mouths of big fish to protect themselves from the Earth's climate until they could come out in open air and lose their scales. He thought that, considering humans' extended infancy, we could not have survived in the primeval world in the same manner we do presently.\nOther accomplishments.\nCartography.\nBoth Strabo and Agathemerus (later Greek geographers) claim that, according to the geographer Eratosthenes, Anaximander was the first to publish a map of the world. The map probably inspired the Greek historian Hecataeus of Miletus to draw a more accurate version. Strabo viewed both as the first geographers after Homer.\nMaps were produced in ancient times, also notably in Egypt, Lydia, the Middle East, and Babylon. Only some small examples survived until today. The unique example of a world map comes from the late Babylonian Map of the World later than 9th century BC but is based probably on a much older map. These maps indicated directions, roads, towns, borders, and geological features. Anaximander's innovation was to represent the entire inhabited land known to the ancient Greeks.\nSuch an accomplishment is more significant than it at first appears. Anaximander most likely drew this map for three reasons. First, it could be used to improve navigation and trade between Miletus's colonies and other colonies around the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea. Second, Thales would probably have found it easier to convince the Ionian city-states to join in a federation in order to push the Median threat away if he possessed such a tool. Finally, the philosophical idea of a global representation of the world simply for the sake of knowledge was reason enough to design one.\nSurely aware of the sea's convexity, he may have designed his map on a slightly rounded metal surface. The centre or \"navel\" of the world ( \"omphal\u00f3s g\u1ebds\") could have been Delphi, but is more likely in Anaximander's time to have been located near Miletus. The Aegean Sea was near the map's centre and enclosed by three continents, themselves located in the middle of the ocean and isolated like islands by sea and rivers. Europe was bordered on the south by the Mediterranean Sea and was separated from Asia by the Black Sea, the Lake Maeotis, and, further east, either by the Phasis River (now called the Rioni in Georgia) or the Tanais. The Nile flowed south into the ocean, separating Libya (which was the name for the part of the then-known African continent) from Asia.\nGnomon.\nThe \"Suda\" relates that Anaximander explained some basic notions of geometry. It also mentions his interest in the measurement of time and associates him with the introduction in Greece of the gnomon. In Lacedaemon, he participated in the construction, or at least in the adjustment, of sundials to indicate solstices and equinoxes. Indeed, a gnomon required adjustments from a place to another because of the difference in latitude.\nIn his time, the gnomon was simply a vertical pillar or rod mounted on a horizontal plane. The position of its shadow on the plane indicated the time of day. As it moves through its apparent course, the Sun draws a curve with the tip of the projected shadow, which is shortest at noon, when pointing due south. The variation in the tip's position at noon indicates the solar time and the seasons; the shadow is longest on the winter solstice and shortest on the summer solstice.\nThe invention of the gnomon itself cannot be attributed to Anaximander because its use, as well as the division of days into twelve parts, came from the Babylonians. It is they, according to Herodotus' Histories (II, 109), who gave the Greeks the art of time measurement. It is likely that he was not the first to determine the solstices, because no calculation is necessary. On the other hand, equinoxes do not correspond to the middle point between the positions during solstices, as the Babylonians thought. As the \"Suda\" seems to suggest, it is very likely that with his knowledge of geometry, he became the first Greek to determine accurately the equinoxes.\nPrediction of an earthquake.\nIn his philosophical work \"De Divinatione\" (I, 50, 112), Cicero states that Anaximander convinced the inhabitants of Lacedaemon to abandon their city and spend the night in the country with their weapons because an earthquake was near. The city collapsed when the top of the Taygetus split like the stern of a ship. Pliny the Elder also mentions this anecdote (II, 81), suggesting that it came from an \"admirable inspiration\", as opposed to Cicero, who did not associate the prediction with divination.\nScientific method.\nRovelli credits Anaximander with pioneering the \"first great scientific revolution in history\" by introducing the naturalistic approach to understanding the universe, according to which the universe operates by inviolable laws, without recourse to supernatural explanations. According to Rovelli, Anaximander not only paved the way for modern science, but revolutionized the process for how we form our worldview, by constantly questioning and rejecting certainty. Rovelli further states that Anaximander has not been given his due credit, largely because his naturalistic approach was strongly opposed in antiquity (among others by Aristotle) and had yet to yield the tangible benefits it has today.\nLegacy.\nBertrand Russell in the \"History of Western Philosophy\" interprets Anaximander's theories as an assertion of the necessity of an appropriate balance between earth, fire, and water, all of which may be independently seeking to aggrandize their proportions relative to the others. Anaximander seems to express his belief that a natural order ensures balance among these elements, that where there was fire, ashes (earth) now exist. His Greek peers echoed this sentiment with their belief in natural boundaries beyond which not even the gods could operate.\nFriedrich Nietzsche, in \"Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks\", claimed that Anaximander was a pessimist who asserted that the primal being of the world was a state of indefiniteness. In accordance with this, anything definite has to eventually pass back into indefiniteness. In other words, Anaximander viewed \"...all coming-to-be as though it were an illegitimate emancipation from eternal being, a wrong for which destruction is the only penance\". (\"Ibid.\", \u00a7 4) The world of individual objects, in this way of thinking, has no worth and should perish.\nMartin Heidegger lectured extensively on Anaximander, and delivered a lecture entitled \"Anaximander's Saying\" which was subsequently included in \"Off the Beaten Track\". The lecture examines the ontological difference and the oblivion of Being or \"Dasein\" in the context of the Anaximander fragment. Heidegger's lecture is, in turn, an important influence on the French philosopher Jacques Derrida.\nIn the 2017 essay collection \"Anaximander in Context: New Studies on the Origins of Greek Philosophy\", Dirk Couprie, Robert Hahn and Gerald Naddaf describe Anaximander as \"one of the greatest minds in history\", but one that has not been given his due. Couprie goes to state that he considers him on par with Newton. Similar sentiments are expressed in Carlo Rovelli's 2011 book \"The First Scientist: Anaximander and His Legacy.\"\nThe Anaximander (31st) High School of Thessaloniki, Greece is named after Anaximander.\nWorks.\nAccording to the \"Suda\":\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1169", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1169", "title": "APL", "text": "APL is an abbreviation, acronym, or initialism that may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "1170", "revid": "42861752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1170", "title": "Architect", "text": "Person who designs buildings and oversees construction\nAn architect is a person who plans, designs, and oversees the construction of buildings. To practice architecture means to provide services in connection with the design of buildings and the space within the site surrounding the buildings that have human occupancy or use as their principal purpose. Etymologically, the term architect derives from the Latin , which derives from the Greek (\"-\", chief + , builder), i.e., chief builder.\nThe professional requirements for architects vary from location to location. An architect's decisions affect public safety, and thus the architect must undergo specialised training consisting of advanced education and a \"practicum\" (or internship) for practical experience to earn a license to practice architecture. Practical, technical, and academic requirements for becoming an architect vary by jurisdiction though the formal study of architecture in academic institutions has played a pivotal role in the development of the profession.\nOrigins.\nThroughout ancient and medieval history, most architectural design and construction was carried out by artisans\u2014such as stone masons and carpenters\u2014who rose to the role of master builders. Until modern times, there was no clear distinction between architect and engineer. In Europe, the titles \"architect\" and \"engineer\" were primarily geographical variations that referred to the same person, often used interchangeably.\n\"Architect\" derives from Greek (, \"master builder,\" \"chief \").\n It is suggested that various developments in technology and mathematics allowed the development of the professional 'gentleman' architect, separate from the hands-on craftsman. Paper was not used in Europe for drawing until the 15th century but became increasingly available after 1500. Pencils were used for drawing by 1600. The availability of both paper and pencils allowed pre-construction drawings to be made by professionals. Concurrently, the introduction of linear perspective and innovations such as the use of different projections to describe a three-dimensional building in two dimensions, together with an increased understanding of dimensional accuracy, helped building designers communicate their ideas. However, development was gradual and slow-going. Until the 18th century, buildings continued to be designed and set out by craftsmen, with the exception of high-status projects.\nArchitecture.\nIn most developed countries only those qualified with an appropriate license, certification, or registration with a relevant body (often a government) may legally practice architecture. Such licensure usually requires a university degree, successful completion of exams, and a training period. Representation of oneself as an architect through the use of terms and titles were restricted to licensed individuals by law, although in general, derivatives such as architectural designer were not legally protected.\nTo practice architecture implies the ability to practice independently of supervision. The term \"building design professional\" (or \"design professional)\", by contrast, is a much broader term that includes professionals who practice independently under an alternate profession, such as engineering professionals, or those who assist in the practice of architecture under the supervision of a licensed architect, such as intern architects. In many places, independent, non-licensed individuals may perform design services outside of professional restrictions, such as the design of houses or other smaller structures.\nPractice.\nIn the architectural profession, technical and environmental knowledge, design, and construction management require an understanding of business as well as design. However, design is the driving force throughout the project and beyond. An architect accepts a commission from a client. The commission might involve preparing feasibility reports, building audits, and designing a building or several buildings, structures, and the spaces among them. The architect participates in developing the requirements the client wants in the building. Throughout the project (planning to occupancy), the architect coordinates a design team. Structural, mechanical, and electrical engineers are hired by the client or architect, who must ensure that the work is coordinated to construct the design.\nDesign role.\nThe architect, once hired by a client, is responsible for creating a design concept that meets the requirements of that client and provides a facility suitable for the required use. The architect must meet with and ask questions to the client, to ascertain all the requirements (and nuances) of the planned project.\nOften, the full brief is not clear in the beginning. It involves a degree of risk in the design undertaking. The architect may make early proposals to the client, which may rework the terms of the brief. The \"program\" (or brief) is essential to producing a project that meets all the needs of the owner. This becomes a guide for the architect in creating the design concept.\nDesign proposals are generally expected to be both imaginative and pragmatic. Much depends upon the time, place, finance, culture, and available crafts and technology in which the design takes place. The extent and nature of these expectations will vary. Foresight is a prerequisite when designing buildings, as it is a very complex and demanding undertaking.\nAny design concept during the early stage of its generation must take into account a great number of issues and variables, including the qualities of the space(s), the end-use and life-cycle of these proposed spaces, connections, relations, and aspects between spaces, including how they are put together, and the impact of proposals on the immediate and wider locality. The selection of appropriate materials and technology must be considered, tested, and reviewed at an early stage in the design to ensure there are no setbacks (such as higher-than-expected costs) that could occur later in the project.\nThe site and its surrounding environment, as well as the culture and history of the place, will also influence the design. The design must also balance increasing concerns with environmental sustainability. The architect may introduce (intentionally or not), aspects of mathematics and architecture, new or current architectural theory, or references to architectural history.\nA key part of the design is that the architect often must consult with engineers, surveyors, and other specialists throughout the design, ensuring that aspects such as structural supports and air conditioning elements are coordinated. The control and planning of construction costs are also part of these consultations. Coordination of the different aspects involves a high degree of specialized communication, including advanced computer technology such as building information modeling (BIM), computer-aided design (CAD), and cloud-based technologies. Finally, at all times, the architect must report back to the client, who may have reservations or recommendations that might introduce further variables into the design.\nArchitects also deal with local and federal jurisdictions regarding regulations and building codes]]s. The architect might need to comply with local planning and zoning laws such as required setbacks, height limitations, parking requirements, transparency requirements (windows), and land use. Some jurisdictions require adherence to design and historic preservation guidelines. Health and safety risks form a vital part of the current design, and in some jurisdictions, design reports and records are required to include ongoing considerations of materials and contaminants, waste management and recycling, traffic control, and fire safety.\nMeans of design.\nPreviously, architects employed drawings to illustrate and generate design proposals. While conceptual sketches are still widely used by architects, computer technology has now become the industry standard. Furthermore, design may include the use of photos, collages, prints, linocuts, 3D scanning technology, and other media in design production. \nIncreasingly, computer software is shaping how architects work. BIM technology allows for the creation of a virtual building that serves as an information database for the sharing of design and building information throughout the life cycle of the building's design, construction, and maintenance. Virtual reality (VR) presentations are becoming more common for visualizing structural designs and interior spaces from the point-of-view perspective.\nEnvironmental role.\nSince modern buildings are known to release carbon into the atmosphere, increasing controls are being placed on buildings and associated technology to reduce emissions, increase energy efficiency, and make use of renewable energy sources. Renewable energy sources may be designed into the proposed building by local or national renewable energy providers. As a result, the architect is required to remain abreast of current regulations that are continually being updated. Some new developments exhibit extremely low energy use or passive solar building design.\nHowever, the architect is also increasingly being required to provide initiatives in a wider environmental sense. Examples of this include making provisions for low-energy transport, natural daylighting instead of artificial lighting, natural ventilation instead of air conditioning, pollution, and waste management, use of recycled materials, and employment of materials which can be easily recycled.\nConstruction role.\nAs the design becomes more advanced and detailed, specifications and detail designs are made of all the elements and components of the building. Techniques in the production of a building are continually advancing which places a demand on the architect to ensure that he or she remains up to date with these advances.\nDepending on the client's needs and the jurisdiction's requirements, the spectrum of the architect's services during each construction stage may be extensive (detailed document preparation and construction review) or less involved (such as allowing a contractor to exercise considerable design-build functions).\nArchitects typically put projects to tender on behalf of their clients, advise them on the award of the project to a general contractor, facilitate and administer a contract of agreement, which is often between the client and the contractor. This contract is legally binding and covers a wide range of aspects, including the insurance and commitments of all stakeholders, the status of the design documents, provisions for the architect's access, and procedures for the control of the works as they proceed. Depending on the type of contract used, provisions for further sub-contract tenders may be required. The architect may require that some elements be covered by a warranty which specifies the expected life and other aspects of the material, product, or work.\nIn most jurisdictions prior notification to the relevant authority must be given before commencement of the project, giving the local authority notice to carry out independent inspections. The architect will then review and inspect the progress of the work in coordination with the local authority.\nThe architect will typically review contractor shop drawings and other submittals, prepare and issue site instructions, and provide Certificates for Payment to the contractor (see also Design-bid-build) which is based on the work done as well as any materials and other goods purchased or hired in the future. In the United Kingdom and other countries, a quantity surveyor is often part of the team to provide cost consulting. With large, complex projects, an independent construction manager is sometimes hired to assist in the design and management of the construction.\nIn many jurisdictions mandatory certification or assurance of the completed work or part of the work is required. This demand for certification entails a high degree of risk; therefore, regular inspections of the work as it progresses on site is required to ensure that the design is in compliance itself as well as following all relevant statutes and permissions.\nAlternate practice and specialisations.\nRecent decades have seen the rise of specialisations within the profession. Many architects and architectural firms focus on certain project types (e.g. healthcare, retail, public housing, and event management), technological expertise, or project delivery methods. Some architects specialise in building code, building envelope, sustainable design, technical writing, historic preservation (US) or conservation (UK), and accessibility.\nMany architects elect to move into real-estate (property) development, corporate facilities planning, project management, construction management, chief sustainability officers interior design, city planning, user experience design, and design research.\nProfessional requirements.\nAlthough there are variations in each location, most of the world's architects are required to register with the appropriate jurisdiction. Architects are typically required to meet three common requirements: education, experience, and examination.\nBasic educational requirements generally consist of a university degree in architecture. The experience requirement for degree candidates is usually satisfied by a practicum or internship (most often two to three years). Finally, a Registration Examination or a series of exams is required prior to licensure.\nProfessionals who engaged in the design and supervision of construction projects before the late 19th century were not necessarily trained in a separate architecture program in an academic setting. Instead, they often trained under established architects. Prior to modern times, there was no distinction between architects and engineers and the title used varied depending on geographical location. They often carried the title of master builder or surveyor after serving a number of years as an apprentice (such as Sir Christopher Wren). The formal study of architecture in academic institutions played a pivotal role in the development of the profession as a whole, serving as a focal point for advances in architectural technology and theory. The use of \"Architect\" or abbreviations such as \"Ar.\" as a title attached to a person's name was regulated by law in some countries.\nFees.\nArchitects' fee structure was typically based on a percentage of construction value, as a rate per unit area of the proposed construction, hourly rates, or a fixed lump sum fee. Combination of these structures were also common. Fixed fees were usually based on a project's allocated construction cost and could range between 4 and 12% of new construction cost for commercial and institutional projects, depending on the project's size and complexity. Residential projects ranged from 12 to 20%. Renovation projects typically commanded higher percentages such as 15\u201320%.\nOverall billings for architectural firms range widely, depending on their location and economic climate. Billings have traditionally been dependent on local economic conditions, but with rapid globalization, this is becoming less of a factor for large international firms. Salaries could also vary depending on experience, position within the firm (i.e. staff architect, partner, or shareholder, etc.), and the size and location of the firm.\nProfessional organizations.\nA number of national professional organizations exist to promote career and business development in architecture.\nPrizes and awards.\nA wide variety of prizes is awarded by national professional associations and other bodies, recognizing accomplished architects, their buildings, structures, and professional careers.\nThe most lucrative award an architect can receive is the Pritzker Prize, sometimes termed the \"Nobel Prize for architecture\". The inaugural Pritzker Prize winner was Philip Johnson who was cited as having \"50 years of imagination and vitality embodied in a myriad of museums, theatres libraries, houses gardens and corporate structures\". The Pritzker Prize has been awarded for forty-two straight editions without interruption, and there are now 22 countries with at least one winning architect. Other prestigious architectural awards are the Royal Gold Medal, the AIA Gold Medal (US), AIA Gold Medal (Australia), and the Praemium Imperiale.\nArchitects in the UK who have made contributions to the profession through design excellence or architectural education or have in some other way advanced the profession might, until 1971, be elected Fellows of the Royal Institute of British Architects and can write FRIBA after their name if they feel so inclined. Those elected to chartered membership of the RIBA after 1971 may use the initials RIBA but cannot use the old ARIBA and FRIBA. An honorary fellow may use the initials Hon. FRIBA, and an international fellow may use the initials Int. FRIBA. Architects in the US who have made contributions to the profession through design excellence or architectural education or have in some other way advanced the profession are elected Fellows of the American Institute of Architects and can write FAIA after their name. Architects in Canada who have made outstanding contributions to the profession through contributions to research, scholarship, public service, or professional standing to the good of architecture in Canada or elsewhere may be recognized as Fellows of the Royal Architectural Institute of Canada and can write FRAIC after their name. In Hong Kong, those elected to chartered membership may use the initial HKIA, and those who have made a special contribution after nomination and election by the Hong Kong Institute of Architects (HKIA), may be elected as fellow members of HKIA and may use FHKIA after their name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1171", "revid": "14587130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1171", "title": "Abbreviation", "text": "Shortened form of a word or phrase\nAn abbreviation (from la\u00a0'short') is a shortened form of a word or phrase, by any method including shortening, contraction, initialism (which includes acronym), or crasis. An abbreviation may be a shortened form of a word, usually ended with a trailing period. For example, the term \"etc.\" is the usual abbreviation for the Latin phrase .\nTypes.\nA \"contraction\" is an abbreviation formed by replacing letters with an apostrophe. Examples include \"I'm\" for \"I am\" and \"li'l\" for \"little\".\nAn \"initialism\" or \"acronym\" is an abbreviation consisting of the initial letter of a sequence of words without other punctuation. For example, FBI (), USA (), IBM (), BBC (). When initialism is used as the preferred term, acronym refers more specifically to when the abbreviation is pronounced as a word rather than as separate letters; examples include SWAT and NASA.\nInitialisms, contractions and crasis share some semantic and phonetic functions, and are connected by the term \"abbreviation\" in loose parlance.\nHistory.\nIn early times, abbreviations may have been common due to the effort involved in writing (many inscriptions were carved in stone) or to provide secrecy via obfuscation.\nReduction of a word to a single letter was common in both Greek and Roman writing. In Roman inscriptions, \"Words were commonly abbreviated by using the initial letter or letters of words, and most inscriptions have at least one abbreviation\". However, \"some could have more than one meaning, depending on their context. (For example, \u27e8A\u27e9 can be an abbreviation for many words, such as ', ', ', ', ', ', ', and '.)\" Many frequent abbreviations consisted of more than one letter: for example COS for \"consul\" and COSS for its nominative etc. plural \"consules\".\nAbbreviations were frequently used in early English. Manuscripts of copies of the Old English poem \"Beowulf\" used many abbreviations, for example the Tironian et (\u204a) or &amp; for \"and\", and y for \"since\", so that \"not much space is wasted\". The standardisation of English in the 15th through 17th centuries included a growth in the use of such abbreviations. At first, abbreviations were sometimes represented with various suspension signs, not only periods. For example, sequences like \u27e8er\u27e9 were replaced with \u27e8\u0254\u27e9, as in mast\u0254 for \"master\" and exac\u0254bate for \"exacerbate\". While this may seem trivial, it was symptomatic of an attempt by people manually reproducing academic texts to reduce the copy time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mast\u0254 subwarden\u0254 y \u0254m\u0113de me to you. And wher\u0254 y wrot to you the last wyke that y trouyde itt good to differr\u0254 thelection\u0254 ov\u0254 to qu\u012bdena\u0254 tinitatis y have be thoug\u0127t me syn\u0254 that itt woll be then\u0254 a bowte mydsom\u0254.\u2014\u200a\nIn the Early Modern English period, between the 15th and 17th centuries, the thorn \u00de was used for \"th\", as in \u00dee ('the'). In modern times, \u27e8\u00de\u27e9 was often used (in the form \u27e8y\u27e9) for promotional reasons, as in Ye Olde Tea Shoppe.\nDuring the growth of philological linguistic theory in academic Britain, abbreviating became very fashionable. Likewise, a century earlier in Boston, a fad of abbreviation started that swept the United States, with the globally popular term OK generally credited as a remnant of its influence.\nOver the years, however, the lack of convention in some style guides has made it difficult to determine which two-word abbreviations should be abbreviated with periods and which should not. This question is considered below.\nWidespread use of electronic communication through mobile phones and the Internet during the 1990s led to a marked rise in colloquial abbreviation. This was due largely to increasing popularity of textual communication services such as instant and text messaging. The original SMS supported message lengths of 160 characters at most (using the GSM 03.38 character set), for instance. This brevity gave rise to an informal abbreviation scheme sometimes called Textese, with which 10% or more of the words in a typical SMS message are abbreviated. More recently Twitter, a popular social networking service, began driving abbreviation use with 140 character message limits.\nIn HTML, abbreviations can be annotated using &lt;abbr title=\"Meaning of the abbreviation.\"&gt;abbreviation&lt;/abbr&gt; to reveal its meaning by hovering the cursor.\nStyle conventions in English.\nIn modern English, there are multiple conventions for abbreviation, and there is controversy as to which should be used. One generally accepted rule is to be consistent in a body of work. To this end, publishers may express their preferences in a style guide.\nSome controversies that arise are described below.\nCapitalization.\nIf the original word was capitalized then the first letter of its abbreviation should retain the capital, for example Lev. for \"Leviticus\". When a word is abbreviated to more than a single letter and was originally spelled with lower case letters then there is no need for capitalization. However, when abbreviating a phrase where only the first letter of each word is taken, then all letters should be capitalized, as in YTD for \"year-to-date\", PCB for \"printed circuit board\" and FYI for \"for your information\". However, see the following section regarding abbreviations that have become common vocabulary: these are no longer written with capital letters.\nPeriods.\nA period (full stop) is sometimes used to signify abbreviation, but opinion is divided as to when and if this convention is best practice.\nAccording to Hart's Rules, a word shortened by dropping letters from the end terminates with a period, whereas a word shorted by dropping letters from the middle does not. Fowler's Modern English Usage says a period is used for both of these shortened forms, but recommends against this practice: advising it only for end-shortened words and lower-case initialisms; not for middle-shortened words and upper-case initialisms.\nSome British style guides, such as for The Guardian and The Economist, disallow periods for all abbreviations.\nIn American English, the period is usually included regardless of whether or not it is a contraction, e.g. \"Dr.\" or \"Mrs.\" In some cases, periods are optional, as in either \"US\" or \"U.S.\" for \"United States\", \"EU\" or \"E.U.\" for \"European Union\", and \"UN\" or \"U.N.\" for \"United Nations\". There are some house styles, however\u2014American ones included\u2014that remove the periods from almost all abbreviations. For example:\nAcronyms that were originally capitalized (with or without periods) but have since entered the vocabulary as generic words are no longer written with capital letters nor with any periods. Examples are sonar, radar, lidar, laser, snafu, and scuba.\nWhen an abbreviation appears at the end of a sentence, only one period is used: \"The capital of the United States is Washington, D.C.\"\nIn the past, some initialisms were styled with a period after each letter and a space between each pair. For example, \"U.\u00a0S.\", but today this is typically \"US\".\nPlural.\nThere are multiple ways to pluralize an abbreviation. Sometimes this accomplished by adding an apostrophe and an \"s\" ('s), as in \"two PC's have broken screens\". But, some find this confusing since the notation can indicate possessive case. And, this style is deprecated by many style guides. For instance, Kate Turabian, writing about style in academic writings, allows for an apostrophe to form plural acronyms \"only when an abbreviation contains internal periods or both capital and lowercase letters\". For example, \"DVDs\" and \"URLs\" and \"Ph.D.'s\", while the Modern Language Association explicitly says, \"do not use an apostrophe to form the plural of an abbreviation\". Also, the American Psychological Association specifically says, \"without an apostrophe\".\nHowever, the 1999 style guide for \"The New York Times\" states that the addition of an apostrophe is necessary when pluralizing all abbreviations, preferring \"PC's, TV's and VCR's\".\nForming a plural of an initialization without an apostrophe can also be used for a number, or a letter. Examples:\nFor units of measure, the same form is used for both singular and plural. Examples:\nWhen an abbreviation contains more than one period, \"Hart's Rules\" recommends putting the \"s\" after the final one. Examples:\nHowever, the same plurals may be rendered less formally as:\nAccording to \"Hart's Rules\", an apostrophe may be used in rare cases where clarity calls for it, for example when letters or symbols are referred to as objects.\nHowever, the apostrophe can be dispensed with if the items are set in italics or quotes:\nIn Latin, and continuing to the derivative forms in European languages as well as English, single-letter abbreviations had the plural being a doubling of the letter for note-taking. Most of these deal with writing and publishing. A few longer abbreviations use this as well.\nConventions followed by publications and newspapers.\nUnited States.\nPublications based in the U.S. tend to follow the style guides of \"The Chicago Manual of Style\" and the Associated Press. The U.S. government follows a style guide published by the U.S. Government Printing Office. The National Institute of Standards and Technology sets the style for abbreviations of units.\nUnited Kingdom.\nMany British publications follow some of these guidelines in abbreviation:\nMeasurements: abbreviations or symbols.\nWriters often use shorthand to denote units of measure. Such shorthand can be an abbreviation, such as \"in\" for \"inch\" or can be a symbol such as \"km\" for \"kilometre\".\nIn the International System of Units (SI) manual the word \"symbol\" is used consistently to define the shorthand used to represent the various SI units of measure. The manual also defines the way in which units should be written, the principal rules being:\nSyllabic abbreviation.\nA syllabic abbreviation is usually formed from the initial syllables of several words, such as \"Interpol\" = \"International\" + \"police\". It is a variant of the acronym. Syllabic abbreviations are usually written using lower case, sometimes starting with a capital letter, and are always pronounced as words rather than letter by letter. Syllabic abbreviations should be distinguished from portmanteaus, which combine two words without necessarily taking whole syllables from each.\nEnglish.\nSyllabic abbreviations are not widely used in English. Some UK government agencies such as Ofcom (Office of Communications) and the former Oftel (Office of Telecommunications) use this style.\nNew York City has various neighborhoods named by syllabic abbreviation, such as Tribeca (Triangle below Canal Street) and SoHo (South of Houston Street). This usage has spread into other American cities, giving SoMa, San Francisco (South of Market), and LoDo, Denver (Lower Downtown), amongst others.\nChicago-based electric service provider ComEd is a syllabic abbreviation of \"Commonwealth\" and (Thomas) \"Edison\", and the Metra commuter rail is a syllabic abbreviation of \"Metripolitan\" and \"Rail.\"\nSections of California are also often colloquially syllabically abbreviated, as in NorCal (Northern California), CenCal (Central California), and SoCal (Southern California). Additionally, in the context of Los Angeles, the syllabic abbreviation SoHo (Southern Hollywood) refers to the southern portion of the Hollywood neighborhood.\nPartially syllabic abbreviations are preferred by the US Navy, as they increase readability amidst the large number of initialisms that would otherwise have to fit into the same acronyms. Hence \"DESRON 6\" is used (in the full capital form) to mean \"Destroyer Squadron 6\", while \"COMNAVAIRLANT\" would be \"Commander, Naval Air Force (in the) Atlantic\".\nSyllabic abbreviations are a prominent feature of Newspeak, the fictional language of George Orwell's dystopian novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". The political contractions of Newspeak\u2014\"Ingsoc\" (English Socialism), \"Minitrue\" (Ministry of Truth), \"Miniplenty\" (Ministry of Plenty)\u2014are described by Orwell as similar to real examples of German \"(see below)\" and Russian (\"see below)\" contractions in the 20th century. The contractions in Newspeak are supposed to have a political function by virtue of their abbreviated structure itself: nice sounding and easily pronounceable, their purpose is to mask all ideological content from the speaker.\nA more recent syllabic abbreviation has emerged with the disease COVID-19 (Corona Virus Disease 2019) caused by the Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (itself frequently abbreviated to SARS-CoV-2, partly an initialism).\nAlbanian.\nIn Albanian, syllabic acronyms are sometimes used for composing a person's name, such as \"Migjeni\"\u2014an abbreviation from his original name (\"Millosh Gjergj Nikolla\") a famous Albanian poet and writer\u2014or \"ASDRENI\" (\"Aleksander Stavre Drenova\"), another famous Albanian poet.\nOther such names which are used commonly in recent decades are GETOAR, composed from \"Gegeria\" + \"Tosks\" (representing the two main dialects of the Albanian language, Geg\u00eb and Tosk\u00eb), and \"Arbanon\"\u2014which is an alternative way used to describe all Albanian lands.\nGerman.\nSyllabic abbreviations were and are common in German; much like acronyms in English, they have a distinctly modern connotation, although contrary to popular belief, many date back to before 1933, if not the end of the Great War. , literally \"criminal police\" but idiomatically the Criminal Investigation Department of any German police force, begat (variously capitalised), and likewise (\"protection police\" or \"uniform department\") begat . Along the same lines, the Swiss Federal Railways' Transit Police\u2014the \u2014are abbreviated as the .\nWith the National Socialist German Workers' Party gaining power came a frenzy of government reorganisation, and with it a series of entirely new syllabic abbreviations. The single national police force amalgamated from the of the various states became the OrPo (, \"order police\"); the state KriPos together formed the \"SiPo\" (, \"security police\"); and there was also the Gestapo (, \"secret state police\"). The new order of the German Democratic Republic in the east brought about a conscious denazification, but also a repudiation of earlier turns of phrase in favour of neologisms such as for (\"state security\", the secret police) and for . The phrase , which may be rendered literally as \"office of politics\" or idiomatically as \"political party steering committee\", became .\nSyllabic abbreviations are not only used in politics, however. Many business names, trademarks, and service marks from across Germany are created on the same pattern: for a few examples, there is Aldi, from \"Theo Albrecht\", the name of its founder, followed by \"discount\"; Haribo, from \"Hans Riegel\", the name of its founder, followed by \"Bonn\", the town of its head office; and Adidas, from \"Adolf \"Adi\" Dassler\", the nickname of its founder followed by his surname.\nRussian.\nSyllabic abbreviations are very common in Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian languages. They are often used as names of organizations. Historically, popularization of abbreviations was a way to simplify mass-education in 1920s (see Likbez). The word \"kolkhoz\" (\"kollekt\u00edvnoye khozy\u00e1ystvo\", collective farm) is another example.\nLeninist organisations such as the \"Comintern\" (\"Communist International\") and \"Komsomol\" (\"Kommunisticheskii Soyuz Molodyozhi\", or \"Communist youth union\") used Russian language syllabic abbreviations. In the modern Russian language, words like \"Rosselkhozbank\" (from Rossiysky selskokhozyaystvenny bank \u2014 Russian Agricultural Bank, RusAg) and \"Minobrnauki\" (from Ministerstvo obrazovaniya i nauki \u2014 Ministry of Education and Science) are still commonly used. In nearby Belarus, there are \"Beltelecom\" (Belarus Telecommunication) and Belsat (Belarus Satellite).\nSpanish.\nSyllabic abbreviations are common in Spanish; examples abound in organization names such as Pemex for \"Petr\u00f3leos Mexicanos\" (\"Mexican Petroleums\") or Fonafifo for \"Fondo Nacional de Financimiento Forestal\" (National Forestry Financing Fund). El Banco Nacional de M\u00e9xico, S.A. (\"Banamex\"), Tel\u00e9fonos de M\u00e9xico, S.A.B. de C.V. (\"TELMEX\"), Operadora de Cinemas, S.A. de C.V. (\"Cinemex\")\nMalay and Indonesian.\nIn Southeast Asian languages, especially in Malay languages, abbreviations are common; examples include Petronas (for \"Petroliam Nasional\", \"National Petroleum\"), its Indonesian equivalent Pertamina (from its original name \"Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak dan Gas Bumi Negara\", \"State Oil and Natural Gas Mining Company\"), and Kemenhub (from \"Kementerian Perhubungan\", \"Ministry of Transportation\").\nMalaysian abbreviation often uses letters from each word, while Indonesia usually uses syllables; although some cases do not follow the style. For example, general elections in Malaysian Malay often shortened into PRU (pilihan raya umum) while Indonesian often shortened into pemilu (pemilihan umum). Another example is Ministry of Health in which Malaysian Malay uses KKM (Kementerian Kesihatan Malaysia), compared to Indonesian Kemenkes (Kementerian Kesehatan).\nChinese and Japanese kanji.\nEast Asian languages whose writing systems use Chinese characters form abbreviations similarly by using key Chinese characters from a term or phrase. For example, in Japanese the term for the United Nations, \"kokusai reng\u014d\" (\u56fd\u969b\u9023\u5408) is often abbreviated to \"kokuren\" (\u56fd\u9023). (Such abbreviations are called (\u7565\u8a9e) in Japanese; see also Japanese abbreviated and contracted words). The syllabic abbreviation of kanji words is frequently used for universities: for instance, \"T\u014ddai\" (\u6771\u5927) for \"T\u014dky\u014d daigaku\" (\u6771\u4eac\u5927\u5b66, University of Tokyo) and is used similarly in Chinese: \"B\u011bid\u00e0\" (\u5317\u5927) for \"B\u011bij\u012bng D\u00e0xu\u00e9\" (\u5317\u4eac\u5927\u5b66, Peking University). Korean universities often follow the same conventions, such as \"Hongdae\" (\ud64d\ub300) as short for \"Hongik Daehakgyo\", or Hongik University. The English phrase \"Gung ho\" originated as a Chinese abbreviation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1174", "revid": "46040862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1174", "title": "Aphrodite", "text": "Ancient Greek goddess of love\nAphrodite (, ) is an ancient Greek goddess associated with love, lust, beauty, pleasure, passion, procreation, and as her syncretised Roman counterpart , desire, sex, fertility, prosperity, and victory. Aphrodite's major symbols include seashells, myrtles, roses, doves, sparrows, and swans. The cult of Aphrodite was largely derived from that of the Phoenician goddess Astarte, a cognate of the East Semitic goddess Ishtar, whose cult was based on the Sumerian cult of Inanna. Aphrodite's main cult centers were Cythera, Cyprus, Corinth, and Athens. Her main festival was the Aphrodisia, which was celebrated annually in midsummer. In Laconia, Aphrodite was worshipped as a warrior goddess. She was also the patron goddess of prostitutes, an association which led early scholars to propose the concept of sacred prostitution in Greco-Roman culture, an idea which is now generally seen as erroneous.\nA major goddess in the Greek pantheon, Aphrodite featured prominently in ancient Greek literature. According to many sources, like Homer's \"Iliad\" and Sappho's Ode to Aphrodite, she is the daughter of Zeus and Dione. In Hesiod's \"Theogony\", however, Aphrodite is born off the coast of Cythera from the foam (, ) produced by Uranus's genitals, which his son Cronus had severed and thrown into the sea. In his \"Symposium\", Plato asserts that these two origins actually belong to separate entities; Aphrodite Urania (a transcendent \"Heavenly\" Aphrodite, who \"partakes not of the female but only of the male\", with Plato describing her as inspiring love between men, but having nothing to do with the love of women) and Aphrodite Pandemos (Aphrodite common to \"all the people\" who Plato described as \"wanton\", to contrast her with the virginal Aphrodite Urania, who did not engage in sexual acts at all. Pandemos inspired love between men and women, unlike her older counterpart). The epithet Aphrodite Areia (the \"Warlike\") reveals her contrasting nature in ancient Greek religion. Aphrodite had many other epithets, each emphasizing a different aspect of the same goddess or used by a different local cult. Thus she was also known as Cytherea (\"Lady of Cythera\") and Cypris (\"Lady of Cyprus\"), because both locations claimed to be the place of her birth. Sappho's \"Ode to Aphrodite\" is one of the earliest poems dedicated to the goddess and survives from the Archaic period nearly complete.\nIn Greek mythology, Aphrodite was married to Hephaestus, the god of fire, blacksmiths and metalworking. Aphrodite was frequently unfaithful to him and had many lovers; in the \"Odyssey\", she is caught in the act of adultery with Ares, the god of war. In the \"First Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite\", she seduces the mortal shepherd Anchises after Zeus made her fall in love with him. Aphrodite was also the surrogate mother and lover of the mortal shepherd Adonis, who was killed by a wild boar. Along with Athena and Hera, Aphrodite was one of the three goddesses whose feud resulted in the beginning of the Trojan War and plays a major role throughout the \"Iliad\". Aphrodite has been featured in Western art as a symbol of female beauty and has appeared in numerous works of Western literature. She is a major deity in modern Neopagan religions, including the Church of Aphrodite, Wicca, and Hellenism.\nEtymology.\nHesiod derives the name \"Aphrodite\" from () \"sea-foam\", interpreting the name as \"risen from the foam\", but most modern scholars regard this as a spurious folk etymology. Early-modern scholars of classical mythology attempted to argue that Aphrodite's name was of Greek or Indo-European origin, but these efforts have mostly been abandoned. Aphrodite's name is generally accepted to likely be of Semitic origin, due to the believed Near Eastern origins of Aphrodite's worship, but its exact derivation cannot be determined with confidence. Some scholars, such as Fritz Hommel, have suggested that Aphrodite's name is a hellenized pronunciation of the name \"Astarte\"; other scholars, however, reject this as being linguistically untenable. Martin West reconstructs a Cyprian Canaanite form of the name as either or , and cautiously suggests the latter as being an epithet with the meaning \"She of the Villages\". Aren Wilson-Wright suggests the Phoenician form as an elative epithet meaning \"unique, excellent, sublime\".\nScholars in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, accepting Hesiod's \"foam\" etymology as genuine, analyzed the second part of Aphrodite's name as *\"-od\u00edt\u0113\" \"wanderer\" or as *\"-d\u00edt\u0113\" \"bright\". More recently, Michael Janda, also accepting Hesiod's etymology, has argued in favor of the latter of these interpretations and claims the story of a birth from the foam as an Indo-European mytheme. Similarly, Krzysztof Tomasz Witczak proposes an Indo-European compound \"very\" and \"to shine\", also referring to Eos, and Daniel K\u00f6lligan has interpreted Aphrodite's name as \"shining up from the mist/foam\". Other scholars have argued that these hypotheses are unlikely, since Aphrodite's attributes are entirely different from those of both Eos and the Vedic deity Ushas.\nA number of improbable non-Greek etymologies have also been suggested. One Semitic etymology compares Aphrodite to the Assyrian \"bar\u012br\u012btu\", the name of a female demon that appears in Middle Babylonian and Late Babylonian texts. Hammarstr\u00f6m looks to Etruscan, comparing \"(e)pr\u03b8ni\" \"lord\", an Etruscan honorific loaned into Greek as \u03c0\u03c1\u03cd\u03c4\u03b1\u03bd\u03b9\u03c2. This would make the theonym in origin an honorific, \"the lady\". Most scholars reject this etymology as implausible, especially since Aphrodite's name actually appears in Etruscan in the borrowed form \"Apru\" (from Greek , clipped form of \"Aphrodite\"). The medieval \"Etymologicum Magnum\" (c.\u20091150) offers a highly contrived etymology, deriving \"Aphrodite\" from the compound \"habrod\u00edaitos\" (), \"she who lives delicately\", from \"habr\u00f3s\" and \"d\u00edaita\". The alteration from \"b\" to \"ph\" is explained as a \"familiar\" characteristic of Greek \"obvious from the Macedonians\".\nIn the Cypriot syllabary, a syllabic script used on the island of Cyprus from the eleventh until the fourth centuries BC, Aphrodite's name is attested in the forms \ud802\udc00\ud802\udc21\ud802\udc26\ud802\udc2d\ud802\udc03\ud802\udc02 (a-po-ro-ta-o-i, read right-to-left), \ud802\udc00\ud802\udc21\ud802\udc26\ud802\udc2f\ud802\udc2d\ud802\udc02 (a-po-ro-ti-ta-i, samewise), and finally \ud802\udc00\ud802\udc21\ud802\udc26\ud802\udc2f\ud802\udc2a\ud802\udc08 (a-po-ro-ti-si-jo, \"Aphrodisian\", \"related to Aphrodite\", in the context of a month).\nOrigins.\nNear Eastern love goddess.\nThe cult of Aphrodite in Greece was imported from, or at least influenced by, the cult of Astarte in Phoenicia, which, in turn, was influenced by the cult of the Mesopotamian goddess known as \"Ishtar\" to the East Semitic peoples and as \"Inanna\" to the Sumerians. Pausanias states that the first to establish a cult of Aphrodite were the Assyrians, followed by the Paphians of Cyprus and then the Phoenicians at Ascalon. The Phoenicians, in turn, taught her worship to the people of Cythera.\nAphrodite took on Inanna-Ishtar's associations with sexuality and procreation. Furthermore, she was known as Ourania (\u039f\u1f50\u03c1\u03b1\u03bd\u03af\u03b1), which means \"heavenly\", a title corresponding to Inanna's role as the Queen of Heaven. Early artistic and literary portrayals of Aphrodite are extremely similar on Inanna-Ishtar. Like Inanna-Ishtar, Aphrodite was also a warrior goddess; the second-century AD Greek geographer Pausanias records that, in Sparta, Aphrodite was worshipped as \"Aphrodite Areia\", which means \"warlike\". He also mentions that Aphrodite's most ancient cult statues in Sparta and on Cythera showed her bearing arms. Modern scholars note that Aphrodite's warrior-goddess aspects appear in the oldest strata of her worship and see it as an indication of her Near Eastern origins.\nNineteenth-century classical scholars had a general aversion to the idea that ancient Greek religion was at all influenced by the cultures of the Near East, but even Friedrich Gottlieb Welcker, who argued that Near Eastern influence on Greek culture was largely confined to material culture, admitted that Aphrodite was clearly of Phoenician origin. The significant influence of Near Eastern culture on early Greek religion in general, and on the cult of Aphrodite in particular, is now widely recognized as dating to a period of orientalization during the eighth century BC, when archaic Greece was on the fringes of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.\nIndo-European dawn goddess.\nSome early comparative mythologists opposed to the idea of a Near Eastern origin argued that Aphrodite originated as an aspect of the Greek dawn goddess Eos and that she was therefore ultimately derived from the Proto-Indo-European dawn goddess *\"Ha\u00e9us\u014ds\" (properly Greek Eos, Latin Aurora, Sanskrit Ushas). Most modern scholars have now rejected the notion of a purely Indo-European Aphrodite, but it is possible that Aphrodite, originally a Semitic deity, may have been influenced by the Indo-European dawn goddess. Both Aphrodite and Eos were known for their erotic beauty and aggressive sexuality and both had relationships with mortal lovers. Both goddesses were associated with the colors red, white, and gold. Michael Janda etymologizes Aphrodite's name as an epithet of Eos meaning \"she who rises from the foam [of the ocean]\" and points to Hesiod's \"Theogony\" account of Aphrodite's birth as an archaic reflex of Indo-European myth. Aphrodite rising out of the waters after Cronus defeats Uranus as a mytheme would then be directly cognate to the Rigvedic myth of Indra defeating Vrtra, liberating Ushas. Another key similarity between Aphrodite and the Indo-European dawn goddess is her close kinship to the Greek sky deity, since both of the main claimants to her paternity (Zeus and Uranus) are sky deities.\nForms and epithets.\nAphrodite's most common cultic epithet was \"Ourania\", meaning \"heavenly\", but this epithet almost never occurs in literary texts, indicating a purely cultic significance. Another common name for Aphrodite was \"Pandemos\" (\"For All the Folk\"). In her role as Aphrodite Pandemos, Aphrodite was associated with \"Peith\u014d\" (), meaning \"persuasion\", and could be prayed to for aid in seduction. The character of Pausanias in Plato's \"Symposium\", takes differing cult-practices associated with different epithets of the goddess to claim that Ourania and Pandemos are, in fact, separate goddesses. He asserts that \"Aphrodite Ourania\" is the celestial Aphrodite, born from the sea foam after Cronus castrated Uranus, and the older of the two goddesses. According to the \"Symposium\", \"Aphrodite Ourania\" is the inspiration of male homosexual desire, specifically the ephebic eros, and pederasty. \"Aphrodite Pandemos\", by contrast, is the younger of the two goddesses: the common Aphrodite, born from the union of Zeus and Dione, and the inspiration of heterosexual desire and sexual promiscuity, the \"lesser\" of the two loves. \"Paphian\" (\u03a0\u03b1\u03c6\u03af\u03b1), was one of her epithets, after the Paphos in Cyprus where she had emerged from the sea at her birth.\nAmong the Neoplatonists and, later, their Christian interpreters, Ourania is associated with spiritual love, and Pandemos with physical love (desire). A representation of Ourania with her foot resting on a tortoise came to be seen as emblematic of discretion in conjugal love; it was the subject of a chryselephantine sculpture by Phidias for Elis, known only from a parenthetical comment by the geographer Pausanias. The image was taken up again after the Renaissance.\nOne of Aphrodite's most common literary epithets is \"Philommeid\u1e17s\" (), which means \"smile-loving\", but is sometimes mistranslated as \"laughter-loving\". This epithet occurs throughout both of the Homeric epics and the \"First Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite\". Hesiod references it once in his \"Theogony\" in the context of Aphrodite's birth, but interprets it as \"genital-loving\" rather than \"smile-loving\". Monica Cyrino notes that the epithet may relate to the fact that, in many artistic depictions of Aphrodite, she is shown smiling. Other epithets of her include \"Mechanitis\" meaning skilled in inventing and \"Automata\" because, according to Servius, she was the source of spontaneous love.\nCommon literary epithets of Aphrodite are \"Cypris\" and \"Cythereia\", which derive from her associations with the islands of Cyprus and Cythera respectively. On Cyprus, Aphrodite was sometimes called \"Eleemon\" (\"the merciful\"). In Athens, she was known as \"Aphrodite en k\u0113pois\" (\"Aphrodite of the Gardens\"). At Cape Colias, a promontory on the Attic coast, she was venerated as Genetyllis (\u0393\u03b5\u03bd\u03b5\u03c4\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03af\u03c2), the protectress of births. Her companions, who presided over generation and birth, were known by the plural form Genetyllides (\u0393\u03b5\u03bd\u03b5\u03c4\u03c5\u03bb\u03bb\u03af\u03b4\u03b5\u03c2). The Spartans worshipped her as \"Potnia\" \"Mistress\", \"Enoplios\" \"Armed\", \"Morpho\" \"Shapely\", \"Ambologera\" \"She who Postpones Old Age\". Across the Greek world, she was known under epithets such as \"Melainis\" in Corinth \"Black or Dark One\", \"Skotia\" \"Dark One\", \"Androphonos\" \"Killer of Men\", \"Anosia\" \"Unholy\", and \"Tymborychos\" \"Gravedigger\", all of which indicate her darker, more violent nature.\nA male version of Aphrodite known as Aphroditus was worshipped in the city of Amathus on Cyprus. Aphroditus was depicted with the figure and dress of a woman, but had a beard, and was shown lifting his dress to reveal an erect phallus. This gesture was believed to be an apotropaic symbol, and was thought to convey good fortune upon the viewer. Eventually, the popularity of Aphroditus waned as the mainstream, fully feminine version of Aphrodite became more popular, but traces of his cult are preserved in the later legends of Hermaphroditus.\nWorship.\nClassical period.\nAphrodite's main festival, the Aphrodisia, was celebrated across Greece, but particularly in Athens and Corinth. In Athens, the Aphrodisia was celebrated on the fourth day of the month of Hekatombaion in honor of Aphrodite's role in the unification of Attica. During this festival, the priests of Aphrodite would purify the temple of Aphrodite Pandemos on the southwestern slope of the Acropolis with the blood of a sacrificed dove. Next, the altars would be anointed and the cult statues of Aphrodite Pandemos and Peitho would be escorted in a majestic procession to a place where they would be ritually bathed. Aphrodite was also honored in Athens as part of the Arrhephoria festival. The fourth day of every month was sacred to Aphrodite.\nPausanias records that, in Sparta, Aphrodite was worshipped as \"Aphrodite Areia\", which means \"warlike\". This epithet stresses Aphrodite's connections to Ares, with whom she had extramarital relations. Pausanias also records that, in Sparta and on Cythera, a number of extremely ancient cult statues of Aphrodite portrayed her bearing arms. Other cult statues showed her bound in chains.\nAphrodite was the patron goddess of prostitutes of all varieties, ranging from \"pornai\" (cheap street prostitutes typically owned as slaves by wealthy pimps) to \"hetairai\" (expensive, well-educated hired companions, who were usually self-employed and sometimes provided sex to their customers). The city of Corinth was renowned throughout the ancient world for its many \"hetairai\", who had a widespread reputation for being among the most skilled, but also the most expensive, prostitutes in the Greek world. Corinth also had a major temple to Aphrodite located on the Acrocorinth and was one of the main centers of her cult. Records of numerous dedications to Aphrodite made by successful courtesans have survived in poems and in pottery inscriptions. References to Aphrodite in association with prostitution are found in Corinth as well as on the islands of Cyprus, Cythera, and Sicily. Aphrodite's Mesopotamian precursor Inanna-Ishtar was also closely associated with prostitution.\nScholars in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries believed that the cult of Aphrodite may have involved ritual prostitution, an assumption based on ambiguous passages in certain ancient texts, particularly a fragment of a \"skolion\" by the Boeotian poet Pindar, which mentions prostitutes in Corinth in association with Aphrodite. Modern scholars now dismiss the notion of ritual prostitution in Greece as a \"historiographic myth\" with no factual basis.\nHellenistic and Roman periods.\nDuring the Hellenistic period, the Greeks identified Aphrodite with the ancient Egyptian goddesses Hathor and Isis. Aphrodite was the patron goddess of the Lagid queens and Queen Arsinoe II was identified as her mortal incarnation. Aphrodite was worshipped in Alexandria and had numerous temples in and around the city. Arsinoe II introduced the cult of Adonis to Alexandria and many of the women there partook in it. The Tessarakonteres, a gigantic catamaran galley designed by Archimedes for Ptolemy IV Philopator, had a circular temple to Aphrodite on it with a marble statue of the goddess herself. In the second century BC, Ptolemy VIII Physcon and his wives Cleopatra II and Cleopatra III dedicated a temple to Aphrodite Hathor at Philae. Statuettes of Aphrodite for personal devotion became common in Egypt starting in the early Ptolemaic times and extending until long after Egypt became a Roman province.\nThe ancient Romans identified Aphrodite with their goddess Venus, who was originally a goddess of agricultural fertility, vegetation, and springtime. According to the Roman historian Livy, Aphrodite and Venus were officially identified in the third century BC when the cult of \"Venus Erycina\" was introduced to Rome from the Greek sanctuary of Aphrodite on Mount Eryx in Sicily. After this point, Romans adopted Aphrodite's iconography and myths and applied them to Venus. Because Aphrodite was the mother of the Trojan hero Aeneas in Greek mythology and the Roman tradition claimed Aeneas as the founder of Rome, Venus became venerated as \"Venus Genetrix\", the mother of the entire Roman nation. Julius Caesar claimed to be directly descended from Aeneas's son Iulus and became a strong proponent of the cult of Venus. This precedent was later followed by his nephew Augustus and the later emperors claiming succession from him.\nThis syncretism greatly impacted Greek worship of Aphrodite. During the Roman era, the cults of Aphrodite in many Greek cities began to emphasize her relationship with Troy and Aeneas. They also began to adopt distinctively Roman elements, portraying Aphrodite as more maternal, more militaristic, and more concerned with administrative bureaucracy. She was claimed as a divine guardian by many political magistrates. Appearances of Aphrodite in Greek literature also vastly proliferated, usually showing Aphrodite in a characteristically Roman manner.\nMythology.\nBirth.\nAphrodite is usually said to have been born near her chief center of worship, Paphos, on the island of Cyprus, which is why she is sometimes called \"Cyprian\", especially in the poetic works of Sappho. The Sanctuary of Aphrodite Paphia, marking her birthplace, was a place of pilgrimage in the ancient world for centuries. Other versions of her myth have her born near the island of Cythera, hence another of her names, \"Cytherea\". Cythera was a stopping place for trade and culture between Crete and the Peloponesus, so these stories may preserve traces of the migration of Aphrodite's cult from the Middle East to mainland Greece.\nAccording to the version of her birth recounted by Hesiod in his \"Theogony\", Cronus severed Uranus' genitals and threw them behind him into the sea. The foam from his genitals gave rise to Aphrodite (hence her name, which Hesiod interprets as \"foam-arisen\"), while the Giants, the Erinyes (furies), and the Meliae emerged from the drops of his blood. Hesiod states that the genitals \"were carried over the sea a long time, and white foam arose from the immortal flesh; with it a girl grew\". After Aphrodite was born from the sea-foam, she washed up to shore in the presence of the other gods. Hesiod's account of Aphrodite's birth following Uranus's castration is probably derived from \"The Song of Kumarbi\", an ancient Hittite epic poem in which the god Kumarbi overthrows his father Anu, the god of the sky, and bites off his genitals, causing him to become pregnant and give birth to Anu's children, which include Ishtar and her brother Teshub, the Hittite storm god.\nIn the \"Iliad\", Aphrodite is described as the daughter of Zeus and Dione. Dione's name appears to be a feminine cognate to \"Dios\" and \"Dion\", which are oblique forms of the name \"Zeus\". Zeus and Dione shared a cult at Dodona in northwestern Greece. In the \"Theogony\", Hesiod describes Dione as an Oceanid, but Apollodorus makes her the thirteenth Titan, child of Gaia and Uranus.\nMarriage.\nAphrodite is consistently portrayed as a nubile, infinitely desirable adult, having had no childhood. She is often depicted nude. In the \"Iliad\", Aphrodite is the apparently unmarried consort of Ares, the god of war, and the wife of Hephaestus is a different goddess named Charis. Likewise, in Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Aphrodite is unmarried and the wife of Hephaestus is Aglaea, the youngest of the three Charites.\nIn Book Eight of the \"Odyssey\", however, the blind singer Demodocus describes Aphrodite as the wife of Hephaestus and tells how she committed adultery with Ares during the Trojan War. The sun-god Helios saw Aphrodite and Ares having sex in Hephaestus's bed and warned Hephaestus, who fashioned a fine, near invisible net. The next time Ares and Aphrodite had sex together, the net trapped them both. Hephaestus brought all the gods into the bedchamber to laugh at the captured adulterers, but Apollo, Hermes, and Poseidon had sympathy for Ares and Poseidon agreed to pay Hephaestus for Ares's release. Aphrodite returned to her temple in Cyprus, where she was attended by the Charites. This narrative probably originated as a Greek folk tale, originally independent of the \"Odyssey\". In a much later interpolated detail, Ares put the young soldier Alectryon by the door to warn of Helios's arrival but Alectryon fell asleep on guard duty. Helios discovered the two and alerted Hephaestus; Ares in rage turned Alectryon into a rooster, which unfailingly crows to announce the sunrise.\nAfter exposing them, Hephaestus asks Zeus for his wedding gifts and dowry to be returned to him; by the time of the Trojan War, he is married to Charis/Aglaea, one of the Graces, apparently divorced from Aphrodite. Afterwards, it was generally Ares who was regarded as the husband or official consort of the goddess; on the Fran\u00e7ois Vase, the two arrive at the wedding of Peleus and Thetis on the same chariot, as do Zeus with Hera and Poseidon with Amphitrite. The poets Pindar and Aeschylus refer to Ares as Aphrodite's husband.\nLater stories were invented to explain Aphrodite's marriage to Hephaestus. In the most famous story, Zeus hastily married Aphrodite to Hephaestus in order to prevent the other gods from fighting over her. In another version of the myth, Hephaestus gave his mother Hera a golden throne, but when she sat on it, she became trapped and he refused to let her go until she agreed to give him Aphrodite's hand in marriage. Hephaestus was overjoyed to be married to the goddess of beauty, and forged her beautiful jewelry, including a \"strophion\" () known as the (), a saltire-shaped undergarment (usually translated as the girdle of Aphrodite), which accentuated her breasts and made her even more irresistible to men. Such \"strophia\" were commonly used in depictions of the Near Eastern goddesses Ishtar and Atargatis.\nAttendants.\nAphrodite is almost always accompanied by Eros, the god of lust and sexual desire. In his \"Theogony\", Hesiod describes Eros as one of the four original primeval forces born at the beginning of time, but, after the birth of Aphrodite from the sea foam, he is joined by Himeros and, together, they become Aphrodite's constant companions. In early Greek art, Eros and Himeros are both shown as idealized handsome youths with wings. The Greek lyric poets regarded the power of Eros and Himeros as dangerous, compulsive, and impossible for anyone to resist. In modern times, Eros is often seen as Aphrodite's son, but this is actually a comparatively late innovation. A \"scholion\" on Theocritus's \"Idylls\" remarks that the sixth-century BC poet Sappho had described Eros as the son of Aphrodite and Uranus, but the first surviving reference to Eros as Aphrodite's son comes from Apollonius of Rhodes's \"Argonautica\", written in the third century BC, which makes him the son of Aphrodite and Ares. Later, the Romans, who saw Venus as a mother goddess, seized on this idea of Eros as Aphrodite's son and popularized it, making it the predominant portrayal in works on mythology until the present day.\nAphrodite's main attendants were the three Charites, whom Hesiod identifies as the daughters of Zeus and Eurynome and names as Aglaea (\"Splendor\"), Euphrosyne (\"Good Cheer\"), and Thalia (\"Abundance\"). The Charites had been worshipped as goddesses in Greece since the beginning of Greek history, long before Aphrodite was introduced to the pantheon. Aphrodite's other set of attendants was the three Horae (the \"Hours\"), whom Hesiod identifies as the daughters of Zeus and Themis and names as Eunomia (\"Good Order\"), Dike (\"Justice\"), and Eirene (\"Peace\"). Aphrodite was also sometimes accompanied by Harmonia, her daughter by Ares, and Hebe, the daughter of Zeus and Hera.\nThe fertility god Priapus was usually considered to be Aphrodite's son by Dionysus, but he was sometimes also described as her son by Hermes, Adonis, or even Zeus. A \"scholion\" on Apollonius of Rhodes's \"Argonautica\" states that, while Aphrodite was pregnant with Priapus, Hera envied her and applied an evil potion to her belly while she was sleeping to ensure that the child would be hideous. In another version, Hera cursed Aphrodite's unborn son because he had been fathered by Zeus. When Aphrodite gave birth, she was horrified to see that the child had a massive, permanently erect penis, a potbelly, and a huge tongue. Aphrodite abandoned the infant to die in the wilderness, but a herdsman found him and raised him, later discovering that Priapus could use his massive penis to aid in the growth of plants.\nAnchises.\nThe \"First Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite\" (https://), which was probably composed sometime in the mid-seventh century BC, describes how Zeus once became annoyed with Aphrodite for causing deities to fall in love with mortals, so he caused her to fall in love with Anchises, a handsome mortal shepherd who lived in the foothills beneath Mount Ida near the city of Troy. Aphrodite appears to Anchises in the form of a tall, beautiful, mortal virgin while he is alone in his home. Anchises sees her dressed in bright clothing and gleaming jewelry, with her breasts shining with divine radiance. He asks her if she is Aphrodite and promises to build her an altar on top of the mountain if she will bless him and his family.\nAphrodite lies and tells him that she is not a goddess, but the daughter of one of the noble families of Phrygia. She claims to be able to understand the Trojan language because she had a Trojan nurse as a child and says that she found herself on the mountainside after she was snatched up by Hermes while dancing in a celebration in honor of Artemis, the goddess of virginity. Aphrodite tells Anchises that she is still a virgin and begs him to take her to his parents. Anchises immediately becomes overcome with mad lust for Aphrodite and swears that he will have sex with her. Anchises takes Aphrodite, with her eyes cast downwards, to his bed, which is covered in the furs of lions and bears. He then strips her naked and makes love to her.\nAfter the lovemaking is complete, Aphrodite reveals her true divine form. Anchises is terrified, but Aphrodite consoles him and promises that she will bear him a son. She prophesies that their son will be the demigod Aeneas, who will be raised by the nymphs of the wilderness for five years before going to Troy to become a nobleman like his father. The story of Aeneas's conception is also mentioned in Hesiod's \"Theogony\" and in Book II of Homer's \"Iliad\".\nAdonis.\nThe myth of Aphrodite and Adonis is probably derived from the ancient Sumerian legend of Inanna and Dumuzid. The Greek name (\"Ad\u014dnis\", ) is derived from the Canaanite word \"\u02bcad\u014dn\", meaning \"lord\". The earliest known Greek reference to Adonis comes from a fragment of a poem by the Lesbian poet Sappho (c.\u2009630 \u2013 c.\u2009570 BC), in which a chorus of young girls asks Aphrodite what they can do to mourn Adonis's death. Aphrodite replies that they must beat their breasts and tear their tunics. Later references flesh out the story with more details. According to the retelling of the story found in the poem \"Metamorphoses\" by the Roman poet Ovid (43 BC \u2013 17/18 AD), Adonis was the son of Myrrha, who was cursed by Aphrodite with insatiable lust for her own father, King Cinyras of Cyprus, after Myrrha's mother bragged that her daughter was more beautiful than the goddess. Driven out after becoming pregnant, Myrrha was changed into a myrrh tree, but still gave birth to Adonis.\nAphrodite found the baby and took him to the underworld to be fostered by Persephone. She returned for him once he was grown and discovered him to be strikingly handsome. Persephone wanted to keep Adonis, resulting in a custody battle between the two goddesses over whom should rightly possess Adonis. Zeus settled the dispute by decreeing that Adonis would spend one third of the year with Aphrodite, one third with Persephone, and one third with whomever he chose. Adonis chose to spend that time with Aphrodite. Then, one day, while Adonis was hunting, he was wounded by a wild boar and bled to death in Aphrodite's arms. In a semi-mocking work, the \"Dialogues of the Gods\", the satirical author Lucian comedically relates how a frustrated Aphrodite complains to the moon goddess Selene about her son Eros making Persephone fall in love with Adonis and now she has to share him with her.\nIn different versions of the story, the boar was either sent by Ares, who was jealous that Aphrodite was spending so much time with Adonis, or by Artemis, who wanted revenge against Aphrodite for having killed her devoted follower Hippolytus. In another version, Apollo in fury changed himself into a boar and killed Adonis because Aphrodite had blinded his son Erymanthus when he stumbled upon Aphrodite naked as she was bathing after intercourse with Adonis. The story also provides an etiology for Aphrodite's associations with certain flowers. Reportedly, as she mourned Adonis's death, she caused anemones to grow wherever his blood fell and declared a festival on the anniversary of his death. In one version of the story, Aphrodite injured herself on a thorn from a rose bush and the rose, which had previously been white, was stained red by her blood. According to Lucian's \"On the Syrian Goddess\", each year during the festival of Adonis, the Adonis River in Lebanon (now known as the Abraham River) ran red with blood.\nThe myth of Adonis is associated with the festival of the Adonia, which was celebrated by Greek women every year in midsummer. The festival, which was evidently already celebrated in Lesbos by Sappho's time, seems to have first become popular in Athens in the mid-fifth century BC. At the start of the festival, the women would plant a \"garden of Adonis\", a small garden planted inside a small basket or a shallow piece of broken pottery containing a variety of quick-growing plants, such as lettuce and fennel, or even quick-sprouting grains such as wheat and barley. The women would then climb ladders to the roofs of their houses, where they would place the gardens out under the heat of the summer sun. The plants would sprout in the sunlight but wither quickly in the heat. Then the women would mourn and lament loudly over the death of Adonis, tearing their clothes and beating their breasts in a public display of grief.\nDivine favoritism.\nIn Hesiod's \"Works and Days\", Zeus orders Aphrodite to make Pandora, the first woman, physically beautiful and sexually attractive. so \"men will love to embrace\" her. Aphrodite \"spills grace\" over Pandora's head and equips her with \"painful desire and knee-weakening anguish\". Aphrodite's attendants, Peitho, the Charites, and the Horae, adorn Pandora with finery and jewelry.\nAfter the deaths of their parents, the orphaned Cleothera along with Merope were raised by Aphrodite. The other Olympian goddesses also blessed the girls with gifts and blessings; Hera gave them beauty, Artemis high stature, and Athena taught them women's crafts. When Cleothera and Merope were of age, Aphrodite consulted with Zeus to secure happy marriages for them.\nAccording to one myth, Aphrodite aided Hippomenes, a noble youth who wished to marry Atalanta, a maiden who was renowned throughout the land for her beauty, but who refused to marry any man unless he could outrun her in a footrace. Atalanta was an exceedingly swift runner and she beheaded all of the men who lost to her. Aphrodite gave Hippomenes three golden apples from the Garden of the Hesperides and instructed him to toss them in front of Atalanta as he raced her. Hippomenes obeyed Aphrodite's order and Atalanta, seeing the beautiful, golden fruits, bent down to pick up each one, allowing Hippomenes to outrun her. In the version of the story from Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", Hippomenes forgets to repay Aphrodite for her aid, so she causes the couple to become inflamed with lust while they are staying at the temple of Cybele. The couple desecrate the temple by having sex in it, leading Cybele to turn them into lions as punishment.\nThe myth of Pygmalion is first mentioned by the third-century BC Greek writer Philostephanus of Cyrene, but is first recounted in detail in Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\". According to Ovid, Pygmalion was an exceedingly handsome sculptor from the island of Cyprus, who was so sickened by the immorality of women that he refused to marry. He fell madly and passionately in love with the ivory cult statue he was carving of Aphrodite and longed to marry it. Because Pygmalion was extremely pious and devoted to Aphrodite, the goddess brought the statue to life. Pygmalion married the girl the statue became and they had a son named Paphos, after whom the capital of Cyprus received its name. Pseudo-Apollodorus later mentions \"Metharme, daughter of Pygmalion, king of Cyprus\".\nAnger myths.\nAphrodite generously rewarded those who honored her, but also punished those who disrespected her, often quite brutally. A myth described in Apollonius of Rhodes's \"Argonautica\" and later summarized in the \"Bibliotheca\" of Pseudo-Apollodorus tells how, when the women of the island of Lemnos refused to sacrifice to Aphrodite, the goddess cursed them to stink horribly so that their husbands would never have sex with them. Instead, their husbands started having sex with their Thracian slave-girls. In anger, the women of Lemnos murdered the entire male population of the island, as well as all the Thracian slaves. When Jason and his crew of Argonauts arrived on Lemnos, they mated with the sex-starved women under Aphrodite's approval and repopulated the island. From then on, the women of Lemnos never disrespected Aphrodite again.\nIn Euripides's tragedy \"Hippolytus\", which was first performed at the City Dionysia in 428 BC, Theseus's son Hippolytus worships only Artemis, the goddess of virginity, and refuses to engage in any form of sexual contact. Aphrodite is infuriated by his prideful behavior and, in the prologue to the play, she declares that, by honoring only Artemis and refusing to venerate her, Hippolytus has directly challenged her authority. Aphrodite therefore causes Hippolytus's stepmother, Phaedra, to fall in love with him, knowing Hippolytus will reject her. After being rejected, Phaedra commits suicide and leaves a suicide note to Theseus telling him that she killed herself because Hippolytus attempted to rape her. Theseus prays to Poseidon to kill Hippolytus for his transgression. Poseidon sends a wild bull to scare Hippolytus's horses as he is riding by the sea in his chariot, causing the horses to bolt and smash the chariot against the cliffs, dragging Hippolytus to a bloody death across the rocky shoreline. The play concludes with Artemis vowing to kill Aphrodite's own mortal beloved (presumably Adonis) in revenge.\nGlaucus of Corinth angered Aphrodite by refusing to let his horses for chariot racing mate, since doing so would hinder their speed. During the chariot race at the funeral games of King Pelias, Aphrodite drove his horses mad and they tore him apart.\nPolyphonte was a young woman who chose a virginal life with Artemis instead of marriage and children, as favoured by Aphrodite. Aphrodite cursed her, causing her to have children by a bear. The resulting bear-like offspring Agrius and Oreius were wild cannibals who incurred the hatred of Zeus for attacking traveling strangers. Ultimately, Ares (who was Polyphonte's grandfather) and Hermes (who was originally dispatched by Zeus to kill them) transformed all Polyphonte, Agrius, and Oreius into birds of ill omen while the servant who begged for mercy was transformed into a woodpecker.\nAccording to Apollodorus, a jealous Aphrodite cursed Eos, the goddess of dawn, to be perpetually in love and have insatiable sexual desire because Eos once had lain with Aphrodite's sweetheart Ares.\nAccording to Ovid in his \"Metamorphoses\" (book 10.238 ff.), Propoetides who are the daughters of Propoetus from the city of Amathus on the island of Cyprus denied Aphrodite's divinity and failed to worship her properly. Therefore, Aphrodite turned them into the world's first prostitutes. According to Diodorus Siculus, when the Rhodian sea nymphe Halia's six sons by Poseidon arrogantly refused to let Aphrodite land upon their shore, the goddess cursed them with insanity. In their madness, they raped Halia. As punishment, Poseidon buried them in the island's sea-caverns.\nXanthius, a descendant of Bellerophon, had two children: Leucippus and an unnamed daughter. Through the wrath of Aphrodite (reasons unknown), Leucippus fell in love with his own sister. They started a secret relationship but the girl was already betrothed to another man and he went on to inform her father Xanthius, without telling him the name of the seducer. Xanthius went straight to his daughter's chamber where she was together with Leucippus right at the moment. On hearing him enter, she tried to escape, but Xanthius hit her with a dagger, thinking that he was slaying the seducer, and killed her. Leucippus, failing to recognise his father at first, slew him. When the truth was revealed, he had to leave the country and took part in colonisation of Crete and the lands in Asia Minor.\nQueen Cenchreis of Cyprus, wife of King Cinyras, bragged that her daughter Myrrha was more beautiful than Aphrodite. Therefore, Myrrha was cursed by Aphrodite with insatiable lust for her own father, King Cinyras of Cyprus and he slept with her unknowingly in the dark. She eventually transformed into the myrrh tree and gave birth to Adonis in this form. In another version of the same story, King of Assyria Theias was the father of Myrrha and Adonis, and again Aphrodite urged Myrrha, or Smyrna, to commit incest with her father, Theias. Myrrha's nurse helped with the scheme. When Theias discovered this, he flew into a rage, chasing his daughter with a knife. The gods turned her into a myrrh tree and Adonis eventually sprung from this tree. It was also said that Myrrha fled from her father, and Aphrodite transformed her into a tree. Adonis was then born when Theias shot an arrow into the tree or when a boar used its tusks to tear the tree's bark off. Cinyras also had three other daughters: Braesia, Laogora, and Orsedice. These girls by the wrath of Aphrodite (reasons unknown) cohabited with foreigners and ended their life in Egypt.\nThe Muse Clio derided the goddess' own love for Adonis. Therefore, Clio fell in love with Pierus, son of Magnes and bore Hyacinth.\nAegiale was a daughter of Adrastus and Amphithea and was married to Diomedes. Because of anger of Aphrodite, whom Diomedes had wounded in the war against Troy, she had multiple lovers, including a certain Hippolytus. when Aegiale went so far as to threaten his life, he fled to Italy. According to Stesichorus and Hesiod while Tyndareus sacrificing to the gods he forgot Aphrodite, therefore the goddess made his daughters twice and thrice wed and deserters of their husbands. Timandra deserted Echemus and went and came to Phyleus and Clytaemnestra deserted Agamemnon and lay with Aegisthus who was a worse mate for her and eventually killed her husband with her lover and finally, Helen of Troy deserted Menelaus under the influence of Aphrodite for Paris and her unfaithfulness eventually causes the War of Troy. As a result of her actions, Aphrodite caused the War of Troy in order to take Priam's kingdom and pass it down to her descendants.\nIn one of the versions of the legend, Pasiphae did not make offerings to the goddess Venus [Aphrodite]. Because of this, Venus [Aphrodite] inspired in her an unnatural love for a bull resulting in the birth of the Minotaur or she cursed her because she was Helios's daughter who revealed her adultery to Hephaestus. For Helios' own tale-telling, she cursed him with uncontrollable lust over the mortal princess Leucothoe, which led to him abandoning his then-lover Clytie, leaving her heartbroken.\nLysippe was the mother of Tanais by Berossos. Her son only venerated Ares and was fully devoted to war, neglecting love and marriage. Aphrodite cursed him with falling in love with his own mother. Preferring to die rather than give up his chastity, he threw himself into the river Amazonius, which was subsequently renamed Tanais.\nAccording to Hyginus, Orpheus's mother Calliope of the Muses at the behest of Zeus, judged the dispute between the goddesses Aphrodite and Persephone over Adonis and decided that both shall possess him half of the year. This enraged Venus [Aphrodite], because she had not been granted what she thought was her right. Therefore, Venus [Aphrodite] inspired love for Orpheus in the women of Thrace, causing them to tear him apart as each of them sought Orpheus for herself.\nAphrodite personally witnessed the young huntress Rhodopis swear eternal devotion and chastity to Artemis when she joined her group. Aphrodite then summoned her son Eros, and convinced him that such lifestyle was an insult to them both. So under her command, Eros made Rhodopis and Euthynicus, another young hunter who had shunned love and romance just like her, to fall in love with each other. Despite their chaste life, Rhodopis and Euthynicus withdrew to some cavern where they violated their vows. Artemis was not slow to take notice after seeing Aphrodite laugh, so she changed Rhodopis into a fountain as a punishment instead.\nJudgment of Paris and Trojan War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe myth of the Judgement of Paris is mentioned briefly in the \"Iliad\", but is described in depth in an epitome of the \"Cypria\", a lost poem of the Epic Cycle, which records that all the gods and goddesses as well as various mortals were invited to the marriage of Peleus and Thetis (the eventual parents of Achilles). Only Eris, goddess of discord, was not invited. She was annoyed at this, so she arrived with a golden apple inscribed with the word \u03ba\u03b1\u03bb\u03bb\u03af\u03c3\u03c4\u1fc3 (kallist\u0113i, \"for the fairest\"), which she threw among the goddesses. Aphrodite, Hera, and Athena all claimed to be the fairest, and thus the rightful owner of the apple.\nThe goddesses chose to place the matter before Zeus, who, not wanting to favor one of the goddesses, put the choice into the hands of Paris, a Trojan prince. After bathing in the spring of Mount Ida where Troy was situated, the goddesses appeared before Paris for his decision. In the extant ancient depictions of the Judgement of Paris, Aphrodite is only occasionally represented nude, and Athena and Hera are always fully clothed. Since the Renaissance, however, Western paintings have typically portrayed all three goddesses as completely naked.All three goddesses were ideally beautiful and Paris could not decide between them, so they resorted to bribes. Hera tried to bribe Paris with power over all Asia and Europe, and Athena offered wisdom, fame and glory in battle, but Aphrodite promised Paris that, if he were to choose her as the fairest, she would let him marry the most beautiful woman on earth. This woman was Helen, who was already married to King Menelaus of Sparta. Paris selected Aphrodite and awarded her the apple. The other two goddesses were enraged and, as a direct result, sided with the Greeks in the Trojan War.\nAphrodite plays an important and active role throughout the entirety of Homer's \"Iliad\". In Book III, she rescues Paris from Menelaus after he foolishly challenges him to a one-on-one duel. She then appears to Helen in the form of an old woman and attempts to persuade her to have sex with Paris, reminding her of his physical beauty and athletic prowess. Helen immediately recognizes Aphrodite by her beautiful neck, perfect breasts, and flashing eyes and sharply chides the goddess. Aphrodite rebukes Helen, reminding her that, if she vexes her, she will punish her just as much as she has favored her already. Helen demurely follows Aphrodite's command.\nIn Book V, Aphrodite charges into battle to rescue her son Aeneas from the Greek hero Diomedes. Diomedes recognizes Aphrodite as a \"weakling\" goddess and, thrusting his spear under Athena's guidance, nicks her wrist through her \"ambrosial robe\". Aphrodite borrows Ares's chariot to ride back to Mount Olympus, where she meets Dione. Aphrodite complains to her mother about Diomedes' handiwork, and Dione consoles her daughter with examples of gods wounded by mortals and notes that Diomedes is risking his life by fighting against the gods. In fact, Diomedes subsequently fought both Apollo and Ares but lived to an old age, his wife Aegialia, however, took other lovers with the help of the vengeful Aphrodite and never permitted him to return home to Argos after the war. Dione then heals Aphrodite's wounds while Zeus chides her for putting herself in danger, reminding her that \"her specialty is love, not war.\" According to Walter Burkert, this scene directly parallels a scene from Tablet VI of the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\" in which Ishtar, Aphrodite's Akkadian precursor, cries to her mother Antu after the hero Gilgamesh rejects her sexual advances, but she is mildly rebuked by her father Anu. In Book XIV of the \"Iliad\", during the \"Dios Apate\" episode, Aphrodite lends her \"kestos himas\" to Hera for the purpose of seducing Zeus and distracting him from the battlefield, so the gods could interfere without the fear of Zeus. In the \"Theomachia\" in Book XXI, Aphrodite again enters the battlefield to carry Ares away after he is wounded by Athena.\nOffspring.\nSometimes poets and dramatists recounted ancient traditions, which varied, and sometimes they invented new details; later scholiasts might draw on either or simply guess. Thus while Aeneas and Phobos were regularly described as offspring of Aphrodite, others listed here such as Priapus and Eros were sometimes said to be children of Aphrodite but with varying fathers and sometimes given other mothers or none at all.\nIconography.\nSymbols.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nAphrodite's most prominent avian symbol was the dove, which was originally an important symbol of her Near Eastern precursor Inanna-Ishtar. (In fact, the ancient Greek word for \"dove\", \"perister\u00e1\", may be derived from a Semitic phrase \"pera\u1e25 I\u0161tar\", meaning \"bird of Ishtar\".) Aphrodite frequently appears with doves in ancient Greek pottery and the temple of Aphrodite Pandemos on the southwest slope of the Athenian Acropolis was decorated with relief sculptures of doves with knotted fillets in their beaks. Votive offerings of small, white, marble doves were also discovered in the temple of Aphrodite at Daphni. In addition to her associations with doves, Aphrodite was also closely linked with sparrows and she is described riding in a chariot pulled by sparrows in Sappho's \"Ode to Aphrodite\". According to myth, the dove was originally a nymph named Peristera who helped Aphrodite win in a flower-picking contest over her son Eros; for this Eros turned her into a dove, but Aphrodite took the dove under her wing and made it her sacred bird.\nBecause of her connections to the sea, Aphrodite was associated with a number of different types of water fowl, including swans, geese, and ducks. Aphrodite's other symbols included the sea, conch shells, and roses. The rose and myrtle flowers were both sacred to Aphrodite. A myth explaining the origin of Aphrodite's connection to myrtle goes that originally the myrtle was a maiden, Myrina, a dedicated priestess of Aphrodite. When her previous betrothed carried her away from the temple to marry her, Myrina killed him, and Aphrodite turned her into a myrtle, forever under her protection. Her most important fruit emblem was the apple, and in myth, she turned Melos, childhood friend and kin-in-law to Adonis, into an apple after he killed himself, mourning over Adonis' death. Likewise, Melos's wife Pelia was turned into a dove. She was also associated with pomegranates, possibly because the red seeds suggested sexuality or because Greek women sometimes used pomegranates as a method of birth control. In Greek art, Aphrodite is often also accompanied by dolphins and Nereids.\nIn classical art.\nA scene of Aphrodite rising from the sea appears on the back of the Ludovisi Throne (c. 460 BC), which was probably originally part of a massive altar that was constructed as part of the Ionic temple to Aphrodite in the Greek polis of Locri Epizephyrii in Magna Graecia in southern Italy. The throne shows Aphrodite rising from the sea, clad in a diaphanous garment, which is drenched with seawater and clinging to her body, revealing her upturned breasts and the outline of her navel. Her hair hangs dripping as she reaches to two attendants standing barefoot on the rocky shore on either side of her, lifting her out of the water. Scenes with Aphrodite appear in works of classical Greek pottery, including a famous white-ground \"kylix\" by the Pistoxenos Painter dating the between c. 470 and 460 BC, showing her riding on a swan or goose.\nIn c.\u2009364/361 BC, the Athenian sculptor Praxiteles carved the marble statue \"Aphrodite of Knidos\", which Pliny the Elder later praised as the greatest sculpture ever made. The statue showed a nude Aphrodite modestly covering her pubic region while resting against a water pot with her robe draped over it for support. The \"Aphrodite of Knidos\" was the first full-sized statue to depict Aphrodite completely naked and one of the first sculptures that was intended to be viewed from all sides. The statue was purchased by the people of Knidos in around 350 BC and proved to be tremendously influential on later depictions of Aphrodite. The original sculpture has been lost, but written descriptions of it as well several depictions of it on coins are still extant and over sixty copies, small-scale models, and fragments of it have been identified.\nThe Greek painter Apelles of Kos, a contemporary of Praxiteles, produced the panel painting \"Aphrodite Anadyomene\" (\"Aphrodite Rising from the Sea\"). According to Athenaeus, Apelles was inspired to paint the painting after watching the courtesan Phryne take off her clothes, untie her hair, and bathe naked in the sea at Eleusis. The painting was displayed in the Asclepeion on the island of Kos. The \"Aphrodite Anadyomene\" went unnoticed for centuries, but Pliny the Elder records that, in his own time, it was regarded as Apelles's most famous work.\nDuring the Hellenistic and Roman periods, statues depicting Aphrodite proliferated; many of these statues were modeled at least to some extent on Praxiteles's \"Aphrodite of Knidos\". Some statues show Aphrodite crouching naked; others show her wringing water out of her hair as she rises from the sea. Another common type of statue is known as \"Aphrodite Kallipygos\", the name of which is Greek for \"Aphrodite of the Beautiful Buttocks\"; this type of sculpture shows Aphrodite lifting her \"peplos\" to display her buttocks to the viewer while looking back at them from over her shoulder. The ancient Romans produced massive numbers of copies of Greek sculptures of Aphrodite and more sculptures of Aphrodite have survived from antiquity than of any other deity.\nPost-classical culture.\nMiddle Ages.\nEarly Christians frequently adapted pagan iconography to suit Christian purposes. In the Early Middle Ages, Christians adapted elements of Aphrodite/Venus's iconography and applied them to Eve and prostitutes, but also female saints and even the Virgin Mary. Christians in the east reinterpreted the story of Aphrodite's birth as a metaphor for baptism; in a Coptic stele from the sixth century AD, a female orant is shown wearing Aphrodite's conch shell as a sign that she is newly baptized. Throughout the Middle Ages, villages and communities across Europe still maintained folk tales and traditions about Aphrodite/Venus and travelers reported a wide variety of stories. Numerous Roman mosaics of Venus survived in Britain, preserving memory of the pagan past. In North Africa in the late fifth century AD, Fulgentius of Ruspe encountered mosaics of Aphrodite and reinterpreted her as a symbol of the sin of Lust, arguing that she was shown naked because \"the sin of lust is never cloaked\" and that she was often shown \"swimming\" because \"all lust suffers shipwreck of its affairs\". He also argued that she was associated with doves and conches because these are symbols of copulation, and that she was associated with roses because \"as the rose gives pleasure, but is swept away by the swift movement of the seasons, so lust is pleasant for a moment, but is swept away forever.\"\nWhile Fulgentius had appropriated Aphrodite as a symbol of Lust, Isidore of Seville (c. 560\u2013636) interpreted her as a symbol of marital procreative sex and declared that the moral of the story of Aphrodite's birth is that sex can only be holy in the presence of semen, blood, and heat, which he regarded as all being necessary for procreation. Meanwhile, Isidore denigrated Aphrodite/Venus's son Eros/Cupid as a \"demon of fornication\" (\"daemon fornicationis\"). Aphrodite/Venus was best known to Western European scholars through her appearances in Virgil's \"Aeneid\" and Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\". Venus is mentioned in the Latin poem \"Pervigilium Veneris\" (\"The Eve of Saint Venus\"), written in the third or fourth century AD, and in Giovanni Boccaccio's \"Genealogia Deorum Gentilium\".\nSince the Late Middle Ages. the myth of the \"Venusberg\" (German; French \"Mont de V\u00e9nus\", \"Mountain of Venus\") \u2013 a subterranean realm ruled by Venus, hidden underneath Christian Europe \u2013 became a motif of European folklore rendered in various legends and epics. In German folklore of the 16th century, the narrative becomes associated with the minnesinger Tannh\u00e4user, and in that form the myth was taken up in later literature and opera.\nArt.\nAphrodite is the central figure in Sandro Botticelli's painting \"Primavera\", which has been described as \"one of the most written about, and most controversial paintings in the world\", and \"one of the most popular paintings in Western art\". The story of Aphrodite's birth from the foam was a popular subject matter for painters during the Italian Renaissance, who were attempting to consciously reconstruct Apelles of Kos's lost masterpiece \"Aphrodite Anadyomene\" based on the literary \"ekphrasis\" of it preserved by Cicero and Pliny the Elder. Artists also drew inspiration from Ovid's description of the birth of Venus in his \"Metamorphoses\". Sandro Botticelli's \"The Birth of Venus\" (c. 1485) was also partially inspired by a description by Poliziano of a relief on the subject. Later Italian renditions of the same scene include Titian's \"Venus Anadyomene\" (c.\u20091525) and Raphael's painting in the \"Stufetta del cardinal Bibbiena\" (1516). Titian's biographer Giorgio Vasari identified all of Titian's paintings of naked women as paintings of \"Venus\", including an erotic painting from c.\u20091534, which he called the \"Venus of Urbino\", even though the painting does not contain any of Aphrodite/Venus's traditional iconography and the woman in it is clearly shown in a contemporary setting, not a classical one.\n\"The Birth of Venus\" (1863) by Alexandre Cabanel Jacques-Louis David's final work was his 1824 \"magnum opus\", \"Mars Being Disarmed by Venus\", which combines elements of classical, Renaissance, traditional French art, and contemporary artistic styles. While he was working on the painting, David described it, saying, \"This is the last picture I want to paint, but I want to surpass myself in it. I will put the date of my seventy-five years on it and afterwards I will never again pick up my brush.\" The painting was exhibited first in Brussels and then in Paris, where over 10,000 people came to see it. Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres's painting \"Venus Anadyomene\" was one of his major works. Louis Geofroy described it as a \"dream of youth realized with the power of maturity, a happiness that few obtain, artists or others.\" Th\u00e9ophile Gautier declared: \"Nothing remains of the marvelous painting of the Greeks, but surely if anything could give the idea of antique painting as it was conceived following the statues of Phidias and the poems of Homer, it is M. Ingres's painting: the \"Venus Anadyomene\" of Apelles has been found.\" Other critics dismissed it as a piece of unimaginative, sentimental kitsch, but Ingres himself considered it to be among his greatest works and used the same figure as the model for his later 1856 painting \"La Source\".\nPaintings of Venus were favorites of the late nineteenth-century Academic artists in France. In 1863, Alexandre Cabanel won widespread critical acclaim at the Paris Salon for his painting \"The Birth of Venus\", which the French emperor Napoleon III immediately purchased for his own personal art collection. \u00c9douard Manet's 1865 painting \"Olympia\" parodied the nude Venuses of the Academic painters, particularly Cabanel's \"Birth of Venus\". In 1867, the English Academic painter Frederic Leighton displayed his \"Venus Disrobing for the Bath\" at the academy. The art critic J. B. Atkinson praised it, declaring that \"Mr Leighton, instead of adopting corrupt Roman notions regarding Venus such as Rubens embodied, has wisely reverted to the Greek idea of Aphrodite, a goddess worshipped, and by artists painted, as the perfection of female grace and beauty\". A year later, the English painter Dante Gabriel Rossetti, a founding member of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, painted \"Venus Verticordia\" (Latin for \"Aphrodite, the Changer of Hearts\"), showing Aphrodite as a nude red-headed woman in a garden of roses. Though he was reproached for his \"outr\u00e9\" subject matter, Rossetti refused to alter the painting and it was soon purchased by J. Mitchell of Bradford. In 1879, William Adolphe Bouguereau exhibited at the Paris Salon his own \"Birth of Venus\", which imitated the classical tradition of \"contrapposto\" and was met with widespread critical acclaim, rivalling the popularity of Cabanel's version from nearly two decades prior.\nLiterature.\nWilliam Shakespeare's erotic narrative poem \"Venus and Adonis\" (1593), a retelling of the courtship of Aphrodite and Adonis from Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", was the most popular of all his works published within his own lifetime. Six editions of it were published before Shakespeare's death (more than any of his other works) and it enjoyed particularly strong popularity among young adults. In 1605, Richard Barnfield lauded it, declaring that the poem had placed Shakespeare's name \"in fames immortall Booke\". Despite this, the poem has received mixed reception from modern critics; Samuel Taylor Coleridge defended it, but Samuel Butler complained that it bored him and C. S. Lewis described an attempted reading of it as \"suffocating\".\nAphrodite appears in Richard Garnett's short story collection \"The Twilight of the Gods and Other Tales\" (1888), in which the gods' temples have been destroyed by Christians. Stories revolving around sculptures of Aphrodite were common in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Examples of such works of literature include the novel \"The Tinted Venus: A Farcical Romance\" (1885) by Thomas Anstey Guthrie and the short story \"The Venus of Ille\" (1887) by Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, both of which are about statues of Aphrodite that come to life. Another noteworthy example is \"Aphrodite in Aulis\" by the Anglo-Irish writer George Moore, which revolves around an ancient Greek family who moves to Aulis. The French writer Pierre Lou\u00ffs titled his erotic historical novel \"\" (1896) after the Greek goddess. The novel enjoyed widespread commercial success, but scandalized French audiences due to its sensuality and its decadent portrayal of Greek society.\nIn the early twentieth century, stories of Aphrodite were used by feminist poets, such as Amy Lowell and Alicia Ostriker. Many of these poems dealt with Aphrodite's legendary birth from the foam of the sea. Other feminist writers, including Claude Cahun, Thit Jensen, and Ana\u00efs Nin also made use of the myth of Aphrodite in their writings. Ever since the publication of Isabel Allende's book \"Aphrodite: A Memoir of the Senses\" in 1998, the name \"Aphrodite\" has been used as a title for dozens of books dealing with all topics even superficially connected to her domain. Frequently these books do not even mention Aphrodite, or mention her only briefly, but make use of her name as a selling point.\nModern worship.\nIn 1938, Gleb Botkin, a Russian immigrant to the United States, founded the Church of Aphrodite, a neopagan religion centered around the worship of a mother goddess, whom its practitioners identified as Aphrodite. The Church of Aphrodite's theology was laid out in the book \"In Search of Reality\", published in 1969, two years before Botkin's death. The book portrayed Aphrodite in a drastically different light than the one in which the Greeks envisioned her, instead casting her as \"the sole Goddess of a somewhat Neoplatonic Pagan monotheism\". It claimed that the worship of Aphrodite had been brought to Greece by the mystic teacher Orpheus, but that the Greeks had misunderstood Orpheus's teachings and had not realized the importance of worshipping Aphrodite alone.\nAphrodite is a major deity in Wicca, a contemporary nature-based syncretic Neopagan religion. Wiccans regard Aphrodite as one aspect of the Goddess and she is frequently invoked by name during enchantments dealing with love and romance. Wiccans regard Aphrodite as the ruler of human emotions, erotic spirituality, creativity, and art. As one of the twelve Olympians, Aphrodite is a major deity within Hellenismos (Hellenic Polytheistic Reconstructionism), a Neopagan religion which seeks to authentically revive and recreate the religion of ancient Greece in the modern world. Unlike Wiccans, Hellenists are usually strictly polytheistic or pantheistic. Hellenists venerate Aphrodite primarily as the goddess of romantic love, but also as a goddess of sexuality, the sea, and war. Her many epithets include \"Sea Born\", \"Killer of Men\", \"She upon the Graves\", \"Fair Sailing\", and \"Ally in War\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1175", "revid": "49917098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1175", "title": "April 1", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearApril 1 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1176", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1176", "title": "Antisymmetric relation", "text": "Type of binary relation\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn mathematics, a binary relation formula_1 on a set formula_2 is antisymmetric if there is no pair of \"distinct\" elements of formula_2 each of which is related by formula_1 to the other. More formally, formula_1 is antisymmetric precisely if for all formula_6\nformula_7\nor equivalently,\nformula_8\nThe definition of antisymmetry says nothing about whether formula_9 actually holds or not for any formula_10. An antisymmetric relation formula_1 on a set formula_2 may be reflexive (that is, formula_9 for all formula_14), irreflexive (that is, formula_9 for no formula_14), or neither reflexive nor irreflexive. A relation is asymmetric if and only if it is both antisymmetric and irreflexive.\nExamples.\nThe divisibility relation on the natural numbers is an important example of an antisymmetric relation. In this context, antisymmetry means that the only way each of two numbers can be divisible by the other is if the two are, in fact, the same number; equivalently, if formula_17 and formula_18 are distinct and formula_17 is a factor of formula_20 then formula_18 cannot be a factor of formula_22 For example, 12 is divisible by 4, but 4 is not divisible by 12.\nThe usual order relation formula_23 on the real numbers is antisymmetric: if for two real numbers formula_24 and formula_25 both inequalities formula_26 and formula_27 hold, then formula_24 and formula_25 must be equal. Similarly, the subset order formula_30 on the subsets of any given set is antisymmetric: given two sets formula_31 and formula_32 if every element in formula_31 also is in formula_34 and every element in formula_34 is also in formula_36 then formula_31 and formula_34 must contain all the same elements and therefore be equal:\nformula_39\nA real-life example of a relation that is typically antisymmetric is \"paid the restaurant bill of\" (understood as restricted to a given occasion). Typically, some people pay their own bills, while others pay for their spouses or friends. As long as no two people pay each other's bills, the relation is antisymmetric.\nProperties.\nPartial and total orders are antisymmetric by definition. A relation can be both symmetric and antisymmetric (in this case, it must be coreflexive), and there are relations which are neither symmetric nor antisymmetric (for example, the \"preys on\" relation on biological species).\nAntisymmetry is different from asymmetry: a relation is asymmetric if and only if it is antisymmetric and irreflexive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1177", "revid": "33959159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1177", "title": "Aleister Crowley", "text": "English occultist (1875\u20131947)\nAleister Crowley ( ; born Edward Alexander Crowley; 12 October 1875 \u2013 1 December 1947) was an English occultist, ceremonial magician, poet, novelist, mountaineer, and painter. He founded the religion of Thelema, identifying himself as the prophet entrusted with guiding humanity into the \u00c6on of Horus in the early 20th century. As a prolific writer, he published widely over the course of his life.\nBorn to a wealthy family in Royal Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, Crowley rejected his parents' fundamentalist Christian Plymouth Brethren faith to pursue an interest in Western esotericism. He was educated at Trinity College at the University of Cambridge, where he focused his attention upon mountaineering and poetry, resulting in several publications. Some biographers allege that here he was recruited into a British intelligence agency, further suggesting that he remained a spy throughout his life. In 1898, he joined the esoteric Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, where he was trained in ceremonial magic by Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers and Allan Bennett. He went mountaineering in Mexico with Oscar Eckenstein, before studying Hindu and Buddhist practices in India. In 1904, he married Rose Edith Kelly, and they honeymooned in Cairo, Egypt, where Crowley wrote down \"The Book of the Law\"\u2014a sacred text that serves as the basis for Thelema, which he said had been dictated to him by a supernatural entity named Aiwass. \"The Book\" announced the start of the \u00c6on of Horus and declared that its followers should \"Do what thou wilt\": seek to align themselves with their True Will via the practice of ceremonial magic.\nAfter the unsuccessful 1905 Kanchenjunga expedition and a visit to India and China, Crowley returned to Britain, where he attracted attention as a prolific author of poetry, novels, and occult literature. In 1907, he and George Cecil Jones co-founded an esoteric order\u2014the A\u2234A\u2234, through which they propagated Thelema. After spending time in Algeria, in 1912 he was initiated into another esoteric order, the German-based Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.); he rose to become the leader of its British branch, which he reformulated in accordance with Thelema. Through O.T.O., Thelemite groups were established in Britain, Australia, and North America. Crowley spent the First World War in the United States, where he took up painting, and campaigned for the German war effort against Britain. His biographers later revealed that he had infiltrated the pro-German movement to assist the British intelligence services. In 1920, he established the Abbey of Thelema, a religious commune in Cefal\u00f9, Sicily, where he lived with various followers. His libertine lifestyle led to denunciations in the British press, and the Italian government evicted him in 1923. He divided the following two decades between France, Germany, and England, and continued to promote Thelema until his death.\nCrowley gained widespread notoriety during his lifetime, being a drug user, a bisexual, and an individualist social critic. Crowley has remained a highly influential figure over western esotericism and the counterculture of the 1960s, and he continues to be considered a prophet in Thelema. He is the subject of various biographies and academic studies.\nEarly life.\nYouth.\nCrowley was born Edward Alexander Crowley at 30 Clarendon Square in Royal Leamington Spa, Warwickshire, England, on 12 October 1875. His father, Edward Crowley (1829\u20131887), was trained as an engineer, but his share in a lucrative family brewing business, Crowley's Alton Ales, allowed him to retire before his son was born. His mother, Emily Bertha Bishop (1848\u20131917), came from a Devonshire-Somerset family and had a strained relationship with her son; she described him as \"the Beast\", a name that he revelled in. The couple had been married at London's Kensington Registry Office in November 1874, and were evangelical Christians. Crowley's father was born a Quaker, but converted to the Exclusive Brethren, a faction of a Christian fundamentalist group known as the Plymouth Brethren; Emily likewise converted upon marriage. Crowley's father was particularly devout, spending his time as a travelling preacher for the sect and reading a chapter from the Bible to his wife and son after breakfast every day. Following the death of their baby daughter in 1880, in 1881 the Crowleys moved to Redhill, Surrey. At the age of 8, Crowley was sent to H. T. Habershon's evangelical Christian boarding school in Hastings, and then to Ebor preparatory school in Cambridge, run by the Reverend Henry d'Arcy Champney, whom Crowley considered a sadist.\nIn March 1887, when Crowley was eleven years old, his father died of tongue cancer. Crowley described this as a turning point in his life, and he always maintained an admiration of his father, describing him as \"my hero and my friend\". Inheriting a third of his father's wealth, he began misbehaving at school and was harshly punished by Champney; Crowley's family removed him from the school when he developed albuminuria. He then attended Malvern College and Tonbridge School, both of which he despised and left after a few terms. He became increasingly sceptical of Christianity, pointing out Biblical inconsistencies to his religious teachers, and went against the Christian morality of his upbringing by smoking, masturbating, and having sex with prostitutes from whom he contracted gonorrhea. Sent to live with a Brethren tutor in Eastbourne, he undertook chemistry courses at Eastbourne College. Crowley developed interests in chess, poetry, and mountain climbing, and in 1894 climbed Beachy Head before visiting the Alps and joining the Scottish Mountaineering Club. The following year he returned to the Bernese Alps, climbing the Eiger, Trift, Jungfrau, M\u00f6nch, and Wetterhorn.\nCambridge University: 1895\u20131898.\nHaving adopted the name of Aleister over Edward, in October 1895 Crowley began a three-year course at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was entered for the Moral Science Tripos studying philosophy. With approval from his personal tutor, he changed to English literature, which was not then part of the curriculum offered. Crowley spent much of his time at university engaged in his pastimes, becoming president of the chess club and practising the game for two hours a day; he briefly considered a professional career as a chess player. Crowley also embraced his love of literature and poetry, particularly the works of Richard Francis Burton and Percy Bysshe Shelley. Many of his own poems appeared in student publications such as \"The Granta\", \"Cambridge Magazine\", and \"Cantab\". He continued his mountaineering, going on holiday to the Alps to climb every year from 1894 to 1898, often with his friend Oscar Eckenstein, and in 1897 he made the first ascent of the M\u00f6nch without a guide. These feats led to his recognition in the Alpine mountaineering community.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor many years I had loathed being called Alick, partly because of the unpleasant sound and sight of the word, partly because it was the name by which my mother called me. Edward did not seem to suit me and the diminutives Ted or Ned were even less appropriate. Alexander was too long and Sandy suggested tow hair and freckles. I had read in some book or other that the most favourable name for becoming famous was one consisting of a dactyl followed by a spondee, as at the end of a hexameter: like \"Jeremy Taylor\". Aleister Crowley fulfilled these conditions and Aleister is the Gaelic form of Alexander. To adopt it would satisfy my romantic ideals.\nAleister Crowley, on his name change.\nCrowley had his first significant mystical experience while on holiday in Stockholm in December 1896. Several biographers, including Lawrence Sutin, Richard Kaczynski, and Tobias Churton, believed that this was the result of Crowley's first same-sex sexual experience, which enabled him to recognize his bisexuality. At Cambridge, Crowley maintained a vigorous sex life with women\u2014largely with female prostitutes, from one of whom he caught syphilis\u2014but eventually he took part in same-sex activities, despite their illegality. In October 1897, Crowley met Herbert Charles Pollitt, president of the Cambridge University Footlights Dramatic Club, and the two entered into a relationship. They broke apart because Pollitt did not share Crowley's increasing interest in Western esotericism, a break-up that Crowley regretted for many years.\nIn 1897, Crowley travelled to Saint Petersburg, Russia, later saying that he was trying to learn Russian, because he was considering a future diplomatic career there. In October 1897, a brief illness triggered considerations of mortality and \"the futility of all human endeavour\", and he abandoned all thoughts of a diplomatic career in favour of pursuing an interest in the occult.\nIn March 1898, he obtained A. E. Waite's \"The Book of Black Magic and of Pacts\" and Karl von Eckartshausen's \"The Cloud upon the Sanctuary\", furthering his occult interests. That same year, Leonard Smithers, a publisher who Crowley met through Pollitt, published 100 copies of Crowley's poem \"Aceldama: A Place to Bury Strangers In\", but it was not a particular success. That same year, Crowley published a string of other poems, including \"White Stains\", a Decadent collection of erotic poetry that was printed abroad lest its publication be prohibited by the British authorities. In July 1898, he left Cambridge without a degree, despite a \"first class\" showing in his 1897 exams and consistent \"second class honours\" results before that.\nThe Golden Dawn: 1898\u20131899.\nIn August 1898, Crowley was in Zermatt, Switzerland, where he met the chemist Julian L. Baker, and the two began discussing their common interest in alchemy. Back in London, Baker introduced Crowley to George Cecil Jones, Baker's brother-in-law and a fellow member of the occult society known as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, which was founded in 1888. Crowley was initiated into the Outer Order of the Golden Dawn on 18 November 1898 by the group's leader, Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers. The ceremony took place in the Golden Dawn's Isis-Urania Temple held at London's Mark Masons Hall, where Crowley took the magical motto and name \"Frater Perdurabo\", which he interpreted as \"Brother I shall endure to the end\".\nCrowley moved into his own luxury flat at 67\u201369 Chancery Lane and soon invited a senior Golden Dawn member, Allan Bennett, to live with him as his personal magical tutor. Bennett taught Crowley more about ceremonial magic and the ritual use of drugs, and together they performed the rituals of the \"Goetia\", until Bennett left for South Asia to study Buddhism. In November 1899, Crowley purchased Boleskine House in Foyers on the shore of Loch Ness in Scotland. He developed a love of Scottish culture, describing himself as the \"Laird of Boleskine\", and took to wearing traditional highland dress even during visits to London. He continued writing poetry, publishing \"Jezebel and Other Tragic Poems\", \"Tales of Archais\", \"Songs of the Spirit\", \"Appeal to the American Republic\", and \"Jephthah\" in 1898\u201399; most gained mixed reviews from literary critics, although \"Jephthah\" was considered a particular critical success.\nCrowley soon progressed through the lower grades of the Golden Dawn, and was ready to enter the group's inner Second Order. He was unpopular in the group; his bisexuality and libertine lifestyle gained him a bad reputation, and he developed feuds with some of the members, including W. B. Yeats. When the Golden Dawn's London lodge refused to initiate Crowley into the Second Order, he visited Mathers in Paris, who personally admitted him into the Adeptus Minor Grade. A schism had developed between Mathers and the London members of the Golden Dawn, who were unhappy with his autocratic rule. Acting under Mathers' orders, Crowley\u2014with the help of his mistress and fellow initiate Elaine Simpson\u2014attempted to seize the Vault of the Adepts, a temple space at 36 Blythe Road in West Kensington, from the London lodge members. When the case was taken to court, the judge ruled in favour of the London lodge, as they had paid for the space's rent, leaving both Crowley and Mathers isolated from the group.\nMexico, India, Paris, and marriage: 1900\u20131903.\nIn 1900, Crowley travelled to Mexico via the United States, settling in Mexico City and starting a relationship with a local woman. Developing a love of the country, he continued experimenting with ceremonial magic, working with John Dee's Enochian invocations. He later said he had been initiated into Freemasonry while there, and he wrote a play based on Richard Wagner's opera \"Tannh\u00e4user\" as well as a series of poems published as \"Oracles\" (1905). Eckenstein joined him later in 1900, and together they climbed several mountains, including Iztaccihuatl, Popocatepetl, and Colima, the latter of which they had to abandon owing to a volcanic eruption. Leaving Mexico, Crowley headed to San Francisco before sailing for Hawaii aboard the \"Nippon Maru\". On the ship, he had a brief affair with a married woman named Mary Alice Rogers; saying he fell in love with her, he wrote a series of poems about the romance, published as \"Alice: An Adultery\" (1903).\nBriefly stopping in Japan and Hong Kong, Crowley reached Ceylon, where he met with Allan Bennett, who was there studying Shaivism. The pair spent some time in Kandy before Bennett decided to become a Buddhist monk in the Theravada tradition, travelling to Burma to do so. Crowley decided to tour India, devoting himself to the Hindu practice of \"R\u0101ja yoga\", by which means he believed he had achieved the spiritual state of \"dhyana\". He spent much of this time studying at the Meenakshi Temple in Madura. At this time he also wrote poetry which was published as \"The Sword of Song\" (1904). He contracted malaria, and had to recuperate from the disease in Calcutta and Rangoon. In 1902, he was joined in India by Eckenstein and several other mountaineers: Guy Knowles, H. Pfannl, V. Wesseley, and Jules Jacot-Guillarmod. Together, the Eckenstein-Crowley expedition attempted K2, which was never climbed before. On the journey, Crowley was afflicted with influenza, malaria, and snow blindness, and other expedition members were also struck with illness. They reached an altitude of before turning back.\nHaving arrived in Paris in November 1902, he socialized with his friend the painter Gerald Kelly, and through him became a fixture of the Parisian arts scene. Whilst there, Crowley wrote a series of poems on the work of an acquaintance, the sculptor Auguste Rodin. These poems were later published as \"Rodin in Rime\" (1907). One of those frequenting this milieu was W. Somerset Maugham, who after briefly meeting Crowley later used him as a model for the character of Oliver Haddo in his novel \"The Magician\" (1908). He returned to Boleskine in April 1903. In August, Crowley wed Gerald Kelly's sister Rose Edith Kelly in a \"marriage of convenience\" to prevent her from entering an arranged marriage; the marriage appalled the Kelly family and damaged his friendship with Gerald. Heading on a honeymoon to Paris, Cairo, and then Ceylon, Crowley fell in love with Rose and worked to prove his affections. While on his honeymoon, he wrote her a series of love poems, published as \"Rosa Mundi and other Love Songs\" (1906), as well as authoring the religious satire \"Why Jesus Wept\" (1904).\nDeveloping Thelema.\nEgypt and \"The Book of the Law\": 1904.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHad! The manifestation of Nuit.&lt;br&gt;The unveiling of the company of heaven.&lt;br&gt;Every man and every woman is a star.&lt;br&gt;Every number is infinite; there is no difference.&lt;br&gt;Help me, o warrior lord of Thebes, in my unveiling before the Children of men!\nThe opening lines of \"The Book of the Law\"\nIn February 1904, Crowley and Rose arrived in Cairo. Pretending to be a prince and princess, they rented an apartment in which Crowley set up a temple room and began invoking ancient Egyptian deities, while studying Islamic mysticism and Arabic. According to Crowley's later account, Rose regularly became delirious and informed him \"they are waiting for you.\" On 18 March, she explained that \"they\" were the god Horus, and on 20 March proclaimed that \"the Equinox of the Gods has come\". She led him to a nearby museum, where she showed him a seventh-century BCE mortuary stele known as the Stele of Ankh-ef-en-Khonsu; Crowley thought it important that the exhibit's number was 666, the Number of the Beast in Christian belief, and in later years termed the artefact the \"Stele of Revealing\".\nAccording to Crowley's later statements, on 8 April he heard a disembodied voice identifying itself as that of Aiwass, the messenger of Horus, or Hoor-Paar-Kraat. Crowley said that he wrote down everything the voice told him over the course of the next three days, and titled it \"Liber AL vel Legis\" or \"The Book of the Law\". The book proclaimed that humanity was entering a new Aeon, and that Crowley would serve as its prophet. It stated that a supreme moral law was to be introduced in this Aeon, \"Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law,\" and that people should learn to live in tune with their Will. This book, and the philosophy that it espoused, became the cornerstone of Thelema. Crowley said that at the time he was unsure what to do with \"The Book of the Law\". Often resenting it, he said that he ignored the instructions which the text commanded him to perform, which included taking the Stele of Revealing from the museum, fortifying his own island, and translating the book into all the world's languages. According to his account, he instead sent typescripts of the work to several occultists he knew, putting the manuscript away and ignoring it.\nKanchenjunga and China: 1905\u20131906.\nReturning to Boleskine, Crowley came to believe that Mathers was using magic against him, and the relationship between the two broke down. On 28 July 1905, Rose gave birth to Crowley's first child, a daughter named Lilith, and Crowley wrote the pornographic \"Snowdrops from a Curate's Garden\" to entertain his recuperating wife. He also founded a publishing company through which to publish his poetry, naming it the Society for the Propagation of Religious Truth in parody of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. Among its first publications were Crowley's \"Collected Works\", edited by Ivor Back, an old friend of Crowley's who was both a practicing surgeon and an enthusiast of literature. His poetry often received strong reviews (either positive or negative), but never sold well. In an attempt to gain more publicity, he issued a reward of \u00a3100 for the best essay on his work. The winner of this was J. F. C. Fuller, a British Army officer and military historian, whose essay, \"The Star in the West\" (1907), heralded Crowley's poetry as some of the greatest ever written.\nCrowley decided to climb Kanchenjunga in the Himalayas of Nepal, widely recognised as the world's most treacherous mountain. The collaboration between Jacot-Guillarmod, Charles Adolphe Reymond, Alexis Pache, and Alcesti C. Rigo de Righi, the expedition was marred by much argument between Crowley and the others, who thought that he was reckless. They eventually mutinied against Crowley's control, with the other climbers heading back down the mountain as nightfall approached despite Crowley's warnings that it was too dangerous. Subsequently, Pache and several porters were killed in an accident, something for which Crowley was widely blamed by the mountaineering community.\nSpending time in Moharbhanj, where he took part in big-game hunting and wrote the homoerotic work \"The Scented Garden\", Crowley met up with Rose and Lilith in Calcutta before being forced to leave India after non-lethally shooting two men who tried to mug him. Briefly visiting Bennett in Burma, Crowley and his family decided to tour Southern China, hiring porters and a nanny for the purpose. Crowley smoked opium throughout the journey, which took the family from Tengyueh through to Yungchang, Tali, Yunnanfu, and then Hanoi. On the way, he spent much time on spiritual and magical work, reciting the \"Bornless Ritual\", an invocation to his Holy Guardian Angel, on a daily basis.\nWhile Rose and Lilith returned to Europe, Crowley headed to Shanghai to meet old friend Elaine Simpson, who was fascinated by \"The Book of the Law\"; together they performed rituals in an attempt to contact Aiwass. Crowley then sailed to Japan and Canada, before continuing to New York City, where he unsuccessfully solicited support for a second expedition up Kanchenjunga. Upon arrival in Britain, Crowley learned that his daughter Lilith had died of typhoid in Rangoon, something he later blamed on Rose's increasing alcoholism. Under emotional distress, his health began to suffer, and he underwent a series of surgical operations. He began short-lived romances with actress Vera \"Lola\" Neville (n\u00e9e Snepp) and author Ada Leverson, while Rose gave birth to Crowley's second daughter. Lola Zaza was born in 1906: either in late summer or in September or in the following winter. The child contracted bronchitis and almost died.\nThe A\u2234A\u2234 and The Holy Books of Thelema: 1907\u20131909.\nWith his old mentor George Cecil Jones, Crowley continued performing the Abramelin rituals at the Ashdown Park Hotel in Coulsdon, Surrey. Crowley believed that in doing so he attained \"samadhi\", or union with the Godhead, thereby marking a turning point in his life. Making heavy use of hashish during these rituals, he wrote an essay on \"The Psychology of Hashish\" (1909) in which he championed the drug as an aid to mysticism. He also said he had been contacted once again by Aiwass in late October and November 1907, adding that Aiwass dictated two further texts to him, \"Liber VII\" and \"Liber Cordis Cincti Serpente\", both of which were later classified in the corpus of The Holy Books of Thelema. Crowley wrote down more Thelemic Holy Books during the last two months of the year, including \"Liber LXVI\", \"Liber Arcanorum\", \"Liber Porta Lucis, Sub Figura X\", \"Liber Tau\", \"Liber Trigrammaton\" and \"Liber DCCCXIII vel Ararita\", which he again said he had received from a preternatural source. Crowley stated that in June 1909, when the manuscript of \"The Book of the Law\" was rediscovered at Boleskine, he developed the opinion that Thelema represented objective truth.\nCrowley's inheritance was running out. Trying to earn money, he was hired by George Montagu Bennett, the Earl of Tankerville, to help protect him from witchcraft; recognising Bennett's paranoia as being based in his cocaine addiction, Crowley took him on holiday to France and Morocco to recuperate. In 1907, he also began taking in paying students, whom he instructed in occult and magical practice. Victor Neuburg, whom Crowley met in February 1907, became his sexual partner and closest disciple; in 1908 the pair toured northern Spain before heading to Tangier, Morocco. The following year Neuburg stayed at Boleskine, where he and Crowley engaged in sadomasochism. Crowley continued to write prolifically, producing such works of poetry as \"Ambergris\", \"Clouds Without Water\", and \"Konx Om Pax\", as well as his first attempt at an autobiography, \"The World's Tragedy\". Recognizing the popularity of short horror stories, Crowley wrote his own, some of which were published, and he also published several articles in \"Vanity Fair\", a magazine edited by his friend Frank Harris. He also wrote \"Liber 777\", a book of magical and Qabalistic correspondences that borrowed from Mathers and Bennett.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInto my loneliness comes\u2014&lt;br&gt;The sound of a flute in dim groves that haunt the uttermost hills.&lt;br&gt;Even from the brave river they reach to the edge of the wilderness.&lt;br&gt;And I behold Pan.\nThe opening lines of Liber VII (1907), the first of the Holy Books of Thelema to be revealed to Crowley after \"The Book of the Law\".\nIn November 1907, Crowley and Jones decided to found an occult order to act as a successor to the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, being aided in doing so by Fuller. The result was the A\u2234A\u2234. The group's headquarters and temple were situated at 124 Victoria Street in central London, and their rites borrowed much from those of the Golden Dawn, but with an added Thelemic basis. Its earliest members included solicitor Richard Noel Warren, artist Austin Osman Spare, Horace Sheridan-Bickers, author George Raffalovich, Francis Henry Everard Joseph Feilding, engineer Herbert Edward Inman, Kenneth Ward, and Charles Stansfeld Jones. In March 1909, Crowley began production of a biannual periodical titled \"The Equinox\". He billed this periodical, which was to become the \"Official Organ\" of the A\u2234A\u2234, as \"The Review of Scientific Illuminism\".\nCrowley became increasingly frustrated with Rose's alcoholism, and in November 1909 he divorced her on the grounds of his own adultery. Lola was entrusted to Rose's care; the couple remained friends and Rose continued to live at Boleskine. Her alcoholism worsened, and as a result she was institutionalized in September 1911.\nAlgeria and the Rites of Eleusis: 1909\u20131911.\nIn November 1909, Crowley and Neuburg travelled to Algeria, touring the desert from El Arba to Aumale, Bou Sa\u00e2da, and then D\u0101'leh Addin, with Crowley reciting the Quran to fortify himself against growing feelings of awe and dread. During the trip he invoked the thirty aethyrs of Enochian magic, with Neuburg recording the results, later published in \"The Equinox\" as \"The Vision and the Voice\". Following a mountaintop sex magic ritual, Crowley also performed an evocation to the demon Choronzon involving blood sacrifice, and considered the results to be a watershed in his magical career. Returning to London in January 1910, Crowley found that Mathers was suing him for publishing Golden Dawn secrets in \"The Equinox\"; the court found in favour of Crowley. The case was widely reported in the press, with Crowley gaining wider fame. Crowley enjoyed this, and played up to the sensationalist stereotype of being a Satanist and advocate of human sacrifice, despite being neither.\nThe publicity attracted new members to the A\u2234A\u2234, among them Frank Bennett, James Bayley, Herbert Close, and James Windram. The Australian violinist Leila Waddell soon became Crowley's lover. Deciding to expand his teachings to a wider audience, Crowley developed the Rites of Artemis, a public performance of magic and symbolism featuring A\u2234A\u2234 members personifying various deities. It was first performed at the A\u2234A\u2234 headquarters, with attendees given a fruit punch containing peyote to enhance their experience. Various members of the press attended, and reported largely positively on it. In October and November 1910, Crowley decided to stage something similar, the Rites of Eleusis, at Caxton Hall, Westminster; this time press reviews were mixed. Crowley came under particular criticism from West de Wend Fenton, editor of \"The Looking Glass\" newspaper, who called him \"one of the most blasphemous and cold-blooded villains of modern times\". Fenton's articles suggested that Crowley and Jones were involved in homosexual activity; Crowley did not mind, but Jones unsuccessfully sued for libel. Fuller broke off his friendship and involvement with Crowley over the scandal, and Crowley and Neuburg returned to Algeria for further magical workings.\n\"The Equinox\" continued publishing, and various books of literature and poetry were also published under its imprint, like Crowley's \"Ambergris\", \"The Winged Beetle\", and \"The Scented Garden\", as well as Neuburg's \"The Triumph of Pan\" and Ethel Archer's \"The Whirlpool\". In 1911, Crowley and Waddell holidayed in Montigny-sur-Loing, where he wrote prolifically, producing poems, short stories, plays, and 19 works on magic and mysticism, including the two final Holy Books of Thelema. In Paris, he met Mary Desti, who became his next \"Scarlet Woman\", with the two undertaking magical workings in St. Moritz; Crowley believed that one of the Secret Chiefs, Ab-ul-Diz, was speaking through her. Based on Desti's statements when in trance, Crowley wrote the two-volume \"Book 4\" (1912\u201313) and at the time developed the spelling \"magick\" in reference to the paranormal phenomenon as a means of distinguishing it from the stage magic of illusionists.\nOrdo Templi Orientis and the Paris Working: 1912\u20131914.\nIn early 1912, Crowley published \"The Book of Lies\", a work of mysticism that biographer Lawrence Sutin described as \"his greatest success in merging his talents as poet, scholar, and magus\". The German occultist Theodor Reuss later accused him of publishing some of the secrets of his own occult order, Ordo Templi Orientis (O.T.O.), within \"The Book\". Crowley convinced Reuss that the similarities were coincidental, and the two became friends. Reuss appointed Crowley as head of O.T.O's British branch, the Mysteria Mystica Maxima (MMM), and at a ceremony in Berlin Crowley adopted the magical name of Baphomet and was proclaimed \"X\u00b0 Supreme Rex and Sovereign Grand Master General of Ireland, Iona, and all the Britons\". With Reuss' permission, Crowley set about advertising the MMM and re-writing many O.T.O. rituals, which were then based largely on Freemasonry; his incorporation of Thelemite elements proved controversial in the group. Fascinated by O.T.O's emphasis on sex magic, Crowley devised a magical working based on anal sex and incorporated it into the syllabus for those O.T.O. members who were initiated into the eleventh degree.\nIn March 1913, Crowley acted as producer for \"The Ragged Ragtime Girls\", a group of female violinists led by Waddell, as they performed at London's Old Tivoli theatre. They subsequently performed in Moscow for six weeks, where Crowley had a sadomasochistic relationship with the Hungarian Anny Ringler. In Moscow, Crowley continued to write plays and poetry, including \"Hymn to Pan\", and the Gnostic Mass, a Thelemic ritual that became a key part of O.T.O. liturgy. Churton suggested that Crowley had travelled to Moscow on the orders of British intelligence to spy on revolutionary elements in the city. In January 1914, Crowley and Neuburg settled into an apartment in Paris, where the former was involved in the controversy surrounding Jacob Epstein's new monument to Oscar Wilde. Together Crowley and Neuburg performed the six-week \"Paris Working\", a period of intense ritual involving strong drug use in which they invoked the gods Mercury and Jupiter. As part of the ritual, the couple performed acts of sex magic together, at times being joined by journalist Walter Duranty. Inspired by the results of the Working, Crowley wrote \"Liber Agap\u00e9\", a treatise on sex magic. Following the Paris Working, Neuburg began to distance himself from Crowley, resulting in an argument in which Crowley cursed him.\nUnited States: 1914\u20131919.\nBy 1914, Crowley was living a hand-to-mouth existence, relying largely on donations from A\u2234A\u2234 members and dues payments made to O.T.O. In May, he transferred ownership of Boleskine House to the MMM for financial reasons, and in July he went mountaineering in the Swiss Alps. During this time the First World War broke out. After recuperating from a bout of phlebitis, Crowley set sail for the United States aboard the RMS \"Lusitania\" in October 1914. Arriving in New York City, he moved into a hotel and began earning money writing for the American edition of \"Vanity Fair\" and undertaking freelance work for the famed astrologer Evangeline Adams. In the city, he continued experimenting with sex magic, through the use of masturbation, female prostitutes, and male clients of a Turkish bathhouse; all of these encounters were documented in his diaries.\nProfessing to be of Irish ancestry and a supporter of Irish independence from Great Britain, Crowley began to espouse support for Germany in their war against Britain. He became involved in New York's pro-German movement, and in January 1915 pro-German propagandist George Sylvester Viereck employed him as a writer for his propagandist paper, \"The Fatherland\", which was dedicated to keeping the US neutral in the conflict. In later years, detractors denounced Crowley as a traitor to Britain for this action.\nCrowley entered into a relationship with Jeanne Robert Foster, with whom he toured the West Coast. In Vancouver, headquarters of the North American O.T.O., he met with Charles Stansfeld Jones and Wilfred Talbot Smith to discuss the propagation of Thelema on the continent. In Detroit he experimented with peyote at Parke-Davis, then visited Seattle, San Francisco, Santa Cruz, Los Angeles, San Diego, Tijuana, and the Grand Canyon, before returning to New York. There he befriended Ananda Coomaraswamy and his wife Alice Richardson; Crowley and Richardson performed sex magic in April 1916, following which she became pregnant and then miscarried. Later that year he took a \"magical retirement\" to a cabin by Lake Pasquaney owned by Evangeline Adams. There, he made heavy use of drugs and undertook a ritual after which he proclaimed himself \"Master Therion\". He also wrote several short stories based on James George Frazer's \"The Golden Bough\" and a work of literary criticism, \"The Gospel According to Bernard Shaw\".\nIn December, he moved to New Orleans, his favourite US city, before spending February 1917 with evangelical Christian relatives in Titusville, Florida. Returning to New York City, he moved in with artist and A\u2234A\u2234 member Leon Engers Kennedy in May, learning of his mother's death. After the collapse of \"The Fatherland\", Crowley continued his association with Viereck, who appointed him contributing editor of arts journal \"The International\". Crowley used it to promote Thelema, but it soon ceased publication. He then moved to the studio apartment of Roddie Minor, who became his partner and Scarlet Woman. Through their rituals, which Crowley called \"The Amalantrah Workings\", he believed that they were contacted by a preternatural entity named Lam. The relationship soon ended.\nIn 1918, Crowley went on a magical retreat in the wilderness of Esopus Island on the Hudson River in upstate New York. Here, he began an adaptation of the \"Tao Te Ching\", painted Thelemic slogans on the riverside cliffs, and\u2014he later wrote\u2014experienced past life memories of being Ge Xuan, Pope Alexander VI, Alessandro Cagliostro, and \u00c9liphas L\u00e9vi. Back in New York City, he moved to Greenwich Village, where he took Leah Hirsig as his lover and next Scarlet Woman. He took up painting as a hobby, exhibiting his work at the Greenwich Village Liberal Club and attracting the attention of \"The Evening World\". With the financial assistance of sympathetic Freemasons, Crowley revived \"The Equinox\" with the first issue of volume III, known as \"The Blue Equinox\". He spent mid-1919 on a climbing holiday in Montauk, New York, before returning to London in December.\nAbbey of Thelema: 1920\u20131923.\nNow destitute and back in London, Crowley came under attack from the tabloid \"John Bull\", which labelled him traitorous \"scum\" for his work with the German war effort; several friends aware of his intelligence work urged him to sue, but he decided not to. When he was suffering from asthma, a doctor prescribed him heroin, to which he soon became addicted. In January 1920, he moved to Paris, renting a house in Fontainebleau with Leah Hirsig; they were soon joined in a \"m\u00e9nage \u00e0 trois\" by Ninette Shumway, and also (in living arrangement) by Leah's newborn daughter Anne \"Poup\u00e9e\" Leah. Crowley had ideas of forming a community of Thelemites, which he called the Abbey of Thelema after the Abbaye de Th\u00e9l\u00e8me in Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais' satire \"Gargantua and Pantagruel\". After consulting the \"I Ching\", he chose Cefal\u00f9 in Sicily as a location, and after arriving there, began renting the old Villa Santa Barbara as his Abbey on 2 April.\nMoving to the commune with Hirsig, Shumway, and their children Hansi, Howard, and Poup\u00e9e, Crowley described the scenario as \"perfectly happy ... my idea of heaven.\" They wore robes, and performed rituals to the sun god Ra at set times during the day, also occasionally performing the Gnostic Mass; the rest of the day they were left to follow their own interests. Undertaking widespread correspondences, Crowley continued to paint, wrote a commentary on \"The Book of the Law\", and revised the third part of \"Book 4\". He offered a libertine education for the children, allowing them to play all day and witness acts of sex magic. He occasionally travelled to Palermo to visit rent boys and buy supplies, including drugs; his heroin addiction came to dominate his life, and cocaine began to erode his nasal cavity. There was no cleaning rota, and wild dogs and cats wandered throughout the building, which soon became unsanitary. Poup\u00e9e died in October 1920, and Ninette gave birth to a daughter, Astarte Lulu Panthea, soon afterwards.\nNew followers continued to arrive at the Abbey to be taught by Crowley. Among them was film star Jane Wolfe, who arrived in July 1920, where she was initiated into the A\u2234A\u2234 and became Crowley's secretary. Another was Cecil Frederick Russell, who often argued with Crowley, disliking the same-sex sexual magic that he was required to perform, and left after a year. More conducive was the Australian Thelemite Frank Bennett, who also spent several months at the Abbey. In February 1922, Crowley returned to Paris for a retreat in an unsuccessful attempt to kick his heroin addiction. He then went to London in search of money, where he published articles in \"The English Review\" criticising the Dangerous Drugs Act 1920 and wrote a novel, \"The Diary of a Drug Fiend\", completed in July. On publication, it received mixed reviews; he was lambasted by the \"Sunday Express\", which called for its burning and used its influence to prevent further reprints.\nSubsequently, a young Thelemite named Raoul Loveday moved to the Abbey with his wife Betty May; while Loveday was devoted to Crowley, May detested him and life at the commune. She later said that Loveday was made to drink the blood of a sacrificed cat, and that they were required to cut themselves with razors every time they used the pronoun \"I\". Loveday drank from a local polluted stream, soon developing a liver infection resulting in his death in February 1923. Returning to London, May told her story to the press. \"John Bull\" proclaimed Crowley \"the wickedest man in the world\" and \"a man we'd like to hang\", and although Crowley deemed many of their accusations against him to be slanderous, he was unable to afford the legal fees to sue them. As a result, \"John Bull\" continued its attack, with its stories being repeated in newspapers throughout Europe and in North America. The Fascist government of Benito Mussolini learned of Crowley's activities, and in April 1923 he was given a deportation notice forcing him to leave Italy; without him, the Abbey closed.\nLater life.\nTunisia, Paris, and London: 1923\u20131929.\nCrowley and Hirsig went to Tunis, where, dogged by continuing poor health, he unsuccessfully tried again to give up heroin, and began writing what he termed his \"autohagiography\", \"The Confessions of Aleister Crowley\". They were joined in Tunis by the Thelemite Norman Mudd, who became Crowley's public relations consultant. Employing a local boy, Mohammad ben Brahim, as his servant, Crowley went with him on a retreat to Nefta, where they performed sex magic together. In January 1924, Crowley travelled to Nice, France, where he met with Frank Harris, underwent a series of nasal operations, and visited the Institute for the Harmonious Development of Man, developing a positive opinion of its founder George Gurdjieff. Destitute, he took on a wealthy student, Alexander Zu Zolar, before taking on another American follower, Dorothy Olsen. Crowley took Olsen back to Tunisia for a magical retreat in Nefta, where he also wrote \"To Man\" (1924), a declaration of his own status as a prophet entrusted with bringing Thelema to humanity. After spending the winter in Paris, in early 1925 Crowley and Olsen returned to Tunis, where he wrote \"The Heart of the Master\" (1938) as an account of a vision he experienced in a trance. In March Olsen became pregnant, and Hirsig was called to take care of her; she miscarried, following which Crowley took Olsen back to France. Hirsig later distanced herself from Crowley, who then denounced her.\nAccording to Crowley, Reuss named him head of O.T.O. upon his death, but this was challenged by a leader of the German O.T.O., Heinrich Tr\u00e4nker. Tr\u00e4nker called the Hohenleuben Conference in Thuringia, Germany, which Crowley attended. There, prominent members like Karl Germer and Martha K\u00fcntzel championed Crowley's leadership, but other key figures like Albin Grau, Oskar Hopfer, and Henri Birven backed Tr\u00e4nker by opposing it, resulting in a split in O.T.O. Moving to Paris, where he broke with Olsen in 1926, Crowley went through a large number of lovers over the following years, with whom he experimented in sex magic. Throughout, he was dogged by poor health, largely caused by his heroin and cocaine addictions. In 1928, Crowley was introduced to Israel Regardie, a young Englishman, who embraced Thelema and became Crowley's secretary for the next three years. That year, Crowley also met Gerald Yorke, who began organising Crowley's finances but never became a Thelemite. He also befriended the journalist Tom Driberg; Driberg did not accept Thelema either. It was here that Crowley also published one of his most significant works, \"Magick in Theory and Practice\", which received little attention at the time.\nIn December 1928 Crowley met the Nicaraguan Maria Teresa Sanchez (Maria Teresa Ferrari de Miramar). Crowley was deported from France by the authorities, who disliked his reputation and feared that he was a German agent. So that she could join him in Britain, Crowley married Sanchez in August 1929. Now based in London, Mandrake Press agreed to publish his autobiography in a limited edition six-volume set, also publishing his novel \"Moonchild\" and book of short stories \"The Stratagem\". Mandrake went into liquidation in November 1930, before the entirety of Crowley's \"Confessions\" could be published. Mandrake's owner P. R. Stephensen meanwhile wrote \"The Legend of Aleister Crowley\", an analysis of the media coverage surrounding him.\nBerlin and London: 1930\u20131938.\nIn April 1930, Crowley moved to Berlin, where he took Hanni Jaegar as his magical partner; the relationship was troubled. In September he went to Lisbon in Portugal to meet the poet Fernando Pessoa. There, he decided to fake his own death, doing so with Pessoa's help at the Boca do Inferno rock formation. He then returned to Berlin, where he reappeared three weeks later at the opening of his art exhibition at the Gallery Neumann-Nierendorf. Crowley's paintings fitted with the fashion for German Expressionism; few of them sold, but the press reports were largely favourable. In August 1931, he took Bertha Busch as his new lover; they had a violent relationship, and often physically assaulted one another. He continued to have affairs with both men and women while in the city, and met with famous people like Aldous Huxley and Alfred Adler. After befriending him, in January 1932 he took the communist Gerald Hamilton as a lodger, through whom he was introduced to many figures within the Berlin far left; it is possible that he was operating as a spy for British intelligence at this time, monitoring the communist movement.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI have been over forty years engaged in the administration of the law in one capacity or another. I thought that I knew of every conceivable form of wickedness. I thought that everything which was vicious and bad had been produced at one time or another before me. I have learnt in this case that we can always learn something more if we live long enough. I have never heard such dreadful, horrible, blasphemous and abominable stuff as that which has been produced by the man (Crowley) who describes himself to you as the greatest living poet.\nJustice Swift, in Crowley's libel case.\nCrowley left Busch and returned to London, where he took Pearl Brooksmith as his new Scarlet Woman. Undergoing further nasal surgery, it was here in 1932 that he was invited to be guest of honour at Foyles' Literary Luncheon, also being invited by Harry Price to speak at the National Laboratory of Psychical Research. In need of money, he launched a series of court cases against people whom he believed to have libelled him, some of which proved successful. He gained much publicity for his lawsuit against Constable and Co for publishing Nina Hamnett's \"Laughing Torso\" (1932)\u2014a book he alleged libelled him by referring to his occult practice as black magic\u2014but lost the case. The court case added to Crowley's financial problems, and in February 1935 he was declared bankrupt. During the hearing, it was revealed that Crowley was spending three times his income for several years.\nCrowley developed a friendship with Deidre Patricia Doherty; she offered to bear his child, who was born in May 1937. Named Randall Gair, Crowley nicknamed him Aleister Atat\u00fcrk. He died in a car accident in 2002 at the age of 65. Crowley continued to socialize with friends, holding curry parties in which he cooked particularly spicy food for them. In 1936, he published his first book in six years, \"The Equinox of the Gods\", which contained a facsimile of \"The Book of the Law\" and was considered to be volume III, number 3, of \"The Equinox\" periodical. The work sold well, resulting in a second print run. In 1937, he gave a series of public lectures on yoga in Soho. Crowley was now living largely off contributions supplied by O.T.O.'s Agape Lodge in California, led by rocket scientist Jack Parsons. Crowley was intrigued by the rise of Nazism in Germany, and influenced by his friend Martha K\u00fcntzel believed that Adolf Hitler might convert to Thelema; when the Nazis abolished the German O.T.O. and imprisoned Germer, who fled to the US, Crowley then lambasted Hitler as a black magician.\nSecond World War and death: 1939\u20131947.\nWhen the Second World War broke out, Crowley wrote to the Naval Intelligence Division offering his services, but they declined. He associated with a variety of figures in Britain's intelligence community at the time, including Dennis Wheatley, Roald Dahl, Ian Fleming, and Maxwell Knight, and wrote that he originated the \"V for Victory\" sign first used by the BBC; this has never been proven. In 1940, his asthma worsened, and with his German-produced medication unavailable, he returned to using heroin, once again becoming addicted. As the Blitz hit London, Crowley relocated to Torquay, where he was briefly admitted to hospital with asthma, and entertained himself with visits to the local chess club. Tiring of Torquay, he returned to London, where he was visited by American Thelemite Grady McMurtry, to whom Crowley awarded the title of \"Hymenaeus Alpha\". He stipulated that though Germer would be his immediate successor, McMurty should succeed Germer as head of O.T.O. after the latter's death. With O.T.O. initiate Lady Frieda Harris, Crowley developed plans to produce a tarot card set, designed by him and painted by Harris. Accompanying this was a book, published in a limited edition as \"The Book of Thoth\" by Chiswick Press in 1944. To aid the war effort, he wrote a proclamation on the rights of humanity, \"Liber OZ\", and a poem for the liberation of France, \"Le Gauloise\". Crowley's final publication during his lifetime was a book of poetry, \"Olla: An Anthology of Sixty Years of Song\". Another of his projects, \"Aleister Explains Everything\", was posthumously published as \"Magick Without Tears\".\nIn April 1944 Crowley briefly moved to Aston Clinton in Buckinghamshire, where he was visited by the poet Nancy Cunard, before relocating to Hastings in Sussex, where he took up residence at the Netherwood boarding house. He took a young man named Kenneth Grant as his secretary, paying him in magical teaching rather than wages. He was also introduced to John Symonds, whom he appointed to be his literary executor; Symonds thought little of Crowley, later publishing unfavorable biographies of him. Corresponding with the illusionist Arnold Crowther, it was through him that Crowley was introduced to Gerald Gardner, the future founder of Gardnerian Wicca. They became friends, with Crowley authorising Gardner to revive Britain's ailing O.T.O. Another visitor was Eliza Marian Butler, who interviewed Crowley for her book \"The Myth of the Magus\". Other friends and family also spent time with him, among them Doherty and Crowley's son Aleister Atat\u00fcrk.\nOn 1 December 1947, Crowley died at Netherwood of chronic bronchitis aggravated by pleurisy and myocardial degeneration, aged 72. His funeral was held at Woodvale Crematorium, Brighton on 5 December; about a dozen people attended, and Louis Wilkinson read excerpts from the Gnostic Mass, \"The Book of the Law\", and \"Hymn to Pan\". The funeral generated press controversy, and was labelled a Black Mass by the tabloids. Crowley's body was cremated; his ashes were sent to Karl Germer in the US, who buried them in his garden in Hampton, New Jersey.\nBeliefs and thought.\nCrowley's belief system, Thelema, has been described by scholars as a religion, and more specifically as both a new religious movement, and as a \"magico-religious doctrine\". Although holding \"The Book of the Law\"\u2014which was composed in 1904\u2014as its central text, Thelema took shape as a complete system in the years after 1904.\nIn his autobiography, Crowley wrote that his purpose in life was to \"bring oriental wisdom to Europe and to restore paganism in a purer form\", although what he meant by \"paganism\" was unclear. Crowley also wrote in the 4th Book of Magick about a great pagan Umbral fleet ruled by Ottovius that would be handed down to the great Spartan. The esoteric nature of this was also unclear. Crowley's thought was not always cohesive, and was influenced by a variety of sources, ranging from eastern religious movements and practices like Hindu yoga and Buddhism, scientific naturalism, and various currents within Western esotericism, among them ceremonial magic, alchemy, astrology, Rosicrucianism, Kabbalah, and the Tarot. He was steeped in the esoteric teachings he had learned from the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, although pushed further with his own interpretations and strategies than the Golden Dawn had done. Crowley incorporated concepts and terminology from South Asian religious traditions like yoga and Tantra into his Thelemic system, believing that there was a fundamental underlying resemblance between Western and Eastern spiritual systems. The historian Alex Owen noted that Crowley adhered to the \"modus operandi\" of the Decadent movement throughout his life.\nCrowley believed that the twentieth century marked humanity's entry to the Aeon of Horus, a new era in which humans would take increasing control of their destiny. He believed that this Aeon follows on from the Aeon of Osiris, in which paternalistic religions like Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism dominated the world, and that this in turn had followed the Aeon of Isis, which was maternalistic and dominated by goddess worship. He believed that Thelema was the proper religion of the Aeon of Horus, and also deemed himself to be the prophet of this new Aeon. Thelema revolves around the idea that human beings each have their own True Will that they should discover and pursue, and that this exists in harmony with the Cosmic Will that pervades the universe. Crowley referred to this process of searching and discovery of one's True Will to be \"the Great Work\" or the attaining of the \"knowledge and conversation of the Holy Guardian Angel\". His favoured method of doing so was through the performance of the Abramelin operation, a ceremonial magic ritual obtained from a 17th-century grimoire. The moral code of \"Do What Thou Wilt\" is believed by Thelemites to be the religion's ethical law, although the historian of religion Marco Pasi noted that this was not anarchistic or libertarian in structure, as Crowley saw individuals as part of a wider societal organism.\nMagick and theology.\nCrowley believed in the objective existence of magic, which he chose to spell as \"Magick\", which is an archaic spelling of the word. He provided various different definitions of this term over his career. In his book \"Magick in Theory and Practice\", Crowley defined Magick as \"the Science and Art of causing change to occur in conformity with Will\". He also told his disciple Karl Germer that \"Magick is getting into communication with individuals who exist on a higher plane than ours. Mysticism is the raising of oneself to their level.\" Crowley saw Magick as a third way between religion and science, giving \"The Equinox\" the subtitle of \"The Method of Science; the Aim of Religion\". Within that journal, he expressed positive sentiments toward science and the scientific method, and urged magicians to keep detailed records of their magical experiments, having said: \"The more scientific the record is, the better.\" His understanding of magic was also influenced by the work of the anthropologist James Frazer, in particular the belief that magic was a precursor to science in a cultural evolutionary framework. Unlike Frazer, however, Crowley did not see magic as a survival from the past that required eradication, but rather he believed that magic had to be adapted to suit the new age of science. In Crowley's alternative schema, old systems of \"magic\" had to decline (per Frazer's framework) so that science and magic could synthesize into \"magick\", which would simultaneously accept the existence of the supernatural and an experimental method. Crowley deliberately adopted an exceptionally broad definition of magick that included almost all forms of technology as magick, adopting an instrumentalist definition of magic, science, and technology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo [Crowley] the greatest aim of the magician was to merge with a higher power connected to the wellsprings of the universe, but he did not trouble himself too much to define that power consistently; sometimes it was God, sometimes the One, sometimes a goddess, and sometimes one's own Holy Guardian Angel or higher self. In the last analysis he was content for the nature of divinity to remain a mystery. As a result, he wrote at times like an atheist, at times like a monotheist, and at others like a polytheist.\nRonald Hutton\nSexuality played an important role in Crowley's ideas about magick and his practice of it, and has been described as being central to Thelema. He outlined three forms of sex magick\u2014the autoerotic, homosexual, and heterosexual\u2014and argued that such acts could be used to focus the magician's will onto a specific goal such as financial gain or personal creative success. For Crowley, sex was treated as a sacrament, with the consumption of sexual fluids interpreted as a Eucharist. This was often manifested as the Cakes of Light, a biscuit containing either menstrual blood or a mixture of semen and vaginal fluids. The Gnostic Mass is the central religious ceremony within Thelema.\nCrowley's theological beliefs were not clear. The historian Ronald Hutton noted that some of Crowley's writings could be used to argue that he was an atheist, while some support the idea that he was a polytheist, and others would bolster the idea that he was a mystical monotheist. On the basis of the teachings in \"The Book of the Law\", Crowley described a pantheon of three deities taken from the ancient Egyptian pantheon: Nuit, Hadit, and Ra-Hoor-Khuit. In 1928, he wrote that all true deities were derived from this trinity. Jason Josephson Storm has argued that Crowley built on 19th-century attempts to link early Christianity to pre-Christian religions, such as Frazer's \"Golden Bough\", to synthesize Christian theology and Neopaganism while remaining critical of institutional and traditional Christianity.\nBoth during his life and after it, Crowley has been widely described as a Satanist, usually by detractors. Crowley stated he did not consider himself a Satanist, nor did he worship Satan, as he did not accept the Christian world view in which Satan was believed to exist. He nevertheless used Satanic imagery, for instance by describing himself as \"the Beast 666\" and referring to the Whore of Babylon in his work, while in later life he sent \"Antichristmas cards\" to his friends. In his writings, Crowley occasionally identified Aiwass as Satan and designated him as \"Our Lord God the Devil\" at one occasion. The scholar of religion Gordan Djurdjevic stated that Crowley \"was emphatically not\" a Satanist, \"if for no other reason than simply because he did not identify himself as such\". Crowley nevertheless expressed strong anti-Christian sentiment, stating that he hated Christianity \"as Socialists hate soap\", an animosity probably stemming from his experiences among the Plymouth Brethren. He was nevertheless influenced by the King James Bible, especially the Book of Revelation, the impact of which can be seen in his writings. He was also accused of advocating human sacrifice, largely because of a passage in \"Book 4\" in which he stated that \"A male child of perfect innocence and high intelligence is the most satisfactory victim\" and added that he had sacrificed about 150 every year. This was a tongue-in-cheek reference to ejaculation, something not realized by his critics.\nImage and opinions.\nCrowley considered himself to be one of the outstanding figures of his time. The historian Ronald Hutton stated that in Crowley's youth, he was \"a self-indulgent and flamboyant young man\" who \"set about a deliberate flouting and provocation of social and religious norms\", while being shielded from an \"outraged public opinion\" by his inherited wealth. Hutton also described Crowley as having both an \"unappeasable desire\" to take control of any organisation that he belonged to, and \"a tendency to quarrel savagely\" with those who challenged him. Crowley biographer Martin Booth asserted that Crowley was \"self-confident, brash, eccentric, egotistic, highly intelligent, arrogant, witty, wealthy, and, when it suited him, cruel\". Similarly, Richard B. Spence noted that Crowley was \"capable of immense physical and emotional cruelty\". Biographer Lawrence Sutin noted that Crowley exhibited \"courage, skill, dauntless energy, and remarkable focus of will\" while at the same time showing a \"blind arrogance, petty fits of bile, [and] contempt for the abilities of his fellow men\". The Thelemite Lon Milo DuQuette noted that Crowley \"was by no means perfect\" and \"often alienated those who loved him dearest.\"\nPolitical opinions.\nCrowley enjoyed being outrageous and flouting conventional morality, with John Symonds noting that he \"was in revolt against the moral and religious values of his time\". Crowley's political thought was studied by the academic Marco Pasi, who noted that for Crowley, socio-political concerns were subordinate to metaphysical and spiritual ones. He was neither on the political left nor right but perhaps best categorized as a \"conservative revolutionary\" despite not being affiliated with the German-based movement of the same name. Pasi described Crowley's fascination with the extreme ideologies of Nazism and Marxism\u2013Leninism, which aimed to violently overturn society: \"What Crowley liked about Nazism and communism, or at least what made him curious about them, was the anti-Christian position and the revolutionary and socially subversive implications of these two movements. In their subversive powers, he saw the possibility of an annihilation of old religious traditions, and the creation of a void that Thelema, subsequently, would be able to fill.\" Crowley described democracy as an \"imbecile and nauseating cult of weakness\", and commented that \"The Book of the Law\" proclaimed that \"there is the master and there is the slave; the noble and the serf; the 'lone wolf' and the herd\". In this attitude, he was influenced by Social Darwinism and the work of Friedrich Nietzsche. Although he had contempt for most of the British aristocracy, he regarded himself as an aristocrat and styled himself as Laird Boleskine, once describing his ideology as \"aristocratic communism\".\nCrowley was bisexual, but exhibited a preference for women, with his relationships with men being fewer and mostly in the early part of his life. In particular he was attracted to \"exotic women\", and said he had fallen in love on multiple occasions; Kaczynski stated that \"when he loved, he did so with his whole being, but the passion was typically short-lived\". Even in later life, Crowley was able to attract young bohemian women to be his lovers, largely due to his charisma. He applied the term \"Scarlet Woman\" to various female lovers whom he believed played an important role in his magical work. During homosexual acts, he usually played 'the passive role', which Booth believed \"appealed to his masochistic side\". An underlying theme in many of his writings is that spiritual enlightenment arises through transgressing socio-sexual norms.\nCrowley advocated complete sexual freedom for both men and women. He argued that homosexual and bisexual people should not suppress their sexual orientation, commenting that a person \"must not be ashamed or afraid of being homosexual if he happens to be so at heart; he must not attempt to violate his own true nature because of public opinion, or medieval morality, or religious prejudice which would wish he were otherwise.\" On other issues he adopted a more conservative attitude; he opposed abortion on moral grounds, believing that no woman following her True Will would ever desire one.\nBiographer Lawrence Sutin stated that \"blatant bigotry is a persistent minor element in Crowley's writings\". Sutin thought Crowley \"a spoiled scion of a wealthy Victorian family who embodied many of the worst John Bull racial and social prejudices of his upper-class contemporaries\", noting that he \"embodied the contradiction that writhed within many Western intellectuals of the time: deeply held racist viewpoints courtesy of society, coupled with a fascination with people of colour\". Crowley is said to have insulted his close Jewish friend Victor Neuburg, using antisemitic slurs, and he had mixed opinions about Jewish people as a group. Although he praised their \"sublime\" poetry and stated that they exhibited \"imagination, romance, loyalty, probity and humanity\", he also thought that centuries of persecution had led some Jewish people to exhibit \"avarice, servility, falseness, cunning and the rest\". He was also known to praise various ethnic and cultural groups, for instance he thought that the Chinese people exhibited a \"spiritual superiority\" to the English, and praised Muslims for exhibiting \"manliness, straightforwardness, subtlety, and self-respect\".\nBoth critics of Crowley and adherents of Thelema have accused Crowley of sexism. Booth described Crowley as exhibiting a \"general misogyny\", something the biographer believed arose from Crowley's bad relationship with his mother. Sutin noted that Crowley \"largely accepted the notion, implicitly embodied in Victorian sexology, of women as secondary social beings in terms of intellect and sensibility\". The scholar of religion Manon Hedenborg White noted that some of Crowley's statements are \"undoubtedly misogynist by contemporary standards\", but characterized Crowley's attitude toward women as complex and multi-faceted. Crowley's comments on women's role varied dramatically within his written work, even that produced in similar periods. Crowley described women as \"moral inferiors\" who had to be treated with \"firmness, kindness and justice\", while also arguing that Thelema was essential to women's emancipation.\nPossible links to intelligence.\nBiographers Richard B. Spence and Tobias Churton have suggested that Crowley was a spy for the British secret services and that among other things he joined the Golden Dawn under their command to monitor the activities of Mathers, who was known to be a Carlist. Spence suggested that the conflict between Mathers and the London lodge for the temple was part of an intelligence operation to undermine Mathers' authority. Spence has suggested that the purpose of Crowley's trip to Mexico might have been to explore Mexican oil prospects for British intelligence. Spence has suggested that his trip to China was orchestrated as part of a British intelligence scheme to monitor the region's opium trade. Churton suggested that Crowley had travelled to Moscow on the orders of British intelligence to spy on revolutionary elements in the city.\nSpence and Sutin both wrote that Crowley's pro-German work in the United States during World War I was actually a cover for him being a double agent for Britain, citing his hyperbolic articles in \"The Fatherland\" to make the German lobby appear ridiculous in the eyes of the American public. Spence also wrote that Crowley encouraged the German Navy to destroy the \"Lusitania\", informing them that it would ensure the US stayed out of the war, while in reality hoping that it would bring the US into the war on Britain's side.\nLegacy and influence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[H]e is today looked upon as a source of inspiration by many people in search of spiritual enlightenment and/or instructions in magical practice. Thus, while during his life his books hardly sold and his disciples were never very numerous, nowadays all his important works are constantly in print, and the people defining themselves as \"thelemites\" (that is, followers of Crowley's new religion) number several thousands all over the world. Furthermore, Crowley's influence over magically oriented new religious movements has in some cases been very deep and pervasive. It would be difficult to understand, for instance, some aspects of Anglo-Saxon neo-paganism and contemporary satanism without a solid knowledge of Crowley's doctrines and ideas. In other fields, such as poetry, alpinism and painting, he may have been a minor figure, but it is only fair to admit that, in the limited context of occultism, he has played and still plays a major role.\"\nMarco Pasi, 2003.\nCrowley has remained an influential figure, both amongst occultists and in popular culture, particularly that of Britain, but also of other parts of the world. In 2002, a BBC poll placed Crowley number 73 in a list of the 100 Greatest Britons. Richard Cavendish has written of him that \"In native talent, penetrating intelligence and determination, Aleister Crowley was the best-equipped magician to emerge since the seventeenth century.\" The scholar of esotericism Egil Asprem described him as \"one of the most well-known figures in modern occultism\". The scholar of esotericism Wouter Hanegraaff asserted that Crowley was an extreme representation of \"the dark side of the occult\", adding that he was \"the most notorious occultist magician of the twentieth century\". The philosopher John Moore opined that Crowley stood out as a \"Modern Master\" when compared with other prominent occult figures like George Gurdjieff, P. D. Ouspensky, Rudolf Steiner, or Helena Blavatsky, also describing him as a \"living embodiment\" of Oswald Spengler's \"Faustian Man\". Biographer Tobias Churton considered Crowley \"a pioneer of consciousness research\". Hutton noted that Crowley had \"an important place in the history of modern Western responses to Oriental spiritual traditions\", while Sutin thought that he had made \"distinctly original contributions\" to the study of yoga in the West.\nThelema continued to develop and spread following Crowley's death. In 1969, O.T.O. was reactivated in California under the leadership of Grady Louis McMurtry; in 1985 its right to the title was unsuccessfully challenged in court by a rival group, the Society Ordo Templi Orientis, led by Brazilian Thelemite Marcelo Ramos Motta. Another American Thelemite is the filmmaker Kenneth Anger, who was influenced by Crowley's writings from a young age. In the United Kingdom, Kenneth Grant propagated a tradition known as Typhonian Thelema through his organisation, the Typhonian O.T.O., later renamed the Typhonian Order. Also in Britain, an occultist known as Amado Crowley claimed to be Crowley's son; this has been refuted by academic investigation. Amado argued that Thelema was a false religion created by Crowley to hide his true esoteric teachings, which Amado said he was propagating.\nSeveral Western esoteric traditions other than Thelema were also influenced by Crowley, with Djurdjevic observing that \"Crowley's influence on twentieth-century and contemporary esotericism has been enormous\". Gerald Gardner, the founder of Gardnerian Wicca, used much of Crowley's published material when composing the Gardnerian ritual liturgy, and the Australian witch Rosaleen Norton was also heavily influenced by Crowley's ideas. More widely, Crowley became \"a dominant figure\" in the modern Pagan community. L. Ron Hubbard, the American founder of Scientology, was involved in Thelema in the early 1940s via Jack Parsons, and it has been argued that Crowley's ideas influenced some of Hubbard's work. The scholars of religion Asbj\u00f8rn Dyrendel, James R. Lewis, and Jesper Petersen noted that despite the fact that Crowley was not a Satanist, he \"in many ways embodies the pre-Satanist esoteric discourse on Satan and Satanism through his lifestyle and his philosophy\", with his \"image and ought\" becoming an \"important influence\" on the later development of religious Satanism. For instance, two prominent figures in religious Satanism, Anton LaVey and Michael Aquino, were influenced by Crowley's work.\nIn popular culture.\nCrowley also had a wider influence in British popular culture. After his time in Cefal\u00f9, which brought him to public attention in Britain, various \"literary Crowleys\" appeared: characters in fiction based upon him. One of the earliest was the character of the poet Shelley Arabin in John Buchan's 1926 novel \"The Dancing Floor\". In his novel \"The Devil Rides Out\", the writer Dennis Wheatley used Crowley as a partial basis for the character of Damien Mocata, a portly bald defrocked priest who engages in black magic. The occultist Dion Fortune used Crowley as a basis for characters in her books \"The Secrets of Doctor Taverner\" (1926) and \"The Winged Bull\" (1935). Crowley was one of the inspirations for the character of Dr. Trelawney in Anthony Powell's \"A Dance to the Music of Time\". He was included as one of the figures on the cover art of The Beatles' album \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" (1967), and his motto of \"Do What Thou Wilt\" was inscribed on the vinyl of Led Zeppelin's album \"Led Zeppelin III\" (1970). Led Zeppelin co-founder Jimmy Page bought Boleskine in 1971, and part of the band's film \"The Song Remains the Same\" was filmed in the grounds. He sold it in 1992. Though David Bowie makes but a fleeting reference to Crowley in the lyrics of his song \"Quicksand\" (1971), it has been suggested that the lyrics of Bowie's No. 1 hit single \"Let's Dance\" (1983) may substantially paraphrase Crowley's 1923 poem \"Lyric of Love to Leah\". Ozzy Osbourne and his lyricist Bob Daisley wrote a song titled \"Mr. Crowley\" (1980). A prophetic quote about the coming of the New Aeon borrowed from Crowley's work \"Magick in Theory and Practice\" (1911) has been featured as the opening introduction to the video game \"\" (1996). Crowley began to receive scholarly attention from academics in the late 1990s.\nNotes and references.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1178", "revid": "51022449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1178", "title": "Afterlife", "text": "Postulated continued existence after death\nThe afterlife or life after death is a postulated existence in which the essential part of an individual's stream of consciousness or identity continues to exist after the death of their physical body. The surviving essential aspect varies between belief systems; it may be some partial element, or the entire soul or spirit, which carries with it one's personal identity.\nIn some views, this continued existence takes place in a spiritual realm, while in others, the individual may be reborn into this world and begin the life cycle over again in a process referred to as reincarnation, likely with no memory of what they have done in the past. In this latter view, such rebirths and deaths may take place over and over again continuously until the individual gains entry to a spiritual realm or otherworld. Major views on the afterlife derive from religion, esotericism, and metaphysics.\nSome belief systems, such as those in the Abrahamic tradition, hold that the dead go to a specific place (e.g., paradise or hell) after death, as determined by their god, based on their actions and beliefs during life. In contrast, in systems of reincarnation, such as those of the Indian religions, the nature of the continued existence is determined directly by the actions of the individual in the ended life.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDifferent metaphysical models.\nTheist immortalists generally believe some afterlife awaits people when they die. Members of some generally non-theistic religions believe in an afterlife without reference to a deity.\nReligions, such as Christianity, Islam, and various pagan belief systems, believe in the soul's existence in another world, while others, like many forms of Hinduism and Buddhism, believe in reincarnation. In both cases, these religions hold that one's status in the afterlife is determined by their conduct during life.\nReincarnation.\nReincarnation is the philosophical or religious concept that an aspect of a living being starts a new life in a different physical body or form after each death. This concept is also known as rebirth or transmigration and is part of the Sa\u1e43s\u0101ra/karma doctrine of cyclic existence. Samsara refers to the process in which souls (jivas) go through a sequence of human and animal forms. Traditional Hinduism teaches that each life helps the soul (jivas) learn until the soul becomes purified to the point of liberation. All major Indian religions, namely Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, and Sikhism have their own interpretations of the idea of reincarnation. The human idea of reincarnation is found in many diverse ancient cultures, and a belief in rebirth/metempsychosis was held by historic Greek figures, such as Pythagoras and Plato. It is a common belief of various ancient and modern religions, such as Spiritism, theosophy, and Eckankar. It is found as well in many tribal societies around the world, in places such as Australia, East Asia, Siberia, and South America.\nAlthough the majority of denominations within the Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam do not believe that individuals reincarnate, particular groups within these religions do refer to reincarnation; these groups include the mainstream historical and contemporary followers of Kabbalah, the Cathars, Alawites, the Druze, and the Rosicrucians. The historical relations between these sects and the beliefs about reincarnation that were characteristic of neoplatonism, Orphism, Hermeticism, Manicheanism, and Gnosticism of the Roman era as well as the Indian religions have been the subject of scholarly research. Unity Church and its founder Charles Fillmore teach reincarnation.\nRosicrucians speak of a life review period occurring immediately after death and before entering the afterlife's planes of existence (before the silver cord is broken), followed by a judgment, more akin to a final review or end report over one's life.\nHeaven and Hell.\nHeaven, the heavens, Seven Heavens, pure lands, Tian, Jannah, Valhalla, or the Summerland, is a common religious, cosmological, or transcendent place where beings such as gods, angels, jinn, saints, or venerated ancestors are said to originate, be enthroned, or live. According to the beliefs of some religions, heavenly beings can descend to earth or incarnate, and earthly beings can ascend to heaven in the afterlife, or in exceptional cases, enter heaven alive.\nHeaven is often described as a \"higher place\", the holiest place, a paradise, in contrast to hell or the underworld or the \"low places\", and universally or conditionally accessible by earthly beings according to various standards of divinity, goodness, piety, faith or other virtues or right beliefs or the will of God. Some believe in the possibility of a heaven on Earth in a world to come.\nIn Hinduism, heaven is termed \"Svarga loka\". There are seven positive regions and seven negative regions to which the soul can go after death. After completing its stay in the respective region, the soul is subjected to rebirth in different living forms according to its \"karma\". This cycle can be broken after a soul achieves \"Moksha\" or \"Nirvana\". Any place of existence, either of humans, souls or deities, outside the tangible world (heaven, hell, or other) is referred to as otherworld.\nHell, in many religious and folkloric traditions, is a place of torment and punishment in the afterlife. Religions with a linear divine history often depict hell as an eternal destination, while religions with a cyclic history often depict a hell as an intermediary period between incarnations. Typically, these traditions locate hell in another dimension or under the Earth's surface and often include entrances to hell from the land of the living. Other afterlife destinations include purgatory and limbo.\nTraditions that do not conceive of the afterlife as a place of punishment or reward merely describe hell as an abode of the dead, the grave, a neutral place (for example, Sheol or Hades) located under the surface of Earth.\nAncient religions.\nAncient Egyptian religion.\nThe afterlife played an important role in Ancient Egyptian religion, and its belief system is one of the earliest known in recorded history. When the body died, parts of its soul known as \"ka\" (body double) and the \"ba\" (personality) would go to the afterlife, which is known to Egyptians as the \"Kingdom of the Dead\". To sustain the ka, the living provided offerings of food and drink, which were believed to nourish the ka's spiritual needs.\nThe ka would reunite with the deceased's spirit and enjoy eternal life in the Fields of Aaru, a paradise reserved for the righteous. However, Osiris demands work as restitution for the protection he provides. Statues were placed in the tombs to serve as substitutes for the deceased.\nArriving at one's reward in afterlife was a demanding ordeal, requiring a sin-free heart and the ability to recite the spells, passwords, and formulae of the Book of the Dead. In the Hall of Two Truths, the deceased's heart was weighed against the \"Shu\" feather of truth and justice taken from the headdress of the goddess Ma'at. If the heart was lighter than the feather, they could pass on, but if it were heavier they would be devoured by the demon Ammit.\nEgyptians also believed that being mummified and put in a sarcophagus (an ancient Egyptian \"coffin\" carved with complex symbols and designs, as well as pictures and hieroglyphs) was the only way to have an afterlife. What are referred to as the Coffin Texts, are inscribed on a coffin and serve as a guide for the challenges in the afterlife. The Coffin texts are more or less a duplication of the Pyramid Texts, which would serve as a guide for Egyptian pharaohs or queens in the afterlife. Only if the corpse had been properly embalmed and entombed in a mastaba, could the dead live again in the Fields of Yalu and accompany the Sun on its daily ride. Due to the dangers the afterlife posed, the Book of the Dead was placed in the tomb with the body as well as food, jewelry, and 'curses'. They also used the \"opening of the mouth\".\nAncient Egyptian civilization was based on religion. The belief in the rebirth after death became the driving force behind funeral practices; for them, death was a temporary interruption rather than complete cessation of life. Eternal life could be ensured by means like piety to the gods, preservation of the physical form through mummification, and the provision of statuary and other funerary equipment. Each human consisted of the physical body, the \"ka\", the \"ba\", and the \"akh\". The Name and Shadow were also living entities. To enjoy the afterlife, all these elements had to be sustained and protected from harm.\nOn 30 March 2010, a spokesman for the Egyptian Culture Ministry claimed it had unearthed a large red granite door in Luxor with inscriptions by User, a powerful adviser to the 18th Dynasty Queen Hatshepsut who ruled between 1479 BC and 1458 BC, the longest of any woman. It believes the false door is a 'door to the Afterlife'. According to the archaeologists, the door was reused in a structure in Roman Egypt.\nAncient Greek and Roman religions.\nThe Greek god Hades is known in Greek mythology as the king of the underworld, a place where souls live after death. The Greek god Hermes, the messenger of the gods, would take the dead soul of a person to the underworld (sometimes called Hades or the House of Hades). Hermes would leave the soul on the banks of the River Styx, the river between life and death.\nCharon, also known as the ferryman, would take the soul across the river to Hades, if the soul had gold: upon burial, the family of the dead soul would put coins under the deceased's tongue. Once crossed, the soul would be judged by Aeacus, Rhadamanthus and King Minos. The soul would be sent to Elysium, Tartarus, or Asphodel Fields. The Elysian Fields were for the ones that lived pure lives. It consisted of green fields, valleys and mountains, everyone there was peaceful and contented, and the Sun always shone there. Tartarus was for the people that blasphemed against the gods or were rebellious and consciously evil. In Tartarus, the soul would be punished by being burned in lava or stretched on racks. The Asphodel Fields were for a varied selection of human souls including those whose sins equaled their goodness, those who were indecisive in their lives, and those who were not judged.\nSome heroes of Greek legend are allowed to visit the underworld. The Romans had a similar belief system about the afterlife, with Hades becoming known as Pluto. In the ancient Greek myth about the Labours of Heracles, the hero Heracles had to travel to the underworld to capture Cerberus, the three-headed guard dog, as one of his tasks.\nIn \"Dream of Scipio\", Cicero describes what seems to be an out of body experience, of the soul traveling high above the Earth, looking down at the small planet, from far away.\nIn Book VI of Virgil's \"Aeneid\", the hero, Aeneas, travels to the underworld to see his father. By the River Styx, he sees the souls of those not given a proper burial, forced to wait by the river until someone buries them. While down there, along with the dead, he is shown the place where the wrongly convicted reside, the fields of sorrow where those who committed suicide and now regret it reside, including Aeneas' former lover, the warriors and shades, Tartarus (where the titans and powerful non-mortal enemies of the Olympians reside) where he can hear the groans of the imprisoned, the palace of Pluto, and the fields of Elysium where the descendants of the divine and bravest heroes reside. He sees the river of forgetfulness, Lethe, which the dead must drink to forget their life and begin anew. Lastly, his father shows him all of the future heroes of Rome who will live if Aeneas fulfills his destiny in founding the city.\nOther eschatological views populate the ancient-Greek worldview. For instance, Plato argued for reincarnation in several dialogues, including the \"Timaeus\".\nNorse religion.\nThe Poetic and Prose Eddas, the oldest sources for information on the Norse concept of the afterlife, vary in their description of the several realms that are described as falling under this topic. The most well-known are:\nCeltic religion.\nIn Celtic mythology, the Otherworld is the realm of the deities and possibly also the dead. It is described either as a parallel world that exists alongside our own, or as a heavenly land beyond the sea or under the earth. In Gaelic and Brittonic myth it is usually a supernatural realm of everlasting youth, beauty, health, abundance and joy.\nAbrahamic religions.\nJudaism.\nSheol.\nSheol, in the Hebrew Bible, is a place of darkness (Job 10:21\u201322) to which all the dead go\u2014both the righteous and the unrighteous\u2014regardless of the moral choices made in life (Genesis 35:37; Book of Ezekiel 32; Isaiah 16; Job 30:23), a place of stillness (Psalm 88:13, 94:17; Ecclesiastes 9:10), at the longest possible distance from Heaven (Job 11:8; Amos 9:2; Psalm 139:8).\nThe inhabitants of Sheol were the \"shades\" (\"rephaim\"), entities without personality or strength. Under some circumstances, they were thought to be able to be contacted by the living (as the Witch of Endor contacts the shade of Samuel for Saul), but such practices were forbidden (Deuteronomy 18:10).\nWhereas the Hebrew Bible appears to describe Sheol as the permanent place of the dead, in the Second Temple period (roughly 500 BC \u2013 70 AD), a more diverse set of ideas developed. In some texts, Sheol is considered to be the home of both the righteous and the wicked, separated into respective compartments; in others, it was considered a place of punishment, meant for the wicked dead alone. When the Hebrew scriptures were translated into Greek in ancient Alexandria around 200 BC, the word \"Hades\" (the Greek underworld) was substituted for Sheol. This is reflected in the New Testament where Hades is both the underworld of the dead and the personification of the evil it represents.\nWorld to Come.\nThe Talmud offers several thoughts relating to the afterlife. After death, the soul is brought for judgment. Those who have led pristine lives immediately enter the \"Olam Haba\" or world to come. Most do not enter the world to come immediately but experience a period of reflection on their earthly actions and are made aware of what they have done wrong. Some view this period as \"re-schooling\", with the soul gaining wisdom as one's errors are reviewed. Others view this period as spiritual discomfort caused by past wrongs. At the end of this period, not longer than one year, the soul then takes its place in the world to come. Although discomforts are made part of certain Jewish conceptions of the afterlife, the concept of eternal damnation is not a tenet of the Jewish afterlife. According to the Talmud, extinction of the soul is reserved for a far smaller group of malicious and evil leaders whose very evil deeds go way beyond norms or who lead large groups of people to utmost evil. This is also part of Maimonides' 13 principles of faith.\nMaimonides describes the \"Olam Haba\" in spiritual terms, relegating the prophesied physical resurrection to the status of a future miracle unrelated to the afterlife or the Messianic era. According to Maimonides, an afterlife continues for the soul of every human being: soul now separated from the body in which it was \"housed\" during its earthly existence.\nThe Zohar describes Gehenna not as a place of punishment for the wicked but as a place of spiritual purification for souls.\nReincarnation in Jewish tradition.\nAlthough there is no reference to reincarnation in the Talmud or any prior writings, according to rabbis such as Avraham Arieh Trugman, reincarnation is recognized as being part and parcel of Jewish tradition. Trugman explains that it is through oral tradition that the meanings of the Torah, its commandments, and stories are known and understood. The classic work of Jewish mysticism, the Zohar, is quoted liberally in all Jewish learning; in the Zohar, the idea of reincarnation is mentioned repeatedly. Trugman states that in the last five centuries, the concept of reincarnation, which until then had been a much-hidden tradition within Judaism, was given open exposure.\nShraga Simmons commented that within the Bible itself, the idea [of reincarnation] is intimated in Deut. 25:5\u201310, Deut. 33:6 and Isaiah 22:14, 65:6.\nYirmiyahu Ullman wrote that reincarnation is an \"ancient, mainstream belief in Judaism\". The Zohar makes frequent and lengthy references to reincarnation. Onkelos, a righteous convert and authoritative commentator of the same period, explained the verse, \"Let Reuben live and not die\u00a0...\" (Deuteronomy 33:6) to mean that Reuben should merit the World to Come directly and not have to die again as a result of being reincarnated. Torah scholar, commentator and kabbalist, Nachmanides (Ramban 1195\u20131270), attributed Job's suffering to reincarnation, as hinted in Job's saying \"God does all these things twice or three times with a man, to bring back his soul from the pit to... the light of the living' (Job 33:29\u201330).\"\nReincarnation, called \"gilgul\", became popular in folk belief and is found in much Yiddish literature among Ashkenazi Jews. Among a few kabbalists, it was posited that some human souls could end up being reincarnated into non-human bodies. These ideas were found in several Kabbalistic works from the 13th century and among many mystics in the late 16th century. Martin Buber's early collection of stories of the Baal Shem Tov's life includes several that refer to people reincarnating in successive lives.\nAmong well-known (generally non-kabbalist or anti-kabbalist) rabbis who rejected the idea of reincarnation are Saadia Gaon, David Kimhi, Hasdai Crescas, Yedayah Bedershi (early 14th century), Joseph Albo, Abraham ibn Daud, the Rosh and Leon de Modena. Saadia Gaon, in Emunoth ve-Deoth (Hebrew: \"beliefs and opinions\"), concludes Section VI with a refutation of the doctrine of metempsychosis (reincarnation). While rebutting reincarnation, Saadia Gaon further states that Jews who hold to reincarnation have adopted non-Jewish beliefs. By no means do all Jews today believe in reincarnation, but belief in reincarnation is not uncommon among many Jews, including Orthodox.\nOther well-known rabbis who are reincarnationists include Yonassan Gershom, Abraham Isaac Kook, Talmud scholar Adin Steinsaltz, DovBer Pinson, David M. Wexelman, Zalman Schachter, and many others. Reincarnation is cited by authoritative Biblical commentators, including Ramban (Nachmanides), Menachem Recanti, and Rabbenu Bachya.\nAmong the many volumes of Yitzchak Luria, most of which come down from the pen of his primary disciple, Chaim Vital, are insights explaining issues related to reincarnation. His \"Shaar HaGilgulim\" (\"The Gates of Reincarnation\") is a book devoted exclusively to the subject of reincarnation in Judaism.\nRabbi Naftali Silberberg of The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute notes that \"Many ideas that originate in other religions and belief systems have been popularized in the media and are taken for granted by unassuming Jews.\"\nChristianity.\nMainstream Christianity professes belief in the Nicene Creed, and English versions of the Nicene Creed in current use include the phrase: \"We look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.\"\nWhen questioned by the Sadducees about the resurrection of the dead (in a context relating to who one's spouse would be if one had been married several times in life), Jesus said that marriage would be irrelevant after the resurrection as the resurrected will be like the angels in Heaven.\nJesus also maintained that the time would come when the dead would hear the voice of the Son of God, and all who were in the tombs would come out; those who have heard his \"[commandments] and believes in the one who sent [Him]\" to the \"resurrection of life\", but those who do not to the \"resurrection of condemnation\".\nThe Book of Enoch describes Sheol as divided into four compartments for four types of the dead: the faithful saints who await resurrection in Paradise, the merely virtuous who await their reward, the wicked who await punishment, and the wicked who have already been punished and will not be resurrected on Judgment Day. The Book of Enoch is considered apocryphal by most denominations of Christianity and all of Judaism.\nThe book of 2 Maccabees clearly describes the dead waiting for future resurrection and judgment, along with prayers and offerings for the deceased to alleviate their sins.\nThe author of the Gospel of Luke recounts the story of Lazarus and the rich man, which shows people in Hades awaiting the resurrection either in comfort or torment. The author of the Book of Revelation writes about God and the angels versus Satan and demons in an epic battle at the end of times when all souls are judged. There is mention of ghostly bodies of the prophets and the transfiguration.\nThe non-canonical Acts of Paul and Thecla speak of the efficacy of prayer for the dead so that they might be \"translated to a state of happiness\".\nHippolytus of Rome pictures the underworld (Hades) as a place where the righteous dead, waiting in the bosom of Abraham for their resurrection, rejoice at their future prospect; the unrighteous are tormented at the sight of the \"lake of unquenchable fire\" into which they are destined to be cast.\nGregory of Nyssa discusses the long-before-believed possibility of purification of souls after death.\nPope Gregory I repeats the concept, articulated over a century earlier by Gregory of Nyssa, that the saved suffer purification after death. In connection with this, he wrote of \"purgatorial flames.\"\nThe noun \"purgatorium\" (Latin: place of cleansing) is used for the first time to describe a state of painful purification of the saved afterlife. The same word in adjectival form (\"purgatorius -a -um\", cleansing), which appears also in non-religious writing, was already used by Christians such as Augustine of Hippo and Pope Gregory I to refer to an after-death cleansing.\nTheologians and philosophers presented various philosophies and beliefs during the Age of Enlightenment. A notable example is Emanuel Swedenborg who wrote some 18 theological works which describe in detail the nature of the afterlife according to his claimed spiritual experiences, the most famous of which is \"Heaven and Hell\". His report of life there covers a wide range of topics, such as marriage in heaven (where all angels are married), children in heaven (where they are raised by angel parents), time and space in heaven (there are none), the after-death awakening process in the World of Spirits (a place halfway between Heaven and Hell and where people first wake up after death), the allowance of a free will choice between Heaven or Hell (as opposed to being sent to either one by God), the eternity of Hell (one could leave but would never want to), and that all angels or devils were once people on earth.\nThe Catholic Church.\nThe Catholic conception of the afterlife teaches that after the body dies, the soul is judged, the righteous and free of sin enter Heaven. However, those who die in unrepented mortal sin go to hell. In the 1990s, the Catechism of the Catholic Church defined hell not as punishment imposed on the sinner but rather as the sinner's self-exclusion from God. Unlike other Christian groups, the Catholic Church teaches that those who die in a state of grace but still carry venial sin go to a place called Purgatory, where they undergo purification to enter Heaven.\nLimbo.\nDespite popular opinion, Limbo, which was elaborated upon by theologians beginning in the Middle Ages, was never recognized as a dogma of the Catholic Church, yet, at times, it has been a very popular theological theory within the Church. Limbo is a theory that unbaptized but innocent souls, such as those of infants or virtuous individuals who lived before Jesus Christ was born, exist in neither Heaven nor Hell proper. Therefore, these souls neither merit the beatific vision nor are subjected to any punishment because they are not guilty of any personal sin although they have not received baptism, so they still bear original sin. So, they are generally seen as existing in a state of natural, but not supernatural, happiness until the end of time.\nIn other Christian denominations, it has been described as an intermediate place or state of confinement in oblivion and neglect.\nPurgatory.\nThe notion of purgatory is associated mainly with the Catholic Church. In the Catholic Church, all those who die in God's grace and friendship but are still imperfectly purified are indeed assured of their eternal salvation. Still, after death, they undergo purification to achieve the holiness necessary to enter the joy of heaven or the final purification of the elect, which is entirely different from the punishment of the damned. The tradition of the church, by reference to specific texts of scripture, speaks of a \"cleansing fire\", but it is not always called purgatory.\nAnglicans of the Anglo-Catholic tradition generally also hold to the belief. John Wesley, the founder of Methodism, believed in an intermediate state between death and the resurrection of the dead and in the possibility of \"continuing to grow in holiness there\", but Methodism does not officially affirm this belief and denies the possibility of helping by prayer any who may be in that state.\nOrthodox Christianity.\nThe Orthodox Church is intentionally reticent about the afterlife, as it acknowledges the mystery, especially of things that have not yet occurred. Beyond the second coming of Jesus, bodily resurrection, and final judgment, all of which are affirmed in the Nicene Creed (325 AD), Orthodoxy does not teach much else in any definitive manner. Unlike Western forms of Christianity, however, Orthodoxy is traditionally non-dualist and does not teach that there are two separate literal locations of heaven and hell, but instead acknowledges that \"the 'location' of one's final destiny\u2014heaven or hell\u2014as being figurative.\"\nInstead, Orthodoxy teaches that the final judgment is one's uniform encounter with divine love and mercy, but this encounter is experienced multifariously depending on the extent to which one has been transformed, partaken of divinity, and is therefore compatible or incompatible with God. \"The monadic, immutable, and ceaseless object of eschatological encounter is therefore the love and mercy of God, his glory which infuses the heavenly temple, and it is the subjective human reaction which engenders multiplicity or any division of experience.\" For instance, St. Isaac the Syrian observes in his \"Ascetical Homilies\" that \"those who are punished in Gehenna, are scourged by the scourge of love. ... The power of love works in two ways: it torments sinners ... [as] bitter regret. But love inebriates the souls of the sons of Heaven by its delectability.\" In this sense, the divine action is always, immutably, and uniformly love, and if one experiences this love negatively, the experience is then one of self-condemnation because of free will rather than condemnation by God.\nOrthodoxy therefore uses the description of Jesus' judgment in John 3:19\u201321 as their model: \"19 And this is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil. 20 For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his works should be exposed. 21 But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.\" As a characteristically Orthodox understanding, then, Fr. Thomas Hopko writes, \"[I]t is precisely the presence of God's mercy and love which cause the torment of the wicked. God does not punish; he forgives... In a word, God has mercy on all, whether all like it or not. If we like it, it is paradise; if we do not, it is hell. Every knee will bend before the Lord. Everything will be subject to Him. God in Christ will indeed be 'all and in all,' with boundless mercy and unconditional pardon. But not all will rejoice in God's gift of forgiveness, and that choice will be judgment, the self-inflicted source of their sorrow and pain.\"\nMoreover, Orthodoxy includes a prevalent tradition of \"apokatastasis\", or the restoration of all things in the end. This has been taught most notably by Origen, but also many other Church fathers and Saints, including Gregory of Nyssa. The Second Council of Constantinople (553 AD) affirmed the orthodoxy of Gregory of Nyssa while simultaneously condemning Origen's brand of universalism because it taught the restoration back to our pre-existent state, which Orthodoxy does not teach. It is also a teaching of such eminent Orthodox theologians as Olivier Cl\u00e9ment, Metropolitan Kallistos Ware, and Bishop Hilarion Alfeyev. Although apokatastasis is not a dogma of the church but instead a theologoumenon, it is no less a teaching of the Orthodox Church than its rejection. As Met. Kallistos Ware explains, \"It is heretical to say that all must be saved, for this is to deny free will; but, it is legitimate to hope that all may be saved,\" as insisting on torment without end also denies free will.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nJoseph F. Smith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints presents an elaborate vision of the afterlife. It is revealed as the scene of an extensive missionary effort by righteous spirits in paradise to redeem those still in darkness\u2014a spirit prison or \"hell\" where the souls of the dead remain until judgment. It is divided into two parts: Spirit Prison and Paradise. These are also known as the Spirit World (also Abraham's Bosom; see Luke 16:19\u201325). They believe that Christ visited the spirit prison https:// and opened the gate for those who repent to cross over to Paradise. This is similar to the Harrowing of Hell doctrine of some mainstream Christian faiths. Both Spirit Prison and Paradise are temporary according to Latter-day Saint beliefs. After the resurrection, spirits are assigned \"permanently\" to three degrees of heavenly glory, determined by how they lived \u2013 Celestial, Terrestrial, and Telestial. (1 Cor 15:44\u201342; Doctrine and Covenants, Section 76) Sons of Perdition, or those who have known and seen God and deny it, will be sent to the realm of Satan, which is called Outer Darkness, where they shall live in misery and agony forever. However, according to the beliefs of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, most persons lack the amount of knowledge to commit the Eternal sin and are therefore incapable of becoming sons of perdition.\nThe Celestial Kingdom is believed to be where the righteous can live eternally with their families. Progression does not end once one has entered the Celestial Kingdom but extends eternally. According to \"True to the Faith\" (a handbook on doctrines in the LDS faith), \"The celestial kingdom is the place prepared for those who have \"received the testimony of Jesus\" and been \"made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood\" (Doctrine and Covenants, 76:51, 69). To inherit this gift, we must receive the ordinances of salvation, keep the commandments, and repent of our sins.\"\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses occasionally use terms such as \"afterlife\" to refer to any hope for the dead, but they understand Ecclesiastes 9:5 to preclude belief in an immortal soul. Individuals judged by God to be wicked, such as in the Great Flood or at Armageddon, are given no hope of an afterlife. However, they believe that after Armageddon, there will be a bodily resurrection of \"both righteous and unrighteous\" dead (but not the \"wicked\"). Survivors of Armageddon and those who are resurrected are then to restore the Earth to a paradise gradually. After Armageddon, unrepentant sinners are punished with eternal death (non-existence).\nSeventh-day Adventists.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church's beliefs regarding the afterlife differ from those of other Christian churches. Rather than ascend to Heaven or descend to Hell, Adventists believe the dead \"remain unconscious until the return of Christ in judgement\". The concept that the dead remain dead until resurrection is one of the fundamental beliefs of Seventh-day Adventism. Adventists believe that death is an unconscious state (a \"sleep\"). This is based on Matt. 9:24; Mark 5:39; John 11:11\u201314; 1 Cor. 15:51, 52; 1 Thess. 4:13\u201317; 2 Peter 3:4; Eccl. 9:5, 6, 10. At death, all consciousness ends. The dead person does not know anything and does not do anything. They believe that death is a decreation, or an undoing of what was created. This is described in Ecclesiastes 12:7: \"When a person dies, the body turns to dust again, and the spirit goes back to God, who gave it.\" The spirit of every person who dies\u2014whether saved or unsaved\u2014returns to God at death. The spirit that returns to God at death is the breath of life.\nIslam.\nThe Quran (the holy book of Islam) emphasizes the insignificance of worldly life (\"\u1e25ay\u0101t ad-duny\u0101\" usually translated as \"this world\") vis-\u00e0-vis the hereafter.\nA central doctrine of Islamic faith is the Judgement Day (\"al-yawm al-\u0101khir\", also known by other names), on which the world will come to an end and God will raise all mankind (as well as the \"jinn\") from the dead and evaluate their worldly actions. The resurrected will be judged according to their deeds, records of which are kept on two books compiled for every human being\u2014one for their good deeds and one for their evil ones.\nHaving been judged, the resurrected will cross the bridge of As-Sir\u0101t over the pit of hell; when the condemned attempt to cross, they will be made to fall off into hellfire below, while the righteous will have no trouble and continue on to their eternal abode of heaven.\nAfterlife in Islam actually begins before the Last Day. After death, humans will be questioned about their faith by two angels, Munkar and Nak\u012br. Those who die as martyrs go immediately to paradise. Others who have died and been buried will receive a taste of their eternal reward from the \"al-qabr\" or \"the grave\" (compare the Jewish concept of Sheol). Those bound for hell will suffer \"Punishment of the Grave\", while those bound for heaven will find the grave \"peaceful and blessed\".\nIslamic scripture\u2014the Quran and hadith (reports of the words and deeds of the Islamic Prophet Muhammad who is believed to have visited heaven and hell during his Isra and Mi'raj journey) \u2013 give vivid descriptions of the pleasures of paradise (Jannah) and sufferings of hell (\"Jahannam\"). The gardens of Jannah have cool shade,[Quran https://] adorned couchs and cushions,[ https://] rich carpets spread out, cups[ https://] full of wine,[ https://] and every meat[ https://] and fruit[ https://]. Men will be provided with perpetually youthful, beautiful \"\u1e25\u016br\", \"untouched beforehand by man or jinn\",[ https://] with large, beautiful eyes[ https://]. (In recent years some have argued that the term \"\u1e25\u016br\" refers both to pure men and pure women, and/or that Quranic references to \"immortal boys\" ( https://, https://) or \"young men\" ( https://) (\"ghilm\u0101n\", \"wild\u0101n\", and \"suq\u0101h\") who serve wine and meals to the blessed, are the male equivalents of hur.)\nIn contrast, those in Jahannam will dwell in a land infested with thousands of serpents and scorpions; be \"burnt\" by \"scorching fire\" [ https://] and when \"their skins are roasted through, We shall change them for fresh skins\" to repeat the process forever [ https://]; they will have nothing to drink but \"boiling water and running sores\"[ https://]; their cries of remorse and pleading for forgiveness will be in vain[ https://].\nTraditionally, \"Jannah\" and \"Jahannam\" are thought to have different levels. Eight gates and eight levels in \"Jannah\", where the higher the level the better it is and the happier you are. \"Jahannam\" possess seven layers. Each layer more horrible than the one above.\nThe Quran teaches that the purpose of Man's creation is to worship God and God alone. Those it describes as being punished in hell are \"most typically\" unbelievers, including those who worship others besides Allah[ https://], those who deny the divine origin of the Quran [ https://], or the coming of Judgement Day[ https://].\nStraightforward crimes/sins against other people are also grounds for going to hell: the murder of a believer[ https://][ https://], usury (Q.2:275)[ https://], devouring the property of an orphan [ https://], and slander [Quran https://], particularly of a chaste woman[ https://]. However, it is a common belief among Muslims that whatever crimes/sins Muslims may have committed, their punishment in hell will be temporary. Only unbelievers will reside in hell permanently. Thus Jahannam combines both the concept of an eternal hell (for unbelievers), and what is known in Christian Catholicism as purgatory (for believers eventually destined for heaven after punishment for their sins).\nThe common belief holds that \"Jahannam\" coexists with the temporal world. Mainstream Islam teaches the continued existence of the soul and a transformed physical existence after death. The resurrection that will take place on the Last Day is physical, and is explained by suggesting that God will recreate the decayed body (\"Have they not realized that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, can \u02f9easily\u02fa re-create them?\" [ https://]).\nAhmadiyya.\nAhmadi Muslims believe that the afterlife is not material but of a spiritual nature. According to Mirza Ghulam Ahmad, founder of the Ahmadiyya, the soul will give birth to another rarer entity and will resemble the life on this earth in the sense that this entity will bear a similar relationship to the soul as the soul bears relationship with the human existence on earth. On earth, if a person leads a righteous life and submits to the will of God, his or her tastes become attuned to enjoying spiritual pleasures as opposed to carnal desires. With this, an \"embryonic soul\" begins to take shape. Different tastes are said to be born which a person given to carnal passions finds no enjoyment. For example, sacrifice of one's own rights over that of others becomes enjoyable, or that forgiveness becomes second nature. In such a state a person finds contentment and peace at heart and at this stage, according to Ahmadiyya beliefs, it can be said that a soul within the soul has begun to take shape.\nSufism.\nThe Sufi Muslim scholar Ibn 'Arabi defined Barzakh as the intermediate realm or \"isthmus\". It is between the world of corporeal bodies and the world of spirits, and is a means of contact between the two worlds. Without it, there would be no contact between the two and both would cease to exist. He described it as simple and luminous, like the world of spirits, but also able to take on many different forms just like the world of corporeal bodies can. In broader terms Barzakh, \"is anything that separates two things\". It has been called the dream world in which the dreamer is in both life and death.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThe teachings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith state that the nature of the afterlife is beyond the understanding of those living, just as an unborn fetus cannot understand the nature of the world outside of the womb. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings state that the soul is immortal and after death it will continue to progress until it finally attains God's presence. In Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief, souls in the afterlife will continue to retain their individuality and consciousness and will be able to recognize and communicate spiritually with other souls whom they have made deep profound friendships with, such as their spouses.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed scriptures also state there are distinctions between souls in the afterlife, and that souls will recognize the worth of their own deeds and understand the consequences of their actions. It is explained that those souls that have turned toward God will experience gladness, while those who have lived in error will become aware of the opportunities they have lost. Also, in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed view, souls will be able to recognize the accomplishments of the souls that have reached the same level as themselves, but not those that have achieved a rank higher than them.\nIndian religions.\nEarly Indian religions were characterized by the belief in an afterlife, ancestor worship, and related rites. These concepts started to significantly change after the period of the Upanishads.\nBuddhism.\nAfterlife in Buddhism consists of intermediated spirit realm that's beyond spatial means, which includes the six realms of existence, the 31 planes of existence, Naraka, Tengoku and the pure land after achieving enlightenment. Ancestor worship, and links to one's ancestors, was once an important component of early Buddhism, but became less relevant already before the formation of the different Buddhist streams. The concepts and importance of afterlife vary among modern Buddhist teachings.\nBuddhists maintain that rebirth takes place without an unchanging self or soul passing from one form to another. The type of rebirth will be conditioned by the moral tone of the person's actions (kamma or karma). For example, if a person has committed harmful actions by body, speech and mind based on greed, hate and delusion, would have his/her rebirth in a lower realm, i.e. an animal, a hungry ghost or a hell realm, is to be expected. On the other hand, where a person has performed skillful actions based on generosity, loving-kindness (metta), compassion and wisdom, rebirth in a happy realm, i.e. human or one of the many heavenly realms, can be expected.\nHowever, the mechanism of rebirth with Kamma is not deterministic. It depends on various levels of kamma. The most important moment that determines where a person is reborn into is the last thought moment. At that moment, heavy kamma would ripen if there were performed. If not, near death kamma would ripen, and if not death kamma, then habitual kamma would ripen. Finally if none of the above happened, then residual kamma from previous actions can ripen. According to Theravada Buddhism, there are 31 realms of existence that one can be reborn into. According to these, 31 existences comprise 20 existences of supreme deities (Brahmas); 6 existences of deities (Devas); the human existence (Manussa); and, lastly, 4 existences of deprivation or unhappiness (Apaya).\nPure Land Buddhism of Mahayana believes in a special place apart from the 31 planes of existence called Pure Land. It is believed that each Buddha has their own pure land, created out of their merits for the sake of sentient beings who recall them mindfully to be able to be reborn in their pure land and train to become a Buddha there. Thus the main practice of pure land Buddhism is to chant a Buddha's name.\nIn Tibetan Buddhism the Tibetan Book of the Dead explains the intermediate state of humans between death and reincarnation. The deceased will find the bright light of wisdom, which shows a straightforward path to move upward and leave the cycle of reincarnation. There are various reasons why the deceased do not follow that light. Some had no briefing about the intermediate state in the former life. Others only used to follow their basic instincts like animals. And some have fear, which results from foul deeds in the former life or from insistent haughtiness. In the intermediate state the awareness is very flexible, so it is important to be virtuous, adopt a positive attitude, and avoid negative ideas. Ideas which are rising from subconsciousness can cause extreme tempers and cowing visions. In this situation they have to understand, that these manifestations are just reflections of the inner thoughts. No one can really hurt them, because they have no more material body. The deceased get help from different Buddhas who show them the path to the bright light. The ones who do not follow the path after all will get hints for a better reincarnation. They have to release the things and beings on which or whom they still hang from the life before. It is recommended to choose a family where the parents trust in the Dharma and to reincarnate with the will to care for the welfare of all beings.\nHinduism.\nThere are two major views of an afterlife in Hinduism: mythical and philosophical. The philosophies of Hinduism consider each individual consists of three bodies: physical body compose of water and biomatter (\"sth\u016bla \u015bar\u012bra\"), an energetic/psychic/mental/subtle body (\"s\u016bk\u1e63ma-\u015bar\u012bra\") and a causal body (\"k\u0101ra\u1e47a \u015bar\u012bra\") comprising subliminal stuff i.e. mental impressions etc.\nThe individual is a stream of consciousness (\"\u0100tman\"), which flows through all the physical changes of the body and at the death of the physical body, flows on into another physical body. The two components that transmigrate are the subtle body and the causal body.\nThe thought that occupies the mind at the time of death determines the quality of our rebirth (antim smara\u1e47a), hence Hinduism advises to be mindful of one's thoughts and cultivate positive wholesome thoughts \u2013 mantra chanting (japa) is commonly practiced for this.\nThe mythical includes the philosophical but adds heaven and hell myths.\nWhen one leaves the physical body at death he appears in the court of Yama, the God of Death, for an exit interview. The panel consists of Yama and Chitragupta \u2013 the cosmic accountant, he has a book which consists the history of the dead persons according to his/her mistakes the Yama decides the punishment is and Varuna, the cosmic intelligence officer. He is counseled about his life, achievements and failures and is shown a mirror in which his entire life is reflected. Philosophically, these three men are projections of one's mind. Yama sends him to a heavenly realm (Svarga) if he has been exceptionally benevolent and beneficent for a period of rest and recreation. His period is limited in time by the weight of his good deeds. If he has been exceptionally malevolent and caused immense suffering to other beings, then he is sent to a hell realm (Naraka) for his sins. After one has exhausted his karma, he takes birth again to continue his spiritual evolution. However, the belief in rebirth was not a part of early Vedic religions and texts. It was later developed by \"rishi\"s (sages) who challenged the idea of one's life as being simplistic.\nRebirth can take place as a god (deva), a human (manu\u1e63ya) an animal (tiryak)\u2014but it is generally taught that the spiritual evolution takes place from lower to higher species. In certain cases of traumatic death a person can take the form of a preta or hungry ghost \u2013 and remains in an earth-bound state interminably \u2013 until certain ceremonies are done to liberate them. This mythological part is extensively elaborated in the Puranas, especially in the Garuda Purana.\nThe Upanishads are the first scriptures in Hinduism which explicitly mention the afterlife. The Bhagavad Gita, a famous Hindu scripture, says that just as a man discards his old clothes and wears new ones; similarly the Atman discards the old body and takes on a new one. In Hinduism, the belief is that the body is nothing but a shell, the consciousness inside is immutable and indestructible and takes on different lives in a cycle of birth and death. The end of this cycle is called \"mukti\" () and staying finally with the ultimate reality forever is \"moksha\" () or liberation.\nThe (diverse) views of modern Hinduism in part differ significantly from the Historical Vedic religion.\nJainism.\nJainism also believes in the afterlife. They believe that the soul takes on a body form based on previous karmas or actions performed by that soul through eternity. Jains believe the soul is eternal and that the freedom from the cycle of reincarnation is the means to attain eternal bliss.\nSikhism.\nThe essential doctrine of Sikhism is to experience the divine through simple living, meditation, and contemplation while being alive. Sikhism also has the belief of being in union with God while living. Accounts of afterlife are considered to be aimed at the popular prevailing views of the time so as to provide a referential framework without necessarily establishing a belief in the afterlife. Thus while it is also acknowledged that living the life of a householder is above the metaphysical truth, Sikhism can be considered agnostic to the question of an afterlife. Some scholars also interpret the mention of reincarnation to be naturalistic akin to the biogeochemical cycles.\nBut if one analyses the Sikh Scriptures carefully, one may find that on many occasions the afterlife and the existence of heaven and hell are mentioned and criticised in \"Guru Granth Sahib\" and in \"Dasam Granth\" as non-true man made ideas, so from that it can be concluded that Sikhism does not believe in the existence of heaven and hell; however, heaven and hell are created to temporarily reward and punish, and one will then take birth again until one merges in God. According to the Sikh scriptures, the human form is the closet form to God if the Guru is read and understood, and the best opportunity for a human being to attain salvation and merge back with God and fully understand Him. Sikh Gurus said that nothing dies, nothing is born, everything is ever present, and it just changes forms. Like standing in front of a wardrobe, you pick up a dress and wear it and then you discard it. You wear another one. Thus, in the view of Sikhism, your soul is never born and never dies. Your soul is a part of God and hence lives forever.\nOthers.\nConfucianism.\nConfucius did not directly discuss the afterlife. Nonetheless, Chinese folk religion has had a strong influence on Confucianism, so adherents believe that their ancestors become deified spirits after death. Ancestor veneration in China is widespread.\nGnosticism.\nIn Gnostic teachings humans contain a divine spark within them said to have been trapped in their bodies by the creator of the material universe known as the Demiurge. It was believed that this spark could be released from the material world and enter into the heavenly spiritual world beyond it if special knowledge or gnosis was attained. The Cathars, for example, viewed reincarnation as a trap made by Satan, who tricked angels from the heavenly realm into entering the physical bodies of humans. They viewed the purpose of life as a way to escape the constant cycle of spiritual incarnations by letting go of worldly attachments.\nShinto.\nIt is common for families to participate in ceremonies for children at a shrine, yet have a Buddhist funeral at the time of death. In old Japanese legends, it is often claimed that the dead go to a place called \"yomi\" (\u9ec4\u6cc9), a gloomy underground realm with a river separating the living from the dead mentioned in the legend of Izanami and Izanagi. This \"yomi\" very closely resembles the Greek Hades; however, later myths include notions of resurrection and even Elysium-like descriptions such as in the legend of \u014ckuninushi and Susanoo. Shinto tends to hold negative views on death and corpses as a source of pollution called \"kegare\". However, death is also viewed as a path towards apotheosis in Shintoism as can be evidenced by how legendary individuals become enshrined after death. Perhaps the most famous would be Emperor \u014cjin who was enshrined as Hachiman the God of War after his death.\nSpiritualism.\nThe spirit world, according to spiritualism, is the world or realm inhabited by spirits, both good or evil of various spiritual manifestations. This spirit world is regarded as an external environment for spirits. The Spiritualism religious movement in the nineteenth century espoused a belief in an afterlife where individual's awareness persists beyond death.\nTaoism.\nTaoism views life as an illusion and death as a transformation into immortality. Taoists believe that immortality of the soul can be achieved by living a virtuous life in harmony with the Tao. They are taught not to fear death, as it is simply part of nature.\nTraditional African religions.\nTraditional African religions are diverse in their beliefs in an afterlife. Hunter-gatherer societies such as the Hadza have no particular belief in an afterlife, and the death of an individual is a straightforward end to their existence. Ancestor cults are found throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, including cultures like the Yombe, Beng, Yoruba and Ewe, \"[T]he belief that the dead come back into life and are reborn into their families is given concrete expression in the personal names that are given to children...What is reincarnated are some of the dominant characteristics of the ancestor and not his soul. For each soul remains distinct and each birth represents a new soul.\" The Yoruba, Dogon and LoDagoa have eschatological ideas similar to Abrahamic religions, \"but in most African societies, there is a marked absence of such clear-cut notions of heaven and hell, although there are notions of God judging the soul after death.\" In some societies like the Mende, multiple beliefs coexist. The Mende believe that people die twice: once during the process of joining the secret society, and again during biological death after which they become ancestors. However, some Mende also believe that after people are created by God they live ten consecutive lives, each in progressively descending worlds. One cross-cultural theme is that the ancestors are part of the world of the living, interacting with it regularly.\nUnitarian Universalism.\nSome Unitarian Universalists believe in universalism: that all souls will ultimately be saved and that there are no torments of hell. Unitarian Universalists differ widely in their theology hence there is no exact same stance on the issue. Although Unitarians historically believed in a literal hell, and Universalists historically believed that everyone goes to heaven, modern Unitarian Universalists can be categorized into those believing in a heaven, reincarnation and oblivion. Most Unitarian Universalists believe that heaven and hell are symbolic places of consciousness and the faith is largely focused on the worldly life rather than any possible afterlife.\nWicca.\nThe Wiccan afterlife is most commonly described as The Summerland. Here, souls rest, recuperate from life, and reflect on the experiences they had during their lives. After a period of rest, the souls are reincarnated, and the memory of their previous lives is erased. Many Wiccans see The Summerland as a place to reflect on their life actions. It is not a place of reward, but rather the end of a life journey at an end point of incarnations.\nZoroastrianism.\nZoroastrianism states that the \"urvan\", the disembodied spirit, lingers on earth for three days before departing downward to the kingdom of the dead that is ruled by Yima. For the three days that it rests on Earth, righteous souls sit at the head of their body, chanting the Ustavaiti Gathas with joy, while a wicked person sits at the feet of the corpse, wails and recites the Yasna. Zoroastrianism states that for the righteous souls, a beautiful maiden, which is the personification of the soul's good thoughts, words and deeds, appears. For a wicked person, a very old, ugly, naked hag appears. After three nights, the soul of the wicked is taken by the demon Vizaresa (V\u012bzar\u0259\u0161a), to Chinvat bridge, and is made to go to darkness (hell).\nYima is believed to have been the first king on earth to rule, as well as the first man to die. Inside of Yima's realm, the spirits live a shadowy existence, and are dependent on their own descendants which are still living on Earth. Their descendants are to satisfy their hunger and clothe them, through rituals done on earth.\nRituals which are done on the first three days are vital and important, as they protect the soul from evil powers and give it strength to reach the underworld. After three days, the soul crosses Chinvat bridge which is the Final Judgment of the soul. Rashnu and Sraosha are present at the final judgment. The list is expanded sometimes, and include Vahman and Ormazd. Rashnu is the yazata who holds the scales of justice. If the good deeds of the person outweigh the bad, the soul is worthy of paradise. If the bad deeds outweigh the good, the bridge narrows down to the width of a blade-edge, and a horrid hag pulls the soul in her arms, and takes it down to hell with her.\nMisvan Gatu is the \"place of the mixed ones\" where the souls lead a gray existence, lacking both joy and sorrow. A soul goes here if his/her good deeds and bad deeds are equal, and Rashnu's scale is equal.\nParapsychology.\nThe Society for Psychical Research was founded in 1882 with the express intention of investigating phenomena relating to Spiritualism and the afterlife. Its members continue to conduct scientific research on the paranormal to this day. Some of the earliest attempts to apply scientific methods to the study of phenomena relating to an afterlife were conducted by this organization. Its earliest members included noted scientists like William Crookes, and philosophers such as Henry Sidgwick and William James.\nParapsychological investigation of the afterlife includes the study of haunting, apparitions of the deceased, instrumental trans-communication, electronic voice phenomena, and mediumship.\nA study conducted in 1901 by physician Duncan MacDougall sought to measure the weight lost by a human when the soul \"departed the body\" upon death. MacDougall weighed dying patients in an attempt to prove that the soul was material, tangible and thus measurable. Although MacDougall's results varied considerably from \"21 grams\", for some people this figure has become synonymous with the measure of a soul's mass. The title of the 2003 movie \"21 Grams\" is a reference to MacDougall's findings. His results have never been reproduced, and are generally regarded either as meaningless or considered to have had little if any scientific merit.\nFrank Tipler has argued that physics can explain immortality, although such arguments are not falsifiable and, in Karl Popper's views, they do not qualify as science.\nAfter 25 years of parapsychological research Susan Blackmore came to the conclusion that, according to her experiences, there is not enough empirical evidence for many of these cases.\nMediumship.\nMediums purportedly act as a vessel for communications from spirits in other realms. Mediumship is not specific to one culture or religion; it can be identified in several belief systems, most notably Spiritualism. While the practice gained popularity in Europe and North America in the 19th century, evidence of mediumship dates back thousands of years in Asia. Mediums who claim to have contact with deceased people include Tyler Henry and Pascal Voggenhuber.\nNear death research.\nResearch also includes the study of the near death experience. Scientists who have worked in this area include Elisabeth K\u00fcbler-Ross, Raymond Moody, Sam Parnia, Michael Sabom, Bruce Greyson, Peter Fenwick, Jeffrey Long, Susan Blackmore, Charles Tart, William James, Ian Stevenson, Michael Persinger, Pim van Lommel, Penny Sartori, Walter van Laack among others.\nPast life regression.\nPast life regression is a method that uses hypnosis to recover what practitioners believe are memories of past lives or incarnations. The technique used during past-life regression involves the subject answering a series of questions while hypnotized to reveal identity and events of alleged past lives, a method similar to that used in recovered memory therapy and one that, similarly, often misrepresents memory as a faithful recording of previous events rather than a constructed set of recollections.\nHowever, medical experts and practitioners do not agree that the past life memories gained from past life regressions are truly from past lives; experts generally regard claims of recovered memories of past lives as fantasies or delusions or a type of confabulation, because the use of hypnosis and suggestive questions can tend to leave the subject particularly likely to hold distorted or false memories.\nPhilosophy.\nModern philosophy.\nThere is a view based on the philosophical question of personal identity, termed open individualism by Daniel Kolak, that concludes that individual conscious experience is illusory, and because consciousness continues after death in all conscious beings, \"you\" do not die. This position has allegedly been supported by physicists such as Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger and Freeman Dyson.\nCertain problems arise with the idea of a particular person continuing after death. Peter van Inwagen, in his argument regarding resurrection, notes that the materialist must have some sort of physical continuity. John Hick also raises questions regarding personal identity in his book, \"Death and Eternal Life\", using an example of a person ceasing to exist in one place while an exact replica appears in another. If the replica had all the same experiences, traits, and physical appearances of the first person, we would all attribute the same identity to the second, according to Hick.\nSome philosophers have used Occam's razor to argue against the existence of an afterlife.\nProcess philosophy.\nIn the panentheistic model of process philosophy and theology the writers Alfred North Whitehead and Charles Hartshorne rejected the idea that the universe was made of substance, instead saying reality is composed of living experiences (occasions of experience). According to Hartshorne people do not experience subjective (or personal) immortality in the afterlife, but they do have objective immortality because their experiences live on forever in God, who contains all that was. However other process philosophers such as David Ray Griffin have written that people may have subjective experience after death.\nScience.\nPsychological proposals for the origin of a belief in an afterlife include cognitive disposition, cultural learning, and as an intuitive religious idea. Fear of death or death anxiety is hypothesized to be a primary motivator for afterlife beliefs. Jamin Halberstadt finds that one function of religion is to alleviate death anxiety via afterlife beliefs. There also is research about afterlife beliefs from an evolutionary perspective, i.e. in the context of group selection.\nNear-death experiences.\nIn 2008, a large-scale study conducted by the University of Southampton involving 2,060 patients from 15 hospitals in the United Kingdom, United States and Austria was launched. The AWARE (AWAreness during REsuscitation) study examined the broad range of mental experiences in relation to death. In a large study, researchers also tested the validity of conscious experiences for the first time using objective markers, to determine whether claims of awareness compatible with out-of-body experiences correspond with real or hallucinatory events. The results revealed that 40% of those who survived a cardiac arrest were aware during the time that they were clinically dead and before their hearts were restarted. One patient also had a verified out-of-body experience (over 80% of patients did not survive their cardiac arrest or were too sick to be interviewed), but his cardiac arrest occurred in a room without markers. Dr. Parnia in the interview stated, \"The evidence thus far suggests that in the first few minutes after death, consciousness is not annihilated.\" The AWARE study drew the following primary conclusions:\nStudies have also been done on the widely reported phenomenon of near-death experiences (NDE). Experiencers commonly report being transported to a different \"realm\" or \"plane of existence\" and they have been shown to display a lasting positive aftereffect on most experiencers.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1181", "revid": "1310051709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1181", "title": "Astrometry", "text": "Branch of astronomy involving positioning and movements of celestial bodies\nAstrometry is a branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestial bodies. It provides the kinematics and physical origin of the Solar System and this galaxy, the Milky Way.\nHistory.\nThe history of astrometry is linked to the history of star catalogues, which gave astronomers reference points for objects in the sky so they could track their movements. This can be dated back to the ancient Greek astronomer Hipparchus, who around 190 BC used the catalogue of his predecessors Timocharis and Aristillus to discover Earth's precession. In doing so, he also developed the brightness scale still in use today. Hipparchus compiled a catalogue with at least 850 stars and their positions. Hipparchus's successor, Ptolemy, included a catalogue of 1,022 stars in his work the \"Almagest\", giving their location, coordinates, and brightness.\nIn the 10th century, the Iranian astronomer Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi carried out observations on the stars and described their positions, magnitudes and star color; furthermore, he provided drawings for each constellation, which are depicted in his \"Book of Fixed Stars\". Egyptian mathematician Ibn Yunus observed more than 10,000 entries for the Sun's position for many years using a large astrolabe with a diameter of nearly 1.4 metres. His observations on eclipses were still used centuries later in Canadian\u2013American astronomer Simon Newcomb's investigations on the motion of the Moon, while his other observations of the motions of the planets Jupiter and Saturn inspired French scholar Laplace's \"Obliquity of the Ecliptic\" and \"Inequalities of Jupiter and Saturn\". In the 15th century, the Timurid astronomer Ulugh Beg compiled the \"Zij-i-Sultani\", in which he catalogued 1,019 stars. Like the earlier catalogs of Hipparchus and Ptolemy, Ulugh Beg's catalogue is estimated to have been precise to within approximately 20 minutes of arc.\nIn the 16th century, Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe used improved instruments, including large mural instruments, to measure star positions more accurately than previously, with a precision of 15\u201335 arcsec. Ottoman scholar Taqi al-Din measured the right ascension of the stars at the Constantinople Observatory of Taqi ad-Din using the \"observational clock\" he invented. When telescopes became commonplace, setting circles sped measurements\nEnglish astronomer James Bradley first tried to measure stellar parallaxes in 1729. The stellar movement proved too insignificant for his telescope, but he instead discovered the aberration of light and the nutation of the Earth's axis. His cataloguing of 3222 stars was refined in 1807 by German astronomer Friedrich Bessel, the father of modern astrometry. He made the first measurement of stellar parallax: 0.3 arcsec for the binary star 61 Cygni. In 1872, British astronomer William Huggins used spectroscopy to measure the radial velocity of several prominent stars, including Sirius.\nBeing very difficult to measure, only about 60 stellar parallaxes had been obtained by the end of the 19th century, mostly by use of the filar micrometer. Astrographs using astronomical photographic plates sped the process in the early 20th century. Automated plate-measuring machines and more sophisticated computer technology of the 1960s allowed more efficient compilation of star catalogues. Started in the late 19th century, the project Carte du Ciel to improve star mapping could not be finished but made photography a common technique for astrometry. In the 1980s, charge-coupled devices (CCDs) replaced photographic plates and reduced optical uncertainties to one milliarcsecond. This technology made astrometry less expensive, opening the field to an amateur audience.\nIn 1989, the European Space Agency's Hipparcos satellite took astrometry into orbit, where it could be less affected by mechanical forces of the Earth and optical distortions from its atmosphere. Operated from 1989 to 1993, Hipparcos measured large and small angles on the sky with much greater precision than any previous optical telescopes. During its 4-year run, the positions, parallaxes, and proper motions of 118,218 stars were determined with an unprecedented degree of accuracy. A new \"Tycho catalog\" drew together a database of 1,058,332 stars to within 20-30 mas (milliarcseconds). Additional catalogues were compiled for the 23,882 double and multiple stars and 11,597 variable stars also analyzed during the Hipparcos mission.\nIn 2013, the Gaia satellite was launched and improved the accuracy of Hipparcos.\nThe precision was improved by a factor of 100 and enabled the mapping of a billion stars.\nToday, the catalogue most often used is USNO-B1.0, an all-sky catalogue that tracks proper motions, positions, magnitudes and other characteristics for over one billion stellar objects. During the past 50 years, 7,435 Schmidt camera plates were used to complete several sky surveys that make the data in USNO-B1.0 accurate to within 0.2 arcsec.\nApplications.\nApart from the fundamental function of providing astronomers with a reference frame to report their observations in, astrometry is also fundamental for fields like celestial mechanics, stellar dynamics and galactic astronomy. In observational astronomy, astrometric techniques help identify stellar objects by their unique motions. It is instrumental for keeping time, in that UTC is essentially the atomic time synchronized to Earth's rotation by means of exact astronomical observations. Astrometry is an important step in the cosmic distance ladder because it establishes parallax distance estimates for stars in the Milky Way.\nAstrometry has also been used to support claims of extrasolar planet detection by measuring the displacement the proposed planets cause in their parent star's apparent position on the sky, due to their mutual orbit around the center of mass of the system. Astrometry is more accurate in space missions that are not affected by the distorting effects of the Earth's atmosphere. NASA's planned Space Interferometry Mission (SIM PlanetQuest) (now cancelled) was to utilize astrometric techniques to detect terrestrial planets orbiting 200 or so of the nearest solar-type stars. The European Space Agency's Gaia Mission, launched in 2013, applies astrometric techniques in its stellar census. In addition to the detection of exoplanets, it can also be used to determine their mass.\nAstrometric measurements are used by astrophysicists to constrain certain models in celestial mechanics. By measuring the velocities of pulsars, it is possible to put a limit on the asymmetry of supernova explosions. Also, astrometric results are used to determine the distribution of dark matter in the galaxy.\nAstronomers use astrometric techniques for the tracking of near-Earth objects. Astrometry is responsible for the detection of many record-breaking Solar System objects. To find such objects astrometrically, astronomers use telescopes to survey the sky and large-area cameras to take pictures at various determined intervals. By studying these images, they can detect Solar System objects by their movements relative to the background stars, which remain fixed. Once a movement per unit time is observed, astronomers compensate for the parallax caused by Earth's motion during this time and the heliocentric distance to this object is calculated. Using this distance and other photographs, more information about the object, including its orbital elements, can be obtained. Asteroid impact avoidance is among the purposes.\nQuaoar and Sedna are two trans-Neptunian dwarf planets discovered in this way by Michael E. Brown and others at Caltech using the Palomar Observatory's Samuel Oschin telescope of and the Palomar-Quest large-area CCD camera. The ability of astronomers to track the positions and movements of such celestial bodies is crucial to the understanding of the Solar System and its interrelated past, present, and future with others in the Universe.\nStatistics.\nA fundamental aspect of astrometry is error correction. Various factors introduce errors into the measurement of stellar positions, including atmospheric conditions, imperfections in the instruments and errors by the observer or the measuring instruments. Many of these errors can be reduced by various techniques, such as through instrument improvements and compensations to the data. The results are then analyzed using statistical methods to compute data estimates and error ranges.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1182", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1182", "title": "Athena", "text": "Goddess of wisdom and war in ancient Greek religion and mythology\nAthena or Athene, often given the epithet Pallas, is an ancient Greek goddess associated with wisdom, warfare, and handicraft who was later syncretized with the Roman goddess Minerva. Athena was regarded as the patron and protectress of various cities across Greece, particularly the city of Athens, from which she most likely received her name. The Parthenon on the Acropolis of Athens is dedicated to her. Her major symbols include owls, olive trees, snakes, and the Gorgoneion. In art, she is generally depicted wearing a helmet and holding a spear.\nFrom her origin as an Aegean palace goddess, Athena was closely associated with the city. She was known as \"Polias\" and \"Poliouchos\" (both derived from \"polis\", meaning \"city-state\"), and her temples were usually located atop the fortified acropolis in the central part of the city. The Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis is dedicated to her, along with numerous other temples and monuments. As the patron of craft and weaving, Athena was known as \"Ergane\". She was also a warrior goddess, and was believed to lead soldiers into battle as \"Athena Promachos\". Her main festival in Athens was the Panathenaia, which was celebrated during the month of Hekatombaion in midsummer and was the most important festival on the Athenian calendar.\nIn Greek mythology, Athena was believed to have been born from the forehead of her father Zeus. In almost all versions of the story, Athena has no mother and is born from Zeus' forehead by parthenogenesis. In a few others, such as Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Zeus swallows his consort Metis, who was pregnant with Athena; in this version, Athena is first born within Zeus and then escapes from his body through his forehead. In the founding myth of Athens, Athena bested Poseidon in a competition over patronage of the city by creating the first olive tree. She was known as \"Athena Parthenos\" \"Athena the Virgin\". In one archaic Attic myth, Hephaestus tried and failed to rape her, resulting in Gaia giving birth to Erichthonius, an important Athenian founding hero whom Athena raised. She was the patron goddess of heroic endeavor; she was believed to have aided the heroes Perseus, Heracles, Bellerophon, and Jason. Along with Aphrodite and Hera, Athena was one of the three goddesses whose feud resulted in the Trojan War. She plays an active role in the \"Iliad\", in which she assists the Achaeans and, in the \"Odyssey\", she is the tutelary deity to Odysseus.\nIn the later writings of the Roman poet Ovid, Athena was said to have competed against the mortal Arachne in a weaving competition, afterward transforming Arachne into the first spider, and to have transformed Medusa into the Gorgon after witnessing the young woman being raped by Poseidon in the goddess's temple. Ovid also says that Athena saved the mortal maiden Corone from the same god by transforming her into a crow. Since the Renaissance, Athena has become an international symbol of wisdom, the arts, and classical learning. Western artists and allegorists have often used Athena as a symbol of freedom and democracy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nAthena is associated with the city of Athens. The name of the city in ancient Greek is (), a plural toponym, designating the place where\u2014according to myth\u2014she presided over the \"Athenai\", a sisterhood devoted to her worship. In ancient times, scholars argued whether Athena was named after Athens or Athens after Athena. Now scholars generally agree that the goddess takes her name from the city; the ending -\"ene\" is common in names of locations, but rare for personal names. Testimonies from different cities in ancient Greece attest that similar city goddesses were worshipped in other cities and, like Athena, took their names from the cities where they were worshipped. For example, in Mycenae there was a goddess called Mykene, whose sisterhood was known as \"Mykenai\", whereas at Thebes an analogous deity was called Thebe, and the city was known under the plural form \"Thebai\" (or Thebes, in English, where the 's' is the plural formation). The name \"Athenai\" is likely of pre-Greek origin because it contains the presumably pre-Greek morpheme \"*-\u0101n-\".\nIn his dialogue \"Cratylus\", the ancient Greek philosopher Plato (428\u2013347 BC) gives some rather imaginative etymologies of Athena's name, based on the theories of the ancient Athenians and his etymological speculations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That is a graver matter, and there, my friend, the modern interpreters of Homer may, I think, assist in explaining the view of the ancients. Most of these in their explanations of the poet, assert that he meant by Athena \"mind\" [, \"no\u0169s\"] and \"intelligence\" [, \"di\u00e1noia\"], and the maker of names appears to have had a singular notion about her; and indeed calls her by a still higher title, \"divine intelligence\" [, \"theo\u0169 n\u00f3\u0113sis\"], as though he would say: This is she who has the mind of God [, \"a theon\u00f3a\"]. Perhaps, however, the name Theonoe may mean \"she who knows divine things\" [, \"ta theia noousa\"] better than others. Nor shall we be far wrong in supposing that the author of it wished to identify this Goddess with moral intelligence [, \"en \u00e9thei n\u00f3esin\"], and therefore gave her the name Etheonoe; which, however, either he or his successors have altered into what they thought a nicer form, and called her Athena.\u2014\u200a\nThus, Plato believed that Athena's name was derived from Greek , \u2014which the later Greeks rationalised as from the deity's (, ) mind (, ). The second-century AD orator Aelius Aristides attempted to derive natural symbols from the etymological roots of Athena's names to be \"aether\", \"air\", \"earth\", and \"moon\".\nOrigins.\nAthena was originally the Aegean goddess of the palace, who presided over household crafts and protected the king. A single Mycenaean Greek inscription appears at Knossos in the Linear B tablets from the Late Minoan II-era \"Room of the Chariot Tablets\"; these comprise the earliest Linear B archive anywhere. Although \"Athana potnia\" is often translated as \"Mistress Athena\", it could also mean \"the \"Potnia\" of Athana\", or \"the Lady of Athens\". However, any connection to the city of Athens in the Knossos inscription is uncertain. A sign series appears in the still undeciphered corpus of Linear A tablets, written in the unclassified Minoan language. This could be connected with the Linear B Mycenaean expressions and or (\"Diwia\", \"of Zeus\" or, possibly, related to a homonymous goddess), resulting in a translation \"Athena of Zeus\" or \"divine Athena\". Similarly, in the Greek mythology and epic tradition, Athena figures as a daughter of Zeus (; \"cfr.\" Dyeus). However, the inscription quoted seems to be very similar to \"\", quoted as SY Za 1 by Jan Best. Best translates the initial , which is recurrent in line beginnings, as \"I have given\".\nA Mycenean fresco depicts two women extending their hands towards a central figure, who is covered by an enormous figure-eight shield; this may depict the warrior-goddess with her \"palladium\", or her palladium in an aniconic representation. In the \"Procession Fresco\" at Knossos, which was reconstructed by the Mycenaeans, two rows of figures carrying vessels seem to meet in front of a central figure, which is probably the Minoan precursor to Athena. The early twentieth-century scholar Martin Persson Nilsson argued that the Minoan snake goddess figurines are early representations of Athena.\nNilsson and others have claimed that, in early times, Athena was either an owl herself or a bird goddess in general. In the third book of the \"Odyssey\", she takes the form of a sea-eagle. Proponents of this view argue that she dropped her prophylactic owl mask before she lost her wings. \"Athena, by the time she appears in art,\" Jane Ellen Harrison remarks, \"has completely shed her animal form, has reduced the shapes she once wore of snake and bird to attributes, but occasionally in black-figure vase-paintings she still appears with wings.\"\nIt is generally agreed that the cult of Athena preserves some aspects of the Proto-Indo-European transfunctional goddess. The cult of Athena may have also been influenced by those of Near Eastern warrior goddesses such as the East Semitic Ishtar and the Ugaritic Anat, both of whom were often portrayed bearing arms. Classical scholar Charles Penglase notes that Athena resembles Inanna in her role as a \"terrifying warrior goddess\" and that both goddesses were closely linked with creation. Athena's birth from the head of Zeus may be derived from the earlier Sumerian myth of Inanna's descent into and return from the Underworld.\nPlato notes that the citizens of Sais in Egypt worshipped a goddess known as Neith, whom he identifies with Athena. Neith was the ancient Egyptian goddess of war and hunting, who was also associated with weaving; her worship began during the Egyptian Pre-Dynastic period. In Greek mythology, Athena was reported to have visited mythological sites in North Africa, including Libya's Triton River and the Phlegraean plain. Based on these similarities, the Sinologist Martin Bernal created the \"Black Athena\" hypothesis, which claimed that Neith was brought to Greece from Egypt, along with \"an enormous number of features of civilization and culture in the third and second millennia\". The \"Black Athena\" hypothesis stirred up widespread controversy near the end of the twentieth century, but it has now been widely rejected by modern scholars.\nEpithets and attributes.\nAthena was also the goddess of peace.\nIn a similar manner to her patronage of various activities and Greek cities, Athena was thought to be a \"protector of heroes\" and a \"patron of art\" and various local traditions related to the arts and handicrafts.\nAthena was known as \"Atrytone\" ( \"the Unwearying\"), \"Parthenos\" ( \"Virgin\"), and \"Promachos\" ( \"she who fights in front\"). The epithet \"Polias\" (\u03a0\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03ac\u03c2 \"of the city\"), refers to Athena's role as protectress of the city. The epithet \"Ergane\" (\u0395\u03c1\u03b3\u03ac\u03bd\u03b7 \"the Industrious\") pointed her out as the patron of craftsmen and artisans. Burkert notes that the Athenians sometimes simply called Athena \"the Goddess\", \"h\u0113 the\u00f3s\" (\u1f21 \u03b8\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2), certainly an ancient title. After serving as the judge at the trial of Orestes in which he was acquitted of having murdered his mother Clytemnestra since he was following Apollo's orders, Athena won the epithet \"Areia\" (\u0391\u03c1\u03b5\u03af\u03b1). Some have described Athena, along with the goddesses Hestia and Artemis as being asexual, this is mainly supported by the fact that in the Homeric Hymns, 5, \"To Aphrodite\", where Aphrodite is described as having \"no power\" over the three goddesses.\nAthena was sometimes given the epithet \"Hippia\" (\u1f3d\u03c0\u03c0\u03b9\u03b1 \"of the horses\", \"equestrian\"), referring to her invention of the bit, bridle, chariot, and wagon. The Greek geographer Pausanias mentions in his \"Guide to Greece\" that the temple of Athena \"Chalinitis\" (\"the bridler\") in Corinth was located near the tomb of Medea's children. Other epithets include Ageleia, Itonia and \"Aethyia\", under which she was worshiped in Megara. She was worshipped as Assesia in Assesos. The word \"a\u00edthyia\" () signifies a \"diver\", also some diving bird species (possibly the shearwater) and figuratively, a \"ship\", so the name must reference Athena teaching the art of shipbuilding or navigation. In a temple at Phrixa in Elis, reportedly built by Clymenus, she was known as \"Cydonia\" (\u039a\u03c5\u03b4\u03c9\u03bd\u03af\u03b1). Pausanias wrote that at Buporthmus there was a sanctuary of Athena Promachorma (\u03a0\u03c1\u03bf\u03bc\u03b1\u03c7\u03cc\u03c1\u03bc\u03b1), meaning \"protector of the anchorage\".\nThe Greek biographer Plutarch describes Pericles's dedication of a statue to her as \"Athena Hygieia\" (\u1f59\u03b3\u03af\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1, \"Health\") after she inspired, in a dream, his successful treatment of a man injured during the construction of the gateway to the Acropolis.\n\"Mechanitis\" (\u039c\u03b7\u03c7\u03b1\u03bd\u1fd6\u03c4\u03b9\u03c2), meaning skilled in inventing, was one of the epithets of her.\nAt Athens there is the temple of Athena \"Phratria\", as patron of a phratry, in the Ancient Agora of Athens.\nPallas Athena.\nAthena's epithet \"Pallas\" \u2013 her most renowned one \u2013 is derived either from , meaning \"to brandish [as a weapon]\", or, more likely, from and related words, meaning \"youth, young woman\". On this topic, Walter Burkert says \"she is the Pallas of Athens, \"Pallas Athenaie\", just as Hera of Argos is \"Here Argeie\"\". In later times, after the original meaning of the name had been forgotten, the Greeks invented myths to explain its origins, such as those reported by the Epicurean philosopher Philodemus and the \"Bibliotheca\" of Pseudo-Apollodorus, which claim that \"Pallas\" was originally a separate entity, whom Athena had slain in combat.\nIn one version of the myth, Pallas was the daughter of the sea-god Triton, who was childhood friends with Athena. Zeus one day watched Athena and Pallas have a friendly sparring match. Not wanting his daughter to lose, Zeus flapped his aegis to distract Pallas, whom Athena accidentally impaled. Distraught over what she had done, Athena took the name Pallas for herself as a sign of her grief and tribute to her friend and Zeus gave her the aegis as an apology. In another version of the story, Pallas was a Giant; Athena slew him during the Gigantomachy and flayed off his skin to make her cloak, which she wore as a victory trophy. In an alternative variation of the same myth, Pallas was instead Athena's father, who attempted to assault his own daughter, causing Athena to kill him and take his skin as a trophy.\nThe \"palladium\" was a statue of Athena that was said to have stood in her temple on the Trojan Acropolis. Athena was said to have carved the statue herself in the likeness of her dead friend Pallas. The statue had special talisman-like properties and it was thought that, as long as it was in the city, Troy could never fall. When the Greeks captured Troy, Cassandra, the daughter of Priam and Hecuba, clung to the palladium for protection, but Ajax the Lesser violently tore her away from it, dragged her over to the other captives and raped her. Athena was infuriated by this violation of her protection. Although Agamemnon attempted to placate her anger with sacrifices, Athena sent a storm at Cape Kaphereos to destroy almost the entire Greek fleet and scatter all of the surviving ships across the Aegean.\n\"Glaukopis\".\nIn Homer's epic works, Athena's most common epithet is ' (), which usually is translated as, \"bright-eyed\" or \"with gleaming eyes\". The word is a combination of ' (, meaning \"gleaming, silvery\", and later, \"bluish-green\" or \"gray\") and \"\" (, \"eye, face\").\nThe word \"\" (, \"little owl\") is from the same root, presumably according to some, because of the bird's own distinctive eyes. Athena was associated with the owl from very early on; in archaic images, she is frequently depicted with an owl perched on her hand. Through its association with Athena, the owl evolved into the national mascot of the Athenians and eventually became a symbol of wisdom.\n\"Tritogeneia\".\nIn the \"Iliad\" (4.514), the \"Odyssey\" (3.378), the \"Homeric Hymns\", and in Hesiod's \"Theogony\", Athena is also given the curious epithet \"Tritogeneia\" (\u03a4\u03c1\u03b9\u03c4\u03bf\u03b3\u03ad\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1), whose significance remains unclear. It could mean various things, including \"Triton-born\", perhaps indicating that the homonymous sea-deity was her parent according to some early myths. One myth relates the foster father relationship of this Triton towards the half-orphan Athena, whom he raised alongside his own daughter Pallas. Ker\u00e9nyi suggests that \"Tritogeneia did not mean that she came into the world on any particular river or lake, but that she was born of the water itself; for the name Triton seems to be associated with water generally.\" In Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", Athena is occasionally referred to as \"Tritonia\".\nAnother possible meaning may be \"triple-born\" or \"third-born\", which may refer to a triad or to her status as the third daughter of Zeus or the fact she was born from Metis, Zeus, and herself; various legends list her as being the first child after Artemis and Apollo, though other legends identify her as Zeus' first child. Several scholars have suggested a connection to the Rigvedic god Trita, who was sometimes grouped in a body of three mythological poets. Michael Janda has connected the myth of Trita to the scene in the \"Iliad\" in which the \"three brothers\" Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades divide the world between them, receiving the \"broad sky\", the sea, and the underworld respectively. Janda further connects the myth of Athena being born of the head (i.\u00a0e. the uppermost part) of Zeus, understanding \"Trito-\" (which perhaps originally meant \"the third\") as another word for \"the sky\". In Janda's analysis of Indo-European mythology, this heavenly sphere is also associated with the mythological body of water surrounding the inhabited world (\"cfr.\" Triton's mother, Amphitrite, queen of Poseidon).\nYet another possible meaning is mentioned in Diogenes Laertius' biography of Democritus, that Athena was called \"Tritogeneia\" because three things, on which all mortal life depends, come from her.\nPanhellenic and Athenian cult.\nIn her aspect of \"Athena Polias\", Athena was venerated as the goddess of the city and the protectress of the citadel. In Athens, the Plynteria, or \"Feast of the Bath\", was observed every year at the end of the month of Thargelion. The festival lasted for five days. During this period, the priestesses of Athena, or \"plyntr\u00eddes\", performed a cleansing ritual within the Erechtheion, a sanctuary devoted to Athena and Poseidon. Here Athena's statue was undressed, her clothes washed, and body purified. Athena was worshipped at festivals such as Chalceia as \"Athena Ergane\", the patroness of various crafts, especially weaving. She was also the patron of metalworkers and was believed to aid in the forging of armor and weapons. During the late fifth century BC, the role of goddess of philosophy became a major aspect of Athena's cult.\nAs \"Athena Promachos\", she was believed to lead soldiers into battle. Athena represented the disciplined, strategic side of war, in contrast to her brother Ares, the patron of violence, bloodlust, and slaughter\u2014\"the raw force of war\". Athena was believed to only support those fighting for a just cause and was thought to view war primarily as a means to resolve conflict. The Greeks regarded Athena with much higher esteem than Ares. Athena was especially worshipped in this role during the festivals of the Panathenaea and Pamboeotia, both of which prominently featured displays of athletic and military prowess. As the patroness of heroes and warriors, Athena was believed to favor those who used cunning and intelligence rather than brute strength.\nIn her aspect as a warrior maiden, Athena was known as \"Parthenos\" ( \"virgin\"), because, like her fellow goddesses Artemis and Hestia, she was believed to remain perpetually a virgin. Athena's most famous temple, the Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis, takes its name from this title. According to Karl Ker\u00e9nyi, a scholar of Greek mythology, the name \"Parthenos\" is not merely an observation of Athena's virginity, but also a recognition of her role as enforcer of rules of sexual modesty and ritual mystery. Even beyond recognition, the Athenians allotted the goddess value based on this pureness of virginity, which they upheld as a rudiment of female behavior. Ker\u00e9nyi's study and theory of Athena explains her virginal epithet as a result of her relationship to her father Zeus and a vital, cohesive piece of her character throughout the ages. This role is expressed in several stories about Athena. Marinus of Neapolis reports that when Christians removed the statue of the goddess from the Parthenon, a beautiful woman appeared in a dream to Proclus, a devotee of Athena, and announced that the \"Athenian Lady\" wished to dwell with him.\nAthena was also credited with creating the pebble-based form of divination. Those pebbles were called \"thriai\", which was also the collective name of a group of nymphs with prophetic powers. Her half-brother Apollo, however, angered and spiteful at the practitioners of an art rival to his own, complained to their father Zeus about it, with the pretext that many people took to casting pebbles, but few actually were true prophets. Zeus, sympathizing with Apollo's grievances, discredited the pebble divination by rendering the pebbles useless. Apollo's words became the basis of an ancient Greek idiom.\nRegional cults.\nAthena was not only the patron goddess of Athens, but also other cities, including Pergamon, Argos, Sparta, Gortyn, Lindos, and Larisa. The various cults of Athena were all branches of her panhellenic cult and often proctored various initiation rites of Grecian youth, such as the passage into citizenship by young men or the passage of young women into marriage. These cults were portals of a uniform socialization, even beyond mainland Greece. Athena was frequently equated with Aphaea, a local goddess of the island of Aegina, originally from Crete and also associated with Artemis and the nymph Britomartis. In Arcadia, she was assimilated with the ancient goddess Alea and worshiped as Athena Alea. Sanctuaries dedicated to Athena Alea were located in the Laconian towns of Mantineia and Tegea. The temple of Athena Alea in Tegea was an important religious center of ancient Greece. The geographer Pausanias was informed that the \"temenos\" had been founded by Aleus.\nAthena had a major temple on the Spartan Acropolis, where she was venerated as Poliouchos and \"Khalk\u00edoikos\" (\"of the Brazen House\", often Latinized as \"Chalcioecus\"). This epithet may refer to the fact that cult statue held there may have been made of bronze, that the walls of the temple itself may have been made of bronze, or that Athena was the patron of metal-workers. Bells made of terracotta and bronze were used in Sparta as part of Athena's cult. An Ionic-style temple to Athena Polias was built at Priene in the fourth century BC. It was designed by Pytheos of Priene, the same architect who designed the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus. The temple was dedicated by Alexander the Great and an inscription from the temple declaring his dedication is now held in the British Museum. She was worshipped as \"Athena Asia\" in Colchis \u2013 supposedly on an account of a nearby mountain with that name \u2013 from which her worship was believed to have been brought by Castor and Pollux to Laconia, where a temple was built to her at Las.\nAthena Cyrrhestica worshiped in the city of Cyrrhus in the Cyrrhestica province of Syria.\nIn Pergamon, Athena was thought to have been a god of the cosmos and the aspects of it that aided Pergamon and its fate.\nMythology.\nBirth.\nIn the classical Olympian pantheon, Athena was regarded as the favorite child of Zeus, the king of the gods, born fully armed from his forehead. Since her birth, she possessed great power. The story of her birth comes in several versions. The earliest mention is in Book V of the \"Iliad\", when Ares accused Zeus of being biased in favor of Athena because \"autos egeinao\" (literally \"you fathered her\", but probably intended as \"you gave birth to her\"). She usually is the daughter of Zeus, produced without a mother, and often emerged full-grown from his forehead; but there is an uncommon alternate story in which Zeus swallowed Metis, the goddess of counsel, while she was pregnant with Athena and when she was fully grown she emerged from his forehead.\nIn the version recounted by Hesiod in his \"Theogony\", Zeus married Metis, who is described as the \"wisest among gods and mortal men\", and engaged in sexual intercourse with her. After learning that Metis was pregnant, however, he became afraid that the unborn offspring would try to overthrow him, because Gaia and Ouranos had prophesied that Metis would bear a son wiser and more powerful than his father who would overthrow him. In order to prevent this, Zeus tricked Metis into letting him swallow her, but it was too late because she had already conceived and soon gave birth to their daughter Athena, whom Metis raised inside of his mind, where she continues to give him advice as a ruler. When Athena grew up, Metis forged robes, armor, a shield and a spear for her daughter. A later account of the story from the \"Bibliotheca\" of Pseudo-Apollodorus, written in the second century AD, makes Metis Zeus's unwilling sexual partner, rather than his wife. According to this version of the story, Metis transformed into many different shapes in effort to escape Zeus, but Zeus successfully raped her and swallowed her.\nAfter swallowing Metis, according to Hesiod, Zeus took six more wives in succession until he married his seventh and present wife, Hera. Then Zeus experienced an enormous headache. He was in such pain that he ordered someone (either Prometheus, Hephaestus, Hermes, Ares, or Palaemon, depending on the sources examined) to cleave his head open with the \"labrys\", the double-headed Minoan axe. Athena leaped from Zeus's head, often fully grown and armed. The \"First Homeric Hymn to Athena\" states in lines 9\u201316 that the gods were awestruck by Athena's appearance and even Helios, the god of the sun, stopped his chariot in the sky. Pindar, in his \"Seventh Olympian Ode\", states that she \"cried aloud with a mighty shout\" and that \"the Sky and mother Earth shuddered before her\".\nHesiod states that Hera was so annoyed at Zeus for having given birth to a child on his own that she conceived and bore Hephaestus by herself, but in \"Imagines\" https:// (trans. Fairbanks), the third-century AD Greek rhetorician Philostratus the Elder writes that Hera \"rejoices\" at Athena's birth \"as though Athena were her daughter also\". The second-century AD Christian apologist Justin Martyr takes issue with those pagans who erect at springs images of Kore, whom he interprets as Athena: \"They said that Athena was the daughter of Zeus not from intercourse, but when the god had in mind the making of a world through a word (\"logos\") his first thought was Athena.\" According to a rare account of the story in a scholium on the \"Iliad\", when Zeus swallowed Metis, she was pregnant with Athena by the Cyclops Brontes. The \"Etymologicum Magnum\" instead deems Athena the daughter of the Daktyl Itonos. Fragments attributed by the Christian Eusebius of Caesarea to the semi-legendary Phoenician historian Sanchuniathon, which Eusebius thought had been written before the Trojan War, make Athena instead the daughter of Cronus, a king of Byblos who visited \"the inhabitable world\" and bequeathed Attica to Athena.\nAthena, born a daughter instead of the son of the prophecy Hesiod described, never successfully overthrew her father Zeus as the ruler of the cosmos; but Homer' \"Iliad\" tells of an attempted overthrow, in which she, Hera and Poseidon conspired to overpower Zeus and tie him in bonds. It is only because of the Nereid Thetis, who summoned Briareus, one of the Hecatoncheires, to Mount Olympus, that the other gods abandon their plans (out of fear for Briareus).\nLady of Athens.\nAs the goddess of war, good counsel, prudent restraint and practical insight, Athena became the guardian of the welfare of kings. In a founding myth reported by Pseudo-Apollodorus, she competed with Poseidon for the patronage of Athens. They agreed that each would give the Athenians one gift and that Cecrops, the king of Athens, would determine which gift was better. Poseidon struck the ground with his trident and a salt water spring sprang up; this gave the Athenians access to trade and water. Athens at its height was a significant sea power, defeating the Persian fleet at the Battle of Salamis\u2014but the water was salty and undrinkable. In an alternative version of the myth from Vergil's \"Georgics\", Poseidon instead gave the Athenians the first horse. Athena offered the first domesticated olive tree. Cecrops accepted this gift and declared Athena the patron goddess of Athens. The olive tree brought wood, oil, and food, and became a symbol of Athenian economic prosperity. Robert Graves was of the opinion that \"Poseidon's attempts to take possession of certain cities are political myths\", which reflect the conflict between matriarchal and patriarchal religions.\nAfterwards, Poseidon was so angry over his defeat that he sent one of his sons, Halirrhothius, to cut down the tree. But as he swung his axe, he missed his aim and it fell in himself, killing him. This was supposedly the origin of calling Athena's sacred olive tree \"moria\", for Halirrhotius's attempt at revenge proved fatal (\"moros\" in Greek). Poseidon in fury accused Ares of murder, and the matter was eventually settled on the Areopagus (\"hill of Ares\") in favour of Ares, which was thereafter named after the event.\nPseudo-Apollodorus records an archaic legend, which claims that Hephaestus once attempted to rape Athena, but she pushed him away, causing him to ejaculate on her thigh. Athena wiped the semen off using a tuft of wool, which she tossed into the dust, impregnating Gaia and causing her to give birth to Erichthonius. Athena adopted Erichthonius as her son and raised him. The \"Fabulae\", a work of Roman mythography attributed to Gaius Julius Hyginus, records a similar story in which Hephaestus demanded Zeus to let him marry Athena since he was the one who had smashed open Zeus's skull, allowing Athena to be born. Zeus agreed to this and Hephaestus and Athena were married, but, when Hephaestus was about to consummate the union, Athena vanished from the bridal bed, causing him to ejaculate on the floor, thus impregnating Gaia with Erichthonius.\nThe geographer Pausanias records that Athena went to place the infant Erichthonius into a small chest (\"cista\"), which she entrusted to the care of the three daughters of Cecrops: Herse, Pandrosos, and Aglauros of Athens. She warned the three sisters not to open the chest, but did not explain to them why or what was in it. Aglauros, and possibly one of the other sisters, opened the chest. Differing reports say that they either found that the child itself was a serpent, that it was guarded by a serpent, that it was guarded by two serpents, or that it had the legs of a serpent. In Pausanias's story, the two sisters were driven mad by the sight of the chest's contents and hurled themselves off the Acropolis, dying instantly, but an Attic vase painting shows them being chased by the serpent off the edge of the cliff instead. An alternative version of the story is that Athena left the box with the daughters of Cecrops while she went to fetch a limestone mountain from the Pallene peninsula to use in the Acropolis. While she was away, Aglaurus and Herse opened the box. A crow saw them open the box, and flew away to tell Athena, who fell into a rage and dropped the mountain she was carrying which became Mount Lycabettus.\nAnother version of the myth of the Athenian maidens is told in \"Metamorphoses\" by the Roman poet Ovid (43 BC\u00a0\u2013\u00a017 AD); in this late variant Hermes falls in love with Herse. Herse, Aglaulus, and Pandrosus go to the temple to offer sacrifices to Athena. Hermes demands help from Aglaulus to seduce Herse. Aglaulus demands money in exchange. Hermes gives her the money the sisters have already offered to Athena. As punishment for Aglaulus's greed, Athena asks the goddess Envy to make Aglaulus jealous of Herse. When Hermes arrives to seduce Herse, Aglaulus stands in his way instead of helping him as she had agreed. He turns her to stone.\nErichthonius was one of the most important founding heroes of Athens and the legend of the daughters of Cecrops was a cult myth linked to the rituals of the Arrhephoria festival. Pausanias records that, during the Arrhephoria, two young girls known as the \"Arrhephoroi\", who lived near the temple of Athena Polias, would be given hidden objects by the priestess of Athena, which they would carry on their heads down a natural underground passage. They would leave the objects they had been given at the bottom of the passage and take another set of hidden objects, which they would carry on their heads back up to the temple. The ritual was performed in the dead of night and no one, not even the priestess, knew what the objects were. The serpent in the story may be the same one depicted coiled at Athena's feet in Pheidias's famous statue of the \"Athena Parthenos\" in the Parthenon. Many of the surviving sculptures of Athena show this serpent. Herodotus records that a serpent lived in a crevice on the north side of the summit of the Athenian Acropolis and that the Athenians left a honey cake for it each month as an offering. On the eve of the Second Persian invasion of Greece in 480 BC, the serpent did not eat the honey cake and the Athenians interpreted it as a sign that Athena herself had abandoned them.\nAthena gave her favour to an Attic girl named Myrsine, a chaste girl who outdid all her fellow athletes in both the palaestra and the race. Out of envy, the other athletes murdered her, but Athena took pity in her and transformed her dead body into a myrtle, a plant thereafter as favoured by her as the olive was. An almost exact story was said about another girl, Elaea, who transformed into an olive, Athena's sacred tree.\nAccording to Ovid, one day as the mortal maiden Corone was walking by the seashore, Poseidon saw her and attempted to seduce her. When his efforts failed, he attempted to rape her instead. However, Corone fled from his rapacious advances, crying out to men and gods. While no man heard her, \"the virgin goddess feels pity for a virgin\"; Athena saved her by transforming her into a crow.\nAfter the deaths of their parents, the orphaned Cleothera and Merope were raised by Aphrodite. The other Olympian goddesses also blessed the girls with gifts and blessings; Hera gave them beauty, Artemis high stature, and Athena taught them women's crafts.\nPatron of heroes.\nIn Homer's \"Iliad\", Athena, as a war goddess, inspired and fought alongside the Greek heroes; her aid was synonymous with military prowess. Zeus, the chief god, specifically assigned the sphere of war to Ares, the god of war, and Athena. Athena's moral and military superiority to Ares derived in part from the fact that she represented the intellectual and civilized side of war and the virtues of justice and skill, whereas Ares represented mere blood lust. Her superiority also derived in part from the vastly greater variety and importance of her functions and the patriotism of Homer's predecessors, Ares being of foreign origin. In the \"Iliad\", Athena was the divine form of the heroic, martial ideal: she personified excellence in close combat and glory, and was personally attended by Nike, the goddess of victory. The qualities that led to victory were found on the aegis, or breastplate, that Athena wore when she went to war: fear, strife, defense, and assault. \nAccording to Pseudo-Apollodorus's \"Bibliotheca\", Athena advised Argos, the builder of the \"Argo\", the ship on which the hero Jason and his band of Argonauts sailed, and aided in the ship's construction. According to Pindar's \"Thirteenth Olympian Ode\", Athena helped the hero Bellerophon tame the winged horse Pegasus by giving him a bit. In Aeschylus's tragedy \"Orestes\", Athena intervenes to save Orestes from the wrath of the Erinyes and presides over his trial for the murder of his mother Clytemnestra. When half the jury votes to acquit and the other half votes to convict, Athena casts the deciding vote to acquit Orestes and declares that, from then on, whenever a jury is tied, the defendant shall always be acquitted.\nPseudo-Apollodorus also records that Athena guided the hero Perseus in his quest to behead Medusa. She and Hermes, the god of travelers, appeared to Perseus after he set off on his quest and gifted him with tools he would need to kill the Gorgon. Athena lent Perseus her polished bronze shield to view Medusa's reflection without becoming petrified himself. Hermes lent Perseus his harpe to behead Medusa with. When Perseus swung the blade to behead Medusa, Athena guided it, allowing the blade to cut the Gorgon's head clean off.\nIn ancient Greek art, Athena is frequently shown aiding the hero Heracles. She appears in four of the twelve metopes on the Temple of Zeus at Olympia depicting Heracles's Twelve Labors, including the first, in which she simply watches him slay the Nemean lion after having told him how to use the lion's own claws to skin the pelt, and in the tenth, in which she is shown actively helping him hold up the sky itself. According to Apollodorus, on Athena's advice, Heracles dragged Alcyoneus, one of the two strongest Giants alongside Porphyrion, beyond the borders of his native land, where he was immortal, and then fatally shot him (compare with Antaeus). She is presented as Heracles' \"stern ally\", but also the \"gentle\u00a0... acknowledger of his achievements\". Artistic depictions of Heracles's apotheosis show Athena driving him to Mount Olympus in her chariot and presenting him to Zeus for his deification.\nIn \"The Odyssey\", Odysseus' cunning and shrewd nature quickly wins Athena's favour. For the first part of the poem, however, she largely is confined to aiding him only from \"afar\", mainly by implanting thoughts in his head during his journey home from Troy. Her guiding actions reinforce her role as the \"protectress of heroes\", or, as mythologian Walter Friedrich Otto dubbed her, the \"goddess of nearness\", due to her mentoring and motherly probing. It is not until he washes up on the shore of the island of the Phaeacians, where Nausicaa is washing her clothes that Athena arrives personally to provide more tangible assistance. She appears in Nausicaa's dreams to ensure that the princess rescues Odysseus and plays a role in his eventual escort to Ithaca. Athena appears to Odysseus upon his arrival, disguised as a herdsman; she initially lies and tells him that Penelope, his wife, has remarried and that he is believed to be dead, but Odysseus lies back to her, employing skillful prevarications to protect himself. Impressed by his resolve and shrewdness, she reveals herself and tells him what he needs to know to win back his kingdom. She disguises him as an elderly beggar so that he will not be recognized by the suitors or Penelope, and helps him to defeat the suitors. Athena also appears to Odysseus's son Telemachus. Her actions lead him to travel around to Odysseus's comrades and ask about his father. He hears stories about some of Odysseus's journey. Athena's push for Telemachus's journey helps him grow into the man role, that his father once held. She also plays a role in ending the resultant feud against the suitors' relatives. She instructs Laertes to throw his spear and to kill Eupeithes, the father of Antinous.\nPunishment myths.\nA myth told by the early third-century BC Hellenistic poet Callimachus in his \"Hymn\" 5 begins with Athena bathing in a spring on Mount Helicon at midday with one of her favorite companions, the nymph Chariclo. Chariclo's son Tiresias happened to be hunting on the same mountain and came to the spring searching for water. He inadvertently saw Athena naked, so she struck him blind to ensure he would never again see what man was not intended to see. Chariclo intervened on her son's behalf and begged Athena to have mercy. Athena replied that she could not restore Tiresias's eyesight, so, instead, she gave him the ability to understand the language of the birds and thus foretell the future.\nMyrmex was a clever and chaste Attic girl who became quickly a favourite of Athena. However, when Athena invented the plough, Myrmex went to the Atticans and told them that it was in fact her own invention. Hurt by the girl's betrayal, Athena transformed her into the small insect bearing her name, the ant.\nThe Gorgoneion appears to have originated as an apotropaic symbol intended to ward off evil. In a late Roman myth invented to explain the origins of the Gorgon, Medusa is described as having been raped by Poseidon in the temple of Athena. Upon discovering the desecration of her temple, Athena transformed Medusa into a hideous monster with serpents for hair whose gaze would turn any mortal to stone.\nIn his \"Twelfth Pythian Ode\", Pindar recounts the story of how Athena invented the \"aulos\", a kind of flute, in imitation of the lamentations of Medusa's sisters, the Gorgons, after she was beheaded by the hero Perseus. According to Pindar, Athena gave the aulos to mortals as a gift. Later, the comic playwright Melanippides of Melos (c. 480\u2013430 BC) embellished the story in his comedy \"Marsyas\", claiming that Athena looked in the mirror while she was playing the aulos and saw how blowing into it puffed up her cheeks and made her look silly, so she threw the aulos away and cursed it so that whoever picked it up would meet an awful death. The aulos was picked up by the satyr Marsyas, who was later killed by Apollo for his hubris. Later, this version of the story became accepted as canonical and the Athenian sculptor Myron created a group of bronze sculptures based on it, which was installed before the western front of the Parthenon in around 440 BC.\nThe fable of Arachne appears in the Roman poet Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\" (8 AD) (vi.5\u201354 and 129\u2013145), which is nearly the only extant source for the legend. The story does not appear to have been well known prior to Ovid's rendition of it and the only earlier reference to it is a brief allusion in Virgil's \"Georgics\", (29 BC) (iv, 246) that does not mention Arachne by name. According to Ovid, Arachne (whose name means \"spider\" in ancient Greek) was the daughter of a famous dyer in Tyrian purple in Hypaipa of Lydia, and a weaving student of Athena. She became so conceited of her skill as a weaver that she began claiming that her skill was greater than that of Athena herself and that she didn't feel grateful to the goddess for anything, despite Athena's invention of the craft. Athena gave Arachne a chance to redeem herself by assuming the form of an old woman and warning Arachne not to offend the deities. Arachne scoffed and invited her to a weaving contest to prove her skill. Athena revealed her true form, accepted and wove the scene of her victory over Poseidon in the contest for the patronage of Athens. Her tapestry also depicted the 12 Olympian gods and defeat of mythological figures who challenged their authority. Arachne's tapestry featured twenty-one episodes of the deities' sexual affairs, including Zeus being unfaithful with Leda, with Europa, and with Dana\u00eb. It represented the unjust and discrediting behavior of the gods towards mortals. Athena admitted that Arachne's work was flawless, but was outraged at Arachne's choice of subject. Finally, losing her temper, Athena destroyed Arachne's tapestry and loom, striking it with her shuttle. Athena then struck Arachne across the face with her staff four times. Arachne hanged herself in despair, but Athena took pity on her and brought her back from the dead in the form of a spider.\nIn a rarer version, surviving in the scholia of an unnamed scholiast on Nicander, whose works heavily influenced Ovid, Arachne is placed in Attica instead and has a brother named Phalanx. Athena taught Arachne the art of weaving and Phalanx the art of war, but when brother and sister laid together in bed, Athena was so disgusted with them that she turned them both into spiders, animals forever doomed to be eaten by their own young.\nAccording to Book VIII (236\u201359) of Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", Daedalus was so proud of his achievements as an inventor that he could not bear the idea of a rival. His sister had placed her son Perdix under his charge to be taught the mechanical arts. While walking on the seashore, he picked up the spine of a fish or a serpent's jaw. Imitating it, he took a piece of iron and notched it on the edge, thus inventing the saw. Daedalus was so envious of his nephew's accomplishments that he took an opportunity, when they were together one day on the top of a high tower, to push him off, but Athena, who favors ingenuity, saw him falling and saved his life by changing him into a bird called after his name, the \"perdix\" (partridge). This bird does not build its nest in the trees, nor take lofty flights, but nestles in the hedges, and mindful of his fall, avoids high places. For this crime, Daedalus was tried and banished. In some accounts, she leaves Daedalus with a scar in the shape of a partridge, to always remind him of his crime.\nTrojan War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe myth of the Judgement of Paris is mentioned briefly in the \"Iliad\", but is described in depth in an epitome of the \"Cypria\", a lost poem of the Epic Cycle, which records that all the gods and goddesses as well as various mortals were invited to the marriage of Peleus and Thetis (the eventual parents of Achilles). Only Eris, goddess of discord, was not invited. She was annoyed at this, so she arrived with a golden apple inscribed with the word \u03ba\u03b1\u03bb\u03bb\u03af\u03c3\u03c4\u1fc3 (kallist\u0113i, \"for the fairest\"), which she threw among the goddesses. Aphrodite, Hera, and Athena all claimed to be the fairest, and thus the rightful owner of the apple. The goddesses chose to place the matter before Zeus, who, not wanting to favor one of the goddesses, put the choice into the hands of Paris, a Trojan prince. After bathing in the spring of Mount Ida where Troy was situated, the goddesses appeared before Paris for his decision. In the extant ancient depictions of the Judgement of Paris, Aphrodite is only occasionally represented nude, and Athena and Hera are always fully clothed. Since the Renaissance, however, Western paintings have typically portrayed all three goddesses as completely naked. All three goddesses were ideally beautiful and Paris could not decide between them, so they resorted to bribes. Hera tried to bribe Paris with power over all Asia and Europe, and Athena offered fame and glory in battle, but Aphrodite promised Paris that, if he were to choose her as the fairest, she would let him marry the most beautiful woman on earth. This woman was Helen, who was already married to King Menelaus of Sparta. Paris selected Aphrodite and awarded her the apple. The other two goddesses were enraged and, as a direct result, sided with the Greeks in the Trojan War.\nIn Books V\u2013VI of the \"Iliad\", Athena aids the hero Diomedes, who, in the absence of Achilles, proves himself to be the most effective Greek warrior. Several artistic representations from the early sixth century BC may show Athena and Diomedes, including an early sixth-century BC shield band depicting Athena and an unidentified warrior riding on a chariot, a vase painting of a warrior with his charioteer facing Athena, and an inscribed clay plaque showing Diomedes and Athena riding in a chariot. Numerous passages in the \"Iliad\" also mention Athena having previously served as the patron of Diomedes's father Tydeus. When the Trojans go to her temple on the Acropolis to plead her for protection from Diomedes, Athena ignores them. Later, when Zeus allows the gods to fight, Ares, who sided with the Trojans, attacks Athena, but she overpowers him by striking him with a boulder.\nIn Book XXII of the \"Iliad\", while Achilles is chasing Hector around the walls of Troy, Athena appears to Hector disguised as his brother Deiphobus and persuades him to hold his ground so that they can fight Achilles together. Then, Hector throws his spear at Achilles and misses, expecting Deiphobus to hand him another, but Athena disappears instead, leaving Hector to face Achilles alone without his spear. In Sophocles's tragedy \"Ajax\", she punishes Odysseus's rival Ajax the Great, driving him insane and causing him to massacre the Achaeans' cattle, thinking that he is slaughtering the Achaeans themselves. Even after Odysseus himself expresses pity for Ajax, Athena declares, \"To laugh at your enemies \u2013 what sweeter laughter can there be than that?\" (lines 78\u20139). Ajax later commits suicide as a result of his humiliation.\nClassical art.\nAthena appears frequently in classical Greek art, including on coins and in paintings on ceramics. She is especially prominent in works produced in Athens. In classical depictions, Athena is usually portrayed standing upright, wearing a full-length chiton. She is most often represented dressed in armor like a male soldier and wearing a Corinthian helmet raised high atop her forehead. Her shield bears at its centre the aegis with the head of the gorgon (\"gorgoneion\") in the center and snakes around the edge. Sometimes she is shown wearing the aegis as a cloak. As Athena Promachos, she is shown brandishing a spear. Scenes in which Athena was represented include her birth from the head of Zeus, her battle with the Gigantes, the birth of Erichthonius, and the Judgement of Paris.\nThe \"Mourning Athena\" or \"Athena Meditating\" is a famous relief sculpture dating to around 470\u2013460 BC that has been interpreted to represent Athena Polias. The most famous classical depiction of Athena was the \"Athena Parthenos\", a now-lost gold and ivory statue of her in the Parthenon created by the Athenian sculptor Phidias. Copies reveal that this statue depicted Athena holding her shield in her left hand with Nike, the winged goddess of victory, standing in her right. Athena Polias is also represented in a Neo-Attic relief now held in the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts, which depicts her holding an owl in her hand and wearing her characteristic Corinthian helmet while resting her shield against a nearby \"herma\". The Roman goddess Minerva adopted most of Athena's Greek iconographical associations, but was also integrated into the Capitoline Triad.\nPost-classical culture.\nArt and symbolism.\nEarly Christian writers, such as Clement of Alexandria and Firmicus, denigrated Athena as representative of all the things that were detestable about paganism; they condemned her as \"immodest and immoral\". During the Middle Ages, however, many attributes of Athena were given to the Virgin Mary, who, in fourth-century portrayals, was often depicted wearing the Gorgoneion. Some even viewed the Virgin Mary as a warrior maiden, much like Athena Parthenos; one anecdote tells that the Virgin Mary once appeared upon the walls of Constantinople when it was under siege by the Avars, clutching a spear and urging the people to fight. During the Middle Ages, Athena became widely used as a Christian symbol and allegory, and she appeared on the family crests of certain noble houses.\nDuring the Renaissance, Athena donned the mantle of patron of the arts and human endeavor; allegorical paintings involving Athena were a favorite of the Italian Renaissance painters. In Sandro Botticelli's painting \"Pallas and the Centaur\", probably painted sometime in the 1480s, Athena is the personification of chastity, who is shown grasping the forelock of a centaur, who represents lust. Andrea Mantegna's 1502 painting \"Minerva Expelling the Vices from the Garden of Virtue\" uses Athena as the personification of Graeco-Roman learning chasing the vices of medievalism from the garden of modern scholarship. Athena is also used as the personification of wisdom in Bartholomeus Spranger's 1591 painting \"The Triumph of Wisdom\" or \"Minerva Victorious over Ignorance\".\nDuring the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Athena was used as a symbol for female rulers. In his book \"A Revelation of the True Minerva\" (1582), Thomas Blennerhassett portrays Queen Elizabeth I of England as a \"new Minerva\" and \"the greatest goddesse nowe on earth\". A series of paintings by Peter Paul Rubens depict Athena as Marie de' Medici's patron and mentor; the final painting in the series goes even further and shows Marie de' Medici with Athena's iconography, as the mortal incarnation of the goddess herself. The Flemish sculptor Jean-Pierre-Antoine Tassaert (Jan Peter Anton Tassaert) later portrayed Catherine II of Russia as Athena in a marble bust in 1774. During the French Revolution, statues of pagan gods were torn down all throughout France, but statues of Athena were not. Instead, Athena was transformed into the personification of freedom and the republic and a statue of the goddess stood in the center of the Place de la Revolution in Paris. In the years following the Revolution, artistic representations of Athena proliferated.\nA statue of Athena stands directly in front of the Austrian Parliament Building in Vienna, and depictions of Athena have influenced other symbols of Western freedom, including the Statue of Liberty and Britannia. For over a century, a full-scale replica of the Parthenon has stood in Nashville, Tennessee. In 1990, the curators added a gilded forty-two-foot (12.5 m) tall replica of Phidias's \"Athena Parthenos\", built from concrete and fiberglass. The Great Seal of California bears the image of Athena kneeling next to a brown grizzly bear. Athena has occasionally appeared on modern coins, as she did on the ancient Athenian drachma. Her head appears on the $50 1915-S Panama-Pacific commemorative coin.\nModern interpretations.\nOne of Sigmund Freud's most treasured possessions was a small, bronze sculpture of Athena, which sat on his desk. Freud once described Athena as \"a woman who is unapproachable and repels all sexual desires\u00a0\u2013 since she displays the terrifying genitals of the Mother\". Feminist views on Athena are sharply divided; some regard her as \"the ultimate patriarchal sell out\u00a0... who uses her powers to promote and advance men rather than others of her sex\", while some feminists regard her as a symbol of female empowerment, In contemporary Wicca, Athena is venerated as an aspect of the Goddess and some Wiccans believe that she may bestow the \"Owl Gift\" (\"the ability to write and communicate clearly\") upon her worshippers. Due to her status as one of the twelve Olympians, Athena is a major deity in Hellenismos, a Neopagan religion which seeks to authentically revive and recreate the religion of ancient Greece in the modern world.\nAthena is a natural patron of universities: At Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania, a statue of Athena (a replica of the original bronze one in the arts and archaeology library) resides in the Great Hall. It is traditional at exam time for students to leave offerings to the goddess with a note asking for good luck, or to repent for accidentally breaking any of the college's numerous other traditions. Pallas Athena is the tutelary goddess of the international social fraternity Phi Delta Theta. Her owl is also a symbol of the fraternity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModern sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1183", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1183", "title": "Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game", "text": "Tabletop fantasy role-playing game\nThe Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game is a role-playing game created and written by Erick Wujcik, set in the fictional universe created by author Roger Zelazny for his \"Chronicles of Amber\". The game is unusual in that no dice are used in resolving conflicts or player actions; instead a simple diceless system of comparative ability, and narrative description of the action by the players and gamemaster, is used to determine how situations are resolved.\n\"Amber DRPG\" was created in the 1980s, and is much more focused on relationships and roleplaying than most of the roleplaying games of that era. Most \"Amber\" characters are members of the two ruling classes in the \"Amber\" multiverse, and are much more advanced in matters of strength, endurance, psyche, warfare and sorcery than ordinary beings. This often means that the only individuals who are capable of opposing a character are from his or her family, a fact that leads to much suspicion and intrigue.\nHistory.\nErick Wujcik wanted to design a role-playing game based on \"Amber\" for West End Games, and they agreed to look at his work. Wujcik intended to integrate the feel of the \"Amber\" setting from the novels into a role-playing game, and playtested his system for a few months at the Michigan Gaming Center where he decided to try it out as a diceless game. West End Games was not interested in a diceless role-playing game, so Wujcik acquired the role-playing game rights to \"Amber\" and offered the game to R. Talsorian Games, until he withdrew over creative differences. Wujcik then founded Phage Press, and published \"Amber Diceless Role-playing\" in 1991.\nThe original 256-page game book was published in 1991 by Phage Press, covering material from the first five novels (the \"Corwin Cycle\") and some details \u2013 sorcery and the Logrus \u2013 from the remaining five novels (the \"Merlin Cycle\"), in order to allow players to roleplay characters from the Courts of Chaos. Some details were changed slightly to allow more player choice \u2013 for example, players can be full Trump Artists without having walked the Pattern or the Logrus, which Merlin says is impossible; and players' psychic abilities are far greater than those shown in the books.\nA 256-page companion volume, \"Shadow Knight\", was published in 1993. This supplemental rule book includes the remaining elements from the Merlin novels, such as Broken Patterns, and allows players to create Constructs such as Merlin's Ghostwheel. The book presents the second series of novels not as additions to the series' continuity but as an example of a roleplaying campaign with Merlin, Luke, Julia, Jurt and Coral as the PCs. The remainder of the book is a collection of essays on the game, statistics for the new characters and an update of the older ones in light of their appearance in the second series, and (perhaps most usefully for GMs) plot summaries of each of the ten books. The book includes some material from the short story \"The Salesman's Tale,\" and some unpublished material cut from \"Prince of Chaos\", notably Coral's pregnancy by Merlin.\nBoth books were translated into French and published by Jeux Descartes in 1994 and 1995.\nA third book, \"Rebma\", was promised. Cover art was commissioned and pre-orders were taken, but it was never published. Wujcik also expressed a desire to create a book giving greater detail to the Courts of Chaos. The publishing rights to the \"Amber DRPG\" games were acquired in 2004 by Guardians of Order, who took over sales of the game and announced their intention to release a new edition of the game. However, no new edition was released before Guardians of Order went out of business in 2006. The two existing books are now out-of-print, but they have been made available as PDF downloads.\nIn June 2007 a new publishing company, headed by Edwin Voskamp and Eleanor Todd, was formed with the express purpose of bringing \"Amber DRPG\" back into print. The new company is named \"Diceless by Design\".\nIn May 2010, \"Rite Publishing\" secured a license from Diceless by Design to use the rules system with a new setting in the creation of a new product to be written by industry and system veteran Jason Durall. The project Lords of Gossamer &amp; Shadow (Diceless) was funded via Kickstarter in May 2013. In Sept 2013 the project was completed, and on in Nov 2013 Lords of Gossamer and Shadow (Diceless) was released publicly in full-color Print and PDF, along with additional supplements and continued support.\nSetting.\nThe game is set in the multiverse described in Zelazny's \"Chronicles of Amber\". The first book assumes that gamemasters will set their campaigns after the Patternfall war; that is, after the end of the fifth book in the series, \"The Courts of Chaos\", but uses material from the following books to describe those parts of Zelazny's cosmology that were featured there in more detail. The \"Amber\" multiverse consists of Amber, a city at one pole of the universe wherein is found the Pattern, the symbol of Order; The Courts of Chaos, an assembly of worlds at the other pole where can be found the Logrus, the manifestation of Chaos, and the Abyss, the source or end of all reality; and Shadow, the collection of all possible universes (shadows) between and around them. Inhabitants of either pole can use one or both of the Pattern and the Logrus to travel through Shadow.\nIt is assumed that players will portray the children of the main characters from the books \u2013 the ruling family of Amber, known as the Elder Amberites \u2013 or a resident of the Courts. However, since some feel that being the children of the main characters is too limiting, it is fairly common to either start with King Oberon's death \"before\" the book begins and roleplay the Elder Amberites as they vie for the throne; or to populate Amber from scratch with a different set of Elder Amberites. The former option is one presented in the book; the latter is known in the Amber community as an \"Amethyst\" game. A third option is to have the players portray Corwin's children, in an Amber-like city built around Corwin's pattern; this is sometimes called an \"Argent\" game, since one of Corwin's heraldic colours is Silver.\nSystem.\nAttributes.\nCharacters in \"Amber DRPG\" are represented by four attributes: \"Psyche\", \"Strength\", \"Endurance\" and \"Warfare\".\nThe attributes run from \u221225 (normal human level), through \u221210 (normal level for a denizen of the Courts of Chaos) and 0 (normal level for an inhabitant of Amber), upwards without limit. Scores above 0 are \"ranked\", with the highest score being ranked 1st, the next-highest 2nd, and so on. The character with 1st rank in each attribute is considered \"superior\" in that attribute, being considered to be substantially better than the character with 2nd rank even if the difference in scores is small. All else being equal, a character with a higher rank in an attribute will always win a contest based on that attribute.\nThe Attribute Auction.\nA character's ability scores are purchased during character creation in an auction; players get 100 character points, and bid on each attribute in turn. The character who bids the most for an attribute is \"ranked\" first and is considered superior to all other characters in that attribute. Unlike conventional auctions, bids are non-refundable; if one player bids 65 for psyche and another wins with a bid of 66, then the character with 66 is \"superior\" to the character with 65 even though there is only one bid difference. Instead, lower bidding characters are ranked in ascending order according to how much they have bid, the characters becoming progressively weaker in that attribute as they pay less for it. After the auction, players can secretly pay extra points to raise their ranks, but they can only pay to raise their scores to an existing rank. Further, a character with a bid-for rank is considered to have a slight advantage over character with a bought-up rank.\nThe Auction simulates a 'history' of competition between the descendants of Oberon for player characters who have not had dozens of decades to get to know each other. Through the competitive Auction, characters may begin the game vying for standings. The auction serves to introduce some unpredictability into character creation without the need to resort to dice, cards, or other randomizing devices. A player may intend, for example, to create a character who is a strong, mighty warrior, but being \"outplayed\" in the auction may result in lower attribute scores than anticipated, therefore necessitating a change of character concept. Since a player cannot control another player's bids, and since all bids are non-refundable, the auction involves a considerable amount of strategizing and prioritization by players. A willingness to spend as many points as possible on an attribute may improve your chances of a high ranking, but too reckless a spending strategy could leave a player with few points to spend on powers and objects. In a hotly contested auction, such as for the important attribute of warfare, the most valuable skill is the ability to force one's opponents to back down. With two or more equally determined players, this can result in a \"bidding war,\" in which the attribute is driven up by increments to large sums. An alternative strategy is to try to cow other players into submission with a high opening bid. Most players bid low amounts between one and ten points in an initial bid in order to feel out the competition and to save points for other uses. A high enough opening bid could signal a player's determination to be first ranked in that attribute, thereby dissuading others from competing.\nPsyche in \"Amber DRPG\" compared to the \"Chronicles\".\nCharacters with high psyche are presented as having strong telepathic abilities, being able to hypnotise and even mentally dominate any character with lesser psyche with whom they can make eye-contact. This is likely due to three scenes in the \"Chronicles\": first, when Eric paralyzes Corwin with an attack across the Trump and refuses to desist because one or the other would be dominated; second, when Corwin faces the demon Strygalldwir, it is able to wrestle mentally with him when their gazes meet; and third, when Fiona is able to keep Brand immobile in the final battle at the Courts of Chaos. However, in general, the books only feature mental battles when there is some reason for mind-to-mind contact (for example, Trump contact) and magic or Trump is involved in all three of the above conflicts, so it is not clear whether Zelazny intended his characters to have such a power; the combination of Brand's \"living trump\" powers and his high Psyche (as presented in the roleplaying game) would have guaranteed him victory over Corwin. \"Shadow Knight\" does address this inconsistency somewhat, by presenting the \"living trump\" abilities as somewhat limited.\nPowers.\nCharacters in \"Amber DRPG\" have access to the powers seen in the \"Chronicles of Amber\": \"Pattern\", \"Logrus\", \"Shape-shifting\", \"Trump\", and \"magic\".\nEach of the first four powers is available in an advanced form.\nArtifacts, Personal shadows and Constructs.\nWhile a character with Pattern, Logrus or Conjuration can acquire virtually any object, players can choose to spend character points to obtain objects with particular virtues \u2013 unbreakability, or a mind of their own. Since they have paid points for the items, they are a part of the character's legend, and cannot lightly be destroyed. Similarly, a character can find any possible universe, but they can spend character points to know of or inhabit shadows which are (in some sense) \"real\" and therefore useful. The expansion, \"Shadow Knight\", adds Constructs \u2013 artifacts with connections to shadows.\nStuff.\nUnspent character points become good stuff \u2013 a good luck for the character. Players are also allowed to overspend (in moderation), with the points becoming bad stuff \u2013 bad luck which the Gamemaster should inflict on the character. Stuff governs how non-player characters perceive and respond to the character: characters with good stuff will often receive friendly or helpful reactions, while characters with bad stuff are often treated with suspicion or hostility.\nAs well as representing luck, stuff can be seen as representing a character's outlook on the universe: characters with good stuff seeing the multiverse as a cheerful place, while characters with bad stuff see it as hostile.\nConflict resolution.\nIn any given fair conflict between two characters, the character with the higher score in the relevant attribute will eventually win. The key words here are \"fair\" and \"eventually\" \u2013 if characters' ranks are close, and the weaker character has obtained some advantage, then the weaker character can escape defeat or perhaps prevail. Close ranks result in longer contests while greater difference between ranks result in fast resolution. Alternatively, if characters' attribute ranks are close, the weaker character can try to change the relevant attribute by changing the nature of the conflict. For example, if two characters are wrestling the relevant attribute is Strength; a character could reveal a weapon, changing it to Warfare; they could try to overcome the other character's mind using a power, changing it to Psyche; or they could concentrate their strength on defense, changing it to Endurance. If there is a substantial difference between characters' ranks, the conflict is generally over before the weaker character can react.\nThe \"Golden Rule\".\n\"Amber DRPG\" advises gamemasters to change rules as they see fit, even to the point of adding or removing powers or attributes.\nReception.\nSteve Crow reviewed \"Amber Diceless Roleplaying Game\" in \"White Wolf\" #31 (May/June, 1992), rating it a 4 out of 5 and stated that \"It is undoubtedly a game for experienced gamers. While I would not recommend \"Amber\" to novices, it is a must buy for experienced gamemasters and players looking for new challenges.\"\nIn the June 1992 edition of \"Dragon\" (Issue 182), both Lester Smith and Allen Varney published reviews of this game.\nIn Issue 65 of \"Challenge\", Dirk DeJong had a good first impression of the game, especially the information provided about the Amber family members and their various flaws and strengths. However he found that \"The biggest problem with this endeavor, and its downfall, is the nature of the conflict systems. First, they are diceless, really diceless, and don't involve any sort of random factors at all, aside from those that you can introduce by roleplaying them out. Thus, if you get involved with a character who's better than you at sword-fighting, even if only by one point out of 100, you're pretty much dead meat, unless you can act your way out.\" DeJong also disagreed with the suggestion that if the referee and players disagreed with a rule to simply remove it from the game. \"I thought the entire idea of using rules and random results was to prevent the type of arguments that I can see arising from this setup.\" DeJong concluded on an ambivalent note, saying, \"If you love Zelazny and the Amber series, jump on it, as this is the premier sourcebook for running an Amber campaign. [...] Personally, I just can't get turned on by a system that expects me to either be content with a simple subtraction of numbers to find out who won, or to describe an entire combat blow by blow, just so that I can attempt some trick to win.\"\nLoyd Blankenship reviewed \"Amber\" in \"Pyramid\" #2 (July/Aug., 1993), and stated that \"\"Amber\" is a valuable resource to a GM - even if he isn't running an \"Amber\" game. For gamers who have an aspiring actor or actress lurking within their breast, or for someone running a campaign via electronic mail or message base, \"Amber\" should be given serious consideration.\"\nIn his 2023 book \"Monsters, Aliens, and Holes in the Ground\", RPG historian Stu Horvath noted, \"There hasn't been an RPG quite like \"Amber\", before or since. Bold though it was, the game didn't do very well commercially. The lack of dice became a flashpoint of controversy, with dice enthusiasts dramatically swearing off the game. That's a bit ridiculous, but it does get at a key hurdle \"Amber\" face: People \"like\" rolling dice. They've been doing it for thousands of years and a significant part of the appeal of RPGs is giving dice, often in sparkly colours, a toss.\"\nCommunity.\nDespite the game's out-of-print status, a thriving convention scene exists supporting the game. Amber conventions, known as \"Ambercons\", are held yearly in Massachusetts, Michigan, Portland (United States), Milton Keynes (England), Belfast (Northern Ireland) and Modena, Italy. Additionally, Phage Press published 12 volumes of a dedicated \"Amber DRPG\" magazine called \"Amberzine\". Some \"Amberzine\" issues are still available from Phage Press.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1184", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1184", "title": "Athene (disambiguation)", "text": "Athene or Athena is the shrewd companion of heroes and the goddess of heroic endeavour in Greek mythology.\nAthene may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "1186", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1186", "title": "AphexTwin", "text": ""}
{"id": "1187", "revid": "8660314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1187", "title": "Alloy", "text": "Mixture or metallic solid solution composed of two or more elements\nAn alloy is a mixture of chemical elements of which in most cases at least one is a metallic element, although it is also sometimes used for mixtures of elements; herein only metallic alloys are described. Metallic alloys often have properties that differ from those of the pure elements from which they are made. The vast majority of metals used for commercial purposes are alloyed to improve their properties or behavior, such as increased strength, hardness or corrosion resistance. Metals may also be alloyed to reduce their overall cost, for instance alloys of gold and copper.\nIn an alloy, the atoms are joined by metallic bonding rather than by covalent bonds typically found in chemical compounds. The alloy constituents are usually measured by mass percentage for practical applications, and in atomic fraction for basic science studies. Alloys are usually classified as substitutional or interstitial alloys, depending on the atomic arrangement that forms the alloy. They can be further classified as homogeneous (consisting of a single phase), or heterogeneous (consisting of two or more phases) or intermetallic. An alloy may be a solid solution of metal elements (a single phase, where all metallic grains (crystals) are of the same composition) or a mixture of metallic phases (two or more solutions, forming a microstructure of different crystals within the metal).\nExamples of alloys include red gold (gold and copper), white gold (gold and silver), sterling silver (silver and copper), steel or silicon steel (iron with non-metallic carbon or silicon respectively), solder, brass, pewter, duralumin, bronze, and amalgams. Alloys are used in a wide variety of applications, from the steel alloys, used in everything from buildings to automobiles to surgical tools, to exotic titanium alloys used in the aerospace industry, to beryllium-copper alloys for non-sparking tools.\nCharacteristics.\nAn alloy is a mixture of chemical elements, which forms an impure substance (admixture) that retains the characteristics of a metal. Alloys are made by mixing two or more elements, at least one of which is a metal. This is usually called the primary metal or the base metal, and the name of this metal may also be the name of the alloy. The other constituents may or may not be metals but, when mixed with the molten base, they will be soluble and dissolve into the mixture.\nThe mechanical properties of alloys will often be quite different from those of its individual constituents. A metal that is normally very soft (malleable), such as aluminium, can be altered by alloying it with another soft metal, such as copper. Although both metals are very soft and ductile, the resulting aluminium\u2013copper alloy will have much greater strength. Adding a small amount of non-metallic carbon to iron trades its great ductility for the greater strength of an alloy called steel. Due to its very-high strength, but still substantial toughness, and its ability to be greatly altered by heat treatment, steel is one of the most useful and common alloys in modern use. By adding chromium to steel, its resistance to corrosion can be enhanced, creating stainless steel, while adding silicon will alter its electrical characteristics, producing silicon steel.\nLike oil and water, a molten metal may not always be miscible with another element. For example, lithium, magnesium, or silver are almost completely insoluble with pure iron. Even when the constituents are soluble, each will usually have a saturation point, beyond which no more of the constituent can be added. Iron, for example, can stably hold a maximum of 6.67% carbon, forming a compound called cementite.\nAlthough the elements of an alloy usually must be soluble in the liquid state, they may not always be soluble in the solid state. If the metals remain soluble when solid, the alloy forms a solid solution, becoming a homogeneous structure consisting of identical crystals, called a phase. If as the mixture cools the constituents become insoluble, they may separate to form two or more different types of crystals, creating a heterogeneous microstructure of different phases, some with more of one constituent than the other. However, in other alloys, the insoluble elements may not separate until after crystallization occurs. If cooled very quickly, they first crystallize as a homogeneous phase, but they are supersaturated with the secondary constituents. As time passes, the atoms of these supersaturated alloys can separate from the crystal lattice, becoming more stable, and forming a second phase that serves to reinforce the crystals internally.\nSome alloys, such as electrum\u2014an alloy of silver and gold\u2014occur naturally. Meteorites are sometimes made of naturally occurring alloys of iron and nickel, but are not native to the Earth. One of the first alloys made by humans was bronze, which is a mixture of the metals tin and copper. Bronze was an extremely useful alloy to the ancients, because it is much stronger and harder than either of its components. Steel was another common alloy. However, in ancient times, it could only be created as an accidental byproduct from the heating of iron ore in fires (smelting) during the manufacture of iron. Other ancient alloys include pewter, brass and pig iron.\nIn the modern age, steel can be created in many forms. Carbon steel can be made by varying only the carbon content, producing soft alloys like mild steel or hard alloys like spring steel. Alloy steels can be made by adding other elements, such as chromium, molybdenum, vanadium or nickel, resulting in alloys such as high-speed steel or tool steel. Small amounts of manganese are usually alloyed with most modern steels because of its ability to remove unwanted impurities, like phosphorus, sulfur and oxygen, which can have detrimental effects on the alloy. However, most alloys were not created until the 1900s, such as various aluminium, titanium, nickel, and magnesium alloys. Some modern superalloys, such as incoloy, inconel, and hastelloy, may consist of a multitude of different elements.\nAn alloy is technically an impure metal, but when referring to alloys, the term \"impurities\" usually denotes undesirable elements. Such impurities are introduced from the base metals and alloying elements, but are removed during processing. For instance, sulfur is a common impurity in steel. Sulfur combines readily with iron to form iron sulfide, which is very brittle, creating weak spots in the steel. Lithium, sodium and calcium are common impurities in aluminium alloys, which can have adverse effects on the structural integrity of castings. Conversely, otherwise pure-metals that contain unwanted impurities are often called \"impure metals\" and are not usually referred to as alloys. Impure metals such as cast iron or wrought iron are less controlled, but are often considered useful.\nOxygen, present in the air, readily combines with most metals to form metal oxides; especially at higher temperatures encountered during alloying. Depending on the alloy, this can eventually result in a failure of the component being produced. Great care is often taken during the alloying process to remove excess impurities, using fluxes, chemical additives, or other methods of extractive metallurgy.\nTheory.\nAlloying a metal is done by combining it with one or more other elements. The most common and oldest alloying process is performed by heating the base metal beyond its melting point and then dissolving the solutes into the molten liquid, which may be possible even if the melting point of the solute is far greater than that of the base. For example, in its liquid state, titanium is a very strong solvent capable of dissolving most metals and elements. In addition, it readily absorbs gases like oxygen and burns in the presence of nitrogen. This increases the chance of contamination from any contacting surface, and so must be melted in vacuum induction-heating and special, water-cooled, copper crucibles.\nCarbon has a very high melting-point and only does so under high atmospheric pressure, so it was impossible for ancient civilizations to combine with iron as a liquid solute. However, alloying (in particular, interstitial alloying) may be performed with one or more constituents in a gaseous state, such as found in a blast furnace to make pig iron (liquid-gas), nitriding, carbonitriding or other forms of case hardening (solid-gas), or the cementation process used to make blister steel (solid-gas). It may also be done with one, more, or all of the constituents in the solid state, such as found in ancient methods of pattern welding (solid-solid), shear steel (solid-solid), or crucible steel production (solid-liquid), mixing the elements via solid-state diffusion.\nBy adding another element to a metal, differences in the size of the atoms create internal stresses in the lattice of the metallic crystals; stresses that often enhance its properties. For example, the combination of carbon with wrought iron produces steel, which is stronger than iron, its primary element. The electrical and thermal conductivity of alloys is usually lower than that of the pure metals. The physical properties, such as density, reactivity, Young's modulus of an alloy may not differ greatly from those of its base element, but engineering properties such as tensile strength, ductility, and shear strength may be substantially different from those of the constituent materials. This is sometimes a result of the sizes of the atoms in the alloy, because larger atoms exert a compressive force on neighboring atoms, and smaller atoms exert a tensile force on their neighbors, helping the alloy resist deformation. Sometimes alloys may exhibit marked differences in behavior even when small amounts of one element are present. For example, impurities in semiconducting ferromagnetic alloys lead to different properties, as first predicted by White, Hogan, Suhl, Tian Abrie and Nakamura.\nUnlike pure metals, most alloys do not have a single melting point, but a melting range during which the material is a mixture of solid and liquid phases (a slush). The temperature at which melting begins is called the solidus, and the temperature when melting is just complete is called the liquidus. For many alloys there is a particular alloy proportion (in some cases more than one), called either a eutectic mixture or a peritectic composition, which gives the alloy a unique and low melting point, and no liquid/solid slush transition.\nHeat treatment.\nAlloying elements are added to a base metal, to induce hardness, toughness, ductility, or other desired properties. Many metals and alloys can be work hardened by creating defects in their crystal structure. These defects are created during plastic deformation by hammering, bending, extruding, et cetera, and are permanent unless the metal is recrystallized. Otherwise, some alloys can also have their properties altered by heat treatment. Nearly all metals can be softened by annealing, which recrystallizes the alloy and repairs the defects, but not as many can be hardened by controlled heating and cooling. Many alloys of aluminium, copper, magnesium, titanium, and nickel can be strengthened to some degree by some method of heat treatment, but few respond to this to the same degree as does steel.\nThe base metal iron of the iron-carbon alloy known as steel, undergoes a change in the arrangement (allotropy) of the atoms of its crystal matrix at a certain temperature (usually or more, depending on carbon content). This allows the smaller carbon atoms to enter the interstices of the iron crystal. When this diffusion happens, the carbon atoms are said to be in \"solution\" in the iron, forming a particular single, homogeneous, crystalline phase called austenite. If the steel is cooled slowly, the carbon can diffuse out of the iron and it will gradually revert to its low temperature allotrope. During slow cooling, the carbon atoms will no longer be as soluble with the iron, and will be forced to precipitate out of solution, nucleating into a more concentrated form of iron carbide (Fe3C) in the spaces between the pure iron crystals. The steel then becomes heterogeneous, as it is formed of two phases, the iron-carbon phase called cementite (or carbide), and pure iron ferrite. Such a heat treatment produces a steel that is rather soft. If the steel is cooled quickly, however, the carbon atoms will not have time to diffuse and precipitate out as carbide, but will be trapped within the iron crystals. When rapidly cooled, a diffusionless (martensite) transformation occurs, in which the carbon atoms become trapped in solution. This causes the iron crystals to deform as the crystal structure tries to change to its low temperature state, leaving those crystals very hard but much less ductile (more brittle).\nWhile the high strength of steel results when diffusion and precipitation is prevented (forming martensite), most heat-treatable alloys are precipitation hardening alloys, that depend on the diffusion of alloying elements to achieve their strength. When heated to form a solution and then cooled quickly, these alloys become much softer than normal, during the diffusionless transformation, but then harden as they age. The solutes in these alloys will precipitate over time, forming intermetallic phases, which are difficult to discern from the base metal. Unlike steel, in which the solid solution separates into different crystal phases (carbide and ferrite), precipitation hardening alloys form different phases within the same crystal. These intermetallic alloys appear homogeneous in crystal structure, but tend to behave heterogeneously, becoming hard and somewhat brittle.\nIn 1906, precipitation hardening alloys were discovered by Alfred Wilm. Precipitation hardening alloys, such as certain alloys of aluminium, titanium, and copper, are heat-treatable alloys that soften when quenched (cooled quickly), and then harden over time. Wilm had been searching for a way to harden aluminium alloys for use in machine-gun cartridge cases. Knowing that aluminium-copper alloys were heat-treatable to some degree, Wilm tried quenching a ternary alloy of aluminium, copper, and the addition of magnesium, but was initially disappointed with the results. However, when Wilm retested it the next day he discovered that the alloy increased in hardness when left to age at room temperature, and far exceeded his expectations. Although an explanation for the phenomenon was not provided until 1919, duralumin was one of the first \"age hardening\" alloys used, becoming the primary building material for the first Zeppelins, and was soon followed by many others. Because they often exhibit a combination of high strength and low weight, these alloys became widely used in many forms of industry, including the construction of modern aircraft.\nMechanisms.\nWhen a molten metal is mixed with another substance, there are two mechanisms that can cause an alloy to form, called \"atom exchange\" and the \"interstitial mechanism\". The relative size of each element in the mix plays a primary role in determining which mechanism will occur. When the atoms are relatively similar in size, the atom exchange method usually happens, where some of the atoms composing the metallic crystals are substituted with atoms of the other constituent. This is called a \"substitutional alloy\". Examples of substitutional alloys include bronze and brass, in which some of the copper atoms are substituted with either tin or zinc atoms respectively.\nIn the case of the interstitial mechanism, one atom is usually much smaller than the other and can not successfully substitute for the other type of atom in the crystals of the base metal. Instead, the smaller atoms become trapped in the interstitial sites between the atoms of the crystal matrix. This is referred to as an \"interstitial alloy\". Steel is an example of an interstitial alloy, because the very small carbon atoms fit into interstices of the iron matrix.\nStainless steel is an example of a combination of interstitial and substitutional alloys, because the carbon atoms fit into the interstices, but some of the iron atoms are substituted by nickel and chromium atoms.\nHistory and examples.\nMeteoric iron.\nThe use of alloys by humans started with the use of meteoric iron, a naturally occurring alloy of nickel and iron. It is the main constituent of iron meteorites. As no metallurgic processes were used to separate iron from nickel, the alloy was used as it was. Meteoric iron could be forged from a red heat to make objects such as tools, weapons, and nails. In many cultures it was shaped by cold hammering into knives and arrowheads. They were often used as anvils. Meteoric iron was very rare and valuable, and difficult for ancient people to work.\nBronze and brass.\nIron is usually found as iron ore on Earth, except for one deposit of native iron in Greenland, which was used by the Inuit. Native copper, however, was found worldwide, along with silver, gold, and platinum, which were also used to make tools, jewelry, and other objects since Neolithic times. Copper was the hardest of these metals, and the most widely distributed. It became one of the most important metals to the ancients. Starting around 10,000 years ago in the highlands of Anatolia (Turkey), humans learned to smelt metals such as copper and tin from ore. Early bronze alloys used copper and arsenic, but the latter can be toxic to the metal-workers. Around 2500 BC, people began alloying tin and copper to form bronze, which was much harder than its ingredients. However, tin was rare, being found mostly in Great Britain.\nIn the Middle East, people began alloying copper with zinc to form brass. Ancient civilizations took into account the mixture and the various properties it produced, such as hardness, toughness and melting point, under various conditions of temperature and work hardening, developing much of the information contained in modern alloy phase diagrams. For example, arrowheads from the Chinese Qin dynasty (around 200 BC) were often constructed with a hard bronze-head, but a softer bronze-tang, combining the alloys to prevent both dulling and breaking during use.\nAmalgams.\nMercury has been smelted from cinnabar for thousands of years. Mercury dissolves many metals, such as gold, silver, and tin, to form amalgams (an alloy in a soft paste or liquid form at ambient temperature). Amalgams have been used since 200 BC in China for gilding objects such as armor and mirrors with precious metals. The ancient Romans often used mercury-tin amalgams for gilding their armor. The amalgam was applied as a paste and then heated until the mercury vaporized, leaving the gold, silver, or tin behind. Mercury was often used in mining, to extract precious metals like gold and silver from their ores.\nPrecious metals.\nMany ancient civilizations alloyed metals for purely aesthetic purposes. In ancient Egypt and Mycenae, gold was often alloyed with copper to produce red-gold, or iron to produce a bright burgundy-gold. Gold was often found alloyed with silver or other metals to produce various types of colored gold. These metals were also used to strengthen each other, for more practical purposes. Copper was often added to silver to make sterling silver, increasing its strength for use in dishes, silverware, and other practical items.\nQuite often, precious metals were alloyed with less valuable substances as a means to deceive buyers. Around 250 BC, Archimedes was commissioned by the King of Syracuse to find a way to check the purity of the gold in a crown, leading to the famous bath-house shouting of \"Eureka!\" upon the discovery of Archimedes' principle.\nPewter.\nThe term pewter covers a variety of alloys consisting primarily of tin. As a pure metal, tin is much too soft to use for most practical purposes. However, during the Bronze Age, tin was a rare metal in many parts of Europe and the Mediterranean, . To make jewellery, cutlery, or other objects from tin, workers usually alloyed it with other metals to increase strength and hardness. These metals were typically lead, antimony, bismuth or copper. These solutes were sometimes added individually in varying amounts, or added together, making a wide variety of objects, ranging from practical items such as dishes, surgical tools, candlesticks or funnels, to decorative items like ear rings and hair clips.\nThe earliest examples of pewter come from ancient Egypt, around 1450 BC. The use of pewter was widespread across Europe, from France to Norway and Britain (where most of the ancient tin was mined) to the Near East. The alloy was also used in China and the Far East, arriving in Japan around 800 AD, where it was used for making objects like ceremonial vessels, tea canisters, or chalices used in shinto shrines.\nIron.\nThe first known smelting of iron began in Anatolia, around 1800 BC. Called the bloomery process, it produced very soft but ductile wrought iron. By 800 BC, iron-making technology had spread to Europe, arriving in Japan around 700 AD. Pig iron, a very hard but brittle alloy of iron and carbon, was being produced in China as early as 1200 BC, but did not arrive in Europe until the Middle Ages. Pig iron has a lower melting point than iron, and was used for making cast-iron. However, these metals found little practical use until the introduction of crucible steel around 300 BC.\nThese steels were of poor quality, and the introduction of pattern welding, around the 1st century AD, sought to balance the extreme properties of the alloys by laminating them, to create a tougher metal. Around 700 AD, the Japanese began folding bloomery-steel and cast-iron in alternating layers to increase the strength of their swords, using clay fluxes to remove slag and impurities. This method of Japanese swordsmithing produced one of the purest steel-alloys of the ancient world.\nWhile the use of iron started to become more widespread around 1200 BC, mainly because of interruptions in the trade routes for tin, the metal was much softer than bronze. However, very small amounts of steel, (an alloy of iron and around 1% carbon), was always a byproduct of the bloomery process. The ability to modify the hardness of steel by heat treatment had been known since 1100 BC, and the rare material was valued for the manufacture of tools and weapons.\nBecause the ancients could not produce temperatures high enough to melt iron fully, the production of steel in decent quantities did not occur until the introduction of blister steel during the Middle Ages. This method introduced carbon by heating wrought iron in charcoal for long periods of time, but the absorption of carbon in this manner is extremely slow thus the penetration was not very deep, so the alloy was not homogeneous. In 1740, Benjamin Huntsman began melting blister steel in a crucible to even out the carbon content, creating the first process for the mass production of tool steel. Huntsman's process was used for manufacturing tool steel until the early 1900s.\nThe introduction of the blast furnace to Europe in the Middle Ages meant that people could produce pig iron in much higher volumes than wrought iron. Because pig iron could be melted, people began to develop processes to reduce carbon in liquid pig iron to create steel. Puddling had been used in China since the first century, and was introduced in Europe during the 1700s, where molten pig iron was stirred while exposed to the air, to remove the carbon by oxidation. In 1858, Henry Bessemer developed a process of steel-making by blowing hot air through liquid pig iron to reduce the carbon content. The Bessemer process led to the first large scale manufacture of steel.\nSteel is an alloy of iron and carbon, but the term \"alloy steel\" usually only refers to steels that contain other elements\u2014 like vanadium, molybdenum, or cobalt\u2014in amounts sufficient to alter the properties of the base steel. Since ancient times, when steel was used primarily for tools and weapons, the methods of producing and working the metal were often closely guarded secrets. Even long after the Age of Enlightenment, the steel industry was very competitive and manufacturers went through great lengths to keep their processes confidential, resisting any attempts to scientifically analyze the material for fear it would reveal their methods. For example, the people of Sheffield, a center of steel production in England, were known to routinely bar visitors and tourists from entering town to deter industrial espionage. Thus, almost no metallurgical information existed about steel until 1860. Because of this lack of understanding, steel was not generally considered an alloy until the decades between 1930 and 1970 (primarily due to the work of scientists like William Chandler Roberts-Austen, Adolf Martens, and Edgar Bain), so \"alloy steel\" became the popular term for ternary and quaternary steel-alloys.\nAfter Benjamin Huntsman developed his crucible steel in 1740, he began experimenting with the addition of elements like manganese (in the form of a high-manganese pig-iron called \"spiegeleisen\"), which helped remove impurities such as phosphorus and oxygen; a process adopted by Bessemer and still used in modern steels (albeit in concentrations low enough to still be considered carbon steel). Afterward, many people began experimenting with various alloys of steel without much success. However, in 1882, Robert Hadfield, being a pioneer in steel metallurgy, took an interest and produced a steel alloy containing around 12% manganese. Called mangalloy, it exhibited extreme hardness and toughness, becoming the first commercially viable alloy-steel. Afterward, he created silicon steel, launching the search for other possible alloys of steel.\nRobert Forester Mushet found that by adding tungsten to steel it could produce a very hard edge that would resist losing its hardness at high temperatures. \"R. Mushet's special steel\" (RMS) became the first high-speed steel. Mushet's steel was quickly replaced by tungsten carbide steel, developed by Taylor and White in 1900, in which they doubled the tungsten content and added small amounts of chromium and vanadium, producing a superior steel for use in lathes and machining tools. In 1903, the Wright brothers used a chromium-nickel steel to make the crankshaft for their airplane engine, while in 1908 Henry Ford began using vanadium steels for parts like crankshafts and valves in his Model T Ford, due to their higher strength and resistance to high temperatures. In 1912, the Krupp Ironworks in Germany developed a rust-resistant steel by adding 21% chromium and 7% nickel, producing the first stainless steel.\nA typical example of a modern alloy is 304 grade stainless steel which is commonly used for kitchen utensils, pans, knives and forks. Sometime also known as 18/8, it as an alloy consisting broadly of 74% iron, 18% chromium and 8% nickel. The chromium and nickel alloying elements add strength and hardness to the majority iron element, but their main function is to make it resistant to rust/corrosion.\nOthers.\nDue to their high reactivity, most metals were not discovered until the 19th century. A method for extracting aluminium from bauxite was proposed by Humphry Davy in 1807, using an electric arc. Although his attempts were unsuccessful, by 1855 the first sales of pure aluminium reached the market. However, as extractive metallurgy was still in its infancy, most aluminium extraction-processes produced unintended alloys contaminated with other elements found in the ore; the most abundant of which was copper. These aluminium-copper alloys (at the time termed \"aluminium bronze\") preceded pure aluminium, offering greater strength and hardness over the soft, pure metal, and to a slight degree were found to be heat treatable. However, due to their softness and limited hardenability these alloys found little practical use, and were more of a novelty, until the Wright brothers used an aluminium alloy to construct the first airplane engine in 1903. During the time between 1865 and 1910, processes for extracting many other metals were discovered, such as chromium, vanadium, tungsten, iridium, cobalt, and molybdenum, and various alloys were developed.\nPrior to 1910, research mainly consisted of private individuals tinkering in their own laboratories. However, as the aircraft and automotive industries began growing, research into alloys became an industrial effort in the years following 1910, as new magnesium alloys were developed for pistons and wheels in cars, and pot metal for levers and knobs, and aluminium alloys developed for airframes and aircraft skins were put into use. The Doehler Die Casting Co. of Toledo, Ohio were known for the production of \"Brastil\", a high tensile corrosion resistant bronze alloy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1189", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1189", "title": "Articles of Faith", "text": ""}
{"id": "1190", "revid": "842922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1190", "title": "Alternative history", "text": ""}
{"id": "1192", "revid": "41390348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1192", "title": "Artistic revolution", "text": "Artistic revolutions are periodic abrupt changes to forms of art.\nScientific and technological.\nNot all artistic revolutions were political. Sometimes, science and technological innovations have brought about unforeseen transformations in the works of artists. The stylistic revolution known as Impressionism, by painters eager to more accurately capture the changing colors of light and shadow, is inseparable from discoveries and inventions in the mid-19th century in which the style was born.\nMichel Eug\u00e8ne Chevreul, a French chemist hired as director of dyes at a French tapestry works, began to investigate the optical nature of color in order to improve color in fabrics. Chevreul realized it was the eye, and not the dye, that had the greatest influence on color, and from this, he revolutionized color theory by grasping what came to be called the law of simultaneous contrast: that colors mutually influence one another when juxtaposed, each imposing its own complementary color on the other. The French painter Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix, who had been experimenting with what he called broken tones, embraced Chevreul's book, \"The Law of Contrast of Color\" (1839) with its explanations of how juxtaposed colors can enhance or diminish each other, and his exploration of all the visible colors of the spectrum. Inspired by Chevreul's 1839 treatise, Delacroix passed his enthusiasm on to the young artists who were inspired by him. It was Chevreul who led the Impressionists to grasp that they should apply separate brushstrokes of pure color to a canvas and allow the viewer's eye to combine them optically.\nThey were aided greatly in this by innovations in oil paint itself. Since the Renaissance, painters had to grind pigment, add oil and thus create their own paints; these time-consuming paints also quickly dried out, making studio painting a necessity for large works, and limiting painters to mix one or two colors at a time and fill in an entire area using just that one color before it dried out. In 1841, a little-known American painter named John G. Rand invented a simple improvement without which the Impressionist movement could not have occurred: the small, flexible tin tube with removable cap in which oil paints could be stored. Oil paints kept in such tubes stayed moist, usable, and portable. For the first time since the Renaissance, painters were not trapped by the time frame of how quickly oil paint dried.\nPaints in tubes could be easily loaded up and carried out into the real world, to directly observe the color in the moment. Selling the oil paint in tubes also brought about the arrival of new pigments - chrome yellow, cadmium blue - invented by 19th century industrial chemists. The tubes allowed the Impressionists to paint quickly, and across an entire canvas, rather than carefully delineated single-color sections at a time; in short, to sketch directly in oil.\nPierre-Auguste Renoir said, \u201cWithout colors in tubes, there would be no C\u00e9zanne, no Monet, no Pissarro, and no Impressionism.\u201d\nFinally, the careful, hyper-realistic techniques of French neo-classicism were seen as stiff and lifeless when compared to the remarkable new vision of the world as seen through the new invention of photography by the mid-1850s. It was not merely that the increasing ability of this new invention, particularly by the French inventor Daguerre, made the realism of the painted image redundant as he deliberately competed in the Paris diorama with large-scale historical paintings. The neo-classical subject matter, limited by Academic tradition to Greek and Roman legends, historical battles and Biblical stories, seemed oppressively clich\u00e9d and limited to artists eager to explore the actual world in front of their own eyes revealed by the camera - daily life, candid groupings of everyday people doing simple things, Paris itself, rural landscapes and most particularly the play of captured light - not the imaginary lionizing of unseen past events. Early photographs influenced Impressionist style by its use of asymmetry, cropping and most obviously the blurring of motion, as inadvertently captured in the very slow speeds of early photography.\nEdgar Degas, Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir - in their framing, use of color, light and shadow, subject matter - put these innovations to work to create a new language of visual beauty and meaning.\nThe CIA and Abstract Expressionism.\nTheir initial break with realism into an exploration of light, color and the nature of paint was brought to an ultimate conclusion by the abstract expressionists who broke away from recognizable content of any kind into works of pure shape, color and painterliness which emerged at the end of the Second World War. At first thought of as primitive, inept works - as in \"my four year old could do that - these works were misunderstood and neglected until given critical and support by the rise of art journalists and critics who championed their work in the 1940s and 50s, expressing the power of such work in aesthetic terms the artists themselves seldom used, or even understood. Jackson Pollock who pioneered splatter painting, dispensing with a paint brush altogether, soon became lionized as the angry young man in a large spread in \"Life\" magazine.\nIn fact, in a deliberate, secret and successful effort to separate artistic revolutions from political ones, abstract expressionists like Pollock, Robert Motherwell, Willem de Kooning and Mark Rothko, while seemingly difficult, pathbreaking artists, were in fact secretly supported for twenty years by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in a Cold War policy begun in 1947 to prove that the United States could foster more artistic freedom than the Soviet bloc. \"It was recognized that Abstract Expressionism was the kind of art that made Socialist Realism look even more stylized and rigid and confined than it was,\" said former CIA case worker Donald Jameson, who finally broke the silence on this program in 1995. Ironically, the covert CIA support for these radical works was required because an attempt to use government funds for a European tour of these works during the Truman administration led to a public uproar in conservative McCarthy-era America, with Truman famously remarking, \"If that's art, I'm a Hottentot.\" Thus, the program was hidden under the guise of fabricated foundations and the support of wealthy patrons who were actually using CIA funds, not their own, to sponsor traveling exhibitions of American abstract expressionists all over the world, publish books and articles praising them and to purchase and exhibit abstract expressionist works in major American and British museums. Thomas Braden, in charge of these cultural programs for the CIA, in the early years of the Cold War, had formerly been executive secretary of the Museum of Modern Art, America's leading institution for 20th century art and the charges of collusion between the two echoed for many years after this program was revealed, though most of the artists involved had no idea they were being used in this way and were furious when they found out.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1193", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1193", "title": "Agrarianism", "text": "Philosophy supporting rural society\nAgrarianism is a social and political philosophy that advocates for rural development, a rural agricultural lifestyle, family farming, widespread property ownership, and political decentralization. Those who adhere to agrarianism tend to value traditional forms of local community over urban modernity. Agrarian political parties sometimes aim to support the rights and sustainability of small farmers and poor peasants against the wealthy, powerful and famous in society.\nPhilosophy.\nSome scholars suggest that agrarianism espouses the superiority of rural society to urban society and the independent farmer as superior to the paid worker, and sees farming as a way of life that can shape the ideal social values. It stresses the superiority of a simpler rural life in comparison to the complexity of urban life. For example, M. Thomas Inge defines agrarianism by the following basic tenets:\nHistory.\nThe philosophical roots of agrarianism include European and Chinese philosophers. The Chinese school of Agriculturalism (\u519c\u5bb6/\u8fb2\u5bb6) was a philosophy that advocated peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism. In societies influenced by Confucianism that had as its foundation that humans are innately good, the farmer was considered an esteemed productive member of society, but merchants who made money were looked down upon. That influenced European intellectuals like Fran\u00e7ois Quesnay, an avid Confucianist and advocate of China's agrarian policies, in forming the French agrarian philosophy of physiocracy. The physiocrats, along with the ideas of John Locke and the Romantic Era, formed the basis of modern European and American agrarianism.\nTypes of agrarianism.\nJeffersonian democracy.\nThe United States president Thomas Jefferson was an agrarian who based his ideas about the budding American democracy around the notion that farmers are \"the most valuable citizens\" and the truest republicans. Jefferson and his support base were committed to American republicanism, which they saw as being in opposition to monarchy, aristocracy, clericalism and corruption, and which prioritized morality and virtue, exemplified by the \"yeoman farmer\", \"planters\", and the \"plain folk\". In praising the rural farmfolk, the Jeffersonians felt that financiers, bankers and industrialists created \"cesspools of corruption\" in the cities and should thus be avoided.\nThe Jeffersonians sought to align the American economy more with agriculture than industry. Part of their motive to do so was Jefferson's fear that the over-industrialization of America would create a class of wage slaves who relied on their employers for income and sustenance. In turn, these workers would cease to be independent voters as their vote could be manipulated by said employers. To counter this, Jefferson introduced, as scholar Clay Jenkinson noted, \"a graduated income tax that would serve as a disincentive to vast accumulations of wealth and would make funds available for some sort of benign redistribution downward\" and tariffs on imported articles, which were mainly purchased by the wealthy. In 1811, Jefferson, writing to a friend, explained: \"these revenues will be levied entirely on the rich... . the rich alone use imported articles, and on these alone the whole taxes of the general government are levied. the poor man ... pays not a farthing of tax to the general government, but on his salt.\"\nThere is general agreement that the substantial United States' federal policy of offering land grants (such as thousands of gifts of land to veterans) had a positive impact on economic development in the 19th century.\nAgrarian socialism.\nAgrarian socialism is a form of agrarianism that is anti-capitalist in nature and seeks to introduce socialist economic systems in their stead.\nZapatismo.\nNotable agrarian socialists include Emiliano Zapata who was a leading figure in the Mexican Revolution. As part of the Liberation Army of the South, his group of revolutionaries fought on behalf of the Mexican peasants, whom they saw as exploited by the landowning classes. Zapata published the Plan of Ayala, which called for significant land reforms and land redistribution in Mexico as part of the revolution. Zapata was killed and his forces crushed over the course of the Revolution, but his political ideas lived on in the form of Zapatismo.\nZapatismo would form the basis for neozapatismo, the ideology of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation. Known as \"Ej\u00e9rcito Zapatista de Liberaci\u00f3n Nacional\" or EZLN in Spanish, EZLN is a far-left libertarian socialist political and militant group that emerged in the state of Chiapas in southmost Mexico in 1994. EZLN and Neozapatismo, as explicit in their name, seek to revive the agrarian socialist movement of Zapata, but fuse it with new elements such as a commitment to indigenous rights and community-level decision making.\nSubcommander Marcos, a leading member of the movement, argues that the peoples' collective ownership of the land was and is the basis for all subsequent developments the movement sought to create:\n...When the land became property of the peasants ... when the land passed into the hands of those who work it ... [This was] the starting point for advances in government, health, education, housing, nutrition, women's participation, trade, culture, communication, and information ...[it was] recovering the means of production, in this case, the land, animals, and machines that were in the hands of large property owners.\"\nMaoism.\nMaoism, the far-left ideology of Mao Zedong and his followers, places a heavy emphasis on the role of peasants in its goals. In contrast to other Marxist schools of thought which normally seek to acquire the support of urban workers, Maoism sees the peasantry as key. Believing that \"political power grows out of the barrel of a gun\", Maoism saw the Chinese Peasantry as the prime source for a Marxist vanguard because it possessed two qualities: (i) they were poor, and (ii) they were a political blank slate; in Mao's words, \"A clean sheet of paper has no blotches, and so the newest and most beautiful words can be written on it\". During the Chinese Civil War and the Second Sino-Japanese War, Mao and the Chinese Communist Party made extensive use of peasants and rural bases in their military tactics, often eschewing the cities.\nFollowing the eventual victory of the Communist Party in both wars, the countryside and how it should be run remained a focus for Mao. In 1958, Mao launched the Great Leap Forward, a social and economic campaign which, amongst other things, altered many aspects of rural Chinese life. It introduced mandatory collective farming and forced the peasantry to organize itself into communal living units which were known as people's communes. These communes, which consisted of 5,000 people on average, were expected to meet high production quotas while the peasants who lived on them adapted to this radically new way of life. The communes were run as co-operatives where wages and money were replaced by work points. Peasants who criticised this new system were persecuted as \"rightists\" and \"counter-revolutionaries\". Leaving the communes was forbidden and escaping from them was difficult or impossible, and those who attempted it were subjected to party-orchestrated \"public struggle sessions,\" which further jeopardized their survival. These public criticism sessions were often used to intimidate the peasants into obeying local officials and they often devolved into little more than public beatings.\nOn the communes, experiments were conducted in order to find new methods of planting crops, efforts were made to construct new irrigation systems on a massive scale, and the communes were all encouraged to produce steel backyard furnaces as part of an effort to increase steel production. However, following the Anti-Rightist Campaign, Mao had instilled a mass distrust of intellectuals into China, and thus engineers often were not consulted with regard to the new irrigation systems and the wisdom of asking untrained peasants to produce good quality steel from scrap iron was not publicly questioned. Similarly, the experimentation with the crops did not produce results. In addition to this the Four Pests Campaign was launched, in which the peasants were called upon to destroy sparrows and other wild birds that ate crop seeds, in order to protect fields. Pest birds were shot down or scared away from landing until they dropped from exhaustion. This campaign resulted in an ecological disaster that saw an explosion of the vermin population, especially crop-eating insects, which was consequently not in danger of being killed by predators.\nNone of these new systems were working, but local leaders did not dare to state this, instead, they falsified reports so as not to be punished for failing to meet the quotas. In many cases they stated that they were greatly exceeding their quotas, and in turn, the Chinese state developed a completely false sense of success with regard to the commune system.\nAll of this culminated in the Great Chinese Famine, which began in 1959, lasted 3 years, and saw an estimated 15 to 30 million Chinese people die. A combination of bad weather and the new, failed farming techniques that were introduced by the state led to massive shortages of food. By 1962, the Great Leap Forward was declared to be at an end.\nIn the late 1960s and early 1970s, Mao once again radically altered life in rural China with the launching of the Down to the Countryside Movement. As a response to the Great Chinese Famine, the Chinese President Liu Shaoqi began \"sending down\" urban youths to rural China in order to recover its population losses and alleviate overcrowding in the cities. However, Mao turned the practice into a political crusade, declaring that the sending down would strip the youth of any bourgeois tendencies by forcing them to learn from the unprivileged rural peasants. In reality, it was the Communist Party's attempt to reign in the Red Guards, who had become uncontrollable during the course of the Cultural Revolution. 10% of the 1970 urban population of China was sent out to remote rural villages, often in Inner Mongolia. The villages, which were still poorly recovering from the effects of the Great Chinese Famine, did not have the excess resources that were needed to support the newcomers. Furthermore, the so-called \"sent-down youth\" had no agricultural experience and as a result, they were unaccustomed to the harsh lifestyle that existed in the countryside, and their unskilled labor in the villages provided little benefit to the agricultural sector. As a result, many of the sent-down youth died in the countryside. The relocation of the youths was originally intended to be permanent, but by the end of the Cultural Revolution, the Communist Party relented and some of those who had the capacity to return to the cities were allowed to do so.\nIn imitation of Mao's policies, the Khmer Rouge of Cambodia (who were heavily funded and supported by the People's Republic of China) created their own version of the Great Leap Forward which was known as \"Maha Lout Ploh\". With the Great Leap Forward as its model, it had similarly disastrous effects, contributing to what is now known as the Cambodian genocide. As a part of the Maha Lout Ploh, the Khmer Rouge sought to create an entirely agrarian socialist society by forcibly relocating 100,000 people to move from Cambodia's cities into newly created communes. The Khmer Rouge leader, Pol Pot sought to \"purify\" the country by setting it back to \"Year Zero\", freeing it from \"corrupting influences\". Besides trying to completely de-urbanize Cambodia, ethnic minorities were slaughtered along with anyone else who was suspected of being a \"reactionary\" or a member of the \"bourgeoisie\", to the point that wearing glasses was seen as grounds for execution. The killings were only brought to an end when Cambodia was invaded by the neighboring socialist nation of Vietnam, whose army toppled the Khmer Rouge. However, with Cambodia's entire society and economy in disarray, including its agricultural sector, the country still plunged into renewed famine due to vast food shortages. However, as international journalists began to report on the situation and send images of it out to the world, a massive international response was provoked, leading to one of the most concentrated relief efforts of its time.\nNotable agrarian parties.\nPeasant parties first appeared across Eastern Europe between 1860 and 1910, when commercialized agriculture and world market forces disrupted traditional rural society, and the railway and growing literacy facilitated the work of roving organizers. Agrarian parties advocated land reforms to redistribute land on large estates among those who work it. They also wanted village cooperatives to keep the profit from crop sales in local hands and credit institutions to underwrite needed improvements. Many peasant parties were also nationalist parties because peasants often worked their land for the benefit of landlords of different ethnicity.\nPeasant parties rarely had any power before World War I but some became influential in the interwar era, especially in Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia. For a while, in the 1920s and the 1930s, there was a Green International (International Agrarian Bureau) based on the peasant parties in Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Serbia. It functioned primarily as an information center that spread the ideas of agrarianism and combating socialism on the left and landlords on the right and never launched any significant activities.\nEurope.\nBulgaria.\nIn Bulgaria, the Bulgarian Agrarian National Union (BZNS) was organized in 1899 to resist taxes and build cooperatives. BZNS came to power in 1919 and introduced many economic, social, and legal reforms. However, conservative forces crushed BZNS in a 1923 coup and assassinated its leader, Aleksandar Stamboliyski (1879\u20131923). BZNS was made into a communist puppet group until 1989, when it reorganized as a genuine party.\nCzechoslovakia.\nIn Czechoslovakia, the Republican Party of Agricultural and Smallholder People often shared power in parliament as a partner in the five-party p\u011btka coalition. The party's leader, Anton\u00edn \u0160vehla (1873\u20131933), was prime minister several times. It was consistently the strongest party, forming and dominating coalitions. It moved beyond its original agrarian base to reach middle-class voters. The party was banned by the National Front after the Second World War.\nFrance.\nIn France, the Hunting, Fishing, Nature, Tradition party is a moderate conservative, agrarian party, reaching a peak of 4.23% in the 2002 French presidential election. It would later on become affiliated to France's main conservative party, Union for a Popular Movement. More recently, the Resistons! movement of Jean Lassalle espoused agrarianism.\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, the first major agrarian party, the small-holders party was founded in 1908. The party became part of the government in the 1920s but lost influence in the government. A new party, the Independent Smallholders, Agrarian Workers and Civic Party was established in 1930 with a more radical program representing larger scale land redistribution initiatives. They implemented this program together with the other coalition parties after WWII. However, after 1949 the party was outlawed when a one-party system was introduced. They became part of the government again 1990\u20131994, and 1998\u20132002 after which they lost political support. The ruling Fidesz party has an agrarian faction, and promotes agrarian interest since 2010 with the emphasis now placed on supporting larger family farms versus small-holders.\nIreland.\nIn the late 19th century, the Irish National Land League aimed to abolish landlordism in Ireland and enable tenant farmers to own the land they worked on. The \"Land War\" of 1878\u20131909 led to the Irish Land Acts, ending absentee landlords and ground rent and redistributing land among peasant farmers.\nPost-independence, the Farmers' Party operated in the Irish Free State from 1922, folding into the National Centre Party in 1932. It was mostly supported by wealthy farmers in the east of Ireland.\nClann na Talmhan (Family of the Land; also called the \"National Agricultural Party\") was founded in 1938. They focused more on the poor smallholders of the west, supporting land reclamation, afforestation, social democracy and rates reform. They formed part of the governing coalition of the Government of the 13th D\u00e1il and Government of the 15th D\u00e1il. Economic improvement in the 1960s saw farmers vote for other parties and Clann na Talmhan disbanded in 1965.\nKazakhstan.\nIn Kazakhstan, the Peasants' Union, originally a communist organization, was formed as one of first agrarian parties in independent Kazakhstan and would win four seats in the 1994 legislative election. The Agrarian Party of Kazakhstan, led by Romin Madinov, was founded in 1999, which favored the privatization of agricultural land, developments towards rural infrastructure, as well as changes in the tax system in agrarian economy. The party would go on to win three M\u00e4jilis seats in the 1999 legislative election and eventually unite with the Civic Party of Kazakhstan to form the pro-government Agrarian-Industrial Union of Workers (AIST) bloc that would be chaired by Madinov for the 2004 legislative election, with the AIST bloc winning 11 seats in the M\u00e4jilis. From there, the bloc remained short-lived as it would merge with the ruling Nur Otan party in 2006.\nSeveral other parties in Kazakhstan over the years have embraced agrarian policies in their programs in an effort to appeal towards a large rural Kazakh demographic base, which included Amanat, ADAL, and Respublica.\nSince late 2000s, the \"Auyl\" People's Democratic Patriotic Party remains the largest and most influential agrarian-oriented party in Kazakhstan, as its presidential candidate Jiguli Dairabaev had become the second-place frontrunner in the 2022 presidential election after sweeping 3.4% of the vote. In the 2023 legislative election, the Auyl party for the first time was represented the parliament after winning nine seats in the lower chamber M\u00e4jilis. The party raises rural issues in regard to decaying villages, rural development and the agro-industrial complex, the issues of social security of the rural population, and has consistently opposed the ongoing rural flight in Kazakhstan.\nLatvia.\nIn Latvia, the Union of Greens and Farmers is supportive of traditional small farms and perceives them as more environmentally friendly than large-scale farming: Nature is threatened by development, while small farms are threatened by large industrial-scale farms.\nLithuania.\nIn Lithuania, the government led by the Lithuanian Farmers and Greens Union was in power between 2016 and 2020.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, the Polish People's Party (\"Polskie Stronnictwo Ludowe\", PSL) traces its tradition to an agrarian party in Austro-Hungarian-controlled Galician Poland. After the fall of the communist regime, PSL's biggest success came in 1993 elections, where it won 132 out of 460 parliamentary seats. Since then, PSL's support has steadily declined, until 2019, when they formed Polish Coalition with an anti-establishment, direct democracy Kukiz'15 party, and managed to get 8.5% of popular vote. Moreover, PSL tends to get much better results in local elections. In 2014 elections they have managed to get 23.88% of votes.\nThe right-wing Law and Justice party has also become supportive of agrarian policies in recent years and polls show that most of their support comes from rural areas. AGROunia resembles the features of agrarianism.\nRomania.\nIn Romania, older party parties from Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia merged to become the National Peasants' Party (PN\u021a) in 1926. Iuliu Maniu (1873\u20131953) was a prime minister with an agrarian cabinet from 1928 to 1930 and briefly in 1932\u20131933, but the Great Depression made proposed reforms impossible. The communist administration dissolved the party in 1947 (along with other historical parties such as the National Liberal Party), but it reformed in 1989 after they fell from power.\nThe reformed party, which also incorporated elements of Christian democracy in its ideology, governed Romania as part of the Romanian Democratic Convention (CDR) between 1996 and 2000.\nSerbia.\nIn Serbia, Nikola Pa\u0161i\u0107 (1845\u20131926) and his People's Radical Party dominated Serbian politics after 1903. The party also monopolized power in Yugoslavia from 1918 to 1929. During the dictatorship of the 1930s, the prime minister was from that party.\nUkraine.\nIn Ukraine, the Radical Party of Oleh Lyashko has promised to purify the country of oligarchs \"with a pitchfork\". The party advocates a number of traditional left-wing positions (a progressive tax structure, a ban on agricultural land sale and eliminating the illegal land market, a tenfold increase in budget spending on health, setting up primary health centres in every village) and mixes them with strong nationalist sentiments.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn land law the heyday of English, Irish (and thus Welsh) agrarianism was c.\u20091500 to 1603, led by the Tudor royal advisors, who sought to maintain a broad pool of agricultural commoners from which to draw military men, against the interests of larger landowners who sought enclosure (meaning complete private control of common land, over which by custom and common law lords of the manor always enjoyed minor rights). The heyday was eroded by hundreds of Acts of Parliament to expressly permit enclosure, chiefly from 1650 to the 1810s. Politicians standing strongly as reactionaries to this included the Levellers, those anti-industrialists (Luddites) going beyond opposing new weaving technology and, later, radicals such as William Cobbett.\nA high level of net national or local self-sufficiency has a strong base in campaigns and movements. In the 19th century such empowered advocates included Peelites and most Conservatives. The 20th century saw the growth or start of influential non-governmental organisations, such as the National Farmers' Union of England and Wales, Campaign for Rural England, Friends of the Earth (EWNI) and of the England Wales, Scottish and Northern Irish political parties prefixed by and focussed on Green politics. The 21st century has seen decarbonisation already in electricity markets. Following protests and charitable lobbying local food has seen growing market share, sometimes backed by wording in public policy papers and manifestos. The UK has many sustainability-prioritising businesses, green charity campaigns, events and lobby groups ranging from espousing allotment gardens (hobby community farming) through to a clear policy of local food and/or self-sustainability models.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nHistorian F.K. Crowley finds that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Australian farmers and their spokesman have always considered that life on the land is inherently more virtuous, as well as more healthy, more important and more productive, than life in the towns and cities...The farmers complained that something was wrong with an electoral system which produced parliamentarians who spent money beautifying vampire-cities instead of developing the interior.\nThe National Party of Australia (formerly called the Country Party), from the 1920s to the 1970s, promulgated its version of agrarianism, which it called \"countrymindedness\". The goal was to enhance the status of the graziers (operators of big sheep stations) and small farmers and justified subsidies for them.\nNew Zealand.\nThe New Zealand Liberal Party aggressively promoted agrarianism in its heyday (1891\u20131912). The landed gentry and aristocracy ruled Britain at this time. New Zealand never had an aristocracy but its wealthy landowners largely controlled politics before 1891. The Liberal Party set out to change that by a policy it called \"populism.\" Richard Seddon had proclaimed the goal as early as 1884: \"It is the rich and the poor; it is the wealthy and the landowners against the middle and labouring classes. That, Sir, shows the real political position of New Zealand.\" The Liberal strategy was to create a large class of small landowning farmers who supported Liberal ideals. The Liberal government also established the basis of the later welfare state such as old age pensions and developed a system for settling industrial disputes, which was accepted by both employers and trade unions. In 1893, it extended voting rights to women, making New Zealand the first country in the world to do so.\nTo obtain land for farmers, the Liberal government from 1891 to 1911 purchased of Maori land. The government also purchased from large estate holders for subdivision and closer settlement by small farmers. The Advances to Settlers Act (1894) provided low-interest mortgages, and the agriculture department disseminated information on the best farming methods. The Liberals proclaimed success in forging an egalitarian, anti-monopoly land policy. The policy built up support for the Liberal Party in rural North Island electorates. By 1903, the Liberals were so dominant that there was no longer an organized opposition in Parliament.\nNorth America.\nThe United States and Canada both saw a rise of Agrarian-oriented parties in the early twentieth century as economic troubles motivated farming communities to become politically active. It has been proposed that different responses to agrarian protest largely determined the course of power generated by these newly energized rural factions. According to Sociologist Barry Eidlin:\"In the United States, Democrats adopted a co-optive response to farmer and labor protest, incorporating these constituencies into the New Deal coalition. In Canada, both mainstream parties adopted a coercive response, leaving these constituencies politically excluded and available for an independent left coalition.\"These reactions may have helped determine the outcome of agrarian power and political associations in the US and Canada.\nUnited States of America.\nKansas.\nEconomic desperation experienced by farmers across the state of Kansas in the nineteenth century spurred the creation of The People's Party in 1890, and soon-after would gain control of the governor's office in 1892. This party, consisting of a mix of Democrats, Socialists, Populists, and Fusionists, would find itself buckling from internal conflict regarding the unlimited coinage of silver. The Populists permanently lost power in 1898.\nOklahoma.\nOklahoma farmers considered their political activity during the early twentieth century due to the outbreak of war, depressed crop prices, and an inhibited sense of progression towards owning their own farms. Tenancy had been reportedly as high as 55% in Oklahoma by 1910. These pressures saw agrarian counties in Oklahoma supporting Socialist policies and politics, with the Socialist platform proposing a deeply agrarian-radical platform:...the platform proposed a \"Renters and Farmer's Program\" which was strongly agrarian radical in its insistence upon various measures to put land into \"The hands of the actual tillers of the soil.\" Although it did not propose to nationalize privately owned land, it did offer numerous plans to enlarge the state's public domain, from which land would be rented at prevailing share rents to tenants until they had paid rent equal to the land's value. The tenant and his children would have the right of occupancy and use, but the 'title' would remind in the 'commonwealth', an arrangement that might be aptly termed 'Socialist fee simple'. They proposed to exempt from taxation all farm dwellings, animals, and improvements up to the value of $1,000. The State Board of Agriculture would encourage 'co-operative societies' of farmers to make plans for the purchase of land, seed, tools, and for preparing and selling produce. In order to give farmers essential services at cost, the Socialists called for the creation of state banks and mortgage agencies, crop insurance, elevators, and warehouses.This agrarian-backed Socialist party would win numerous offices, causing a panic within the local Democratic party. This agrarian-Socialist movement would be inhibited by voter suppression laws aimed at reducing the participation of voters of color, as well as national wartime policies intended to disrupt political elements considered subversive. This party would peak in power in 1914.\nBack-to-the-land movement.\nAgrarianism is similar to but not identical with the back-to-the-land movement. Agrarianism concentrates on the fundamental goods of the earth, on communities of more limited economic and political scale than in modern society, and on simple living, even when the shift involves questioning the \"progressive\" character of some recent social and economic developments. Thus, agrarianism is not industrial farming, with its specialization on products and industrial scale.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1194", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1194", "title": "Atomic", "text": "Atomic may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "1195", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1195", "title": "Allotropes", "text": ""}
{"id": "1196", "revid": "50883675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1196", "title": "Angle", "text": "Figure formed by two rays meeting at a common point\nIn geometry, an angle is formed by two lines that meet at a point. Each line is called a \"side\" of the angle, and the point they share is called the \"vertex\" of the angle. The term \"angle\" is used to denote both geometric figures and their size or magnitude as associated quantity. Angular measure or measure of angle are sometimes used to distinguish between the measure of the quantity and figure itself. The measurement of angles is intrinsically linked with circles and rotation, and this is often visualized or defined using the arc of a circle centered at the vertex and lying between the sides.\nFundamentals.\nThere is no universally agreed definition of an angle. Angles can be conceived of and used in a variety of ways and while valid definitions may be given for specific contexts, it is difficult to give a single formal definition that is completely satisfactory in capturing all aspects of the general concept of \"angle\".\nOne standard definition is that an angle is a \"figure\" consisting of two rays which lie in a plane and share a common endpoint. Alternatively, given such a figure, an angle might be defined as: the \"opening\" between the rays; the \"area of the plane\" that lies between the rays; or the \"amount of rotation\" about the vertex of one ray to the other.\nMore generally, angles are also formed wherever two line segments come together, such as at the corners of triangles and other polygons, or at the intersection of two planes or curves, in which case the rays lying tangent to each curve at the point of intersection define the angle.\nIt is common to consider that the sides of the angle divide the plane into two regions called the \"interior of the angle\" and the \"exterior of the angle\". The interior of the angle is also referred to as an angular sector.\nNotation and measurement.\nAn angle symbol (formula_1 or formula_2, read as \"angle\") together with one or three defining points is used to identify angles in geometric figures. For example, the angle with vertex A formed by the rays formula_3 and formula_4 is denoted as formula_5 (using the vertex alone) or formula_6 (with the vertex always named in the middle). The size or measure of the angle is denoted formula_7 or formula_8.\nIn geometric figures and mathematical expressions, it is also common to use Greek letters (\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\", \"\u03b3\", \"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\",\u00a0...) or lower case Roman letters (\"a\",\u00a0\"b\",\u00a0\"c\",\u00a0...) as variables to represent the size of an angle. Angular measure is commonly a scalar quantity, although in physics and some fields of mathematics, signed angles are used by convention to indicate a direction of rotation: positive for anti-clockwise; negative for clockwise.\nUnits of measurement.\nAngles are measured in various units, the most common being the degree (denoted by the symbol \u00b0), radian (denoted by the symbol rad) and turn. These units differ in the way they divide up a \"full angle\", an angle where one ray, initially congruent to the other, performs a compete rotation about the vertex to return back to its starting position.\nDegrees and turns are defined directly with reference to a full angle, which measures 1 turn or 360\u00b0. A measure in turns gives an angle's size as a proportion of a full angle and a degree can be considered as a subdivision of a turn. Radians are not defined directly in relation to a full angle (see \"\"), but in such a way that its measure is 2\u03c0\u00a0rad, approximately 6.28\u00a0rad.\nHistorically the degree unit was chosen such as the straight angle or half the full angle was attributed the value of 180.\nAddition and subtraction.\nThe angle addition postulate states that if D is a point lying in the interior of formula_6 then: formula_10 This relationship \"defines\" what it means to add any two angles: their vertices are placed together while sharing a side to create a new larger angle. The measure of the new larger angle is the sum of the measures of the two angles. Subtraction follows from rearrangement of the formula.\nTypes.\nAdjacent and vertical angles.\nAdjacent angles (abbreviated \"adj. \u2220s\"), are angles that share a common vertex and edge but do not share any interior points. In other words, they are angles side by side or adjacent, sharing an \"arm\".\nVertical angles are formed when two straight lines intersect at a point producing four angles. A pair of angles opposite each other are called \"vertical angles\", \"opposite angles\" or \"vertically opposite angles\" (abbreviated \"vert. opp. \u2220s\"), where \"vertical\" refers to the sharing of a vertex, rather than an up-down orientation. A theorem states that vertical angles are always congruent or equal to each other.\nA \"transversal\" is a line that intersects a pair of (often parallel) lines and is associated with \"exterior angles\", \"interior angles\", \"alternate exterior angles\", \"alternate interior angles\", \"corresponding angles\", and \"consecutive interior angles\".\nCombining angle pairs.\nWhen summing two angles (either adjacent or separated in space), three special cases are named \"complementary\", \"supplementary\", and \"explementary\" angles.\nComplementary angles are angle pairs whose measures sum to a right angle ( turn, 90\u00b0, or rad). If the two complementary angles are adjacent, their non-shared sides form a right angle. In a right-angle triangle the two acute angles are complementary as the sum of the internal angles of a triangle is 180\u00b0. The difference between an angle and a right angle is termed the \"complement\" of the angle.\nSupplementary angles sum to a straight angle ( turn, 180\u00b0, or \u03c0 rad). If the two supplementary angles are adjacent, their non-shared sides form a straight angle or straight line and are called a \"linear pair of angles\". The difference between an angle and a straight angle is termed the \"supplement\" of the angle.\nExplementary angles or conjugate angles sum to a full angle (1 turn, 360\u00b0, or 2\u03c0 radians). The difference between an angle and a full angle is termed the \"explement\" or \"conjugate\" of the angle.\nExamples of non-adjacent supplementary angles include the consecutive angles of a parallelogram and opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral. For a circle with center O, and tangent lines from an exterior point P touching the circle at points T and Q, the resulting angles \u2220TPQ and \u2220TOQ are supplementary.\nMeasuring angles.\nAngle measurement encompasses both direct physical measurement using a measuring instrument such as a protractor, as well as the theoretical calculation of angle size from other known quantities. While the measurement of angles is intrinsically linked with rotation and circles, there are various perspectives as to exactly \"what\" is being measured, including amongst others: the amount of rotation about the vertex of one ray to the other; the amount of opening between the rays; or the length of the arc that subtends the angle at the centre of a unit circle.\nThe measurement of angles is inherently different from the measurement of other physical quantities such as length. Angles of special significance (such as the right angle) inform the systems and units of angular measurement, which is not the case for length where the units of measurement (metres, feet) are arbitrary.\nBroadly there are two approaches to measuring angles: relative to a reference angle (such as a right angle); and circular measurement.\nReference angle.\nA chosen reference angle (right angle, straight angle or full angle) can be divided into equal parts, and the size of one part used as a unit for measurement of other angles.\nIn the most common method of practical angular measurement a right angle is divided into 90 equal parts called degrees, while in the rarely used \"centesimal\" system, a right angle is divided into 100 equal parts called gradians.\nCircular measurement.\nWith circular measurement an angle is placed within a circle of any size, with the vertex at the circle's centre and the sides intersecting the perimeter.\nAn arc with length s is formed as the perimeter between the two points of intersection, which is said to subtend the angle. The length \"s\" can be used to measure the angle's size \"\u03b8\", however as \"s\" is dependent on the size of the circle chosen, the measure must be scaled. This can be done by taking the ratio of \"s\" to either the radius \"r\" or circumference \"C\" of the circle.\nThe ratio of the length s by the radius r is the number of radians in the angle, while the ratio of length s by the circumference C is the number of turns:\nformula_11\nThe value of \"\u03b8\" thus defined is independent of the size of the circle: if the length of the radius is changed, then both the circumference and the arc length change in the same proportion, so the ratios and are unaltered.\nThe ratio is called the \"radian measure\" or \"circular measure\" of an angle, but is also used to define a unit of measurement called a radian, which is defined as an angle for which the ratio = 1. Thus, the measurement of an angle given by can be thought of in two ways: firstly as a measure in terms of the angle's own proportions (ratio of arc length to radius), or secondly as the quantity of units in the angle (ratio of arc length of measured angle to arc length of unit angle).\nUnits.\nThe following table lists some notable units used to represent angles.\nDimensional analysis.\nIn mathematics and the International System of Quantities, an angle is defined as a dimensionless quantity, and in particular, the radian is defined as dimensionless in the International System of Units. This convention prevents angles providing information for dimensional analysis. For example, when one measures an angle in radians by dividing the arc length by the radius, one is essentially dividing a length by another length, and the units of length cancel each other out. Therefore the result\u2014the angle\u2014doesn't have a physical \"dimension\" like meters or seconds. This holds true with all angle units, such as radians, degrees, or turns\u2014they all represent a pure number quantifying how much something has turned. This is why, in many equations, angle units seem to \"disappear\" during calculations, which feels inconsistent and can lead to mixing up angle units.\nThis has led to significant discussion among scientists and educators. Some scientists have suggested treating the angle as having its own fundamental dimension, similar to length or time. This would mean that angle units like radians would always be explicitly present in calculations, facilitating dimensional analysis. However, this approach would also require changing many well-known mathematical and physics formulas, making them longer and perhaps a bit less familiar. For now, the established practice is to write angle units where appropriate but consider them dimensionless, understanding that these units are important but behave differently from meters or kilograms.\nSigned angles.\nAn angle denoted as \u2220BAC might refer to any of four angles: the clockwise angle from B to C about A, the anticlockwise angle from B to C about A, the clockwise angle from C to B about A, or the anticlockwise angle from C to B about A, It is therefore frequently helpful to impose a convention that allows positive and negative angular values to represent orientations and/or rotations in opposite directions or \"sense\" relative to some reference.\nIn a two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system, an angle is typically defined by its two sides, with its vertex at the origin. The \"initial side\" is on the positive x-axis, while the other side or \"terminal side\" is defined by the measure from the initial side in radians, degrees, or turns, with \"positive angles\" representing rotations toward the positive y-axis and \"negative angles\" representing rotations toward the negative \"y\"-axis. When Cartesian coordinates are represented by \"standard position\", defined by the \"x\"-axis rightward and the \"y\"-axis upward, positive rotations are anticlockwise, and negative cycles are clockwise.\nIn many contexts, an angle of \u2212\"\u03b8\" is effectively equivalent to an angle of \"one full turn minus \"\u03b8\"\". For example, an orientation represented as \u221245\u00b0 is effectively equal to an orientation defined as 360\u00b0 \u2212 45\u00b0 or 315\u00b0. Although the final position is the same, a physical rotation (movement) of \u221245\u00b0 is not the same as a rotation of 315\u00b0 (for example, the rotation of a person holding a broom resting on a dusty floor would leave visually different traces of swept regions on the floor).\nIn three-dimensional geometry, \"clockwise\" and \"anticlockwise\" have no absolute meaning, so the direction of positive and negative angles must be defined in terms of an orientation, which is typically determined by a normal vector passing through the angle's vertex and perpendicular to the plane in which the rays of the angle lie.\nIn navigation, bearings or azimuth are measured relative to north. By convention, viewed from above, bearing angles are positive clockwise, so a bearing of 45\u00b0 corresponds to a north-east orientation. Negative bearings are not used in navigation, so a north-west orientation corresponds to a bearing of 315\u00b0.\nRelated quantities.\nFor an angular unit, it is definitional that the angle addition postulate holds, however some measurements or quantities related to angles are in use that do not satisfy this postulate:\nAngles between curves.\nThe angle between a line and a curve (mixed angle) or between two intersecting curves (curvilinear angle) is defined to be the angle between the tangents at the point of intersection. Various names (now rarely, if ever, used) have been given to particular cases:\u2014\"amphicyrtic\" (Gr. , on both sides, \u03ba\u03c5\u03c1\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2, convex) or \"cissoidal\" (Gr. \u03ba\u03b9\u03c3\u03c3\u03cc\u03c2, ivy), biconvex; \"xystroidal\" or \"sistroidal\" (Gr. \u03be\u03c5\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03af\u03c2, a tool for scraping), concavo-convex; \"amphicoelic\" (Gr. \u03ba\u03bf\u03af\u03bb\u03b7, a hollow) or \"angulus lunularis\", biconcave.\nBisecting and trisecting angles.\nThe ancient Greek mathematicians knew how to bisect an angle (divide it into two angles of equal measure) using only a compass and straightedge but could only trisect certain angles. In 1837, Pierre Wantzel showed that this construction could not be performed for most angles.\nDot product and generalisations.\nIn the Euclidean space, the angle \"\u03b8\" between two Euclidean vectors u and v is related to their dot product and their lengths by the formula\nformula_12\nThis formula supplies an easy method to find the angle between two planes (or curved surfaces) from their normal vectors and between skew lines from their vector equations.\nInner product.\nTo define angles in an abstract real inner product space, we replace the Euclidean dot product ( \u00b7 ) by the inner product formula_13, i.e.\nformula_14\nIn a complex inner product space, the expression for the cosine above may give non-real values, so it is replaced with\nformula_15\nor, more commonly, using the absolute value, with\nformula_16\nThe latter definition ignores the direction of the vectors. It thus describes the angle between one-dimensional subspaces formula_17 and formula_18 spanned by the vectors formula_19 and formula_20 correspondingly.\nAngles between subspaces.\nThe definition of the angle between one-dimensional subspaces formula_17 and formula_18 given by\nformula_23\nin a Hilbert space can be extended to subspaces of finite number of dimensions. Given two subspaces formula_24, formula_25 with formula_26, this leads to a definition of formula_27 angles called canonical or principal angles between subspaces.\nAngles in Riemannian geometry.\nIn Riemannian geometry, the metric tensor is used to define the angle between two tangents. Where \"U\" and \"V\" are tangent vectors and \"g\"\"ij\" are the components of the metric tensor \"G\",\nformula_28\nHyperbolic angle.\nA hyperbolic angle is an argument of a hyperbolic function just as the \"circular angle\" is the argument of a circular function. The comparison can be visualized as the size of the openings of a hyperbolic sector and a circular sector since the areas of these sectors correspond to the angle magnitudes in each case. Unlike the circular angle, the hyperbolic angle is unbounded. When the circular and hyperbolic functions are viewed as infinite series in their angle argument, the circular ones are just alternating series forms of the hyperbolic functions. This comparison of the two series corresponding to functions of angles was described by Leonhard Euler in \"Introduction to the Analysis of the Infinite\" (1748).\nHistory and etymology.\nThe word \"angle\" comes from the Latin word , meaning \"corner\". Cognate words include the Greek () meaning \"crooked, curved\" and the English word \"ankle\". Both are connected with the Proto-Indo-European root \"*ank-\", meaning \"to bend\" or \"bow\".\nPhilosophers have debated the nature of angles for millennia, with some arguing that angles are a measure (quantity), and others saying they are a kind of shape defined by the lines that bound it (qualitative relation), and still others saying an angle is both. Pedagogically, the accepted answer is that angles are defined as figures, and the measure of an angle is defined as the number of congruent non-overlapping copies of a unit angle necessary to cover the angle and its interior. Angles are said to be equal in measure and similar or congruent in shape.\nEuclid defines a plane angle as the inclination to each other, in a plane, of two lines that meet each other and do not lie straight with respect to each other. According to the Neoplatonic metaphysician Proclus, an angle must be either a quality, a quantity, or a relationship. The first concept, angle as quality, was used by Eudemus of Rhodes, who regarded an angle as a deviation from a straight line; the second, angle as quantity, by Carpus of Antioch, who regarded it as the interval or space between the intersecting lines; Euclid adopted the third: angle as a relationship.\nVertical angle theorem.\nThe equality of vertically opposite angles is called the \"vertical angle theorem\". Eudemus of Rhodes attributed the proof to Thales of Miletus. The proposition showed that since both of a pair of vertical angles are supplementary to both of the adjacent angles, the vertical angles are equal in measure. According to a historical note, when Thales visited Egypt, he observed that whenever the Egyptians drew two intersecting lines, they would measure the vertical angles to make sure that they were equal. Thales concluded that one could prove that all vertical angles are equal if one accepted some general notions such as:\nWhen two adjacent angles form a straight line, they are supplementary. Therefore, if we assume that the measure of angle \"A\" equals \"x\", the measure of angle \"C\" would be 180\u00b0 \u2212 \"x\". Similarly, the measure of angle \"D\" would be 180\u00b0 \u2212 \"x\". Both angle \"C\" and angle \"D\" have measures equal to 180\u00b0 \u2212 \"x\" and are congruent. Since angle \"B\" is supplementary to both angles \"C\" and \"D\", either of these angle measures may be used to determine the measure of Angle \"B\". Using the measure of either angle \"C\" or angle \"D\", we find the measure of angle \"B\" to be 180\u00b0 \u2212 (180\u00b0 \u2212 \"x\") = \"x\". Therefore, both angle \"A\" and angle \"B\" have measures equal to \"x\" and are equal in measure.\nAngles in geography and astronomy.\nIn geography, the location of any point on the Earth can be identified using a \"geographic coordinate system\". This system specifies the latitude and longitude of any location in terms of angles subtended at the center of the Earth, using the equator and (usually) the Greenwich meridian as references.\nIn astronomy, a given point on the celestial sphere (that is, the apparent position of an astronomical object) can be identified using any of several \"astronomical coordinate systems\", where the references vary according to the particular system. Astronomers measure the \"angular separation\" of two stars by imagining two lines through the center of the Earth, each intersecting one of the stars. The angle between those lines and the angular separation between the two stars can be measured.\nIn both geography and astronomy, a sighting direction can be specified in terms of a vertical angle such as altitude angle or elevation with respect to the horizon as well as the azimuth with respect to north.\nAstronomers also measure objects' \"apparent size\" as an angular diameter. For example, the full moon has an angular diameter of approximately 0.5\u00b0 when viewed from Earth. One could say, \"The Moon's diameter subtends an angle of half a degree.\" The small-angle formula can convert such an angular measurement into a distance/size ratio.\nOther astronomical approximations include:\nThese measurements depend on the individual subject, and the above should be treated as rough rule of thumb approximations only.\nIn astronomy, right ascension is usually measured in angular units that are expressed in terms of time based on a 24-hour day.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1197", "revid": "15213913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1197", "title": "Asa", "text": "Asa may refer to:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "1198", "revid": "47349670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1198", "title": "Acoustics", "text": "Branch of physics involving mechanical waves\nAcoustics is a branch of physics that deals with the study of mechanical waves in gases, liquids, and solids including topics such as vibration, sound, ultrasound and infrasound. A scientist who works in the field of acoustics is an acoustician while someone working in the field of acoustics technology may be called an acoustical engineer. The application of acoustics is present in almost all aspects of modern society with the most obvious being the audio and noise control industries.\nHearing is one of the most crucial means of survival in the animal world and speech is one of the most distinctive characteristics of human development and culture. Accordingly, the science of acoustics spreads across many facets of human society\u2014music, medicine, architecture, industrial production, warfare and more. Likewise, animal species such as songbirds and frogs use sound and hearing as a key element of mating rituals or for marking territories. Art, craft, science and technology have provoked one another to advance the whole, as in many other fields of knowledge. Robert Bruce Lindsay's \"Wheel of Acoustics\" is a well-accepted overview of the various fields in acoustics.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"acoustic\" is derived from the Greek word scratching (\"acoustic\"), meaning \"of or for hearing, ready to hear\" and that from Christmas (\"acoustic\"), \"heard, audible\", which in turn derives from the verb \u1f00\u03ba\u03bf\u03cd\u03c9(\"akouo\"), \"I hear\".\nThe Latin synonym is \"sonic\", after which the term sonics used to be a synonym for acoustics and later a branch of acoustics. Frequencies above and below the audible range are called \"ultrasonic\" and \"infrasonic\", respectively.\nEarly research in acoustics.\nIn the 6th century BC, the ancient Greek philosopher Pythagoras wanted to know why some combinations of musical sounds seemed more beautiful than others, and he found answers in terms of numerical ratios representing the harmonic overtone series on a string. He is reputed to have observed that when the lengths of vibrating strings are expressible as ratios of integers (e.g. 2 to 3, 3 to 4), the tones produced will be harmonious, and the smaller the integers the more harmonious the sounds. For example, a string of a certain length would sound particularly harmonious with a string of twice the length (other factors being equal). In modern parlance, if a string sounds the note C when plucked, a string twice as long will sound a C an octave lower. In one system of musical tuning, the tones in between are then given by 16:9 for D, 8:5 for E, 3:2 for F, 4:3 for G, 6:5 for A, and 16:15 for B, in ascending order.\nAristotle (384\u2013322 BC) understood that sound consisted of compressions and rarefactions of air which \"falls upon and strikes the air which is next to it...\", a very good expression of the nature of wave motion. \"On Things Heard\", generally ascribed to Strato of Lampsacus, states that the pitch is related to the frequency of vibrations of the air and to the speed of sound.\nIn about 20 BC, the Roman architect and engineer Vitruvius wrote a treatise on the acoustic properties of theaters including a discussion of interference, echoes, and reverberation\u2014the beginnings of architectural acoustics. In Book V of his (\"The Ten Books of Architecture\") Vitruvius describes sound as a wave comparable to a water wave extended to three dimensions, which, when interrupted by obstructions, would flow back and break up following waves. He described the ascending seats in ancient theaters as designed to prevent this deterioration of sound and also recommended bronze vessels (echea) of appropriate sizes be placed in theaters to resonate with the fourth, fifth and so on, up to the double octave, in order to resonate with the more desirable, harmonious notes.\nDuring the Islamic golden age, Ab\u016b Rayh\u0101n al-B\u012br\u016bn\u012b (973\u20131048) is believed to have postulated that the speed of sound was much slower than the speed of light.\nThe physical understanding of acoustical processes advanced rapidly during and after the Scientific Revolution. Mainly Galileo Galilei (1564\u20131642) but also Marin Mersenne (1588\u20131648), independently, discovered the complete laws of vibrating strings (completing what Pythagoras and Pythagoreans had started 2000 years earlier). Galileo wrote \"Waves are produced by the vibrations of a sonorous body, which spread through the air, bringing to the tympanum of the ear a stimulus which the mind interprets as sound\", a remarkable statement that points to the beginnings of physiological and psychological acoustics. Experimental measurements of the speed of sound in air were carried out successfully between 1630 and 1680 by a number of investigators, prominently Mersenne. Inspired by Mersenne's \"Harmonie universelle\" (\"Universal Harmony\") or 1634, the Rome-based Jesuit scholar Athanasius Kircher undertook research in acoustics. Kircher published two major books on acoustics: the \"Musurgia universalis\" (\"Universal Music-Making\") in 1650 and the \"Phonurgia nova\" (\"New Sound-Making\") in 1673. Meanwhile, Newton (1642\u20131727) derived the relationship for wave velocity in solids, a cornerstone of physical acoustics (Principia, 1687).\nAge of Enlightenment and onward.\nSubstantial progress in acoustics, resting on firmer mathematical and physical concepts, was made during the eighteenth century by Euler (1707\u20131783), Lagrange (1736\u20131813), and d'Alembert (1717\u20131783). During this era, continuum physics, or field theory, began to receive a definite mathematical structure. The wave equation emerged in a number of contexts, including the propagation of sound in air.\nIn the nineteenth century the major figures of mathematical acoustics were Helmholtz in Germany, who consolidated the field of physiological acoustics, and Lord Rayleigh in England, who combined the previous knowledge with his own copious contributions to the field in his monumental work \"The Theory of Sound\" (1877). Also in the 19th century, Wheatstone, Ohm, and Henry developed the analogy between electricity and acoustics.\nThe twentieth century saw a burgeoning of technological applications of the large body of scientific knowledge that was by then in place. The first such application was Sabine's groundbreaking work in architectural acoustics, and many others followed. Underwater acoustics was used for detecting submarines in the first World War. Sound recording and the telephone played important roles in a global transformation of society. Sound measurement and analysis reached new levels of accuracy and sophistication through the use of electronics and computing. The ultrasonic frequency range enabled wholly new kinds of application in medicine and industry. New kinds of transducers (generators and receivers of acoustic energy) were invented and put to use.\nDefinition.\nAcoustics is defined by ANSI/ASA S1.1-2013 as \"(a) Science of sound, including its production, transmission, and effects, including biological and psychological effects. (b) Those qualities of a room that, together, determine its character with respect to auditory effects.\"\nThe study of acoustics revolves around the generation, propagation and reception of mechanical waves and vibrations.\nThe steps shown in the above diagram can be found in any acoustical event or process. There are many kinds of causes, both natural and volitional. There are many kinds of transduction processes that convert energy from some other form into sonic energy, producing a sound wave. There is one fundamental equation that describes sound wave propagation, the acoustic wave equation, but the phenomena that emerge from it are varied and often complex. The wave carries energy throughout the propagating medium. Eventually this energy is transduced again into other forms, in ways that again may be natural and/or volitionally contrived. The final effect may be purely physical or it may reach far into the biological or volitional domains. The five basic steps are found equally well whether we are talking about an earthquake, a submarine using sonar to locate its foe, or a band playing in a rock concert.\nThe central stage in the acoustical process is wave propagation. This falls within the domain of physical acoustics. In fluids, sound propagates primarily as a pressure wave. In solids, mechanical waves can take many forms including longitudinal waves, transverse waves and surface waves.\nAcoustics looks first at the pressure levels and frequencies in the sound wave and how the wave interacts with the environment. This interaction can be described as either a diffraction, interference or a reflection or a mix of the three. If several media are present, a refraction can also occur. Transduction processes are also of special importance to acoustics.\nFundamental concepts.\nWave propagation: pressure levels.\nIn fluids such as air and water, sound waves propagate as disturbances in the ambient pressure level. While this disturbance is usually small, it is still noticeable to the human ear. The smallest sound that a person can hear, known as the threshold of hearing, is nine orders of magnitude smaller than the ambient pressure. The loudness of these disturbances is related to the sound pressure level (SPL) which is measured on a logarithmic scale in decibels.\nWave propagation: frequency.\nPhysicists and acoustic engineers tend to discuss sound pressure levels in terms of frequencies, partly because this is how our ears interpret sound. What we experience as \"higher pitched\" or \"lower pitched\" sounds are pressure vibrations having a higher or lower number of cycles per second. In a common technique of acoustic measurement, acoustic signals are sampled in time, and then presented in more meaningful forms such as octave bands or time frequency plots. Both of these popular methods are used to analyze sound and better understand the acoustic phenomenon.\nThe entire spectrum can be divided into three sections: audio, ultrasonic, and infrasonic. The audio range falls between 20 Hz and 20,000\u00a0Hz. This range is important because its frequencies can be detected by the human ear. This range has a number of applications, including speech communication and music. The ultrasonic range refers to the very high frequencies: 20,000\u00a0Hz and higher. This range has shorter wavelengths which allow better resolution in imaging technologies. Medical applications such as ultrasonography and elastography rely on the ultrasonic frequency range. On the other end of the spectrum, the lowest frequencies are known as the infrasonic range. These frequencies can be used to study geological phenomena such as earthquakes.\nAnalytic instruments such as the spectrum analyzer facilitate visualization and measurement of acoustic signals and their properties. The spectrogram produced by such an instrument is a graphical display of the time varying pressure level and frequency profiles that give a specific acoustic signal its defining character.\nTransduction in acoustics.\nA transducer is a device for converting one form of energy into another. In an electroacoustic context, this means converting sound energy into electrical energy (or vice versa). Electroacoustic transducers include loudspeakers, microphones, particle velocity sensors, hydrophones and sonar projectors. These devices convert a sound wave to or from an electric signal. The most widely used transduction principles are electromagnetism, electrostatics and piezoelectricity.\nThe transducers in most common loudspeakers (e.g. woofers and tweeters), are electromagnetic devices that generate waves using a suspended diaphragm driven by an electromagnetic voice coil, sending off pressure waves. Electret microphones and condenser microphones employ electrostatics\u2014as the sound wave strikes the microphone's diaphragm, it moves and induces a voltage change. The ultrasonic systems used in medical ultrasonography employ piezoelectric transducers. These are made from special ceramics in which mechanical vibrations and electrical fields are interlinked through a property of the material itself.\nAcoustician.\nAn acoustician is an expert in the science of sound.\nEducation.\nThere are many types of acousticians, but they usually have a Bachelor's degree or higher qualification. Some possess a degree in acoustics, while others enter the discipline via studies in fields such as physics or engineering. Much work in acoustics requires a good grounding in Mathematics and science. Many acoustic scientists work in research and development. Some conduct basic research to advance our knowledge of the perception (e.g. hearing, psychoacoustics or neurophysiology) of speech, music and noise. Other acoustic scientists advance understanding of how sound is affected as it moves through environments, e.g. underwater acoustics, architectural acoustics or structural acoustics. Other areas of work are listed under subdisciplines below. Acoustic scientists work in government, university and private industry laboratories. Many go on to work in Acoustical Engineering. Some positions, such as Faculty (academic staff) require a Doctor of Philosophy.\nSubdisciplines.\nArchaeoacoustics.\nArchaeoacoustics, also known as the archaeology of sound, is one of the only ways to experience the past with senses other than our eyes. Archaeoacoustics is studied by testing the acoustic properties of prehistoric sites, including caves. Iegor Rezkinoff, a sound archaeologist, studies the acoustic properties of caves through natural sounds like humming and whistling. Archaeological theories of acoustics are focused around ritualistic purposes as well as a way of echolocation in the caves. In archaeology, acoustic sounds and rituals directly correlate as specific sounds were meant to bring ritual participants closer to a spiritual awakening. Parallels can also be drawn between cave wall paintings and the acoustic properties of the cave; they are both dynamic. Because archaeoacoustics is a fairly new archaeological subject, acoustic sound is still being tested in these prehistoric sites today.\nAeroacoustics.\nAeroacoustics is the study of noise generated by air movement, for instance via turbulence, and the movement of sound through the fluid air. This knowledge was applied in the 1920s and '30s to detect aircraft before radar was invented and is applied in acoustical engineering to study how to quieten aircraft. Aeroacoustics is important for understanding how wind musical instruments work.\nAcoustic signal processing.\nAcoustic signal processing is the electronic manipulation of acoustic signals. Applications include: active noise control; design for hearing aids or cochlear implants; echo cancellation; music information retrieval, and perceptual coding (e.g. MP3 or Opus).\nArchitectural acoustics.\nArchitectural acoustics (also known as building acoustics) involves the scientific understanding of how to achieve good sound within a building. It typically involves the study of speech intelligibility, speech privacy, music quality, and vibration reduction in the built environment. Commonly studied environments are hospitals, classrooms, dwellings, performance venues, recording and broadcasting studios. Focus considerations include room acoustics, airborne and impact transmission in building structures, airborne and structure-borne noise control, noise control of building systems and electroacoustic systems.\nBioacoustics.\nBioacoustics is the scientific study of the hearing and calls of animal calls, as well as how animals are affected by the acoustic and sounds of their habitat.\nElectroacoustics.\nThis subdiscipline is concerned with the recording, manipulation and reproduction of audio using electronics. This might include products such as mobile phones, large scale public address systems or virtual reality systems in research laboratories.\nEnvironmental noise and soundscapes.\nEnvironmental acoustics is the study of noise and vibrations, and their impact on structures, objects, humans, and animals.\nThe main aim of these studies is to reduce levels of environmental noise and vibration. Typical work and research within environmental acoustics concerns the development of models used in simulations, measurement techniques, noise mitigation strategies, and the development of standards and regulations. Research work now also has a focus on the positive use of sound in urban environments: soundscapes and tranquility.\nExamples of noise and vibration sources include railways, road traffic, aircraft, industrial equipment and recreational activities.\nMusical acoustics.\nMusical acoustics is the study of the physics of acoustic instruments; the audio signal processing used in electronic music; the computer analysis of music and composition, and the perception and cognitive neuroscience of music.\nPsychoacoustics.\nMany studies have been conducted to identify the relationship between acoustics and cognition, or more commonly known as psychoacoustics, in which what one hears is a combination of perception and biological aspects. The information intercepted by the passage of sound waves through the ear is understood and interpreted through the brain, emphasizing the connection between the mind and acoustics. Psychological changes have been seen as brain waves slow down or speed up as a result of varying auditory stimulus which can in turn affect the way one thinks, feels, or even behaves. This correlation can be viewed in normal, everyday situations in which listening to an upbeat or uptempo song can cause one's foot to start tapping or a slower song can leave one feeling calm and serene. In a deeper biological look at the phenomenon of psychoacoustics, it was discovered that the central nervous system is activated by basic acoustical characteristics of music. By observing how the central nervous system, which includes the brain and spine, is influenced by acoustics, the pathway in which acoustic affects the mind, and essentially the body, is evident.\nSpeech.\nAcousticians study the production, processing and perception of speech. Speech recognition and Speech synthesis are two important areas of speech processing using computers. The subject also overlaps with the disciplines of physics, physiology, psychology, and linguistics.\nStructural Vibration and Dynamics.\nStructural acoustics is the study of motions and interactions of mechanical systems with their environments and the methods of their measurement, analysis, and control. There are several sub-disciplines found within this regime:\nApplications might include: ground vibrations from railways; vibration isolation to reduce vibration in operating theatres; studying how vibration can damage health (vibration white finger); vibration control to protect a building from earthquakes, or measuring how structure-borne sound moves through buildings.\nUltrasonics.\nUltrasonics deals with sounds at frequencies too high to be heard by humans. Specialisms include medical ultrasonics (including medical ultrasonography), sonochemistry, ultrasonic testing, material characterisation and underwater acoustics (sonar).\nUnderwater acoustics.\nUnderwater acoustics is the scientific study of natural and man-made sounds underwater. Applications include sonar to locate submarines, underwater communication by whales, climate change monitoring by measuring sea temperatures acoustically, sonic weapons, and marine bioacoustics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1199", "revid": "33924242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1199", "title": "Angle tribe", "text": ""}
{"id": "1200", "revid": "50674824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1200", "title": "Atomic physics", "text": "Field of physics that studies the atom\nAtomic physics is the field of physics that studies atoms as an isolated system of electrons and an atomic nucleus. Atomic physics typically refers to the study of atomic structure and the interaction between atoms. It is primarily concerned with the way in which electrons are arranged around the nucleus and\nthe processes by which these arrangements change. This comprises ions, neutral atoms and, unless otherwise stated, it can be assumed that the term \"atom\" includes ions.\nThe term \"atomic physics\" can be associated with nuclear power and nuclear weapons, due to the synonymous use of \"atomic\" and \"nuclear\" in standard English. Physicists distinguish between atomic physics\u2014which deals with the atom as a system consisting of a nucleus and electrons\u2014and nuclear physics, which studies nuclear reactions and special properties of atomic nuclei.\nAs with many scientific fields, strict delineation can be highly contrived and atomic physics is often considered in the wider context of atomic, molecular, and optical physics. As a result, atomic physics research groups are usually classified as such.\nIsolated atoms.\nAtomic physics primarily considers atoms in isolation. Atomic models will consist of a single nucleus that may be surrounded by one or more bound electrons. It is not concerned with the formation of molecules (although much of the physics is identical), nor does it examine atoms in a solid state as condensed matter. It is concerned with processes such as ionization and excitation by photons or collisions with atomic particles.\nWhile modelling atoms in isolation may not seem realistic, if one considers atoms in a gas or plasma then the time-scales for atom-atom interactions are huge in comparison to the atomic processes that are generally considered. This means that the individual atoms can be treated as if each were in isolation, as the vast majority of the time they are. By this consideration, atomic physics provides the underlying theory in plasma physics and atmospheric physics, even though both deal with very large numbers of atoms.\nElectronic configuration.\nElectrons form notional shells around the nucleus. These are normally in a ground state but can be excited by the absorption of energy from light (photons), magnetic fields, or interaction with a colliding particle (typically ions or other electrons).\n Electrons that populate a shell are said to be in a bound state. The energy necessary to remove an electron from its shell (taking it to infinity) is called the binding energy. Any quantity of energy absorbed by the electron in excess of this amount is converted to kinetic energy according to the conservation of energy. The atom is said to have undergone the process of ionization.\nIf the electron absorbs a quantity of energy less than the binding energy, it will be transferred to an excited state. After a certain time, the electron in an excited state will \"jump\" (undergo a transition) to a lower state. In a neutral atom, the system will emit a photon of the difference in energy, since energy is conserved.\nIf an inner electron has absorbed more than the binding energy (so that the atom ionizes), then a more outer electron may undergo a transition to fill the inner orbital. In this case, a visible photon or a characteristic X-ray is emitted, or a phenomenon known as the Auger effect may take place, where the released energy is transferred to another bound electron, causing it to go into the continuum. The Auger effect allows one to multiply ionize an atom with a single photon.\nThere are rather strict selection rules as to the electronic configurations that can be reached by excitation by light \u2013however, there are no such rules for excitation by collision processes.\nBohr model of the atom.\nThe Bohr model, proposed by Niels Bohr in 1913, is a revolutionary theory describing the structure of the hydrogen atom. It introduced the idea of quantized orbits for electrons, combining classical and quantum physics.\nHistory and developments.\nOne of the earliest steps towards atomic physics was the recognition that matter was composed\nof \"atoms\". It forms a part of the texts written in 6th century BC to 2nd century BC, such as those of Democritus or \"\" written by . This theory was later developed in the modern sense of the basic unit of a chemical element by the British chemist and physicist John Dalton in the 18th century. At this stage, it was not clear what atoms were, although they could be described and classified by their properties (in bulk). The invention of the periodic system of elements by Dmitri Mendeleev was another great step forward.\nThe true beginning of atomic physics is marked by the discovery of spectral lines and attempts to describe the phenomenon, most notably by Joseph von Fraunhofer. The study of these lines led to the Bohr atom model and to the birth of quantum mechanics. In seeking to explain atomic spectra, an entirely new mathematical model of matter was revealed. As far as atoms and their electron shells were concerned, not only did this yield a better overall description, i.e. the atomic orbital model, but it also provided a new theoretical basis for chemistry\n(quantum chemistry) and spectroscopy.\nSince the Second World War, both theoretical and experimental fields have advanced at a rapid pace. This can be attributed to progress in computing technology, which has allowed larger and more sophisticated models of atomic structure and associated collision processes. Similar technological advances in accelerators, detectors, magnetic field generation and lasers have greatly assisted experimental work.\nBeyond the well-known phenomena which can be described with regular quantum mechanics chaotic processes can occur which need different descriptions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1201", "revid": "19285652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1201", "title": "American Sign Language", "text": "Sign language used predominantly in the US\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAmerican Sign Language (ASL) is a natural language that serves as the predominant sign language of Deaf communities in the United States and most of Anglophone Canada. ASL is a complete and organized visual language that is expressed by employing both manual and nonmanual features. Besides North America, dialects of ASL and ASL-based creoles are used in many countries around the world, including much of West Africa and parts of Southeast Asia. ASL is also widely learned as a second language, serving as a lingua franca. ASL is most closely related to French Sign Language (LSF). It has been proposed that ASL is a creole language of LSF, although ASL shows features atypical of creole languages, such as agglutinative morphology.\nASL originated in the early 19th century in the American School for the Deaf (ASD) in Hartford, Connecticut, from a situation of language contact. Since then, ASL use has been propagated widely by schools for the deaf and deaf community organizations. Despite its wide use, no accurate count of ASL users has been taken. Reliable estimates for American ASL users range from 250,000 to 500,000 persons, including a number of children of deaf adults (CODA) and other hearing individuals.\nSigns in ASL have a number of phonemic components, such as movement of the face, the torso, and the hands. ASL is not a form of pantomime, although iconicity plays a larger role in ASL than in spoken languages. English loan words are often borrowed through fingerspelling, although ASL grammar is unrelated to that of English. ASL has verbal agreement and aspectual marking and has a productive system of forming agglutinative classifiers. Many linguists believe ASL to be a subject\u2013verb\u2013object language. However, there are several other proposals to account for ASL word order.\nClassification.\nASL emerged as a language in the American School for the Deaf (ASD), founded by Thomas Gallaudet in 1817, which brought together Old French Sign Language, various village sign languages, and home sign systems. ASL was created in that situation by language contact. ASL is influenced by its forerunners, yet linguistically distinct.\nThe influence of French Sign Language (LSF) on ASL is readily apparent; for example, it has been found that about 58% of signs in modern ASL are cognate to Old French Sign Language signs. However, that is far less than the standard 80% measure used to determine whether related languages are actually dialects. That suggests nascent ASL was highly affected by the other signing systems brought by the ASD students although the school's original director, Laurent Clerc, taught in LSF. In fact, Clerc reported that he often learned the students' signs rather than conveying LSF:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I see, however, and I say it with regret, that any efforts that we have made or may still be making, to do better than, we have inadvertently fallen somewhat back of Abb\u00e9 de l'\u00c9p\u00e9e. Some of us have learned and still learn signs from uneducated pupils, instead of learning them from well instructed and experienced teachers.\u2014\u200a\nIt has been proposed that ASL is a creole in which LSF is the superstrate language and the native village sign languages are substrate languages. However, more recent research has shown that modern ASL does not share many of the structural features that characterize creole languages. ASL may have begun as a creole and then undergone structural change over time, but it is also possible that it was never a creole-type language. There are modality-specific reasons that signed languages tend towards agglutination, such as the ability to simultaneously convey information via the face, head, torso, and other body parts. That might override creole characteristics such as the tendency towards isolating morphology. Additionally, Clerc and Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet may have used an artificially constructed form of manually coded language in instruction rather than true LSF.\nAlthough the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia share English as a common oral and written language, ASL is not mutually intelligible with either British Sign Language (BSL) or Auslan. All three languages show degrees of borrowing from English, but that alone is not sufficient for cross-language comprehension. It has been found that a relatively high percentage (37\u201344%) of ASL signs have similar translations in Auslan, which for oral languages would suggest that they belong to the same language family. However, that does not seem justified historically for ASL and Auslan, and it is likely that the resemblance is caused by the higher degree of iconicity in sign languages in general as well as contact with English.\nAmerican Sign Language is growing in popularity in many states. Many high school and university students desire to take it as a foreign language, but until recently, it was usually not considered a creditable foreign language elective. ASL users, however, have a very distinct culture, and they interact very differently when they talk. Their facial expressions and hand movements reflect what they are communicating. They also have their own sentence structure, which sets the language apart.\nAmerican Sign Language is now being accepted by many colleges as a language eligible for foreign language course credit; many states are making it mandatory to accept it as such. In some states however, this is only true with regard to high school coursework.\nHistory.\nPrior to the birth of ASL, sign language had been used by various communities in the United States. In the United States, as elsewhere in the world, hearing families with deaf children have historically employed ad hoc home sign, which often reaches much higher levels of sophistication than gestures used by hearing people in spoken conversation. As early as 1541 at first contact by Francisco V\u00e1squez de Coronado, there were reports that the Indigenous peoples of the Great Plains widely spoke a sign language to communicate across vast national and linguistic lines.\nIn the 19th century, a \"triangle\" of village sign languages developed in New England: one in Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts; one in Henniker, New Hampshire, and one in Sandy River Valley, Maine. Martha's Vineyard Sign Language (MVSL), which was particularly important for the history of ASL, was used mainly in Chilmark, Massachusetts. Due to intermarriage in the original community of English settlers of the 1690s, and the recessive nature of genetic deafness, Chilmark had a high 4% rate of genetic deafness. MVSL was used even by hearing residents whenever a deaf person was present, and also in some situations where spoken language would be ineffective or inappropriate, such as during church sermons or between boats at sea.\nASL is thought to have originated in the American School for the Deaf (ASD), founded in Hartford, Connecticut, in 1817. Originally known as \"The American Asylum, At Hartford, For The Education And Instruction Of The Deaf And Dumb\", the school was founded by the Yale graduate and divinity student Thomas Hopkins Gallaudet. Gallaudet, inspired by his success in demonstrating the learning abilities of a young deaf girl Alice Cogswell, traveled to Europe in order to learn deaf pedagogy from European institutions. Ultimately, Gallaudet chose to adopt the methods of the French Institut National de Jeunes Sourds de Paris, and convinced Laurent Clerc, an assistant to the school's founder Charles-Michel de l'\u00c9p\u00e9e, to accompany him back to the United States. Upon his return, Gallaudet founded the ASD on April 15, 1817.\nThe largest group of students during the first seven decades of the school were from Martha's Vineyard, and they brought MVSL with them. There were also 44 students from around Henniker, New Hampshire, and 27 from the Sandy River valley in Maine, each of which had their own village sign language. Other students brought knowledge of their own home signs. Laurent Clerc, the first teacher at ASD, taught using French Sign Language (LSF), which itself had developed in the Parisian school for the deaf established in 1755. From that situation of language contact, a new language emerged, now known as ASL.\nMore schools for the deaf were founded after ASD, and knowledge of ASL spread to those schools. In addition, the rise of Deaf community organizations bolstered the continued use of ASL. Societies such as the National Association of the Deaf and the National Fraternal Society of the Deaf held national conventions that attracted signers from across the country. All of that contributed to ASL's wide use over a large geographical area, atypical of a sign language.\nWhile oralism, an approach to educating deaf students focusing on oral language, had previously been used in American schools, the Milan Congress made it dominant and effectively banned the use of sign languages at schools in the United States and Europe. However, the efforts of Deaf advocates and educators, more lenient enforcement of the Congress's mandate, and the use of ASL in religious education and proselytism ensured greater use and documentation compared to European sign languages, albeit more influenced by fingerspelled loanwords and borrowed idioms from English as students were societally pressured to achieve fluency in spoken language. Nevertheless, oralism remained the predominant method of deaf education up to the 1950s. Linguists did not consider sign language to be true \"language\" but as something inferior. Recognition of the legitimacy of ASL was achieved by William Stokoe, a linguist who arrived at Gallaudet University in 1955 when that was still the dominant assumption. Aided by the Civil Rights Movement of the 1960s, Stokoe argued for manualism, the use of sign language in deaf education. Stokoe noted that sign language shares the important features that oral languages have as a means of communication, and even devised a transcription system for ASL. In doing so, Stokoe revolutionized both deaf education and linguistics. In the 1960s, ASL was sometimes referred to as \"Ameslan\", but that term is now considered obsolete.\nPopulation.\nCounting the number of ASL signers is difficult because ASL users have never been counted by the American census. The ultimate source for current estimates of the number of ASL users in the United States is a report for the National Census of the Deaf Population (NCDP) by Schein and Delk (1974). Based on a 1972 survey of the NCDP, Schein and Delk provided estimates consistent with a signing population between 250,000 and 500,000. The survey did not distinguish between ASL and other forms of signing; in fact, the name \"ASL\" was not yet in widespread use.\nIncorrect figures are sometimes cited for the population of ASL users in the United States based on misunderstandings of known statistics. Demographics of the deaf population have been confused with those of ASL use since adults who become deaf late in life rarely use ASL in the home. That accounts for currently-cited estimations that are greater than 500,000; such mistaken estimations can reach as high as 15,000,000. A 100,000-person lower bound has been cited for ASL users; the source of that figure is unclear, but it may be an estimate of prelingual deafness, which is correlated with but not equivalent to signing.\nASL is sometimes incorrectly cited as the third- or fourth-most-spoken language in the United States. Those figures misquote Schein and Delk (1974), who actually concluded that ASL speakers constituted the third-largest population \"requiring an interpreter in court\". Although that would make ASL the third-most used language among monolinguals other than English, it does not imply that it is the fourth-most-spoken language in the United States since speakers of other languages may also speak English.\nGeographic distribution.\nASL is used throughout Anglo-America. That contrasts with Europe, where a variety of sign languages are used within the same continent. The unique situation of ASL seems to have been caused by the proliferation of ASL through schools influenced by the American School for the Deaf, wherein ASL originated, and the rise of community organizations for the Deaf.\nThroughout West Africa, ASL-based sign languages are signed by educated Deaf adults. Such languages, imported by boarding schools, are often considered by associations to be the official sign languages of their countries and are named accordingly, such as Nigerian Sign Language and Ghanaian Sign Language. Such signing systems are found in Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Liberia, Mauritania, Mali, Nigeria, and Togo. Due to lack of data, it is still an open question how similar those sign languages are to the variety of ASL used in America.\nIn addition to the aforementioned West African countries, ASL is reported to be used as a first language in Barbados, Bolivia, Cambodia (alongside Cambodian Sign Language), the Central African Republic, Chad, China (Hong Kong), the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Jamaica, Kenya, Madagascar, the Philippines, Singapore, and Zimbabwe. ASL is also used as a lingua franca throughout the deaf world, widely learned as a second language.\nRegional variation.\nSign production.\nSign production can often vary according to location. Signers from the South tend to sign with more flow and ease. Native signers from New York have been reported as signing comparatively quicker and sharper. Sign production of native Californian signers has also been reported as being fast. Research on that phenomenon often concludes that the fast-paced production for signers from the coasts could be due to the fast-paced nature of living in large metropolitan areas. That conclusion also supports how the ease with which Southerners sign could be caused by the easygoing environment of the South in comparison to that of the coasts.\nSign production can also vary depending on age and native language. For example, sign production of letters may vary in older signers. Slight differences in finger spelling production can be a signal of age. Additionally, signers who learned American Sign Language as a second language vary in production. For Deaf signers who learned a different sign language before learning American Sign Language, qualities of their native language may show in their ASL production. Some examples of that varied production include fingerspelling towards the body, instead of away from it, and signing certain movement from bottom to top, instead of top to bottom. Hearing people who learn American Sign Language also have noticeable differences in signing production. The most notable production difference of hearing people learning American Sign Language is their rhythm and arm posture.\nSign variants.\nMost popularly, there are variants of the signs for English words such as \"birthday\", \"pizza\", \"Halloween\", \"early\", and \"soon\", just a sample of the most commonly recognized signs with variants based on regional change. The sign for \"school\" is commonly varied between black and white signers; the variants used by black signers are sometimes called Black American Sign Language. Social variation is also found between citation forms and forms used by Deaf gay men for words such as \"pain\" and \"protest\".\nHistory and implications.\nThe prevalence of residential Deaf schools can account for much of the regional variance of signs and sign productions across the United States. Deaf schools often serve students of the state in which the school resides. That limited access to signers from other regions, combined with the residential quality of Deaf Schools promoted specific use of certain sign variants. Native signers did not have much access to signers from other regions during the beginning years of their education. It is hypothesized that because of that seclusion, certain variants of a sign prevailed over others due to the choice of variant used by the student of the school/signers in the community.\nHowever, American Sign Language does not appear to be vastly varied in comparison to other signed languages. That is because when Deaf education was beginning in the United States, many educators flocked to the American School for the Deaf in Hartford, Connecticut, whose central location for the first generation of educators in Deaf education to learn American Sign Language allows ASL to be more standardized than its variant.\nVarieties.\nVarieties of ASL are found throughout the world. There is little difficulty in comprehension among the varieties of the United States and Canada.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Just as there are accents in speech, there are regional accents in sign. People from the South sign slower than people in the North\u2014even people from northern and southern Indiana have different styles.\nMutual intelligibility among those ASL varieties is high, and the variation is primarily lexical. For example, there are three different words for English \"about\" in Canadian ASL; the standard way, and two regional variations (Atlantic and Ontario). Variation may also be phonological, meaning that the same sign may be signed in a different way depending on the region. For example, an extremely common type of variation is between the handshapes /1/, /L/, and /5/ in signs with one handshape.\nThere is also a distinct variety of ASL used by the Black Deaf community. Black ASL evolved as a result of racially segregated schools in some states, which included the residential schools for the deaf. Black ASL differs from standard ASL in vocabulary, phonology, and some grammatical structure. While African American English (AAE) is generally viewed as more innovating than standard English, Black ASL is more conservative than standard ASL, preserving older forms of many signs. Black sign language speakers use more two-handed signs than in mainstream ASL, are less likely to show assimilatory lowering of signs produced on the forehead (e.g. KNOW) and use a wider signing space. Modern Black ASL borrows a number of idioms from AAE; for instance, the AAE idiom \"I feel you\" is calqued into Black ASL.\nASL is used internationally as a lingua franca, and a number of closely related sign languages derived from ASL are used in many different countries. Even so, there have been varying degrees of divergence from standard ASL in those imported ASL varieties. Bolivian Sign Language is reported to be a dialect of ASL, no more divergent than other acknowledged dialects. On the other hand, it is also known that some imported ASL varieties have diverged to the extent of being separate languages. For example, Malaysian Sign Language, which has ASL origins, is no longer mutually comprehensible with ASL and must be considered its own language. For some imported ASL varieties, such as those used in West Africa, it is still an open question how similar they are to American ASL.\nWhen communicating with hearing English speakers, ASL-speakers often use what is commonly called Pidgin Signed English (PSE) or 'contact signing', a blend of English structure with ASL vocabulary. Various types of PSE exist, ranging from highly English-influenced PSE (practically relexified English) to PSE which is quite close to ASL lexically and grammatically, but may alter some subtle features of ASL grammar. Fingerspelling may be used more often in PSE than it is normally used in ASL. There have been some constructed sign languages, known as Manually Coded English (MCE), which match English grammar exactly and simply replace spoken words with signs; those systems are not considered to be varieties of ASL.\nTactile ASL (TASL) is a variety of ASL used throughout the United States by and with the deaf-blind. It is particularly common among those with Usher's syndrome. It results in deafness from birth followed by loss of vision later in life; consequently, those with Usher's syndrome often grow up in the Deaf community using ASL, and later transition to TASL. TASL differs from ASL in that signs are produced by touching the palms, and there are some grammatical differences from standard ASL in order to compensate for the lack of nonmanual signing.\nASL changes over time and from generation to generation. The sign for telephone has changed as the shape of phones and the manner of holding them have changed. The development of telephones with screens has also changed ASL, encouraging the use of signs that can be seen on small screens.\nStigma.\nIn 2013, the White House published a response to a petition that gained over 37,000 signatures to \"officially recognize American Sign Language as a community language and a language of instruction in schools\". The response is titled \"there shouldn't be any stigma about American Sign Language\" and addressed that ASL is a vital language for the Deaf and hard of hearing. Stigmas associated with sign languages and the use of sign for educating children often lead to the absence of sign during periods in children's lives when they can access languages most effectively. Scholars such as Beth S. Benedict advocate not only for bilingualism (using ASL and English training) but also for early childhood intervention for children who are deaf. York University psychologist Ellen Bialystok has also campaigned for bilingualism, arguing that those who are bilingual acquire cognitive skills that may help to prevent dementia later in life.\nMost children born to deaf parents are hearing. Known as CODAs (\"Children of Deaf Adults\"), they are often more culturally Deaf than deaf children, most of whom are born to hearing parents. Unlike many deaf children, CODAs acquire ASL as well as Deaf cultural values and behaviors from birth. Such bilingual hearing children may be mistakenly labeled as being \"slow learners\" or as having \"language difficulties\" because of preferential attitudes towards spoken language.\nWriting systems.\nAlthough there is no well-established writing system for ASL, written sign language dates back almost two centuries. The first systematic writing system for a sign language seems to be that of Roch-Ambroise Auguste B\u00e9bian, developed in 1825. However, written sign language remained marginal among the public. In the 1960s, linguist William Stokoe created Stokoe notation specifically for ASL. It is alphabetic, with a letter or diacritic for every phonemic (distinctive) hand shape, orientation, motion, and position, though it lacks any representation of facial expression, and is better suited for individual words than for extended passages of text. Stokoe used that system for his 1965 \"A Dictionary of American Sign Language on Linguistic Principles\".\nSignWriting, proposed in 1974 by Valerie Sutton, is the first writing system to gain use among the public and the first writing system for sign languages to be included in the Unicode Standard. SignWriting consists of more than 5000 distinct iconic graphs/glyphs. Currently, it is in use in many schools for the Deaf, particularly in Brazil, and has been used in International Sign forums with speakers and researchers in more than 40 countries, including Brazil, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, Tunisia, and the United States. Sutton SignWriting has both a printed and an electronically produced form so that persons can use the system anywhere that oral languages are written (personal letters, newspapers, and media, academic research). The systematic examination of the International Sign Writing Alphabet (ISWA) as an equivalent usage structure to the International Phonetic Alphabet for spoken languages has been proposed. According to some researchers, SignWriting is not a phonemic orthography and does not have a one-to-one map from phonological forms to written forms. That assertion has been disputed, and the process for each country to look at the ISWA and create a phonemic/morphemic assignment of features of each sign language was proposed by researchers Msc. Roberto Cesar Reis da Costa and Madson Barreto in a thesis forum on June 23, 2014. The SignWriting community has an open project on Wikimedia Labs to support the various Wikimedia projects on Wikimedia Incubator and elsewhere involving SignWriting. The ASL Wikipedia request was marked as eligible in 2008 and the test ASL Wikipedia has 50 articles written in ASL using SignWriting.\nThe most widely used transcription system among academics is HamNoSys, developed at the University of Hamburg. Based on Stokoe Notation, HamNoSys was expanded to about 200 graphs in order to allow transcription of any sign language. Phonological features are usually indicated with single symbols, though the group of features that make up a handshape is indicated collectively with a symbol.\nSeveral additional candidates for written ASL have appeared over the years, including SignFont, ASL-phabet, and Si5s.\nFor English-speaking audiences, ASL is often glossed using English words. Such glosses are typically all-capitalized and are arranged in ASL order. For example, the ASL sentence \"DOG NOW CHASE&gt;IX=3 CAT\", meaning \"the dog is chasing the cat\", uses NOW to mark ASL progressive aspect and shows ASL verbal inflection for the third person (\"&gt;IX=3\"). However, glossing is not used to write the language for speakers of ASL.\nPhonology.\nEach sign in ASL is composed of a number of distinctive components, generally referred to as parameters. A sign may use one hand or both. All signs can be described using the five parameters involved in signed languages, which are handshape, movement, palm orientation, location and nonmanual markers. Just as phonemes of sound distinguish meaning in spoken languages, those parameters are the phonemes that distinguish meaning in signed languages like ASL. Changing any one of them may change the meaning of a sign, as illustrated by the ASL signs THINK and DISAPPOINTED:\nThere are also meaningful nonmanual signals in ASL, which may include movement of the eyebrows, the cheeks, the nose, the head, the torso, and the eyes.\nWilliam Stokoe proposed that such components are analogous to the phonemes of spoken languages. There has also been a proposal that they are analogous to classes like place and manner of articulation. As in spoken languages, those phonological units can be split into distinctive features. For instance, the handshapes /2/ and /3/ are distinguished by the presence or absence of the feature [\u00b1 closed thumb], as illustrated to the right. ASL has processes of allophony and phonotactic restrictions. There is ongoing research into whether ASL has an analog of syllables in spoken language.\nGrammar.\nMorphology.\nASL has a rich system of verbal inflection, which involves both grammatical aspect: how the action of verbs flows in time\u2014and agreement marking. Aspect can be marked by changing the manner of movement of the verb; for example, continuous aspect is marked by incorporating rhythmic, circular movement, while punctual aspect is achieved by modifying the sign so that it has a stationary hand position. Verbs may agree with both the subject and the object, and are marked for number and reciprocity. Reciprocity is indicated by using two one-handed signs; for example, the sign SHOOT, made with an L-shaped handshape with inward movement of the thumb, inflects to SHOOT[reciprocal], articulated by having two L-shaped hands \"shooting\" at each other.\nASL has a productive system of classifiers, which are used to classify objects and their movement in space. For example, a rabbit running downhill would use a classifier consisting of a bent V classifier handshape with a downhill-directed path; if the rabbit is hopping, the path is executed with a bouncy manner. In general, classifiers are composed of a \"classifier handshape\" bound to a \"movement root\". The classifier handshape represents the object as a whole, incorporating such attributes as surface, depth, and shape, and is usually very iconic. The movement root consists of a path, a direction and a manner.\nIn linguistics, there are two primary ways of changing the form of a word: derivation and inflection. Derivation involves creating new words by adding something to an existing word, while inflection involves changing the form of a word to convey grammatical information without altering its fundamental meaning or category.\nFor example, adding the suffix \"-ship\" to the noun \"friend\" creates the new word \"friendship\", which has a different meaning than the original word. Inflection, on the other hand, involves modifying a word's form to indicate grammatical features such as tense, number, gender, person, case, and degree of comparison.\nIn American Sign Language (ASL), inflection is conveyed through facial expressions, body movements, and other non-manual markers. For instance, to indicate past tense in ASL, one might sign the present tense of a verb (such as \"walk\"), and then add a facial expression and head tilt to signify that the action occurred in the past (i.e., \"walked\").\nAccording to the book Linguistics of American Sign Language, ASL signs have two main components: hold segments and movement segments. Hold segments consist of hand-shape, location, orientation, and non-manual features, while movement segments possess similar features.\nMorphology is the study of how languages form words by using smaller units to construct larger units. The smallest meaningful unit in a language is known as a \"morpheme\", with some morphemes able to stand alone as independent units (free morphemes), while others must occur with other morphemes (bound morphemes).\nFor example, the plural \"-s\" and third person \"-s\" in English are bound morphemes. In ASL, the 3 handshape in signs like THREE-WEEKS and THREE-MONTHS are also bound morphemes.\nAffixes, which are morphemes added to words to create new words or modify their meanings, are part of the derivational process. For example, in English, prefixes like \"re-\" and suffixes like \"-able\" are affixes. In ASL, affixation can be used to modify the sign for CHAIR to indicate different types of chairs. The inflectional process, on the other hand, adds grammatical information to existing units.\nBy studying morphemes and how they can be combined or modified, linguists gain insight into the underlying structure of language and the creative ways in which it can be used to express meaning. Understanding morphology is essential to understanding how languages are built and how new signs or words can be formed.\nFurthermore, understanding morphology has practical applications in language learning and teaching. For example, teaching students the basic morphological structures of a language can help them to better understand the language's grammar and syntax, and can also aid in their acquisition of new vocabulary.\nIn summary, morphology is an essential component of language and provides valuable insights into the structure and function of languages. By understanding the morphological processes involved in language formation, we can gain a deeper understanding of how languages work and how they can be effectively taught and learned.\nFingerspelling.\nAmerican Sign Language possesses a set of 26 signs known as the American manual alphabet, which can be used to spell out words from the English language. It is rather a representation of the English alphabet, and not a unique alphabet of ASL, although commonly labeled as the \"ASL alphabet\". It is borrowed from French Sign Language (LSF), as much of ASL is derived from LSF. Such signs make use of the 19 handshapes of ASL. For example, the signs for 'p' and 'k' use the same handshape but different orientations. A common misconception is that ASL consists only of fingerspelling; although such a method (Rochester Method) has been used, it is not ASL.\nFingerspelling is a form of borrowing, a linguistic process wherein words from one language are incorporated into another. In ASL, fingerspelling is used for proper nouns and for technical terms with no native ASL equivalent. There are also some other loan words which are fingerspelled, either very short English words or abbreviations of longer English words, e.g. \"O-N\" from English 'on', and \"A-P-T\" from English 'apartment'. Fingerspelling may also be used to emphasize a word that would normally be signed otherwise.\nSyntax.\nASL is a subject\u2013verb\u2013object (SVO) language, but various phenomena affect that basic word order. Basic SVO sentences are signed without any pauses:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, other word orders may also occur since ASL allows the topic of a sentence to be moved to sentence-initial position, a phenomenon known as topicalization. In object\u2013subject\u2013verb (OSV) sentences, the object is topicalized, marked by a forward head-tilt and a pause:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBesides, word orders can be obtained through the phenomenon of subject copy in which the subject is repeated at the end of the sentence, accompanied by head nodding for clarification or emphasis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nASL also allows null subject sentences whose subject is implied, rather than stated explicitly. Subjects can be copied even in a null subject sentence, and the subject is then omitted from its original position, yielding a verb\u2013object\u2013subject (VOS) construction:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTopicalization, accompanied with a null subject and a subject copy, can produce yet another word order, object\u2013verb\u2013subject (OVS).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThose properties of ASL allow it a variety of word orders, leading many to question which is the true, underlying, \"basic\" order. There are several other proposals that attempt to account for the flexibility of word order in ASL. One proposal is that languages like ASL are best described with a topic\u2013comment structure whose words are ordered by their importance in the sentence, rather than by their syntactic properties. Another hypothesis is that ASL exhibits free word order, in which syntax is not encoded in word order but can be encoded by other means such as head nods, eyebrow movement, and body position.\nIconicity.\nCommon misconceptions are that signs are iconically self-explanatory, that they are a transparent imitation of what they mean, or even that they are pantomime. In fact, many signs bear no resemblance to their referent because they were originally arbitrary symbols, or their iconicity has been obscured over time. Even so, in ASL iconicity plays a significant role; a high percentage of signs resemble their referents in some way. That may be because the medium of sign, three-dimensional space, naturally allows more iconicity than oral language.\nIn the era of the influential linguist Ferdinand de Saussure, it was assumed that the mapping between form and meaning in language must be completely arbitrary. Although onomatopoeia is a clear exception, since words like \"choo-choo\" bear clear resemblance to the sounds that they mimic, the Saussurean approach was to treat them as marginal exceptions. ASL, with its significant inventory of iconic signs, directly challenges that theory.\nResearch on acquisition of pronouns in ASL has shown that children do not always take advantage of the iconic properties of signs when they interpret their meaning. It has been found that when children acquire the pronoun \"you\", the iconicity of the point (at the child) is often confused, being treated more like a name. That is a similar finding to research in oral languages on pronoun acquisition. It has also been found that iconicity of signs does not affect immediate memory and recall; less iconic signs are remembered just as well as highly-iconic signs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1202", "revid": "1315799604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1202", "title": "Applet", "text": "Small software application\nIn computing, an applet is any small application that performs one specific task that runs within the scope of a dedicated widget engine or a larger program, often as a plug-in. The term is frequently used to refer to a Java applet, a program written in the Java programming language that is designed to be placed on a web page. Applets are typical examples of transient and auxiliary applications that do not monopolize the user's attention. Applets are not full-featured application programs, and are intended to be easily accessible.\nHistory.\nThe word \"applet\" was first used in 1990 in \"PC Magazine\". However, the concept of an applet, or more broadly a small interpreted program downloaded and executed by the user, dates at least to RFC 5 (1969) by Jeff Rulifson, which described the Decode-Encode Language, which was designed to allow remote use of the oN-Line System over ARPANET, by downloading small programs to enhance the interaction. This has been specifically credited as a forerunner of Java's downloadable programs in RFC 2555.\nApplet as an extension of other software.\nIn some cases, an applet does not run independently. These applets must run either in a container provided by a host program, through a plugin, or a variety of other applications including mobile devices that support the applet programming model.\nWeb-based applets.\nApplets were used to provide interactive features to web applications that historically could not be provided by HTML alone. They could capture mouse input and also had controls like buttons or check boxes. In response to the user action, an applet could change the provided graphic content. This made applets well suited for demonstration, visualization, and teaching. There were online applet collections for studying various subjects, from physics to heart physiology. Applets were also used to create online game collections that allowed players to compete against live opponents in real-time.\nAn applet could also be a text area only, providing, for instance, a cross-platform command-line interface to some remote system. If needed, an applet could leave the dedicated area and run as a separate window. However, applets had very little control over web page content outside the applet dedicated area, so they were less useful for improving the site appearance in general (while applets like news tickers or WYSIWYG editors are also known). Applets could also play media in formats that are not natively supported by the browser.\nHTML pages could embed parameters that were passed to the applet. Hence, the same applet could appear differently depending on the parameters that were passed.\nExamples of Web-based applets include:\nApplet versus subroutine.\nA larger application distinguishes its applets through several features:\nJava applets.\nA Java applet is a Java program that is launched from HTML and run in a web browser. It takes code from server and run in a web browser. It can provide web applications with interactive features that cannot be provided by HTML. Since Java's bytecode is platform-independent, Java applets can be executed by browsers running under many platforms, including Windows, Unix, macOS, and Linux. When a Java technology-enabled web browser processes a page that contains an applet, the applet's code is transferred to the client's system and executed by the browser's Java virtual machine. An HTML page references an applet either via the deprecated codice_1 tag or via its replacement, the codice_2 tag.\nSecurity.\nRecent developments in the coding of applications, including mobile and embedded systems, have led to the awareness of the security of applets.\nOpen platform applets.\nApplets in an open platform environment should provide secure interactions between different applications. A compositional approach can be used to provide security for open platform applets. Advanced compositional verification methods have been developed for secure applet interactions.\nJava applets.\nA Java applet contains different security models: unsigned Java applet security, signed Java applet security, and self-signed Java applet security.\nWeb-based applets.\nIn an applet-enabled web browser, many methods can be used to provide applet security for malicious applets. A malicious applet can infect a computer system in many ways, including denial of service, invasion of privacy, and annoyance. A typical solution for malicious applets is to make the web browser to monitor applets' activities. This will result in a web browser that will enable the manual or automatic stopping of malicious applets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1203", "revid": "50991461", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1203", "title": "Alternate history", "text": "Fictional genre where historical events occur differently\nAlternate history (also called alternative history, allohistory, althist, or simply A.H.) is a subgenre of speculative fiction in which one or more historical events have occurred but are resolved differently than in real history. As conjecture based upon historical fact, alternate history stories propose \"what if?\" scenarios about pivotal events in human history, and present outcomes very different from the historical record. Some alternate histories are considered a subgenre of science fiction, or historical fiction.\nSince the 1950s, as a subgenre of science fiction, some alternative history stories have featured the tropes of time travel between histories, the psychic awareness of the existence of an alternative universe by the inhabitants of a given universe, and time travel that divides history into various timestreams.\nDefinition.\nOften described as a subgenre of science fiction, alternative history is a genre of fiction wherein the author speculates upon how the course of history might have been altered if a particular historical event had an outcome different from the real life outcome. An alternative history requires three conditions: (i) A point of divergence from the historical record, before the time in which the author is writing; (ii) A change that would alter known history; and (iii) An examination of the ramifications of that alteration to history. Occasionally, some types of genre fiction are misidentified as \"alternative history\", specifically science fiction stories set in what was then the future, but is now the past. Examples include the novels \"\" (1968) by Arthur C. Clarke and \"1984\" (1949) by George Orwell, as well as the movie \"2012\" (2009). None of these stories present an alternative history of events before the time of writing.\nSimilar to the genre of alternative history, there is also the genre of secret history - which can be either fictional or non-fictional - which documents events that might have occurred in history, but which had no effect upon the recorded historical outcome. Alternative history also is thematically related to, but distinct from, counterfactual history, which is a form of historiography that explores historical events in an extrapolated timeline in which key historical events either did not occur or had an outcome different from the historical record, in order to understand what did happen.\nHistory of literature.\nAntiquity and medieval.\nThe earliest example of alternative (or counterfactual) history is found in Livy's \"Ab Urbe Condita Libri\" (book IX, sections 17\u201319). Livy contemplated an alternative 4th century BC in which Alexander the Great had survived to attack Europe as he had planned; asking, \"What would have been the results for Rome if she had been engaged in a war with Alexander?\" Livy concluded that the Romans would likely have defeated Alexander. An even earlier possibility is Herodotus's \"Histories\", which contains speculative material.\nAnother example of counterfactual history was posited by cardinal and Doctor of the Church Peter Damian in the 11th century. In his famous work \"De Divina Omnipotentia\", a long letter in which he discusses God's omnipotence, he treats questions related to the limits of divine power, including the question of whether God can change the past, for example, bringing about that Rome was never founded:I see I must respond finally to what many people, on the basis of your holiness's [own] judgment, raise as an objection on the topic of this dispute. For they say: If, as you assert, God is omnipotent in all things, can he manage this, that things that have been made were not made? He can certainly destroy all things that have been made, so that they do not exist now. But it cannot be seen how he can bring it about that things that have been made were not made. To be sure, it can come about that from now on and hereafter Rome does not exist; for it can be destroyed. But no opinion can grasp how it can come about that it was not founded long ago...One early work of fiction detailing an alternate history is Joanot Martorell's 1490 epic romance \"Tirant lo Blanch\", which was written when the fall of Constantinople to the Turks was still a recent and traumatic memory for Christian Europe. It tells the story of the knight Tirant the White from Brittany who travels to the embattled remnants of the Byzantine Empire. He becomes a Megaduke and commander of its armies and manages to fight off the invading Ottoman armies of Mehmet II. He saves the city from Islamic conquest, and even chases the Turks deeper into lands they had previously conquered.\n19th century.\nOne of the earliest works of alternate history published in large quantities for the reception of a large audience may be Louis Geoffroy's \"Histoire de la Monarchie universelle : Napol\u00e9on et la conqu\u00eate du monde (1812\u20131832)\" () (1836), which imagines Napoleon's First French Empire emerging victorious in the French invasion of Russia in 1812 and in an invasion of England in 1814, later unifying the world under Bonaparte's rule.\n\"The Book of Mormon\" (published 1830) is described as an \"alternative history\" by Richard Lyman Bushman, a biographer of Joseph Smith. Smith claimed to have translated the document from golden plates, which told the story of a Jewish group who migrated from Israel to the Americas and inhabited the region from about 600 B.C. to 400 A.D., becoming the ancestors of Native Americans. In the 2005 biography \"\", Bushman wrote that the \"Book of Mormon\" \"turned American history upside down [and] works on the premise that a history\u2014a book\u2014can reconstitute a nation. It assumes that by giving a nation an alternative history, alternative values can be made to grow.\"\nIn the English language, the first known complete alternate history may be Nathaniel Hawthorne's short story \"P.'s Correspondence\", published in 1845. It recounts the tale of a man who is considered \"a madman\" due to his perceptions of a different 1845, a reality in which long-dead famous people, such as the poets Robert Burns, Lord Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley, and John Keats, the actor Edmund Kean, the British politician George Canning, and Napoleon Bonaparte, are still alive.\nThe first novel-length alternate history in English would seem to be Castello Holford's \"Aristopia\" (1895). While not as nationalistic as Geoffroy's \"Napol\u00e9on et la conqu\u00eate du monde, 1812\u20131823\", \"Aristopia\" is another attempt to portray a Utopian society. In \"Aristopia\", the earliest settlers in Virginia discover a reef made of solid gold and are able to build a Utopian society in North America.\nEarly 20th century and the era of the pulps.\nIn 1905, H. G. Wells published \"A Modern Utopia\". As explicitly noted in the book itself, Wells's main aim in writing it was to set out his social and political ideas, the plot serving mainly as a vehicle to expound them. This book introduced the idea of a person being transported from a point in our familiar world to the precise geographical equivalent point in an alternate world in which history had gone differently. The protagonists undergo various adventures in the alternate world, and then are finally transported back to our world, again to the precise geographical equivalent point. Since then, that has become a staple of the alternate history genre.\nA number of alternate history stories and novels appeared in the late 19th and early 20th centuries (see, for example, Joseph Edgar Chamberlin's \"\" [1907] and Charles Petrie's \"If: A Jacobite Fantasy\" [1926]). In 1931, British historian Sir John Squire collected a series of essays from some of the leading historians of the period for his anthology \"If It Had Happened Otherwise\". In that work, scholars from major universities, as well as important non-academic authors, turned their attention to such questions as \"If the Moors in Spain Had Won\" and \"If Louis XVI Had Had an Atom of Firmness\". The essays range from serious scholarly efforts to Hendrik Willem van Loon's fanciful and satiric portrayal of an independent 20th-century New Amsterdam, a Dutch city-state on the island of Manhattan. Among the authors included were Hilaire Belloc, Andr\u00e9 Maurois, and Winston Churchill.\nOne of the entries in Squire's volume was Churchill's \"If Lee Had Not Won the Battle of Gettysburg\", written from the viewpoint of a historian in a world in which the Confederacy had won the American Civil War. The entry considers what would have happened if the North had been victorious (in other words, a character from an alternate world imagines a world more like the real one we live in, although it is not identical in every detail). Speculative work that narrates from the point of view of an alternate history is variously known as \"recursive alternate history\", a \"double-blind what-if\", or an \"alternate-alternate history\". Churchill's essay was one of the influences behind Ward Moore's alternate history novel \"Bring the Jubilee\" in which General Robert E. Lee won the Battle of Gettysburg and paved the way for the eventual victory of the Confederacy in the American Civil War (named the \"War of Southron Independence\" in this timeline). The protagonist, the autodidact Hodgins Backmaker, travels back to the aforementioned battle and inadvertently changes history, which results in the emergence of our own timeline and the consequent victory of the Union instead.\nThe American humorist author James Thurber parodied alternate history stories about the American Civil War in his 1930 story \"If Grant Had Been Drinking at Appomattox\", which he accompanied with this very brief introduction: \"\"Scribner's\" magazine is publishing a series of three articles: 'If Booth Had Missed Lincoln', 'If Lee Had Won the Battle of Gettysburg', and 'If Napoleon Had Escaped to America'. This is the fourth\".\nAnother example of alternate history from this period (and arguably the first that explicitly posited cross-time travel from one universe to another as anything more than a visionary experience) is H.G. Wells' \"Men Like Gods\" (1923) in which the London-based journalist Mr. Barnstable, along with two cars and their passengers, is mysteriously teleported into \"another world\", which the \"Earthlings\" call Utopia. Being far more advanced than Earth, Utopia is some 3000 years ahead of humanity in its development. Wells describes a multiverse of alternative worlds, complete with the paratime travel machines that would later become popular with American pulp writers. However, since his hero experiences only a single alternate world, the story is not very different from conventional alternate history.\nIn the 1930s, alternate history moved into a new arena. The December 1933 issue of \"Astounding\" published Nat Schachner's \"Ancestral Voices\", which was quickly followed by Murray Leinster's \"Sidewise in Time\" (1934). While earlier alternate histories examined reasonably-straightforward divergences, Leinster attempted something completely different. In his \"World gone mad\", pieces of Earth traded places with their analogs from different timelines. The story follows Professor Minott and his students from a fictitious Robinson College as they wander through analogues of worlds that followed a different history. \"Sidewise in Time\" has been described as \"the point at which the alternate history narrative first enters science fiction as a plot device\" and is the story for which the Sidewise Award for Alternate History is named.\nA somewhat similar approach was taken by Robert A. Heinlein in his 1941 novelette \"Elsewhen\" in which a professor trains his mind to move his body across timelines. He then hypnotizes his students so that they can explore more of them. Eventually, each settles into the reality that is most suitable for him or her. Some of the worlds they visit are mundane, some are very odd, and others follow science fiction or fantasy conventions.\nWorld War II produced alternate history for propaganda: both British and American authors wrote works depicting Nazi invasions of their respective countries as cautionary tales.\nTime travel to create historical divergences.\nThe period around World War II also saw the publication of the time travel novel \"Lest Darkness Fall\" by L. Sprague de Camp in which an American academic travels to Italy at the time of the Byzantine invasion of the Ostrogoths. De Camp's time traveler, Martin Padway, is depicted as making permanent historical changes and implicitly forming a new time branch, thereby making the work an alternate history.\nIn William Tenn's short story \"Brooklyn Project\" (1948), a tyrannical US Government brushes aside the warnings of scientists about the dangers of time travel and goes on with a planned experiment - with the result that minor changes to the prehistoric past cause Humanity to never have existed, its place taken by tentacled underwater intelligent creatures - who also have a tyrannical government which also insists on experimenting with time-travel.\nIn Ray Bradbury's classic short story \"A Sound of Thunder\" (1952) a group of hunters travel to the Late Cretaceous to hunt dinosaurs whose death would not be considered consequential as they are about to die a natural death within two minutes of the encounter. To minimize risking changes history they are told to stay on a levitating antigravity path that touches nothing. However one of the hunters stumbles off the path, inadvertently crushing a butterfly. When the group returns they find that history became significantly harsher and a fascist is now President.\nTime travel as the cause of a point of divergence (POD), which can denote either the bifurcation of a historical timeline or a simple replacement of the future that existed before the time-travelling event, has continued to be a popular theme. In Ward Moore's \"Bring the Jubilee\" (1953), the protagonist lives in an alternate history in which the Confederacy has won the American Civil War. He travels backward through time and brings about a Union victory at the Battle of Gettysburg.\nWhen a story's assumptions about the nature of time travel lead to the complete replacement of the visited time's future, rather than just the creation of an additional time line, the device of a \"time patrol\" is often used where guardians move through time to preserve the \"correct\" history.\nA more recent example is \"Making History\" by Stephen Fry in which a time machine is used to alter history so that Adolf Hitler was never born. That ironically results in a more competent leader of Nazi Germany and results in the country's ascendancy and longevity in the altered timeline.\nQuantum theory of many worlds.\nWhile many justifications for alternate histories involve a multiverse, the \"many world\" theory would naturally involve many worlds, in fact a continually exploding array of universes. In quantum theory, new worlds would proliferate with every quantum event, and even if the writer uses human decisions, every decision that could be made differently would result in a different timeline. A writer's fictional multiverse may, in fact, preclude some decisions as humanly impossible, as when, in \"Night Watch\", Terry Pratchett depicts a character informing Vimes that while anything that can happen, has happened, nevertheless there is no history whatsoever in which Vimes has ever murdered his wife. When the writer explicitly maintains that \"all\" possible decisions are made in all possible ways, one possible conclusion is that the characters were neither brave, nor clever, nor skilled, but simply lucky enough to happen on the universe in which they did not choose the cowardly route, take the stupid action, fumble the crucial activity, etc.; few writers focus on this idea, although it has been explored in stories such as Larry Niven's story \"All the Myriad Ways\", where the reality of all possible universes leads to an epidemic of suicide and crime because people conclude their choices have no moral import.\nIn any case, even if it is true that every possible outcome occurs in some world, it can still be argued that traits such as bravery and intelligence might still affect the relative frequency of worlds in which better or worse outcomes occurred (even if the total number of worlds with each type of outcome is infinite, it is still possible to assign a different measure to different infinite sets). The physicist David Deutsch, a strong advocate of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, has argued along these lines, saying that \"By making good choices, doing the right thing, we thicken the stack of universes in which versions of us live reasonable lives. When you succeed, all the copies of you who made the same decision succeed too. What you do for the better increases the portion of the multiverse where good things happen.\" This view is perhaps somewhat too abstract to be explored directly in science fiction stories, but a few writers have tried, such as Greg Egan in his short story \"The Infinite Assassin\", where an agent is trying to contain reality-scrambling \"whirlpools\" that form around users of a certain drug, and the agent is constantly trying to maximize the consistency of behavior among his alternate selves, attempting to compensate for events and thoughts he experiences, he guesses are of low measure relative to those experienced by most of his other selves.\nMany writers\u2014perhaps the majority\u2014avoid the discussion entirely. In one novel of this type, H. Beam Piper's \"Lord Kalvan of Otherwhen\", a Pennsylvania State Police officer, who knows how to make gunpowder, is transported from our world to an alternate universe where the recipe for gunpowder is a tightly held secret and saves a country that is about to be conquered by its neighbors. The paratime patrol members are warned against going into the timelines immediately surrounding it, where the country \"will\" be overrun, but the book never depicts the slaughter of the innocent thus entailed, remaining solely in the timeline where the country is saved.\nThe cross-time theme was further developed in the 1960s by Keith Laumer in the first three volumes of his \"Imperium\" sequence, which would be completed in \"Zone Yellow\" (1990). Piper's politically more sophisticated variant was adopted and adapted by Michael Kurland and Jack Chalker in the 1980s; Chalker's \"G.O.D. Inc\" trilogy (1987\u201389), featuring paratime detectives Sam and Brandy Horowitz, marks the first attempt at merging the paratime thriller with the police procedural. Kurland's \"Perchance\" (1988), the first volume of the never-completed \"Chronicles of Elsewhen\", presents a multiverse of secretive cross-time societies that utilize a variety of means for cross-time travel, ranging from high-tech capsules to mutant powers. Crosstime Traffic is a 6-book series written by Harry Turtledove aimed at teenagers featuring a variant of H. Beam Piper's paratime trading empire. While the home timeline appears to be the same in each of the books there is no overlap in characters or repetition of the alternative worlds.\nRival paratime worlds.\nThe concept of a cross-time version of a world war, involving rival paratime empires, was developed in Fritz Leiber's Change War series, starting with the Hugo Award winning \"The Big Time\" (1958); followed by Richard C. Meredith's \"Timeliner\" trilogy in the 1970s, Michael McCollum's \"A Greater Infinity\" (1982) and John Barnes' \"Timeline Wars\" trilogy in the 1990s.\nSuch \"paratime\" stories may include speculation that the laws of nature can vary from one universe to the next, providing a science fictional explanation\u2014or veneer\u2014for what is normally fantasy. Aaron Allston's \"Doc Sidhe\" and \"Sidhe Devil\" take place between our world, the \"grim world\" and an alternate \"fair world\" where the Sidhe retreated to. Although technology is clearly present in both worlds, and the \"fair world\" parallels our history, about fifty years out of step, there is functional magic in the fair world. Even with such explanation, the more explicitly the alternate world resembles a normal fantasy world, the more likely the story is to be labelled fantasy, as in Poul Anderson's \"House Rule\" and \"Loser's Night\". In both science fiction and fantasy, whether a given parallel universe is an alternate history may not be clear. The writer might allude to a POD only to explain the existence and make no use of the concept, or may present the universe without explanation of its existence.\nMajor writers explore alternate histories.\nIsaac Asimov's short story \"What If\u2014\" (1952) is about a couple who can explore alternate realities by means of a television-like device. This idea can also be found in Asimov's novel \"The End of Eternity\" (1955), in which the \"Eternals\" can change the realities of the world, without people being aware of it. Poul Anderson's \"Time Patrol\" stories feature conflicts between forces intent on changing history and the Patrol who work to preserve it. One story, Delenda Est, describes a world in which Carthage triumphed over the Roman Republic. \"The Big Time\", by Fritz Leiber, describes a Change War ranging across all of history.\nKeith Laumer's \"Worlds of the Imperium\" is one of the earliest alternate history novels; it was published by \"Fantastic Stories of the Imagination\" in 1961, in magazine form, and reprinted by Ace Books in 1962 as one half of an Ace Double. Besides our world, Laumer describes a world ruled by an Imperial aristocracy formed by the merger of European empires, in which the American Revolution never happened, and a third world in post-war chaos ruled by the protagonist's doppelganger.\nPhilip K. Dick's novel, \"The Man in the High Castle\" (1962), is an alternate history in which Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan won World War II. This book contains an example of \"alternate-alternate\" history, in that one of its characters authored a book depicting a reality in which the Allies won the war, itself divergent from real-world history in several aspects. The several characters live within a divided United States, in which the Empire of Japan takes the Pacific states, governing them as a puppet, Nazi Germany takes the East Coast of the United States and parts of the Midwest, with the remnants of the old United States' government as the Neutral Zone, a buffer state between the two superpowers. The book has inspired an Amazon series of the same name.\nVladimir Nabokov's novel, \"\" (1969), is a story of incest that takes place within an alternate North America settled in part by Czarist Russia and that borrows from Dick's idea of \"alternate-alternate\" history (the world of Nabokov's hero is wracked by rumors of a \"counter-earth\" that apparently is ours). Some critics believe that the references to a counter-earth suggest that the world portrayed in \"Ada\" is a delusion in the mind of the hero (another favorite theme of Dick's novels). Strikingly, the characters in \"Ada\" seem to acknowledge their own world as the copy or negative version, calling it \"Anti-Terra\", while its mythical twin is the real \"Terra\". Like history, science has followed a divergent path on Anti-Terra: it boasts all the same technology as our world, but all based on water instead of electricity; e.g., when a character in \"Ada\" makes a long-distance call, all the toilets in the house flush at once to provide hydraulic power.\nGuido Morselli described the defeat of Italy (and subsequently France) in World War I in his novel, \"Past Conditional\" (1975; ), wherein the static Alpine front line which divided Italy from Austria during that war collapses when the Germans and the Austrians forsake trench warfare and adopt blitzkrieg twenty years in advance.\nKingsley Amis set his novel, \"The Alteration\" (1976), in the 20th century, but major events in the Reformation did not take place, and Protestantism is limited to the breakaway Republic of New England. Martin Luther was reconciled to the Roman Catholic Church and later became Pope Germanian I.\nIn Nick Hancock and Chris England's 1997 book \"What Didn't Happen Next: An Alternative History of Football\" it is suggested that, had Gordon Banks been fit to play in the 1970 FIFA World Cup quarter-final, there would have been no Thatcherism and the post-war consensus would have continued indefinitely.\nKim Stanley Robinson's novel, \"The Years of Rice and Salt\" (2002), starts at the point of divergence with Timur turning his army away from Europe, and the Black Death has killed 99% of Europe's population, instead of only a third. Robinson explores world history from that point in AD 1405 (807 AH) to about AD 2045 (1467 AH). Rather than following the great man theory of history, focusing on leaders, wars, and major events, Robinson writes more about social history, similar to the Annales School of history theory and Marxist historiography, focusing on the lives of ordinary people living in their time and place.\nPhilip Roth's novel, \"The Plot Against America\" (2004), looks at an America where Franklin D. Roosevelt is defeated in 1940 in his bid for a third term as President of the United States, and Charles Lindbergh is elected, leading to a US that features increasing fascism and anti-Semitism.\nMichael Chabon, occasionally an author of speculative fiction, contributed to the genre with his novel \"The Yiddish Policemen's Union\" (2007), which explores a world in which the State of Israel was destroyed in its infancy and many of the world's Jews instead live in a small strip of Alaska set aside by the US government for Jewish settlement. The story follows a Jewish detective solving a murder case in the Yiddish-speaking semi-autonomous city state of Sitka. Stylistically, Chabon borrows heavily from the noir and detective fiction genres, while exploring social issues related to Jewish history and culture. Apart from the alternate history of the Jews and Israel, Chabon also plays with other common tropes of alternate history fiction; in the book, Germany actually loses the war even \"harder\" than they did in reality, getting hit with a nuclear bomb instead of just simply losing a ground war (subverting the common \"what if Germany won WWII?\" trope).\nContemporary alternate history in popular literature.\nThe late 1980s and the 1990s saw a boom in popular-fiction versions of alternate history, fueled by the emergence of the prolific alternate history author Harry Turtledove, as well as the development of the steampunk genre and two series of anthologies\u2014the \"What Might Have Been\" series edited by Gregory Benford and the \"Alternate ...\" series edited by Mike Resnick. This period also saw alternate history works by S. M. Stirling, Kim Stanley Robinson, Harry Harrison, Howard Waldrop, Peter Tieryas, and others.\nIn 1986, a sixteen-part epic comic book series called \"Captain Confederacy\" began examining a world where the Confederate States of America won the American Civil War. In the series, the Captain and others heroes are staged government propaganda events featuring the feats of these superheroes.\nSince the late 1990s, Harry Turtledove has been the most prolific practitioner of alternate history and has been given the title \"Master of Alternate History\" by some. His books include those of Timeline 191 (a.k.a. Southern Victory, also known as TL-191), in which, while the Confederate States of America won the American Civil War, the Union and Imperial Germany defeat the Entente Powers in the two \"Great War\"s of the 1910s and 1940s (with a Nazi-esque Confederate government attempting to exterminate its black population), and the Worldwar series, in which aliens invaded Earth during World War II. Other stories by Turtledove include \"A Different Flesh\", in which the Americas were not populated from Asia during the last ice age; \"In the Presence of Mine Enemies\", in which the Nazis won World War II; and \"Ruled Britannia\", in which the Spanish Armada succeeded in conquering England in the Elizabethan era, with William Shakespeare being given the task of writing the play that will motivate the Britons to rise up against their Spanish conquerors. He also co-authored a book with actor Richard Dreyfuss, \"The Two Georges\", in which the United Kingdom retained the American colonies, with George Washington and King George III making peace. He did a two-volume series in which the Japanese not only bombed Pearl Harbor but also invaded and occupied the Hawaiian Islands.\nPerhaps the most incessantly explored theme in popular alternate history focuses on the aftermath of an Axis victory in World War II. In some versions, the Nazis and/or Axis powers win; or in others, they conquer most of the world but a \"Fortress America\" exists under siege; while in others, there is a Nazi/Japanese Cold War comparable to the US/Soviet equivalent in 'our' timeline. \"Fatherland\" (1992), by Robert Harris, is set in Europe following the Nazi victory. The novel \"Dominion\" by C.J. Sansom (2012) is similar in concept but is set in England, with Churchill the leader of an anti-German Resistance and other historic persons in various fictional roles. In the Mecha Samurai Empire series (2016), Peter Tieryas focuses on the Asian-American side of the alternate history, exploring an America ruled by the Japanese Empire while integrating elements of Asian pop culture like mechas and videogames.\nSeveral writers have posited points of departure for such a world but then have injected time splitters from the future. For instance James P. Hogan's \"The Proteus Operation\". Norman Spinrad wrote \"The Iron Dream\" in 1972, which is intended to be a science fiction novel written by Adolf Hitler after fleeing from Europe to North America in the 1920s.\nIn Jo Walton's \"Small Change\" series, the United Kingdom made peace with Hitler before the involvement of the United States in World War II, and slowly collapses due to severe economic depression. Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and William R. Forstchen have written a novel, \"1945\", in which the US defeated Japan but not Germany in World War II, resulting in a Cold War with Germany rather than the Soviet Union. Gingrich and Forstchen neglected to write the promised sequel; instead, they wrote a trilogy about the American Civil War, starting with \"\", in which the Confederates win a victory at the Battle of Gettysburg - however, after Lincoln responds by bringing Grant and his forces to the eastern theater, the Army of Northern Virginia is soon trapped and destroyed in Maryland, and the war ends within weeks.\nWhile World War II has been a common point of divergence in alternate history literature, several works have been based on other points of divergence. For example, Martin Cruz Smith, in his first novel, posited an independent American Indian nation following the defeat of Custer in \"The Indians Won\" (1970). Beginning with \"The Probability Broach\" in 1980, L. Neil Smith wrote several novels that postulated the disintegration of the US Federal Government after Albert Gallatin joins the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794 and eventually leads to the creation of a libertarian utopia. In the 2022 novel \"Poutine and Gin\" by Steve Rhinelander, the point of divergence is the Battle of the Plains of Abraham of the French and Indian War. That novel is a mystery set in 1940 of that time line.\nA recent time traveling splitter variant involves entire communities being shifted elsewhere to become the unwitting creators of new time branches. These communities are transported from the present (or the near-future) to the past or to another timeline via a natural disaster, the action of technologically advanced aliens, or a human experiment gone wrong. S. M. Stirling wrote the \"Island in the Sea of Time\" trilogy, in which Nantucket Island and all its modern inhabitants are transported to Bronze Age times to become the world's first superpower. In Eric Flint's \"1632\" series, a small town in West Virginia is transported to 17th century central Europe and drastically changes the course of the Thirty Years' War, which was then underway. John Birmingham's \"Axis of Time\" trilogy deals with the culture shock when a United Nations naval task force from 2021 finds itself back in 1942 helping the Allies against the Empire of Japan and the Germans (and doing almost as much harm as good in spite of its advanced weapons). The series also explores the cultural impacts of people with 2021 ideals interacting with 1940s culture. Similarly, Robert Charles Wilson's \"Mysterium\" depicts a failed US government experiment which transports a small American town into an alternative version of the US run by Gnostics, who are engaged in a bitter war with the \"Spanish\" in Mexico (the chief scientist at the laboratory where the experiment occurred is described as a Gnostic, and references to Christian Gnosticism appear repeatedly in the book).\nAlthough not dealing in physical time travel, in his alt-history novel \"Marx Returns\", Jason Barker introduces anachronisms into the life and times of Karl Marx, such as when his wife Jenny sings a verse from the Sex Pistols's song \"Anarchy in the U.K.\", or in the games of chess she plays with the Marxes' housekeeper Helene Demuth, which on one occasion involves a Caro\u2013Kann Defence. In her review of the novel, Nina Power writes of \"Jenny's 'utopian' desire for an end to time\", an attitude which, according to Power, is inspired by her husband's co-authored book \"The German Ideology\". However, in keeping with the novel's anachronisms, the latter was not published until 1932. By contrast, the novel's timeline ends in 1871.\nIn the 2022 novel \"Hydrogen Wars: Atomic Sunrise\" by R.M. Christianson, a small change in post-war Japanese history leads to the election of General Douglas MacArthur as President of the United States. This minor change ultimately leads to all-out atomic war between the major Cold War powers.\nThrough crowdfunding on Kickstarter, Alan Jenkins and Gan Golan produced a graphic novel series called \"1/6\" depicting a dystopian alternate reality in which the January 6 United States Capitol attack was successful. What follows is the burning down of the Capitol building and the hanging of Vice President Mike Pence. Under Donald Trump's second term as president, a solid gold statue of him is erected and armed thugs patrol the streets of Washington, D.C. suppressing civilian resistance with brutal violence under the banner of the Confederate flag.\nIn fantasy genre.\nMany works of straight fantasy and science fantasy take place in historical settings, though with the addition of, for example, magic or mythological beasts. Some present a secret history in which the modern day world no longer believes that these elements ever existed. Many ambiguous alternate/secret histories are set in Renaissance or pre-Renaissance times, and may explicitly include a \"retreat\" from the world, which would explain the current absence of such phenomena. Other stories make plan a divergence of some kind.\nIn Poul Anderson's \"Three Hearts and Three Lions\" in which the Matter of France is history and the fairy folk are real and powerful. The same author's \"A Midsummer Tempest\" occurs in a world in which the plays of William Shakespeare (called here \"the Great Historian\"), presented the literal truth in every instance. The novel itself takes place in the era of Oliver Cromwell and Charles I. Here, the English Civil War had a different outcome, and the Industrial Revolution has occurred early.\nRandall Garrett's \"Lord Darcy\" series presents a point of divergence: a monk systemizes magic rather than science, so the use of foxglove to treat heart disease is regarded as superstition. Another point of divergence occurs in 1199, when Richard the Lionheart survives the Siege of Chaluz and returns to England and makes the Angevin Empire so strong that it survives into the 20th century.\n\"Jonathan Strange &amp; Mr Norrell\" by Susanna Clarke takes place in an England where a separate Kingdom ruled by the Raven King and founded on magic existed in Northumbria for over 300 years. In Patricia Wrede's Regency fantasies, Great Britain has a Royal Society of Wizards.\n\"The Tales of Alvin Maker\" series by Orson Scott Card (a parallel to the life of Joseph Smith, founder of the Latter Day Saint movement) takes place in an alternate America, beginning in the early 19th century. Prior to that time, a POD occurred: England, under the rule of Oliver Cromwell, had banished \"makers\", or anyone else demonstrating \"knacks\" (an ability to perform seemingly supernatural feats) to the North American continent. Thus the early American colonists embraced these gifts as perfectly ordinary, and counted on them as a part of their daily lives. The political division of the continent is considerably altered, with two large English colonies bookending a smaller \"American\" nation, one aligned with England, and the other governed by exiled Cavaliers. Actual historical figures are seen in a much different light: Ben Franklin is revered as the continent's finest \"maker\", George Washington was executed after being captured, and \"Tom\" Jefferson is the first president of \"Appalachia\", the result of a compromise between the Continentals and the British Crown.\nOn the other hand, when the \"Old Ones\" (fairies) still manifest themselves in England in Keith Roberts's \"Pavane\", which takes place in a technologically backward world after a Spanish assassination of Elizabeth I allowed the Spanish Armada to conquer England, the possibility that the fairies were real but retreated from modern advances makes the POD possible: the fairies really were present all along, in a secret history.\nAgain, in the English Renaissance fantasy \"Armor of Light\" by Melissa Scott and Lisa A. Barnett, the magic used in the book, by Dr. John Dee and others, actually was practiced in the Renaissance; positing a secret history of effective magic makes this an alternate history with a point of departure. Sir Philip Sidney survives the Battle of Zutphen in 1586, and shortly thereafter saving the life of Christopher Marlowe.\nWhen the magical version of our world's history is set in contemporary times, the distinction becomes clear between alternate history on the one hand and contemporary fantasy, using in effect a form of secret history (as when Josepha Sherman's \"Son of Darkness\" has an elf living in New York City, in disguise) on the other. In works such as Robert A. Heinlein's \"Magic, Incorporated\" where a construction company can use magic to rig up stands at a sporting event and Poul Anderson's \"Operation Chaos\" and its sequel \"Operation Luna\", where djinns are serious weapons of war\u2014with atomic bombs\u2014the use of magic throughout the United States and other modern countries makes it clear that this is not secret history\u2014although references in \"Operation Chaos\" to degaussing the effects of cold iron make it possible that it is the result of a POD. The sequel clarifies this as the result of a collaboration of Einstein and Planck in 1901, resulting in the theory of \"rhea tics\". Henry Moseley applies this theory to \"degauss the effects of cold iron and release the goetic forces.\" This results in the suppression of ferromagnetism and the re-emergence of magic and magical creatures.\nAlternate history shades off into other fantasy subgenres when the use of actual, though altered, history and geography decreases, although a culture may still be clearly the original source; Barry Hughart's \"Bridge of Birds\" and its sequels take place in a fantasy world, albeit one clearly based on China, and with allusions to actual Chinese history, such as the Empress Wu. Richard Garfinkle's \"Celestial Matters\" incorporates ancient Chinese physics and Greek Aristotelian physics, using them as if factual.\nAlternate history has long been a staple of Japanese speculative fiction with such authors as Futaro Yamada and Ry\u014d Hanmura writing novels set in recognizable historical settings with added supernatural or science fiction elements. Ry\u014d Hanmura's 1973 \"Musubi no Yama Hiroku\" which recreated 400 years of Japan's history from the perspective of a secret magical family with psychic abilities. The novel has since come to be recognized as a masterpiece of Japanese speculative fiction. Twelve years later, author Hiroshi Aramata wrote the groundbreaking \"Teito Monogatari\" which reimagined the history of Tokyo across the 20th century in a world heavily influenced by the supernatural.\nDisney's \"Pirates of the Caribbean\" series takes place in an alternate history. The filmmakers of ' made no secret about taking liberties with the time period in which their story takes place. Producer Jerry Bruckheimer explained that the film is a fantasy, but did want to be true to the overall feel of the era, paying particular attention to the years between 1720 and 1750 \"in an effort to find an approximation.\" Director Gore Verbinski asserted that it takes place \"roughly at the tail end of the Golden Age of Piracy, when the Morgans lived. Maybe the late 1720s.\" The crew went to great lengths to maintain authenticity, such as Jack Sparrow's sword being an original that dates from the 1750s. Ann C. Crispin knew about the Pirates universe being an alternate history writing the prequel novel ', with Disney's instructions for Crispin being to \"stick to historical fact, unless it conflicts with established Pirates of the Caribbean continuity.\" Crispin made a faithful effort to do this, having done plenty of research, with \"Under the Black Flag\" by David Cordingly being one of the four pirate-related books she found herself using the most consistently. According to production designer John Myhre, the filmmakers of the fourth film, ', picked the date of 1750, or in the range of the mid-1700s. The film also featured Blackbeard, based on the historical figure and an element retained from the novel \"On Stranger Tides\" by Tim Powers. The history prior to \"On Stranger Tides\" is also slightly different from real-world history, with Blackbeard's death at Ocracoke Inlet in 1718 was considered a legend in the film, with Jack Sparrow saying he was beheaded, and that his headless body swam three times around his ship before climbing back on board. The fifth film, ', also took place in the 1750s, with an early draft taking place sometime the Seven Years' War.\nTelevision.\n\"1983\" is set on a world where the Iron Curtain never fell and the Cold War continues until the present (2003).\n\"An Englishman's Castle\" tells the story of the writer of a soap opera in a 1970s England which lost World War II. England is run by a collaborator government which strains to maintain a normal appearance of British life. Slowly, however, the writer begins to uncover the truth.\nIn the \"Community\" episode \"Remedial Chaos Theory,\" each of the six members of the study group rolls a die to decide who has to go downstairs to accept a pizza delivery for the group, creating 6 different alternative worlds. Characters from the worst universe, \"darkest timeline,\" would later appear in the \"prime universe\".\n\"Confederate\" was a planned HBO series set on a world where the south won the US Civil War. Social media backlash during pre-production led to the series being cancelled with no episodes produced.\n\"Counterpart\" tells of a United Nations agency that is responsible for monitoring passage between alternative worlds. Two of the worlds, Alpha and Prime, are locked in a cold war.\n\"The Court-Martial of George Armstrong Custer\" is a 1977 telemovie where George Custer survives the Battle of Little Bighorn and faces a court martial hearing over his incompetence.\n\"\" presents itself as a British TV documentary uncovering some of the dark secrets of the Confederacy on a world where the south won the US Civil War.\n\"Dark Skies\" tells that much of history having been shaped since the 1940s by a government conspiracy with aliens. One race of aliens can take over humans, while those immune to the alien's control fight back.\n\"Doctor Who\"'s main character has visited two alternative worlds in the TV show and several in its spin off media. The Third Doctor visits a world with a fascist Great Britain on the brink of destruction in \"Inferno\", while the Tenth Doctor visits a Britain that has a President and blimps are a common form of transportation beset by Cybermen in \"Rise of the Cybermen\" / \"The Age of Steel\". The Seventh Doctor faces a threat from an alternative world in \"Battlefield\", where magic is real and the alternative version of The Doctor is hinted to be that reality's Merlin.\n\"The Fallout franchise\" shows a 1950s retro-futuristic world that suffers a global nuclear war which destroys much of the globe. \n\"Fatherland\" is a TV movie set in a 1960 alternative world where US President Joseph Kennedy and Adolf Hitler have agreed to meet to discuss an end to their country's Cold War 15 years after the Axis victory in World War II. However, an American reporter has discovered proof of the long denied Final Solution threatens the meeting.\nThe anime \"\" featured an alternate 18th century.\n\"For All Mankind\" depicts an alternate timeline in which the Soviet crewed lunar program successfully lands on the Moon before the US Apollo program, resulting in a continued and intensified Space Race.\n\"Fringe\" has the father of one of the main characters cross into another reality to steal that world's version of his son after his son dies. The second world has a slightly different history, with a few different states in the United States, such as only one Carolina and Upper Michigan as a state. In addition, the 9/11 attack didn't take down the Twin Towers but the White House. Also, several major DC Comics events are different, such as Superman not Supergirl dying during \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\". The incursion to steal the son has many negative effects on that world, and while the realities start out as antagonist, they eventually work together to repair the damage.\n\"The Man in the High Castle,\" an adaptation of the novel of the same name, showed a world where the Axis Powers won World War II.\n\"\" explores a female-dominated world in which witchcraft is real. Its world diverged from our timeline when the Salem witch trials are resolved by an agreement between witches and ungifted humans.\n\"Noughts + Crosses\" is a British TV show set on a world where a powerful West African empire colonizes Europe 700 years before the start of the series.\n\"Parallels\" was a planned TV show whose pilot was later released as a Netflix movie. The plot concerns a building which can shift realities every 36 hours and those who use the building to travel to other realities.\n\"The Plot Against America\" is an HBO miniseries where Charles Lindbergh wins the 1940 US presidential election as an anti-war candidate who moves the country toward fascism.\nPrimal features Spear and Fang from the Prehistoric encountering with Ancient Egypt and Vikings era, and in episode The Primal Theory where Charles Darwin is alive in 1890 instead of 1882.\nThe TV show \"Sliders\" explores different possible alternate realities by having the protagonist \"slide\" into different parallel dimensions of the same planet Earth.\n\"The Great Martian War 1913-1917\" is an alternate history mockumentary where giant martians with machines invaded the Earth during WW1, causing huge technological upgrades and the entente and central powers fighting alongside each other.\n\"SS-GB\" shows a world where the Axis powers quickly win World War II, killing Churchill and installing a puppet government. However, British resistance fights back.\nIn the various \"Star Trek\" TV shows and spin off media a Mirror Universe has been encountered where Earth has an empire that subjugates other planets. Doppelg\u00e4ngers of the main cast of many the TV shows appear in that reality.\nThe \"Watchmen\" series is set on a world where costumed heroes were initially welcomed but later outlawed. It is set 34 years after the events of the comic book on which the series shares a name.\nThe Marvel Cinematic Universe series, \"Loki\" (2021 &amp; 2023), on Disney+, shows an agency which prevents alterations to the timeline. Alternate versions of Loki from various universes appear.\nThe Marvel Cinematic Universe series, \"What If...?\" (2021\u20132024), on Disney+, shows alternate universes that depict alternate events from the MCU films.\nOnline.\nFans of alternate history have made use of the internet from a very early point to showcase their own works and provide useful tools for those fans searching for anything alternate history, first in mailing lists and usenet groups, later in web databases and forums. The \"Usenet Alternate History List\" was first posted on 11 April 1991, to the Usenet newsgroup rec.arts.sf-lovers. In May 1995, the dedicated newsgroup \"soc.history.what-if\" was created for showcasing and discussing alternate histories. Its prominence declined with the general migration from unmoderated usenet to moderated web forums, most prominently AlternateHistory.com, the self-described \"largest gathering of alternate history fans on the internet\" with over 10,000 active members.\nIn addition to these discussion forums, in 1997 was created as an online repository, now containing over 2,900 alternate history novels, stories, essays, and other printed materials in several different languages. Uchronia was selected as the Sci Fi Channel's \"Sci Fi Site of the Week\" twice.\nUchronia.\nIn Spanish, French, German, Portuguese, Italian, Catalan, and Galician, the words ', ', and \"\" are native versions of \"alternate history\", from which comes the English loanword \"uchronia\". The English term \"uchronia\" is a neologism that is sometimes used in its original meaning as a straightforward synonym for \"alternate history.\" However, it may also now refer to other concepts, namely an umbrella genre of fiction that encompasses alternate history, parallel universes in fiction, and fiction based in futuristic or non-temporal settings.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1205", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1205", "title": "Atomic orbitals", "text": ""}
{"id": "1206", "revid": "18481282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1206", "title": "Atomic orbital", "text": "Function describing an electron in an atom\nIn quantum mechanics, an atomic orbital () is a function describing the location and wave-like behavior of an electron in an atom. This function describes an electron's charge distribution around the atom's nucleus, and can be used to calculate the probability of finding an electron in a specific region around the nucleus.\nEach orbital in an atom is characterized by a set of values of three quantum numbers n, \u2113, and m\u2113, which respectively correspond to an electron's energy, its orbital angular momentum, and its orbital angular momentum projected along a chosen axis (magnetic quantum number). The orbitals with a well-defined magnetic quantum number are generally complex-valued. Real-valued orbitals can be formed as linear combinations of m\u2113 and \u2212m\u2113 orbitals, and are often labeled using associated harmonic polynomials (e.g., \"xy\", \"x\"2 \u2212 \"y\"2) which describe their angular structure.\nAn orbital can be occupied by a maximum of two electrons, each with its own projection of spin formula_1. The simple names s orbital, p orbital, d orbital, and f orbital refer to orbitals with angular momentum quantum number \"\u2113\" = 0, 1, 2, and 3 respectively. These names, together with their n values, are used to describe electron configurations of atoms. They are derived from description by early spectroscopists of certain series of alkali metal spectroscopic lines as sharp, principal, diffuse, and fundamental. Orbitals for \"\u2113\" &gt; 3 continue alphabetically (g, h, i, k, ...), omitting\u00a0j because some languages do not distinguish between letters \"i\" and \"j\".\nAtomic orbitals are basic building blocks of the atomic orbital model (or electron cloud or wave mechanics model), a modern framework for visualizing submicroscopic behavior of electrons in matter. In this model, the electron cloud of an atom may be seen as being built up (in approximation) in an electron configuration that is a product of simpler hydrogen-like atomic orbitals. The repeating \"periodicity\" of blocks of 2, 6, 10, and 14 elements within sections of the periodic table arises naturally from the total number of electrons that occupy a complete set of s, p, d, and f orbitals, respectively, though for higher values of quantum number n, particularly when the atom bears a positive charge, energies of certain sub-shells become very similar and therefore, the order in which they are said to be populated by electrons (e.g., Cr = [Ar]4s13d5 and Cr2+ = [Ar]3d4) can be rationalized only somewhat arbitrarily.\nElectron properties.\nWith the development of quantum mechanics and experimental findings (such as the two slit diffraction of electrons), it was found that the electrons orbiting a nucleus could not be fully described as particles, but needed to be explained by wave\u2013particle duality. In this sense, electrons have the following properties:\nWave-like properties:\nParticle-like properties:\nThus, electrons cannot be described simply as solid particles. An analogy might be that of a large and often oddly shaped \"atmosphere\" (the electron), distributed around a relatively tiny planet (the nucleus). Atomic orbitals exactly describe the shape of this \"atmosphere\" only when one electron is present. When more electrons are added, the additional electrons tend to more evenly fill in a volume of space around the nucleus so that the resulting collection (\"electron cloud\") tends toward a generally spherical zone of probability describing the electron's location, because of the uncertainty principle.\nOne should remember that these orbital 'states', as described here, are merely eigenstates of an electron in its orbit. An actual electron exists in a superposition of states, which is like a weighted average, but with complex number weights. For instance, an electron could be in a pure eigenstate (2, 1, 0), or a mixed state (2, 1, 0) + formula_2 (2, 1, 1), or even the mixed state (2, 1, 0) + formula_2 (2, 1, 1). For each eigenstate, a property has an eigenvalue. Therefore, for the three states just mentioned, the value of formula_4 is 2, and the value of formula_5 is 1. For the second and third states, the value for formula_6 is a superposition of 0 and 1. As a superposition of states, it is ambiguous\u2014either exactly 0 or exactly 1\u2014not an intermediate or average value like the fraction . A superposition of eigenstates (2, 1, 1) and (3, 2, 1) would have an ambiguous formula_4 and formula_5, but formula_6 would definitely be 1. Eigenstates make it easier to deal with the math. You can choose a different basis of eigenstates by superimposing eigenstates from any other basis (see Real orbitals below).\nFormal quantum mechanical definition.\nAtomic orbitals may be defined more precisely in formal quantum mechanical language. They are approximate solutions to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the electrons bound to the atom by the electric field of the atom's nucleus. Specifically, in quantum mechanics, the state of an atom, i.e., an eigenstate of the atomic Hamiltonian, is approximated by an expansion (see configuration interaction expansion and basis set) into linear combinations of anti-symmetrized products (Slater determinants) of one-electron functions. The spatial components of these one-electron functions are called atomic orbitals. (When one considers also their spin component, one speaks of atomic spin orbitals.) A state is actually a function of the coordinates of all the electrons, so that their motion is correlated, but this is often approximated by this independent-particle model of products of single electron wave functions. (The London dispersion force, for example, depends on the correlations of the motion of the electrons.)\nIn atomic physics, the atomic spectral lines correspond to transitions (quantum leaps) between quantum states of an atom. These states are labeled by a set of quantum numbers summarized in the term symbol and usually associated with particular electron configurations, i.e., by occupation schemes of atomic orbitals (for example, 1s2\u00a02s2\u00a02p6 for the ground state of neon-term symbol: 1S0).\nThis notation means that the corresponding Slater determinants have a clear higher weight in the configuration interaction expansion. The atomic orbital concept is therefore a key concept for visualizing the excitation process associated with a given transition. For example, one can say for a given transition that it corresponds to the excitation of an electron from an occupied orbital to a given unoccupied orbital. Nevertheless, one has to keep in mind that electrons are fermions ruled by the Pauli exclusion principle and cannot be distinguished from each other. Moreover, it sometimes happens that the configuration interaction expansion converges very slowly and that one cannot speak about simple one-determinant wave function at all. This is the case when electron correlation is large.\nFundamentally, an atomic orbital is a one-electron wave function, even though many electrons are not in one-electron atoms, and so the one-electron view is an approximation. When thinking about orbitals, we are often given an orbital visualization heavily influenced by the Hartree\u2013Fock approximation, which is one way to reduce the complexities of molecular orbital theory.\nTypes of orbital.\nAtomic orbitals can be the hydrogen-like \"orbitals\" which are exact solutions to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for a hydrogen-like \"atom\" (i.e., atom with one electron). Alternatively, atomic orbitals refer to functions that depend on the coordinates of one electron (i.e., orbitals) but are used as starting points for approximating wave functions that depend on the simultaneous coordinates of all the electrons in an atom or molecule. The coordinate systems chosen for orbitals are usually spherical coordinates (\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\") in atoms and Cartesian (\"x\",\u2009\"y\",\u2009\"z\") in polyatomic molecules. The advantage of spherical coordinates here is that an orbital wave function is a product of three factors each dependent on a single coordinate: \"\u03c8\"(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\") = \"R\"(\"r\")\u2009\u0398(\"\u03b8\")\u2009\u03a6(\"\u03c6\"). The angular factors of atomic orbitals \u0398(\"\u03b8\")\u2009\u03a6(\"\u03c6\") generate s, p, d, etc. functions as real combinations of spherical harmonics \"Y\"\"\u2113m\"(\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\") (where \u2113 and m are quantum numbers). There are typically three mathematical forms for the radial functions\u00a0\"R\"(\"r\") which can be chosen as a starting point for the calculation of the properties of atoms and molecules with many electrons:\nAlthough hydrogen-like orbitals are still used as pedagogical tools, the advent of computers has made STOs preferable for atoms and diatomic molecules since combinations of STOs can replace the nodes in hydrogen-like orbitals. Gaussians are typically used in molecules with three or more atoms. Although not as accurate by themselves as STOs, combinations of many Gaussians can attain the accuracy of hydrogen-like orbitals.\nHistory.\nThe term \"orbital\" was introduced by Robert S. Mulliken in 1932 as short for \"one-electron orbital wave function\". Niels Bohr explained around 1913 that electrons might revolve around a compact nucleus with definite angular momentum. Bohr's model was an improvement on the 1911 explanations of Ernest Rutherford, that of the electron moving around a nucleus. Japanese physicist Hantaro Nagaoka published an orbit-based hypothesis for electron behavior as early as 1904. These theories were each built upon new observations starting with simple understanding and becoming more correct and complex. Explaining the behavior of these electron \"orbits\" was one of the driving forces behind the development of quantum mechanics.\nEarly models.\nWith J. J. Thomson's discovery of the electron in 1897, it became clear that atoms were not the smallest building blocks of nature, but were rather composite particles. The newly discovered structure within atoms tempted many to imagine how the atom's constituent parts might interact with each other. Thomson theorized that multiple electrons revolve in orbit-like rings within a positively charged jelly-like substance, and between the electron's discovery and 1909, this \"plum pudding model\" was the most widely accepted explanation of atomic structure.\nShortly after Thomson's discovery, Hantaro Nagaoka predicted a different model for electronic structure. Unlike the plum pudding model, the positive charge in Nagaoka's \"Saturnian Model\" was concentrated into a central core, pulling the electrons into circular orbits reminiscent of Saturn's rings. Few people took notice of Nagaoka's work at the time, and Nagaoka himself recognized a fundamental defect in the theory even at its conception, namely that a classical charged object cannot sustain orbital motion because it is accelerating and therefore loses energy due to electromagnetic radiation. Nevertheless, the Saturnian model turned out to have more in common with modern theory than any of its contemporaries.\nBohr atom.\nIn 1909, Ernest Rutherford discovered that the bulk of the atomic mass was tightly condensed into a nucleus, which was also found to be positively charged. It became clear from his analysis in 1911 that the plum pudding model could not explain atomic structure. In 1913, Rutherford's post-doctoral student, Niels Bohr, proposed a new model of the atom, wherein electrons orbited the nucleus with classical periods, but were permitted to have only discrete values of angular momentum, quantized in units \u0127. This constraint automatically allowed only certain electron energies. The Bohr model of the atom fixed the problem of energy loss from radiation from a ground state (by declaring that there was no state below this), and more importantly explained the origin of spectral lines.\nAfter Bohr's use of Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect to relate energy levels in atoms with the wavelength of emitted light, the connection between the structure of electrons in atoms and the emission and absorption spectra of atoms became an increasingly useful tool in the understanding of electrons in atoms. The most prominent feature of emission and absorption spectra (known experimentally since the middle of the 19th century), was that these atomic spectra contained discrete lines. The significance of the Bohr model was that it related the lines in emission and absorption spectra to the energy differences between the orbits that electrons could take around an atom. This was, however, \"not\" achieved by Bohr through giving the electrons some kind of wave-like properties, since the idea that electrons could behave as matter waves was not suggested until eleven years later. Still, the Bohr model's use of quantized angular momenta and therefore quantized energy levels was a significant step toward the understanding of electrons in atoms, and also a significant step towards the development of quantum mechanics in suggesting that quantized restraints must account for all discontinuous energy levels and spectra in atoms.\nWith de Broglie's suggestion of the existence of electron matter waves in 1924, and for a short time before the full 1926 Schr\u00f6dinger equation treatment of hydrogen-like atoms, a Bohr electron \"wavelength\" could be seen to be a function of its momentum; so a Bohr orbiting electron was seen to orbit in a circle at a multiple of its half-wavelength. The Bohr model for a short time could be seen as a classical model with an additional constraint provided by the 'wavelength' argument. However, this period was immediately superseded by the full three-dimensional wave mechanics of 1926. In our current understanding of physics, the Bohr model is called a semi-classical model because of its quantization of angular momentum, not primarily because of its relationship with electron wavelength, which appeared in hindsight a dozen years after the Bohr model was proposed.\nThe Bohr model was able to explain the emission and absorption spectra of hydrogen. The energies of electrons in the \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01, 2, 3, etc. states in the Bohr model match those of current physics. However, this did not explain similarities between different atoms, as expressed by the periodic table, such as the fact that helium (two electrons), neon (10 electrons), and argon (18 electrons) exhibit similar chemical inertness. Modern quantum mechanics explains this in terms of electron shells and subshells which can each hold a number of electrons determined by the Pauli exclusion principle. Thus the \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01 state can hold one or two electrons, while the \"n\" = 2 state can hold up to eight electrons in 2s and 2p subshells. In helium, all \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01 states are fully occupied; the same is true for \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a01 and \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a02 in neon. In argon, the 3s and 3p subshells are similarly fully occupied by eight electrons; quantum mechanics also allows a 3d subshell but this is at higher energy than the 3s and 3p in argon (contrary to the situation for hydrogen) and remains empty.\nModern conceptions and connections to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.\nImmediately after Heisenberg discovered his uncertainty principle, Bohr noted that the existence of any sort of wave packet implies uncertainty in the wave frequency and wavelength, since a spread of frequencies is needed to create the packet itself. In quantum mechanics, where all particle momenta are associated with waves, it is the formation of such a wave packet which localizes the wave, and thus the particle, in space. In states where a quantum mechanical particle is bound, it must be localized as a wave packet, and the existence of the packet and its minimum size implies a spread and minimal value in particle wavelength, and thus also momentum and energy. In quantum mechanics, as a particle is localized to a smaller region in space, the associated compressed wave packet requires a larger and larger range of momenta, and thus larger kinetic energy. Thus the binding energy to contain or trap a particle in a smaller region of space increases without bound as the region of space grows smaller. Particles cannot be restricted to a geometric point in space, since this would require infinite particle momentum.\nIn chemistry, Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Linus Pauling, Mulliken and others noted that the consequence of Heisenberg's relation was that the electron, as a wave packet, could not be considered to have an exact location in its orbital. Max Born suggested that the electron's position needed to be described by a probability distribution which was connected with finding the electron at some point in the wave-function which described its associated wave packet. The new quantum mechanics did not give exact results, but only the probabilities for the occurrence of a variety of possible such results. Heisenberg held that the path of a moving particle has no meaning if we cannot observe it, as we cannot with electrons in an atom.\nOrbital names.\nOrbital notation and subshells.\nOrbitals have been given names, which are usually given in the form:\nformula_12\nwhere \"X\" is the energy level corresponding to the principal quantum number n; type is a lower-case letter denoting the shape or subshell of the orbital, corresponding to the angular momentum quantum number\u00a0\u2113.\nFor example, the orbital 1s (pronounced as the individual numbers and letters: \"'one' 'ess'\") is the lowest energy level (\"n\" = 1) and has an angular quantum number of \"\u2113\" = 0, denoted as s. Orbitals with \"\u2113\" = 1, 2 and 3 are denoted as p, d and f respectively.\nThe set of orbitals for a given n and \u2113 is called a \"subshell\", denoted \nformula_13. \nThe superscript y shows the number of electrons in the subshell. For example, the notation 2p4 indicates that the 2p subshell of an atom contains 4 electrons. This subshell has 3 orbitals, each with n = 2 and \u2113 = 1.\nX-ray notation.\nThere is also another, less common system still used in X-ray science known as X-ray notation, which is a continuation of the notations used before orbital theory was well understood. In this system, the principal quantum number is given a letter associated with it. For \"n\" = 1,\u20092,\u20093,\u20094,\u20095,\u2009..., the letters associated with those numbers are K, L, M, N, O, ... respectively.\nHydrogen-like orbitals.\nThe simplest atomic orbitals are those that are calculated for systems with a single electron, such as the hydrogen atom. An atom of any other element ionized down to a single electron (He+, Li2+, etc.) is very similar to hydrogen, and the orbitals take the same form. In the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for this system of one negative and one positive particle, the atomic orbitals are the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian operator for the energy. They can be obtained analytically, meaning that the resulting orbitals are products of a polynomial series, and exponential and trigonometric functions. (see hydrogen atom).\nFor atoms with two or more electrons, the governing equations can be solved only with the use of methods of iterative approximation. Orbitals of multi-electron atoms are \"qualitatively\" similar to those of hydrogen, and in the simplest models, they are taken to have the same form. For more rigorous and precise analysis, numerical approximations must be used.\nA given (hydrogen-like) atomic orbital is identified by unique values of three quantum numbers: n, \u2113, and m\u2113. The rules restricting the values of the quantum numbers, and their energies (see below), explain the electron configuration of the atoms and the periodic table.\nThe stationary states (quantum states) of a hydrogen-like atom are its atomic orbitals. However, in general, an electron's behavior is not fully described by a single orbital. Electron states are best represented by time-depending \"mixtures\" (linear combinations) of multiple orbitals. See Linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital method.\nThe quantum number n first appeared in the Bohr model where it determines the radius of each circular electron orbit. In modern quantum mechanics however, n determines the mean distance of the electron from the nucleus; all electrons with the same value of \"n\" lie at the same average distance. For this reason, orbitals with the same value of \"n\" are said to comprise a \"shell\". Orbitals with the same value of \"n\" and also the same value of\u00a0\u2113 are even more closely related, and are said to comprise a \"subshell\".\nQuantum numbers.\nBecause of the quantum mechanical nature of the electrons around a nucleus, atomic orbitals can be uniquely defined by a set of integers known as quantum numbers. These quantum numbers occur only in certain combinations of values, and their physical interpretation changes depending on whether real or complex versions of the atomic orbitals are employed.\nComplex orbitals.\nIn physics, the most common orbital descriptions are based on the solutions to the hydrogen atom, where orbitals are given by the product between a radial function and a pure spherical harmonic. The quantum numbers, together with the rules governing their possible values, are as follows:\nThe principal quantum number n describes the energy of the electron and is always a positive integer. In fact, it can be any positive integer, but for reasons discussed below, large numbers are seldom encountered. Each atom has, in general, many orbitals associated with each value of \"n\"; these orbitals together are sometimes called \"electron shells\".\nThe azimuthal quantum number \u2113 describes the orbital angular momentum of each electron and is a non-negative integer. Within a shell where n is some integer \"n\"0, \u2113 ranges across all (integer) values satisfying the relation formula_14. For instance, the \"n\" = 1\u00a0shell has only orbitals with formula_15, and the \"n\" = 2\u00a0shell has only orbitals with formula_15, and formula_17. The set of orbitals associated with a particular value of\u00a0\u2113 are sometimes collectively called a \"subshell\".\nThe magnetic quantum number, formula_18, describes the projection of the orbital angular momentum along a chosen axis. It determines the magnitude of the current circulating around that axis and the orbital contribution to the magnetic moment of an electron via the Amp\u00e8rian loop model. Within a subshell formula_19, formula_18 obtains the integer values in the range formula_21.\nThe above results may be summarized in the following table. Each cell represents a subshell, and lists the values of formula_18 available in that subshell. Empty cells represent subshells that do not exist.\nSubshells are usually identified by their formula_4- and formula_19-values. formula_4 is represented by its numerical value, but formula_19 is represented by a letter as follows: 0 is represented by 's', 1 by 'p', 2 by 'd', 3 by 'f', and 4 by 'g'. For instance, one may speak of the subshell with formula_27 and formula_15 as a '2s subshell'.\nEach electron also has angular momentum in the form of quantum mechanical spin given by spin \"s\" = . Its projection along a specified axis is given by the spin magnetic quantum number, \"ms\", which can be + or \u2212. These values are also called \"spin up\" or \"spin down\" respectively.\nThe Pauli exclusion principle states that no two electrons in an atom can have the same values of all four quantum numbers. If there are two electrons in an orbital with given values for three quantum numbers, (n, \u2113, m), these two electrons must differ in their spin projection \"ms\".\nThe above conventions imply a preferred axis (for example, the \"z\" direction in Cartesian coordinates), and they also imply a preferred direction along this preferred axis. Otherwise there would be no sense in distinguishing \"m\" = +1 from \"m\" = \u22121. As such, the model is most useful when applied to physical systems that share these symmetries. The Stern\u2013Gerlach experiment\u2014where an atom is exposed to a magnetic field\u2014provides one such example.\nReal orbitals.\nInstead of the complex orbitals described above, it is common, especially in the chemistry literature, to use \"real\" atomic orbitals. These real orbitals arise from simple linear combinations of complex orbitals. Using the Condon\u2013Shortley phase convention, real orbitals are related to complex orbitals in the same way that the real spherical harmonics are related to complex spherical harmonics. Letting formula_29 denote a complex orbital with quantum numbers n, &amp;ell;, and m, the real orbitals formula_30 may be defined by\nformula_31\nIf formula_32, with formula_33 the radial part of the orbital, this definition is equivalent to formula_34 where formula_35 is the real spherical harmonic related to either the real or imaginary part of the complex spherical harmonic formula_36.\nReal spherical harmonics are physically relevant when an atom is embedded in a crystalline solid, in which case there are multiple preferred symmetry axes but no single preferred direction. Real atomic orbitals are also more frequently encountered in introductory chemistry textbooks and shown in common orbital visualizations. In real hydrogen-like orbitals, quantum numbers n and &amp;ell; have the same interpretation and significance as their complex counterparts, but m is no longer a good quantum number (but its absolute value is).\nSome real orbitals are given specific names beyond the simple formula_37 designation. Orbitals with quantum number \"&amp;ell;\" = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6... are called s, p, d, f, g, h, i, ... orbitals. With this one can already assign names to complex orbitals such as formula_38; the first symbol is the n quantum number, the second character is the symbol for that particular &amp;ell; quantum number and the subscript is the m quantum number.\nAs an example of how the full orbital names are generated for real orbitals, one may calculate formula_39. From the table of spherical harmonics, formula_40 with formula_41. Then\nformula_42\nLikewise formula_43. As a more complicated example:\nformula_44\nIn all these cases we generate a Cartesian label for the orbital by examining, and abbreviating, the polynomial in \"x\", \"y\", \"z\" appearing in the numerator. We ignore any terms in the \"z\", \"r\" polynomial except for the term with the highest exponent in z.\nWe then use the abbreviated polynomial as a subscript label for the atomic state, using the same nomenclature as above to indicate the formula_4 and formula_19 quantum numbers.\nformula_47\nThe expression above all use the Condon\u2013Shortley phase convention which is favored by quantum physicists. Other conventions exist for the phase of the spherical harmonics. Under these different conventions the formula_48 and formula_49 orbitals may appear, for example, as the sum and difference of formula_50 and formula_51, contrary to what is shown above.\nBelow is a list of these Cartesian polynomial names for the atomic orbitals. There does not seem to be reference in the literature as to how to abbreviate the long Cartesian spherical harmonic polynomials for formula_52 so there does not seem be consensus on the naming of formula_53 orbitals or higher according to this nomenclature.\nShapes of orbitals.\nSimple pictures showing orbital shapes are intended to describe the angular forms of regions in space where the electrons occupying the orbital are likely to be found. The diagrams cannot show the entire region where an electron can be found, since according to quantum mechanics there is a non-zero probability of finding the electron (almost) anywhere in space. Instead the diagrams are approximate representations of boundary or contour surfaces where the probability density |\u2009\u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\")\u2009|2 has a constant value, chosen so that there is a certain probability (for example 90%) of finding the electron within the contour. Although |\u2009\"\u03c8\"\u2009|2 as the square of an absolute value is everywhere non-negative, the sign of the wave function \u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\") is often indicated in each subregion of the orbital picture.\nSometimes the \u03c8 function is graphed to show its phases, rather than |\u2009\u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\")\u2009|2 which shows probability density but has no phase (which is lost when taking absolute value, since \u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\") is a complex number). orbital graphs tend to have less spherical, thinner lobes than \u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\") graphs, but have the same number of lobes in the same places, and otherwise are recognizable. This article, to show wave function phase, shows mostly \u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\") graphs.\nThe lobes can be seen as standing wave interference patterns between the two counter-rotating, ring-resonant traveling wave m and \u2212\"m\" modes; the projection of the orbital onto the xy plane has a resonant m wavelength around the circumference. Although rarely shown, the traveling wave solutions can be seen as rotating banded tori; the bands represent phase information. For each m there are two standing wave solutions \u27e8\"m\"\u27e9 + \u27e8\u2212\"m\"\u27e9 and \u27e8\"m\"\u27e9 \u2212 \u27e8\u2212\"m\"\u27e9. If \"m\" = 0, the orbital is vertical, counter rotating information is unknown, and the orbital is \"z\"-axis symmetric. If \"\u2113\" = 0 there are no counter rotating modes. There are only radial modes and the shape is spherically symmetric.\n\"Nodal planes\" and \"nodal spheres\" are surfaces on which the probability density vanishes. The number of nodal surfaces is controlled by the quantum numbers n and \u2113. An orbital with azimuthal quantum number \u2113 has \u2113 radial nodal planes passing through the origin. For example, the s orbitals (\"\u2113\" = 0) are spherically symmetric and have no nodal planes, whereas the p orbitals (\"\u2113\" = 1) have a single nodal plane between the lobes. The number of nodal spheres equals n\u2212\u2113\u22121, consistent with the restriction \u2113 \u2264 n\u22121 on the quantum numbers. The principal quantum number controls the total number of nodal surfaces which is n\u22121. Loosely speaking, n is energy, \u2113 is analogous to eccentricity, and m is orientation.\nIn general, n determines size and energy of the orbital for a given nucleus; as n increases, the size of the orbital increases. The higher nuclear charge Z of heavier elements causes their orbitals to contract by comparison to lighter ones, so that the size of the atom remains very roughly constant, even as the number of electrons increases.\nAlso in general terms, \u2113 determines an orbital's shape, and m\u2113 its orientation. However, since some orbitals are described by equations in complex numbers, the shape sometimes depends on m\u2113 also. Together, the whole set of orbitals for a given \u2113 and n fill space as symmetrically as possible, though with increasingly complex sets of lobes and nodes.\nThe single s orbitals (formula_15) are shaped like spheres. For \"n\" = 1 it is roughly a solid ball (densest at center and fades outward exponentially), but for \"n\" \u2265 2, each single s orbital is made of spherically symmetric surfaces which are nested shells (i.e., the \"wave-structure\" is radial, following a sinusoidal radial component as well). See illustration of a cross-section of these nested shells, at right. The s orbitals for all n numbers are the only orbitals with an anti-node (a region of high wave function density) at the center of the nucleus. All other orbitals (p, d, f, etc.) have angular momentum, and thus avoid the nucleus (having a wave node \"at\" the nucleus). Recently, there has been an effort to experimentally image the 1s and 2p orbitals in a SrTiO3 crystal using scanning transmission electron microscopy with energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy. Because the imaging was conducted using an electron beam, Coulombic beam-orbital interaction that is often termed as the impact parameter effect is included in the outcome (see the figure at right).\nThe shapes of p, d and f orbitals are described verbally here and shown graphically in the \"Orbitals table\" below. The three p orbitals for \"n\" = 2 have the form of two ellipsoids with a point of tangency at the nucleus (the two-lobed shape is sometimes referred to as a \"dumbbell\"\u2014there are two lobes pointing in opposite directions from each other). The three p orbitals in each shell are oriented at right angles to each other, as determined by their respective linear combination of values of\u00a0m\u2113. The overall result is a lobe pointing along each direction of the primary axes.\nFour of the five d orbitals for \"n\" = 3 look similar, each with four pear-shaped lobes, each lobe tangent at right angles to two others, and the centers of all four lying in one plane. Three of these planes are the xy-, xz-, and yz-planes\u2014the lobes are between the pairs of primary axes\u2014and the fourth has the center along the x and y axes themselves. The fifth and final d orbital consists of three regions of high probability density: a torus in between two pear-shaped regions placed symmetrically on its z axis. The overall total of 18 directional lobes point in every primary axis direction and between every pair.\nThere are seven f orbitals, each with shapes more complex than those of the d orbitals.\nAdditionally, as is the case with the s orbitals, individual p, d, f and g orbitals with n values higher than the lowest possible value, exhibit an additional radial node structure which is reminiscent of harmonic waves of the same type, as compared with the lowest (or fundamental) mode of the wave. As with s orbitals, this phenomenon provides p, d, f, and g orbitals at the next higher possible value of n (for example, 3p orbitals vs. the fundamental 2p), an additional node in each lobe. Still higher values of n further increase the number of radial nodes, for each type of orbital.\nThe shapes of atomic orbitals in one-electron atom are related to 3-dimensional spherical harmonics. These shapes are not unique, and any linear combination is valid, like a transformation to cubic harmonics, in fact it is possible to generate sets where all the d's are the same shape, just like the p\"x\", p\"y\", and p\"z\" are the same shape.\nAlthough individual orbitals are most often shown independent of each other, the orbitals coexist around the nucleus at the same time. Also, in 1927, Albrecht Uns\u00f6ld proved that if one sums the electron density of all orbitals of a particular azimuthal quantum number \u2113 of the same shell n (e.g., all three 2p orbitals, or all five 3d orbitals) where each orbital is occupied by an electron or each is occupied by an electron pair, then all angular dependence disappears; that is, the resulting total density of all the atomic orbitals in that subshell (those with the same \u2113) is spherical. This is known as Uns\u00f6ld's theorem.\nOrbitals table.\nThis table shows the real hydrogen-like wave functions for all atomic orbitals up to 7s, and therefore covers the occupied orbitals in the ground state of all elements in the periodic table up to radium. \"\u03c8\" graphs are shown with \u2212 and + wave function phases shown in two different colors (arbitrarily red and blue). The p\"z\" orbital is the same as the p0 orbital, but the p\"x\" and p\"y\" are formed by taking linear combinations of the p+1 and p\u22121 orbitals (which is why they are listed under the \"m\" = \u00b11 label). Also, the p+1 and p\u22121 are not the same shape as the p0, since they are pure spherical harmonics.\n\u2020 \"Elements with 7p electrons have been discovered, but their electronic configurations are only predicted \u2013 save the exceptional Lr, which fills 7p1 instead of 6d1.\"\n\u2021 \"For the elements whose highest occupied orbital is a 6d orbital, only some electronic configurations have been confirmed.\" (Mt, Ds, Rg and Cn are still missing).\nThese are the real-valued orbitals commonly used in chemistry. Only the formula_55 orbitals where are eigenstates of the orbital angular momentum operator, formula_56. The columns with formula_57 are combinations of two eigenstates. See : \nQualitative understanding of shapes.\nThe shapes of atomic orbitals can be qualitatively understood by considering the analogous case of standing waves on a circular drum. To see the analogy, the mean vibrational displacement of each bit of drum membrane from the equilibrium point over many cycles (a measure of average drum membrane velocity and momentum at that point) must be considered relative to that point's distance from the center of the drum head. If this displacement is taken as being analogous to the probability of finding an electron at a given distance from the nucleus, then it will be seen that the many modes of the vibrating disk form patterns that trace the various shapes of atomic orbitals. The basic reason for this correspondence lies in the fact that the distribution of kinetic energy and momentum in a matter-wave is predictive of where the particle associated with the wave will be. That is, the probability of finding an electron at a given place is also a function of the electron's average momentum at that point, since high electron momentum at a given position tends to \"localize\" the electron in that position, via the properties of electron wave-packets (see the Heisenberg uncertainty principle for details of the mechanism).\nThis relationship means that certain key features can be observed in both drum membrane modes and atomic orbitals. For example, in all of the modes analogous to s\u00a0orbitals (the top row in the animated illustration below), it can be seen that the very center of the drum membrane vibrates most strongly, corresponding to the antinode in all s\u00a0orbitals in an atom. This antinode means the electron is most likely to be at the physical position of the nucleus (which it passes straight through without scattering or striking it), since it is moving (on average) most rapidly at that point, giving it maximal momentum.\nA mental \"planetary orbit\" picture closest to the behavior of electrons in s\u00a0orbitals, all of which have no angular momentum, might perhaps be that of a Keplerian orbit with the orbital eccentricity of 1 but a finite major axis, not physically possible (because particles were to collide), but can be imagined as a limit of orbits with equal major axes but increasing eccentricity.\nBelow, a number of drum membrane vibration modes and the respective wave functions of the hydrogen atom are shown. A correspondence can be considered where the wave functions of a vibrating drum head are for a two-coordinate system \u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\") and the wave functions for a vibrating sphere are three-coordinate \u03c8(\"r\",\u2009\"\u03b8\",\u2009\"\u03c6\").\nNone of the other sets of modes in a drum membrane have a central antinode, and in all of them the center of the drum does not move. These correspond to a node at the nucleus for all non-s orbitals in an atom. These orbitals all have some angular momentum, and in the planetary model, they correspond to particles in orbit with eccentricity less than 1.0, so that they do not pass straight through the center of the primary body, but keep somewhat away from it.\nIn addition, the drum modes analogous to p and d modes in an atom show spatial irregularity along the different radial directions from the center of the drum, whereas all of the modes analogous to s\u00a0modes are perfectly symmetrical in radial direction. The non-radial-symmetry properties of non-s orbitals are necessary to localize a particle with angular momentum and a wave nature in an orbital where it must tend to stay away from the central attraction force, since any particle localized at the point of central attraction could have no angular momentum. For these modes, waves in the drum head tend to avoid the central point. Such features again emphasize that the shapes of atomic orbitals are a direct consequence of the wave nature of electrons.\nOrbital energy.\nIn atoms with one electron (hydrogen-like atom), the energy of an orbital (and, consequently, any electron in the orbital) is determined mainly by formula_4. The formula_59 orbital has the lowest possible energy in the atom. Each successively higher value of formula_4 has a higher energy, but the difference decreases as formula_4 increases. For high formula_4, the energy becomes so high that the electron can easily escape the atom. In single electron atoms, all levels with different formula_19 within a given formula_4 are degenerate in the Schr\u00f6dinger approximation, and have the same energy. This approximation is broken slightly in the solution to the Dirac equation (where energy depends on n and another quantum number j), and by the effect of the magnetic field of the nucleus and quantum electrodynamics effects. The latter induce tiny binding energy differences especially for s\u00a0electrons that go nearer the nucleus, since these feel a very slightly different nuclear charge, even in one-electron atoms; see Lamb shift.\nIn atoms with multiple electrons, the energy of an electron depends not only on its orbital, but also on its interactions with other electrons. These interactions depend on the detail of its spatial probability distribution, and so the energy levels of orbitals depend not only on formula_4 but also on formula_19. Higher values of formula_19 are associated with higher values of energy; for instance, the 2p state is higher than the 2s state. When formula_68, the increase in energy of the orbital becomes so large as to push the energy of orbital above the energy of the s orbital in the next higher shell; when formula_69 the energy is pushed into the shell two steps higher. The filling of the 3d orbitals does not occur until the 4s orbitals have been filled, and the filling of the 4f orbitals does not occur all the way until the 6s orbitals have been filled. (See Electron configurations of the elements (data page).)\nThe increase in energy for subshells of increasing angular momentum in larger atoms is due to electron\u2013electron interaction effects, and it is specifically related to the ability of low angular momentum electrons to penetrate more effectively toward the nucleus, where they are subject to less screening from the charge of intervening electrons. Thus, in atoms with higher atomic number, the formula_19 of electrons becomes more and more of a determining factor in their energy, and the principal quantum numbers formula_4 of electrons becomes less and less important in their energy placement.\nThe energy sequence of the first 35\u00a0subshells (e.g., 1s, 2p, 3d, etc.) is given in the following table. Each cell represents a subshell with formula_4 and formula_19 given by its row and column indices, respectively. The number in the cell is the subshell's position in the sequence. For a linear listing of the subshells in terms of increasing energies in multielectron atoms, see the section below.\n\"Note: empty cells indicate non-existent sublevels, while numbers in italics indicate sublevels that could (potentially) exist, but which do not hold electrons in any element currently known.\"\nElectron placement and the periodic table.\nSeveral rules govern the placement of electrons in orbitals (\"electron configuration\"). The first dictates that no two electrons in an atom may have the same set of values of quantum numbers (this is the Pauli exclusion principle). These quantum numbers include the three that define orbitals, as well as the spin magnetic quantum number ms. Thus, two electrons may occupy a single orbital, so long as they have different values of ms. Because ms takes one of only two values ( or \u2212), at most two electrons can occupy each orbital.\nAdditionally, an electron always tends to fall to the lowest possible energy state. It is possible for it to occupy any orbital so long as it does not violate the Pauli exclusion principle, but if lower-energy orbitals are available, this condition is unstable. The electron will eventually lose energy (by releasing a photon) and drop into the lower orbital. Thus, electrons fill orbitals in the order specified by the energy sequence given above.\nThis behavior is responsible for the structure of the periodic table. The table may be divided into several rows (called 'periods'), numbered starting with 1 at the top. The presently known elements occupy seven periods. If a certain period has number \"i\", it consists of elements whose outermost electrons fall in the \"i\"th shell. Niels Bohr was the first to propose (1923) that the periodicity in the properties of the elements might be explained by the periodic filling of the electron energy levels, resulting in the electronic structure of the atom.\nThe periodic table may also be divided into several numbered rectangular 'blocks'. The elements belonging to a given block have this common feature: their highest-energy electrons all belong to the same \u2113-state (but the n associated with that \u2113-state depends upon the period). For instance, the leftmost two columns constitute the 's-block'. The outermost electrons of Li and Be respectively belong to the 2s\u00a0subshell, and those of Na and Mg to the 3s\u00a0subshell.\nThe following is the order for filling the \"subshell\" orbitals, which also gives the order of the \"blocks\" in the periodic table:\n1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 4d, 5p, 6s, 4f, 5d, 6p, 7s, 5f, 6d, 7p\nThe \"periodic\" nature of the filling of orbitals, as well as emergence of the s, p, d, and f \"blocks\", is more obvious if this order of filling is given in matrix form, with increasing principal quantum numbers starting the new rows (\"periods\") in the matrix. Then, each subshell (composed of the first two quantum numbers) is repeated as many times as required for each pair of electrons it may contain. The result is a compressed periodic table, with each entry representing two successive elements:\nAlthough this is the general order of orbital filling according to the Madelung rule, there are exceptions, and the actual electronic energies of each element are also dependent upon additional details of the atoms (see ).\nThe number of electrons in an electrically neutral atom increases with the atomic number. The electrons in the outermost shell, or \"valence electrons\", tend to be responsible for an element's chemical behavior. Elements that contain the same number of valence electrons can be grouped together and display similar chemical properties.\nRelativistic effects.\nFor elements with high atomic number Z, the effects of relativity become more pronounced, and especially so for s\u00a0electrons, which move at relativistic velocities as they penetrate the screening electrons near the core of high-Z atoms. This relativistic increase in momentum for high speed electrons causes a corresponding decrease in wavelength and contraction of 6s orbitals relative to 5d orbitals (by comparison to corresponding s and d electrons in lighter elements in the same column of the periodic table); this results in 6s valence electrons becoming lowered in energy.\nExamples of significant physical outcomes of this effect include the lowered melting temperature of mercury (which results from 6s electrons not being available for metal bonding) and the golden color of gold and caesium.\nIn the Bohr model, an \"n\" = 1\u00a0electron has a velocity given by \"v\" = \"Z\u03b1c\", where \"Z\" is the atomic number, \"\u03b1\" is the fine-structure constant, and \"c\" is the speed of light. In non-relativistic quantum mechanics, therefore, any atom with an atomic number greater than 137 would require its 1s electrons to be traveling faster than the speed of light. Even in the Dirac equation, which accounts for relativistic effects, the wave function of the electron for atoms with \"Z\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0137 is oscillatory and unbounded. The significance of element 137, also known as untriseptium, was first pointed out by the physicist Richard Feynman. Element 137 is sometimes informally called feynmanium (symbol Fy). However, Feynman's approximation fails to predict the exact critical value of\u00a0Z due to the non-point-charge nature of the nucleus and very small orbital radius of inner electrons, resulting in a potential seen by inner electrons which is effectively less than Z. The critical Z\u00a0value, which makes the atom unstable with regard to high-field breakdown of the vacuum and production of electron\u2013positron pairs, does not occur until Z is about 173. These conditions are not seen except transiently in collisions of very heavy nuclei such as lead or uranium in accelerators, where such electron\u2013positron production from these effects has been claimed to be observed.\nThere are no nodes in relativistic orbital densities, although individual components of the wave function will have nodes.\npp hybridization (conjectured).\nIn late period 8 elements, a hybrid of 8p3/2 and 9p1/2 is expected to exist, where \"3/2\" and \"1/2\" refer to the total angular momentum quantum number. This \"pp\" hybrid may be responsible for the p-block of the period due to properties similar to p\u00a0subshells in ordinary valence shells. Energy levels of 8p3/2 and 9p1/2 come close due to relativistic spin\u2013orbit effects; the 9s subshell should also participate, as these elements are expected to be analogous to the respective 5p elements indium through xenon.\nTransitions between orbitals.\nBound quantum states have discrete energy levels. When applied to atomic orbitals, this means that the energy differences between states are also discrete. A transition between these states (i.e., an electron absorbing or emitting a photon) can thus happen only if the photon has an energy corresponding with the exact energy difference between said states.\nConsider two states of the hydrogen atom:\nBy quantum theory, state\u00a01 has a fixed energy of \"E\"1, and state\u00a02 has a fixed energy of \"E\"2. Now, what would happen if an electron in state\u00a01 were to move to state\u00a02? For this to happen, the electron would need to gain an energy of exactly \"E\"2 \u2212 \"E\"1. If the electron receives energy that is less than or greater than this value, it cannot jump from state\u00a01 to state\u00a02. Now, suppose we irradiate the atom with a broad-spectrum of light. Photons that reach the atom that have an energy of exactly \"E\"2 \u2212 \"E\"1 will be absorbed by the electron in state\u00a01, and that electron will jump to state\u00a02. However, photons that are greater or lower in energy cannot be absorbed by the electron, because the electron can jump only to one of the orbitals, it cannot jump to a state between orbitals. The result is that only photons of a specific frequency will be absorbed by the atom. This creates a line in the spectrum, known as an absorption line, which corresponds to the energy difference between states 1 and 2.\nThe atomic orbital model thus predicts line spectra, which are observed experimentally. This is one of the main validations of the atomic orbital model.\nThe atomic orbital model is nevertheless an approximation to the full quantum theory, which only recognizes many electron states. The predictions of line spectra are qualitatively useful but are not quantitatively accurate for atoms and ions other than those containing only one electron.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1207", "revid": "712163", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1207", "title": "Amino acid", "text": "Organic compounds containing amine and carboxylic groups\n \nAmino acids are organic compounds that contain both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. Although over 500 amino acids exist in nature, by far the most important are the 22 \u03b1-amino acids incorporated into proteins. Only these 22 appear in the genetic code of life.\nAmino acids can be classified according to the locations of the core structural functional groups (alpha- (\u03b1-), beta- (\u03b2-), gamma- (\u03b3-) amino acids, etc.); other categories relate to polarity, ionization, and side-chain group type (aliphatic, acyclic, aromatic, polar, etc.). In the form of proteins, amino-acid \"residues\" form the second-largest component (water being the largest) of human muscles and other tissues. Beyond their role as residues in proteins, amino acids participate in a number of processes such as neurotransmitter transport and biosynthesis. It is thought that they played a key role in enabling life on Earth and its emergence.\nAmino acids are formally named by the IUPAC-IUBMB Joint Commission on Biochemical Nomenclature in terms of the fictitious \"neutral\" structure shown in the illustration. For example, the systematic name of alanine is 2-aminopropanoic acid, based on the formula . The Commission justified this approach as follows:\nThe systematic names and formulas given refer to hypothetical forms in which amino groups are unprotonated and carboxyl groups are undissociated. This convention is useful to avoid various nomenclatural problems but should not be taken to imply that these structures represent an appreciable fraction of the amino-acid molecules.\nHistory.\nThe first few amino acids were discovered in the early 1800s. In 1806, French chemists Louis-Nicolas Vauquelin and Pierre Jean Robiquet isolated a compound from asparagus that was subsequently named asparagine, the first amino acid to be discovered. Cystine was discovered in 1810, although its monomer, cysteine, remained undiscovered until 1884. Glycine and leucine were discovered in 1820. The last of the 20 common amino acids to be discovered was threonine in 1935 by William Cumming Rose, who also determined the essential amino acids and established the minimum daily requirements of all amino acids for optimal growth.\nThe unity of the chemical category was recognized by Wurtz in 1865, but he gave no particular name to it. The first use of the term \"amino acid\" in the English language dates from 1898, while the German term, , was used earlier. Proteins were found to yield amino acids after enzymatic digestion or acid hydrolysis. In 1902, Emil Fischer and Franz Hofmeister independently proposed that proteins are formed from many amino acids, whereby bonds are formed between the amino group of one amino acid with the carboxyl group of another, resulting in a linear structure that Fischer termed \"peptide\".\nGeneral structure.\n2-, alpha-, or \u03b1-amino acids have the generic formula in most cases, where R is an organic substituent known as a \"side chain\".\nOf the many hundreds of described amino acids, 22 are proteinogenic (\"protein-building\"). It is these 22 compounds that combine to give a vast array of peptides and proteins assembled by ribosomes. Non-proteinogenic or modified amino acids may arise from post-translational modification or during nonribosomal peptide synthesis.\nChirality.\nThe carbon atom next to the carboxyl group is called the \u03b1\u2013carbon. In proteinogenic amino acids, it bears the amine and the R group or side chain specific to each amino acid, as well as a hydrogen atom. With the exception of glycine, for which the side chain is also a hydrogen atom, the \u03b1\u2013carbon is stereogenic. All chiral proteogenic amino acids have the configuration. They are \"left-handed\" enantiomers, which refers to the stereoisomers of the alpha carbon.\nA few -amino acids (\"right-handed\") have been found in nature, e.g., in bacterial envelopes, as a neuromodulator (-serine), and in some antibiotics. Rarely, -amino acid residues are found in proteins, and are converted from the -amino acid as a post-translational modification.\nSide chains.\nPolar charged side chains.\nFive amino acids possess a charge at neutral pH. Often these side chains appear at the surfaces on proteins to enable their solubility in water, and side chains with opposite charges form important electrostatic contacts called salt bridges that maintain structures within a single protein or between interfacing proteins. Many proteins bind metal into their structures specifically, and these interactions are commonly mediated by charged side chains such as aspartate, glutamate and histidine. Under certain conditions, each ion-forming group can be charged, forming double salts.\nThe two negatively charged amino acids at neutral pH are aspartate (Asp, D) and glutamate (Glu, E). The anionic carboxylate groups behave as Br\u00f8nsted bases in most circumstances. Enzymes in very low pH environments, like the aspartic protease pepsin in mammalian stomachs, may have catalytic aspartate or glutamate residues that act as Br\u00f8nsted acids.\nThere are three amino acids with side chains that are cations at neutral pH: arginine (Arg, R), lysine (Lys, K) and histidine (His, H). Arginine has a charged guanidino group and lysine a charged alkyl amino group, and are fully protonated at pH 7. Histidine's imidazole group has a pKa of 6.0, and is only around 10% protonated at neutral pH. Because histidine is easily found in its basic and conjugate acid forms it often participates in catalytic proton transfers in enzyme reactions.\nPolar uncharged side chains.\nThe polar, uncharged amino acids serine (Ser, S), threonine (Thr, T), asparagine (Asn, N) and glutamine (Gln, Q) readily form hydrogen bonds with water and other amino acids. They do not ionize in normal conditions, a prominent exception being the catalytic serine in serine proteases. This is an example of severe perturbation, and is not characteristic of serine residues in general. Threonine has two chiral centers, not only the (2\"S\") chiral center at the \u03b1-carbon shared by all amino acids apart from achiral glycine, but also (3\"R\") at the \u03b2-carbon. The full stereochemical specification is (2\"S\",3\"R\")--threonine.\nHydrophobic side chains.\nNonpolar amino acid interactions are the primary driving force behind the processes that fold proteins into their functional three dimensional structures. None of these amino acids' side chains ionize easily, and therefore do not have pKas, with the exception of tyrosine (Tyr, Y). The hydroxyl of tyrosine can deprotonate at high pH forming the negatively charged phenolate. Because of this one could place tyrosine into the polar, uncharged amino acid category, but its very low solubility in water matches the characteristics of hydrophobic amino acids well.\nSpecial case side chains.\nSeveral side chains are not described well by the charged, polar and hydrophobic categories. Glycine (Gly, G) could be considered a polar amino acid since its small size means that its solubility is largely determined by the amino and carboxylate groups. However, the lack of any side chain provides glycine with a unique flexibility among amino acids with large ramifications to protein folding. Cysteine (Cys, C) can also form hydrogen bonds readily, which would place it in the polar amino acid category, though it can often be found in protein structures forming covalent bonds, called disulphide bonds, with other cysteines. These bonds influence the folding and stability of proteins, and are essential in the formation of antibodies. Proline (Pro, P) has an alkyl side chain and could be considered hydrophobic, but because the side chain joins back onto the alpha amino group it becomes particularly inflexible when incorporated into proteins. Similar to glycine this influences protein structure in a way unique among amino acids. Selenocysteine (Sec, U) is a rare amino acid not directly encoded by DNA, but is incorporated into proteins via the ribosome. Selenocysteine has a lower redox potential compared to the similar cysteine, and participates in several unique enzymatic reactions. Pyrrolysine (Pyl, O) is another amino acid not encoded in DNA, but synthesized into protein by ribosomes. It is found in archaeal species where it participates in the catalytic activity of several methyltransferases.\n\u03b2- and \u03b3-amino acids.\nAmino acids with the structure , such as \u03b2-alanine, a component of carnosine and a few other peptides, are \u03b2-amino acids. Ones with the structure are \u03b3-amino acids, and so on, where X and Y are two substituents (one of which is normally H).\nZwitterions.\nThe common natural forms of amino acids have a zwitterionic structure, with ( in the case of proline) and functional groups attached to the same C atom, and are thus \u03b1-amino acids, and are the only ones found in proteins during translation in the ribosome.\nIn aqueous solution at pH close to neutrality, amino acids exist as zwitterions, i.e. as dipolar ions with both and in charged states, so the overall structure is . At physiological pH the so-called \"neutral forms\" are not present to any measurable degree. Although the two charges in the zwitterion structure add up to zero it is misleading to call a species with a net charge of zero \"uncharged\".\nIn strongly acidic conditions (pH below 3), the carboxylate group becomes protonated and the structure becomes an ammonio carboxylic acid, . This is relevant for enzymes like pepsin that are active in acidic environments such as the mammalian stomach and lysosomes, but does not significantly apply to intracellular enzymes. In highly basic conditions (pH greater than 10, not normally seen in physiological conditions), the ammonio group is deprotonated to give .\nAlthough various definitions of acids and bases are used in chemistry, the only one that is useful for chemistry in aqueous solution is that of Br\u00f8nsted: an acid is a species that can donate a proton to another species, and a base is one that can accept a proton. This criterion is used to label the groups in the above illustration. The carboxylate side chains of aspartate and glutamate residues are the principal Br\u00f8nsted bases in proteins. Likewise, lysine, tyrosine and cysteine will typically act as a Br\u00f8nsted acid. Histidine under these conditions can act both as a Br\u00f8nsted acid and a base.\nIsoelectric point.\nFor amino acids with uncharged side-chains the zwitterion predominates at pH values between the two p\"K\"a values, but coexists in equilibrium with small amounts of net negative and net positive ions. At the midpoint between the two p\"K\"a values, the trace amount of net negative and trace of net positive ions balance, so that average net charge of all forms present is zero. This pH is known as the isoelectric point p\"I\", so p\"I\" = (p\"K\"a1 + p\"K\"a2).\nFor amino acids with charged side chains, the p\"K\"a of the side chain is involved. Thus for aspartate or glutamate with negative side chains, the terminal amino group is essentially entirely in the charged form , but this positive charge needs to be balanced by the state with just one C-terminal carboxylate group is negatively charged. This occurs halfway between the two carboxylate p\"K\"a values: p\"I\" = (p\"K\"a1 + p\"K\"a(R)), where p\"K\"a(R) is the side chain p\"K\"a.\nSimilar considerations apply to other amino acids with ionizable side-chains, including not only glutamate (similar to aspartate), but also cysteine, histidine, lysine, tyrosine and arginine with positive side chains.\nAmino acids have zero mobility in electrophoresis at their isoelectric point, although this behaviour is more usually exploited for peptides and proteins than single amino acids. Zwitterions have minimum solubility at their isoelectric point, and some amino acids (in particular, with nonpolar side chains) can be isolated by precipitation from water by adjusting the pH to the required isoelectric point.\nPhysicochemical properties.\nThe 20 canonical amino acids can be classified according to their properties. Important factors are charge, hydrophilicity or hydrophobicity, size, and functional groups. These properties influence protein structure and protein\u2013protein interactions. The water-soluble proteins tend to have their hydrophobic residues (Leu, Ile, Val, Phe, and Trp) buried in the middle of the protein, whereas hydrophilic side chains are exposed to the aqueous solvent. (In biochemistry, a residue refers to a specific monomer \"within\" the polymeric chain of a polysaccharide, protein or nucleic acid.) The integral membrane proteins tend to have outer rings of exposed hydrophobic amino acids that anchor them in the lipid bilayer. Some peripheral membrane proteins have a patch of hydrophobic amino acids on their surface that sticks to the membrane. In a similar fashion, proteins that have to bind to positively charged molecules have surfaces rich in negatively charged amino acids such as glutamate and aspartate, while proteins binding to negatively charged molecules have surfaces rich in positively charged amino acids like lysine and arginine. For example, lysine and arginine are present in large amounts in the low-complexity regions of nucleic-acid binding proteins. There are various hydrophobicity scales of amino acid residues.\nSome amino acids have special properties. Cysteine can form covalent disulfide bonds to other cysteine residues. Proline forms a cycle to the polypeptide backbone, and glycine is more flexible than other amino acids.\nGlycine and proline are strongly present within low complexity regions of both eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins, whereas the opposite is the case with cysteine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, methionine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, which are highly reactive, or complex, or hydrophobic.\nMany proteins undergo a range of posttranslational modifications, whereby additional chemical groups are attached to the amino acid residue side chains sometimes producing lipoproteins (that are hydrophobic), or glycoproteins (that are hydrophilic) allowing the protein to attach temporarily to a membrane. For example, a signaling protein can attach and then detach from a cell membrane, because it contains cysteine residues that can have the fatty acid palmitic acid added to them and subsequently removed.\nTable of standard amino acid abbreviations and properties.\nAlthough one-letter symbols are included in the table, IUPAC\u2013IUBMB recommend that \"Use of the one-letter symbols should be restricted to the comparison of long sequences\".\nThe one-letter notation was chosen by IUPAC-IUB based on the following rules:\nTwo additional amino acids are in some species coded for by codons that are usually interpreted as stop codons:\nIn addition to the specific amino acid codes, placeholders are used in cases where chemical or crystallographic analysis of a peptide or protein cannot conclusively determine the identity of a residue. They are also used to summarize conserved protein sequence motifs. The use of single letters to indicate sets of similar residues is similar to the use of abbreviation codes for degenerate bases.\nUnk is sometimes used instead of Xaa, but is less standard.\nTer or * (from termination) is used in notation for mutations in proteins when a stop codon occurs. It corresponds to no amino acid at all.\nIn addition, many nonstandard amino acids have a specific code. For example, several peptide drugs, such as Bortezomib and MG132, are artificially synthesized and retain their protecting groups, which have specific codes. Bortezomib is Pyz\u2013Phe\u2013boroLeu, and MG132 is Z\u2013Leu\u2013Leu\u2013Leu\u2013al. To aid in the analysis of protein structure, photo-reactive amino acid analogs are available. These include photoleucine (pLeu) and photomethionine (pMet).\nOccurrence and functions in biochemistry.\nProteinogenic amino acids.\nAmino acids are the precursors to proteins. They join by condensation reactions to form short polymer chains called peptides or longer chains called either polypeptides or proteins. These chains are linear and unbranched, with each amino acid residue within the chain attached to two neighboring amino acids. In nature, the process of making proteins encoded by RNA genetic material is called \"translation\" and involves the step-by-step addition of amino acids to a growing protein chain by a ribozyme that is called a ribosome. The order in which the amino acids are added is read through the genetic code from an mRNA template, which is an RNA derived from one of the organism's genes.\nThere are 22 amino acids that get naturally incorporated into polypeptides; these are called \"proteinogenic amino acids\" or \"natural amino acids\". Of these, 20 are encoded by the universal genetic code. The remaining 2, selenocysteine and pyrrolysine, are incorporated into proteins by unique synthetic mechanisms. Selenocysteine is incorporated when the mRNA being translated includes a SECIS element, which causes the UGA codon to encode selenocysteine instead of a stop codon. Pyrrolysine is used by some methanogenic archaea in enzymes that they use to produce methane. It is coded for with the codon UAG, which is normally a stop codon in other organisms.\nSeveral independent evolutionary studies have suggested that Gly, Ala, Asp, Val, Ser, Pro, Glu, Leu, Thr may belong to a group of amino acids that constituted the early genetic code, whereas Cys, Met, Tyr, Trp, His, Phe may belong to a group of amino acids that constituted later additions of the genetic code.\nStandard vs nonstandard amino acids.\nThe 20 amino acids that are encoded directly by the codons of the universal genetic code are called \"standard\" or \"canonical\" amino acids. A modified form of methionine (\"N\"-formylmethionine) is often incorporated in place of methionine as the initial amino acid of proteins in bacteria, mitochondria and plastids (including chloroplasts). Other amino acids are called \"nonstandard\" or \"non-canonical\". Most of the nonstandard amino acids are also non-proteinogenic (i.e. they cannot be incorporated into proteins during translation), but two of them are proteinogenic, as they can be incorporated translationally into proteins by exploiting information not encoded in the universal genetic code.\nThe two nonstandard proteinogenic amino acids are selenocysteine (present in many non-eukaryotes as well as most eukaryotes, but not coded directly by DNA) and pyrrolysine (found only in some archaea and at least one bacterium). The incorporation of these nonstandard amino acids is rare. For example, 25 human proteins include selenocysteine in their primary structure, and the structurally characterized enzymes (selenoenzymes) employ selenocysteine as the catalytic moiety in their active sites. Pyrrolysine and selenocysteine are encoded via variant codons. For example, selenocysteine is encoded by stop codon and SECIS element.\n\"N\"-formylmethionine (which is often the initial amino acid of proteins in bacteria, mitochondria, and chloroplasts) is generally considered as a form of methionine rather than as a separate proteinogenic amino acid. Codon\u2013tRNA combinations not found in nature can also be used to \"expand\" the genetic code and form novel proteins known as alloproteins incorporating non-proteinogenic amino acids.\nNon-proteinogenic amino acids.\nAside from the 22 proteinogenic amino acids, many \"non-proteinogenic\" amino acids are known. Those either are not found in proteins (for example carnitine, GABA, levothyroxine) or are not produced directly and in isolation by standard cellular machinery. For example, hydroxyproline, is synthesised from proline. Another example is selenomethionine.\nNon-proteinogenic amino acids that are found in proteins are formed by post-translational modification. Such modifications can also determine the localization of the protein, e.g., the addition of long hydrophobic groups can cause a protein to bind to a phospholipid membrane. Examples:\nSome non-proteinogenic amino acids are not found in proteins. Examples include 2-aminoisobutyric acid and the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid. Non-proteinogenic amino acids often occur as intermediates in the metabolic pathways for standard amino acids\u00a0\u2013 for example, ornithine and citrulline occur in the urea cycle, part of amino acid catabolism (see below). A rare exception to the dominance of \u03b1-amino acids in biology is the \u03b2-amino acid beta alanine (3-aminopropanoic acid), which is used in plants and microorganisms in the synthesis of pantothenic acid (vitamin B5), a component of coenzyme A.\nIn mammalian nutrition.\nAnimals ingest amino acids in the form of protein. The protein is broken down into its constituent amino acids in the process of digestion. The amino acids are then used to synthesize new proteins and other nitrogenous biomolecules, or they are further catabolized through oxidation to provide a source of energy. The oxidation pathway starts with the removal of the amino group by a transaminase; the amino group is then fed into the urea cycle. The other product of transamidation is a keto acid that enters the citric acid cycle. Glucogenic amino acids can also be converted into glucose, through gluconeogenesis.\nOf the 20 standard amino acids, nine (His, Ile, Leu, Lys, Met, Phe, Thr, Trp and Val) are called essential amino acids because the human body cannot synthesize them from other compounds at the level needed for normal growth, so they must be obtained from food.\nSemi-essential and conditionally essential amino acids, and juvenile requirements.\nIn addition, cysteine, tyrosine, and arginine are considered semiessential amino acids, and taurine a semi-essential aminosulfonic acid in children. Some amino acids are conditionally essential for certain ages or medical conditions. Essential amino acids may also vary from species to species. The metabolic pathways that synthesize these monomers are not fully developed.\nNon-protein functions.\nMany proteinogenic and non-proteinogenic amino acids have biological functions beyond being precursors to proteins and peptides. In humans, amino acids also have important roles in diverse biosynthetic pathways. Defenses against herbivores in plants sometimes employ amino acids. Examples:\nRoles for nonstandard amino acids.\nHowever, not all of the functions of other abundant nonstandard amino acids are known.\nUses in industry.\nAnimal feed.\nAmino acids are sometimes added to animal feed because some of the components of these feeds, such as soybeans, have low levels of some of the essential amino acids, especially of lysine, methionine, threonine, and tryptophan. Likewise amino acids are used to chelate metal cations in order to improve the absorption of minerals from feed supplements.\nFood.\nThe food industry is a major consumer of amino acids, especially glutamic acid, which is used as a flavor enhancer, and aspartame (aspartylphenylalanine 1-methyl ester), which is used as an artificial sweetener. Amino acids are sometimes added to food by manufacturers to alleviate symptoms of mineral deficiencies, such as anemia, by improving mineral absorption and reducing negative side effects from inorganic mineral supplementation.\nChemical building blocks.\nAmino acids are low-cost feedstocks used in chiral pool synthesis as enantiomerically pure building blocks.\nAmino acids are used in the synthesis of some cosmetics.\nAspirational uses.\nFertilizer.\nThe chelating ability of amino acids is sometimes used in fertilizers to facilitate the delivery of minerals to plants in order to correct mineral deficiencies, such as iron chlorosis. These fertilizers are also used to prevent deficiencies from occurring and to improve the overall health of the plants.\nBiodegradable plastics.\nAmino acids have been considered as components of biodegradable polymers, which have applications as environmentally friendly packaging and in medicine in drug delivery and the construction of prosthetic implants. An interesting example of such materials is polyaspartate, a water-soluble biodegradable polymer that may have applications in disposable diapers and agriculture. Due to its solubility and ability to chelate metal ions, polyaspartate is also being used as a biodegradable antiscaling agent and a corrosion inhibitor.\nSynthesis.\nChemical synthesis.\nThe commercial production of amino acids usually relies on mutant bacteria that overproduce individual amino acids using glucose as a carbon source. Some amino acids are produced by enzymatic conversions of synthetic intermediates. 2-Aminothiazoline-4-carboxylic acid is an intermediate in one industrial synthesis of -cysteine for example. Aspartic acid is produced by the addition of ammonia to fumarate using a lyase.\nBiosynthesis.\nIn plants, nitrogen is first assimilated into organic compounds in the form of glutamate, formed from alpha-ketoglutarate and ammonia in the mitochondrion. For other amino acids, plants use transaminases to move the amino group from glutamate to another alpha-keto acid. For example, aspartate aminotransferase converts glutamate and oxaloacetate to alpha-ketoglutarate and aspartate. Other organisms use transaminases for amino acid synthesis, too.\nNonstandard amino acids are usually formed through modifications to standard amino acids. For example, homocysteine is formed through the transsulfuration pathway or by the demethylation of methionine via the intermediate metabolite \"S\"-adenosylmethionine, while hydroxyproline is made by a post translational modification of proline.\nMicroorganisms and plants synthesize many uncommon amino acids. For example, some microbes make 2-aminoisobutyric acid and lanthionine, which is a sulfide-bridged derivative of alanine. Both of these amino acids are found in peptidic lantibiotics such as alamethicin. However, in plants, 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid is a small disubstituted cyclic amino acid that is an intermediate in the production of the plant hormone ethylene.\nPrimordial synthesis.\nThe formation of amino acids and peptides is assumed to have preceded and perhaps induced the emergence of life on earth. Amino acids can form from simple precursors under various conditions. Surface-based chemical metabolism of amino acids and very small compounds may have led to the build-up of amino acids, coenzymes and phosphate-based small carbon molecules. Amino acids and similar building blocks could have been elaborated into proto-peptides, with peptides being considered key players in the origin of life.\nIn the famous Urey-Miller experiment, the passage of an electric arc through a mixture of methane, hydrogen, and ammonia produces a large number of amino acids. Since then, scientists have discovered a range of ways and components by which the potentially prebiotic formation and chemical evolution of peptides may have occurred, such as condensing agents, the design of self-replicating peptides and a number of non-enzymatic mechanisms by which amino acids could have emerged and elaborated into peptides. Several hypotheses invoke the Strecker synthesis whereby hydrogen cyanide, simple aldehydes, ammonia, and water produce amino acids.\nAccording to a review, amino acids, and even peptides, \"turn up fairly regularly in the various experimental broths that have been allowed to be cooked from simple chemicals. This is because nucleotides are far more difficult to synthesize chemically than amino acids.\" For a chronological order, it suggests that there must have been a 'protein world' or at least a 'polypeptide world', possibly later followed by the 'RNA world' and the 'DNA world'. Codon\u2013amino acids mappings may be the biological information system at the primordial origin of life on Earth. While amino acids and consequently simple peptides must have formed under different experimentally probed geochemical scenarios, the transition from an abiotic world to the first life forms is to a large extent still unresolved.\nReactions.\nAmino acids undergo the reactions expected of the constituent functional groups.\nPeptide bond formation.\nAs both the amine and carboxylic acid groups of amino acids can react to form amide bonds, one amino acid molecule can react with another and become joined through an amide linkage. This polymerization of amino acids is what creates proteins. This condensation reaction yields the newly formed peptide bond and a molecule of water. In cells, this reaction does not occur directly; instead, the amino acid is first activated by attachment to a transfer RNA molecule through an ester bond. This aminoacyl-tRNA is produced in an ATP-dependent reaction carried out by an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase. This aminoacyl-tRNA is then a substrate for the ribosome, which catalyzes the attack of the amino group of the elongating protein chain on the ester bond. As a result of this mechanism, all proteins made by ribosomes are synthesized starting at their \"N\"-terminus and moving toward their \"C\"-terminus.\nHowever, not all peptide bonds are formed in this way. In a few cases, peptides are synthesized by specific enzymes. For example, the tripeptide glutathione is an essential part of the defenses of cells against oxidative stress. This peptide is synthesized in two steps from free amino acids. In the first step, gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase condenses cysteine and glutamate through a peptide bond formed between the side chain carboxyl of the glutamate (the gamma carbon of this side chain) and the amino group of the cysteine. This dipeptide is then condensed with glycine by glutathione synthetase to form glutathione.\nIn chemistry, peptides are synthesized by a variety of reactions. One of the most-used in solid-phase peptide synthesis uses the aromatic oxime derivatives of amino acids as activated units. These are added in sequence onto the growing peptide chain, which is attached to a solid resin support. Libraries of peptides are used in drug discovery through high-throughput screening.\nThe combination of functional groups allow amino acids to be effective polydentate ligands for metal\u2013amino acid chelates.\nThe multiple side chains of amino acids can also undergo chemical reactions.\nCatabolism.\nDegradation of an amino acid often involves deamination by moving its amino group to \u03b1-ketoglutarate, forming glutamate. This process involves transaminases, often the same as those used in amination during synthesis. In many vertebrates, the amino group is then removed through the urea cycle and is excreted in the form of urea. However, amino acid degradation can produce uric acid or ammonia instead. For example, serine dehydratase converts serine to pyruvate and ammonia. After removal of one or more amino groups, the remainder of the molecule can sometimes be used to synthesize new amino acids, or it can be used for energy by entering glycolysis or the citric acid cycle, as detailed in image at right.\nComplexation.\nAmino acids are bidentate ligands, forming transition metal amino acid complexes.\nChemical analysis.\nThe total nitrogen content of organic matter is mainly formed by the amino groups in proteins. The total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) is a measure of nitrogen widely used in the analysis of (waste) water, soil, food, feed and organic matter in general. As the name suggests, the Kjeldahl method is applied. More sensitive methods are available.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1208", "revid": "9612106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1208", "title": "Alan Turing", "text": "English computer scientist (1912\u20131954)\nAlan Mathison Turing (; 23 June 1912\u00a0\u2013 7 June 1954) was an English mathematician, computer scientist, logician, cryptanalyst, philosopher and theoretical biologist. He was highly influential in the development of theoretical computer science, providing a formalisation of the concepts of algorithm and computation with the Turing machine, which can be considered a model of a general-purpose computer. Turing is widely considered to be the father of theoretical computer science.\nBorn in London, Turing was raised in southern England. He graduated from King's College, Cambridge, and in 1938, earned a doctorate degree from Princeton University. During World War II, Turing worked for the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park, Britain's codebreaking centre that produced Ultra intelligence. He led Hut 8, the section responsible for German naval cryptanalysis. Turing devised techniques for speeding the breaking of German ciphers, including improvements to the pre-war Polish bomba method, an electromechanical machine that could find settings for the Enigma machine. He played a crucial role in cracking intercepted messages that enabled the Allies to defeat the Axis powers in the Battle of the Atlantic and other engagements.\nAfter the war, Turing worked at the National Physical Laboratory, where he designed the Automatic Computing Engine, one of the first designs for a stored-program computer. In 1948, Turing joined Max Newman's Computing Machine Laboratory at the University of Manchester, where he contributed to the development of early Manchester computers and became interested in mathematical biology. Turing wrote on the chemical basis of morphogenesis and predicted oscillating chemical reactions such as the Belousov\u2013Zhabotinsky reaction, first observed in the 1960s. Despite these accomplishments, he was never fully recognised during his lifetime because much of his work was covered by the Official Secrets Act.\nIn 1952, Turing was prosecuted for homosexual acts. He accepted hormone treatment, a procedure commonly referred to as chemical castration, as an alternative to prison. Turing died on 7 June 1954, aged 41, from cyanide poisoning. An inquest determined his death as suicide, but the evidence is also consistent with accidental poisoning. Following a campaign in 2009, British prime minister Gordon Brown made an official public apology for \"the appalling way [Turing] was treated\". Queen Elizabeth II granted a pardon in 2013. The term \"Alan Turing law\" is used informally to refer to a 2017 law in the UK that retroactively pardoned men cautioned or convicted under historical legislation that outlawed homosexual acts.\nTuring left an extensive legacy in mathematics and computing which has become widely recognised with statues and many things named after him, including an annual award for computing innovation. His portrait appears on the Bank of England \u00a350 note, first released on 23 June 2021 to coincide with his birthday. The audience vote in a named Turing the greatest scientist of the 20th century.\nThe cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter writes: \u201cAtheist, homosexual, eccentric, marathon-running mathematician, A. M. Turing was in large part responsible not only for the concept of computers, incisive theorems about their powers, and a clear vision of the possibility of computer minds, but also for the cracking of German ciphers during the Second World War. It is fair to say we owe much to Alan Turing for the fact that we are not under Nazi rule today.\u201d\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nFamily.\nTuring was born in Maida Vale, London, while his father, Julius Mathison Turing, was on leave from his position with the Indian Civil Service (ICS) of the British Raj government at Chatrapur, then in the Madras Presidency and presently in Odisha state, in India. Turing's father was the son of a clergyman, the Rev.\u00a0John Robert Turing, from a Scottish family of merchants that had been based in the Netherlands and included a baronet. Turing's mother, Julius's wife, was Ethel Sara Turing (n\u00e9e\u00a0Stoney), daughter of Edward Waller Stoney, chief engineer of the Madras Railways. The Stoneys were a Protestant Anglo-Irish gentry family from both County Tipperary and County Longford, while Ethel herself had spent much of her childhood in County Clare. Julius and Ethel married on 1 October 1907 at the Church of Ireland St. Bartholomew's Church on Clyde Road in Ballsbridge, Dublin.\nJulius's work with the ICS brought the family to British India, where his grandfather had been a general in the Bengal Army. However, both Julius and Ethel wanted their children to be brought up in Britain, so they moved to Maida Vale, London, where Alan Turing was born on 23 June 1912, as recorded by a blue plaque on the outside of the house of his birth, later the Colonnade Hotel. Turing had an elder brother, John Ferrier Turing, father of Dermot Turing, 12th Baronet of the Turing baronets. In 1922, he discovered \"Natural Wonders Every Child Should Know\" by Edwin Tenney Brewster. He credited it with opening his eyes to science.\nTuring's father's civil service commission was still active during Turing's childhood years, and his parents travelled between Hastings in the United Kingdom and India, leaving their two sons to stay with a retired Army couple. At Hastings, Turing stayed at Baston Lodge, Upper Maze Hill, St Leonards-on-Sea, now marked with a blue plaque. The plaque was unveiled on 23 June 2012, the centenary of Turing's birth.\nVery early in life, Turing's parents purchased a house in Guildford in 1927, and Turing lived there during school holidays. The location is also marked with a blue plaque.\nSchool.\nTuring's parents enrolled him at St Michael's, a primary school at 20 Charles Road, St Leonards-on-Sea, from the age of six to nine. The headmistress recognised his talent, noting that she \"...had clever boys and hardworking boys, but Alan is a genius\".\nBetween January 1922 and 1926, Turing was educated at Hazelhurst Preparatory School, an independent school in the village of Frant in Sussex (now East Sussex). In 1926, at the age of 13, he went on to Sherborne School, an independent boarding school in the market town of Sherborne in Dorset, where he boarded at Westcott House. The first day of term coincided with the 1926 General Strike, in Britain, but Turing was so determined to attend that he rode his bicycle unaccompanied from Southampton to Sherborne, stopping overnight at an inn.\nTuring's natural inclination towards mathematics and science did not earn him respect from some of the teachers at Sherborne, whose definition of education placed more emphasis on the classics. His headmaster wrote to his parents: \"I hope he will not fall between two stools. If he is to stay at public school, he must aim at becoming \"educated\". If he is to be solely a \"Scientific Specialist\", he is wasting his time at a public school\". Despite this, Turing continued to show remarkable ability in the studies he loved, solving advanced problems in 1927 without having studied even elementary calculus. In 1928, aged 16, Turing encountered Albert Einstein's work; not only did he grasp it, but it is possible that he managed to deduce Einstein's questioning of Newton's laws of motion from a text in which this was never made explicit.\nChristopher Morcom.\nAt Sherborne, Turing formed a significant friendship with fellow pupil Christopher Collan Morcom (13 July 1911 \u2013 13 February 1930), who has been described as Turing's first love. Their relationship provided inspiration in Turing's future endeavours, but it was cut short by Morcom's death, in February 1930, from complications of bovine tuberculosis, contracted after drinking infected cow's milk some years previously.\nThe event caused Turing great sorrow. He coped with his grief by working that much harder on the topics of science and mathematics that he had shared with Morcom. In a letter to Morcom's mother, Frances Isobel Morcom (n\u00e9e Swan), Turing wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am sure I could not have found anywhere another companion so brilliant and yet so charming and unconceited. I regarded my interest in my work, and in such things as astronomy (to which he introduced me) as something to be shared with him and I think he felt a little the same about me\u00a0... I know I must put as much energy if not as much interest into my work as if he were alive, because that is what he would like me to do.\nTuring's relationship with Morcom's mother continued long after Morcom's death, with her sending gifts to Turing, and him sending letters, typically on Morcom's birthday. A day before the third anniversary of Morcom's death (13 February 1933), he wrote to Mrs. Morcom:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I expect you will be thinking of Chris when this reaches you. I shall too, and this letter is just to tell you that I shall be thinking of Chris and of you tomorrow. I am sure that he is as happy now as he was when he was here. Your affectionate Alan.\nSome have speculated that Morcom's death was the cause of Turing's atheism and materialism. Apparently, at this point in his life he still believed in such concepts as a spirit, independent of the body and surviving death. In a later letter, also written to Morcom's mother, Turing wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Personally, I believe that spirit is really eternally connected with matter but certainly not by the same kind of body\u00a0... as regards the actual connection between spirit and body I consider that the body can hold on to a 'spirit', whilst the body is alive and awake the two are firmly connected. When the body is asleep I cannot guess what happens but when the body dies, the 'mechanism' of the body, holding the spirit is gone and the spirit finds a new body sooner or later, perhaps immediately.\nUniversity and work on computability.\nAfter graduating from Sherborne, Turing applied for several Cambridge colleges scholarships, including Trinity and King's, eventually earning an \u00a380 per annum scholarship (equivalent to about \u00a34,300 as of 2023) to study at the latter. There, Turing studied the undergraduate course in Schedule B from February 1931 to November 1934 at King's College, Cambridge, where he was awarded first-class honours in mathematics. His dissertation, \"On the Gaussian error function\", written during his senior year and delivered in November 1934 proved a version of the central limit theorem. It was finally accepted on 16 March 1935. By spring of that same year, Turing started his master's course (Part III)\u2014which he completed in 1937\u2014and, at the same time, he published his first paper, a one-page article called \"Equivalence of left and right almost periodicity\" (sent on 23 April), featured in the tenth volume of the \"Journal of the London Mathematical Society\". Later that year, Turing was elected a Fellow of King's College on the strength of his dissertation where he served as a lecturer. However, unknown to Turing, the version of the theorem he proved in his paper had already been proven by Jarl Waldemar Lindeberg in 1922. Despite this, the committee found Turing's methods original and so regarded the work worthy of consideration for the fellowship. Abram Besicovitch's report for the committee went so far as to say that if Turing's work had been published before Lindeberg's, it would have been \"an important event in the mathematical literature of that year\".\nBetween the springs of 1935 and 1936, at the same time as Alonzo Church, Turing worked on the decidability of problems, starting from G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems. In mid-April 1936, Turing sent Max Newman the first draft typescript of his investigations. That same month, Church published his \"An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory\", with similar conclusions to Turing's then-yet unpublished work. Finally, on 28 May of that year, he finished and delivered his 36-page paper for publication called \"On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem\". It was published in the \"Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society\" journal in two parts, the first on 30 November and the second on 23 December. In this paper, Turing reformulated Kurt G\u00f6del's 1931 results on the limits of proof and computation, replacing G\u00f6del's universal arithmetic-based formal language with the formal and simple hypothetical devices that became known as Turing machines. The \"Entscheidungsproblem\" (decision problem) was originally posed by German mathematician David Hilbert in 1928. Turing proved that his \"universal computing machine\" would be capable of performing any conceivable mathematical computation if it were representable as an algorithm. He went on to prove that there was no solution to the \"decision problem\" by first showing that the halting problem for Turing machines is undecidable: it is not possible to decide algorithmically whether a Turing machine will ever halt. This paper has been called \"easily the most influential math paper in history\".\nAlthough Turing's proof was published shortly after Church's equivalent proof using his lambda calculus, Turing's approach is considerably more accessible and intuitive than Church's. It also included a notion of a 'Universal Machine' (now known as a universal Turing machine), with the idea that such a machine could perform the tasks of any other computation machine (as indeed could Church's lambda calculus). According to the Church\u2013Turing thesis, Turing machines and the lambda calculus are capable of computing anything that is computable. John von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to Turing's paper. To this day, Turing machines are a central object of study in theory of computation.\nFrom September 1936 to July 1938, Turing spent most of his time studying under Church at Princeton University, in the second year as a Jane Eliza Procter Visiting Fellow. In addition to his purely mathematical work, he studied cryptology and also built three of four stages of an electro-mechanical binary multiplier. In June 1938, he obtained his PhD from the Department of Mathematics at Princeton; his dissertation, \"Systems of Logic Based on Ordinals\", introduced the concept of ordinal logic and the notion of relative computing, in which Turing machines are augmented with so-called oracles, allowing the study of problems that cannot be solved by Turing machines. John von Neumann wanted to hire him as his postdoctoral assistant, but he went back to the United Kingdom.\nCareer and research.\nWhen Turing returned to Cambridge, he attended lectures given in 1939 by Ludwig Wittgenstein about the foundations of mathematics. The lectures have been reconstructed verbatim, including interjections from Turing and other students, from students' notes. Turing and Wittgenstein argued and disagreed, with Turing defending formalism and Wittgenstein propounding his view that mathematics does not discover any absolute truths, but rather invents them.\nCryptanalysis.\nDuring the Second World War, Turing was a leading participant in the breaking of German ciphers at Bletchley Park. The historian and wartime codebreaker Asa Briggs has said, \"You needed exceptional talent, you needed genius at Bletchley and Turing's was that genius.\"\nFrom September 1938, Turing worked part-time with the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&amp;CS), the British codebreaking organisation. He concentrated on cryptanalysis of the Enigma cipher machine used by Nazi Germany, together with Dilly Knox, a senior GC&amp;CS codebreaker. Soon after the July 1939 meeting near Warsaw at which the Polish Cipher Bureau gave the British and French details of the wiring of Enigma machine's rotors and their method of decrypting Enigma machine's messages, Turing and Knox developed a broader solution. The Polish method relied on an insecure indicator procedure that the Germans were likely to change, which they in fact did in May 1940. Turing's approach was more general, using crib-based decryption for which he produced the functional specification of the bombe (an improvement on the Polish Bomba).\nOn 4 September 1939, the day after the UK declared war on Germany, Turing reported to Bletchley Park, the wartime station of GC&amp;CS. Like all others who came to Bletchley, he was required to sign the Official Secrets Act, in which he agreed not to disclose anything about his work at Bletchley, with severe legal penalties for violating the Act.\nSpecifying the bombe was the first of five major cryptanalytical advances that Turing made during the war. The others were: deducing the indicator procedure used by the German navy; developing a statistical procedure dubbed \"Banburismus\" for making much more efficient use of the bombes; developing a procedure dubbed \"Turingery\" for working out the cam settings of the wheels of the Lorenz SZ 40/42 (\"Tunny\") cipher machine and, towards the end of the war, the development of a portable secure voice scrambler at Hanslope Park that was codenamed Delilah.\nBy using statistical techniques to optimise the trial of different possibilities in the code breaking process, Turing made an innovative contribution to the subject. He wrote two papers discussing mathematical approaches, titled \"The Applications of Probability to Cryptography\" and \"Paper on Statistics of Repetitions\", which were of such value to GC&amp;CS and its successor GCHQ that they were not released to the UK National Archives until April 2012, shortly before the centenary of his birth. A GCHQ mathematician, \"who identified himself only as Richard,\" said at the time that the fact that the contents had been restricted under the Official Secrets Act for some 70 years demonstrated their importance, and their relevance to post-war cryptanalysis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[He] said the fact that the contents had been restricted \"shows what a tremendous importance it has in the foundations of our subject\". ... The papers detailed using \"mathematical analysis to try and determine which are the more likely settings so that they can be tried as quickly as possible\". ... Richard said that GCHQ had now \"squeezed the juice\" out of the two papers and was \"happy for them to be released into the public domain\".\nTuring had a reputation for eccentricity at Bletchley Park. He was known to his colleagues as \"Prof\" and his treatise on Enigma was known as the \"Prof's Book\". According to historian Ronald Lewin, Jack Good, a cryptanalyst who worked with Turing, said of his colleague:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the first week of June each year he would get a bad attack of hay fever, and he would cycle to the office wearing a service gas mask to keep the pollen off. His bicycle had a fault: the chain would come off at regular intervals. Instead of having it mended he would count the number of times the pedals went round and would get off the bicycle in time to adjust the chain by hand. Another of his eccentricities is that he chained his mug to the radiator pipes to prevent it being stolen.\nPeter Hilton recounted his experience working with Turing in Hut 8 in his \"Reminiscences of Bletchley Park\" from \"A Century of Mathematics in America:\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is a rare experience to meet an authentic genius. Those of us privileged to inhabit the world of scholarship are familiar with the intellectual stimulation furnished by talented colleagues. We can admire the ideas they share with us and are usually able to understand their source; we may even often believe that we ourselves could have created such concepts and originated such thoughts. However, the experience of sharing the intellectual life of a genius is entirely different; one realizes that one is in the presence of an intelligence, a sensibility of such profundity and originality that one is filled with wonder and excitement.\nAlan Turing was such a genius, and those, like myself, who had the astonishing and unexpected opportunity, created by the strange exigencies of the Second World War, to be able to count Turing as colleague and friend will never forget that experience, nor can we ever lose its immense benefit to us.\nHilton echoed similar thoughts in the Nova PBS documentary \"Decoding Nazi Secrets\".\nWhile working at Bletchley, Turing, who was a talented long-distance runner, occasionally ran the to London when he was needed for meetings, and he was capable of world-class marathon standards. Turing tried out for the 1948 British Olympic team, but he was hampered by an injury. His tryout time for the marathon was only 11 minutes slower than British silver medallist Thomas Richards' Olympic race time of 2 hours 35 minutes. He was Walton Athletic Club's best runner, a fact discovered when he passed the group while running alone. When asked why he ran so hard in training he replied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have such a stressful job that the only way I can get it out of my mind is by running hard; it's the only way I can get some release.\nDue to the challenges answering questions concerning what an outcome would have been if a historical event did or did not occur (the realm of counterfactual history), it is hard to estimate the precise effect Ultra intelligence had on the war. However, official war historian Harry Hinsley estimated that this work shortened the war in Europe by more than two years. He added the caveat that this did not account for the use of the atomic bomb and other eventualities.\nAt the end of the war, a memo was sent to all those who had worked at Bletchley Park, reminding them that the code of silence dictated by the Official Secrets Act did not end with the war but would continue indefinitely. Thus, even though Turing was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1946 by King George VI for his wartime services, his work remained secret for many years.\nBombe.\nWithin weeks of arriving at Bletchley Park, Turing had specified an electromechanical machine called the bombe, which could break Enigma more effectively than the Polish \"bomba kryptologiczna\", from which its name was derived. The bombe, with an enhancement suggested by mathematician Gordon Welchman, became one of the primary tools, and the major automated one, used to attack Enigma-enciphered messages.\nThe bombe searched for possible correct settings used for an Enigma message (i.e., rotor order, rotor settings and plugboard settings) using a suitable \"crib\": a fragment of probable plaintext. For each possible setting of the rotors (which had on the order of 1019 states, or 1022 states for the four-rotor U-boat variant), the bombe performed a chain of logical deductions based on the crib, implemented electromechanically.\nThe bombe detected when a contradiction had occurred and ruled out that setting, moving on to the next. Most of the possible settings would cause contradictions and be discarded, leaving only a few to be investigated in detail. A contradiction would occur when an enciphered letter would be turned back into the same plaintext letter, which was impossible with the Enigma. The first bombe was installed on 18 March 1940.\nAction This Day.\nBy late 1941, Turing and his fellow cryptanalysts Gordon Welchman, Hugh Alexander and Stuart Milner-Barry were frustrated. Building on the work of the Poles, they had set up a good working system for decrypting Enigma signals, but their limited staff and bombes meant they could not translate all the signals. In the summer, they had considerable success, and shipping losses had fallen to under 100,000 tons a month; however, they badly needed more resources to keep abreast of German adjustments. They had tried to get more people and fund more bombes through the proper channels, but had failed.\nOn 28 October they wrote directly to Winston Churchill explaining their difficulties, with Turing as the first named. They emphasised how small their need was compared with the vast expenditure of men and money by the forces and compared with the level of assistance they could offer to the forces. As Andrew Hodges, biographer of Turing, later wrote, \"This letter had an electric effect.\" Churchill wrote a memo to General Ismay, which read: \"ACTION THIS DAY. Make sure they have all they want on extreme priority and report to me that this has been done.\" On 18 November, the chief of the secret service reported that every possible measure was being taken. The cryptographers at Bletchley Park did not know of the Prime Minister's response, but as Milner-Barry recalled, \"All that we did notice was that almost from that day the rough ways began miraculously to be made smooth.\" More than two hundred bombes were in operation by the end of the war.\nHut 8 and the naval Enigma.\nTuring decided to tackle the particularly difficult problem of cracking the German naval use of Enigma \"because no one else was doing anything about it and I could have it to myself\". In December 1939, Turing solved the essential part of the naval indicator system, which was more complex than the indicator systems used by the other services.\nThat same night, he also conceived of the idea of \"Banburismus\", a sequential statistical technique (what Abraham Wald later called sequential analysis) to assist in breaking the naval Enigma, \"though I was not sure that it would work in practice, and was not, in fact, sure until some days had actually broken\". For this, he invented a measure of weight of evidence that he called the \"ban\". \"Banburismus\" could rule out certain sequences of the Enigma rotors, substantially reducing the time needed to test settings on the bombes. Later this sequential process of accumulating sufficient weight of evidence using decibans (one tenth of a ban) was used in cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher.\nTuring travelled to the United States in November 1942 and worked with US Navy cryptanalysts on the naval Enigma and bombe construction in Washington. He also visited their Computing Machine Laboratory in Dayton, Ohio.\nTuring's reaction to the American bombe design was far from enthusiastic:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The American Bombe programme was to produce 336 Bombes, one for each wheel order. I used to smile inwardly at the conception of Bombe hut routine implied by this programme, but thought that no particular purpose would be served by pointing out that we would not really use them in that way.\nTheir test (of commutators) can hardly be considered conclusive as they were not testing for the bounce with electronic stop finding devices. Nobody seems to be told about rods or offiziers or banburismus unless they are really going to do something about it.\nDuring this trip, he also assisted at Bell Labs with the development of secure speech devices. He returned to Bletchley Park in March 1943. During his absence, Hugh Alexander had officially assumed the position of head of Hut 8, although Alexander had been \"de facto\" head for some time (Turing having little interest in the day-to-day running of the section). Turing became a general consultant for cryptanalysis at Bletchley Park.\nAlexander wrote of Turing's contribution:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There should be no question in anyone's mind that Turing's work was the biggest factor in Hut 8's success. In the early days, he was the only cryptographer who thought the problem worth tackling and not only was he primarily responsible for the main theoretical work within the Hut, but he also shared with Welchman and Keen the chief credit for the invention of the bombe. It is always difficult to say that anyone is 'absolutely indispensable', but if anyone was indispensable to Hut 8, it was Turing. The pioneer's work always tends to be forgotten when experience and routine later make everything seem easy and many of us in Hut 8 felt that the magnitude of Turing's contribution was never fully realised by the outside world.\nTuringery.\nIn July 1942, Turing devised a technique termed \"Turingery\" (or jokingly \"Turingismus\") for use against the Lorenz cipher messages produced by the Germans' new \"Geheimschreiber\" (secret writer) machine. This was a teleprinter rotor cipher attachment codenamed \"Tunny\" at Bletchley Park. Turingery was a method of \"wheel-breaking\", i.e., a procedure for working out the cam settings of Tunny's wheels. He also introduced the Tunny team to Tommy Flowers who, under the guidance of Max Newman, went on to build the Colossus computer, the world's first programmable digital electronic computer, which replaced a simpler prior machine (the Heath Robinson), and whose superior speed allowed the statistical decryption techniques to be applied usefully to the messages. Some have mistakenly said that Turing was a key figure in the design of the Colossus computer. Turingery and the statistical approach of Banburismus undoubtedly fed into the thinking about cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher, but he was not directly involved in the Colossus development.\nDelilah.\nFollowing his work at Bell Labs in the US, Turing pursued the idea of electronic enciphering of speech in the telephone system. In the latter part of the war, he moved to work for the Secret Service's Radio Security Service (later HMGCC) at Hanslope Park. At the park, he further developed his knowledge of electronics with the assistance of REME officer Donald Bayley. Together they undertook the design and construction of a portable secure voice communications machine codenamed \"Delilah\". The machine was intended for different applications, but it lacked the capability for use with long-distance radio transmissions. In any case, Delilah was completed too late to be used during the war. Though the system worked fully, with Turing demonstrating it to officials by encrypting and decrypting a recording of a Winston Churchill speech, Delilah was not adopted for use. Turing also consulted with Bell Labs on the development of SIGSALY, a secure voice system that was used in the later years of the war.\nEarly computers and the Turing test.\nBetween 1945 and 1947, Turing lived in Hampton, London, while he worked on the design of the ACE (Automatic Computing Engine) at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL). He presented a paper on 19 February 1946, which was the first detailed design of a stored-program computer. Von Neumann's incomplete \"First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC\" had predated Turing's paper, but it was much less detailed and, according to John R. Womersley, Superintendent of the NPL Mathematics Division, it \"contains a number of ideas which are Dr. Turing's own\".\nAlthough ACE was a feasible design, the effect of the Official Secrets Act surrounding the wartime work at Bletchley Park made it impossible for Turing to explain the basis of his analysis of how a computer installation involving human operators would work. This led to delays in starting the project and he became disillusioned. In late 1947 he returned to Cambridge for a sabbatical year during which he produced a seminal work on \"Intelligent Machinery\" that was not published in his lifetime. While he was at Cambridge, the Pilot ACE was being built in his absence. It executed its first program on 10 May 1950, and a number of later computers around the world owe much to it, including the English Electric DEUCE and the American Bendix G-15. The full version of Turing's ACE was not built until after his death.\nAccording to the memoirs of the German computer pioneer Heinz Billing from the Max Planck Institute for Physics, published by Genscher, D\u00fcsseldorf, there was a meeting between Turing and Konrad Zuse. It took place in G\u00f6ttingen in 1947. The interrogation had the form of a colloquium. Participants were Womersley, Turing, Porter from England and a few German researchers like Zuse, Walther, and Billing (for more details see Herbert Bruderer, \"Konrad Zuse und die Schweiz\").\nIn 1948, Turing was appointed reader in the Mathematics Department at the University of Manchester. He lived at \"Copper Folly\", 43 Adlington Road, in Wilmslow. A year later, he became deputy director of the Computing Machine Laboratory, where he worked on software for one of the earliest stored-program computers\u2014the Manchester Mark 1. Turing wrote the first version of the Programmer's Manual for this machine, was elected to membership of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, and was recruited by Ferranti as a consultant in the development of their commercialised machine, the Ferranti Mark 1. He continued to be paid consultancy fees by Ferranti until his death. During this time, he continued to do more abstract work in mathematics,&lt;ref name=\"doi10.1093/qjmam/1.1.287\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and in \"Computing Machinery and Intelligence\", Turing addressed the problem of artificial intelligence, and proposed an experiment that became known as the Turing test, an attempt to define a standard for a machine to be called \"intelligent\". The idea was that a computer could be said to \"think\" if a human interrogator could not tell it apart, through conversation, from a human being. In the paper, Turing suggested that rather than building a program to simulate the adult mind, it would be better to produce a simpler one to simulate a child's mind and then to subject it to a course of education. A reversed form of the Turing test is widely used on the Internet; the CAPTCHA test is intended to determine whether the user is a human or a computer.\nIn 1948, Turing, working with his former undergraduate colleague, D.G. Champernowne, began writing a chess program for a computer that did not yet exist. By 1950, the program was completed and dubbed the Turochamp. In 1952, he tried to implement it on a Ferranti Mark 1, but lacking enough power, the computer was unable to execute the program. Instead, Turing \"ran\" the program by flipping through the pages of the algorithm and carrying out its instructions on a chessboard, taking about half an hour per move. The game was recorded. According to Garry Kasparov, Turing's program \"played a recognizable game of chess\". The program lost to Turing's colleague Alick Glennie, although it is said that it won a game against Champernowne's wife, Isabel.\nHis Turing test was a significant, characteristically provocative, and lasting contribution to the debate regarding artificial intelligence, which continues after more than half a century.\nPattern formation and mathematical biology.\nWhen Turing was 39 years old in 1951, he turned to mathematical biology, finally publishing his masterpiece \"The Chemical Basis of Morphogenesis\" in January 1952. He was interested in morphogenesis, the development of patterns and shapes in biological organisms. He suggested that a system of chemicals reacting with each other and diffusing across space, termed a reaction\u2013diffusion system, could account for \"the main phenomena of morphogenesis\". He used systems of partial differential equations to model catalytic chemical reactions. For example, if a catalyst A is required for a certain chemical reaction to take place, and if the reaction produced more of the catalyst A, then we say that the reaction is autocatalytic, and there is positive feedback that can be modelled by nonlinear differential equations. Turing discovered that patterns could be created if the chemical reaction not only produced catalyst A, but also produced an inhibitor B that slowed down the production of A. If A and B then diffused through the container at different rates, then you could have some regions where A dominated and some where B did. To calculate the extent of this, Turing would have needed a powerful computer, but these were not so freely available in 1951, so he had to use linear approximations to solve the equations by hand. These calculations gave the right qualitative results, and produced, for example, a uniform mixture that oddly enough had regularly spaced fixed red spots. The Russian biochemist Boris Belousov had performed experiments with similar results, but could not get his papers published because of the contemporary prejudice that any such thing violated the second law of thermodynamics. Belousov was not aware of Turing's paper in the \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\".\nAlthough published before the structure and role of DNA was understood, Turing's work on morphogenesis remains relevant today and is considered a seminal piece of work in mathematical biology. One of the early applications of Turing's paper was the work by James Murray explaining spots and stripes on the fur of cats, large and small. Further research in the area suggests that Turing's work can partially explain the growth of \"feathers, hair follicles, the branching pattern of lungs, and even the left-right asymmetry that puts the heart on the left side of the chest\". In 2012, Sheth, et al. found that in mice, removal of Hox genes causes an increase in the number of digits without an increase in the overall size of the limb, suggesting that Hox genes control digit formation by tuning the wavelength of a Turing-type mechanism. Later papers were not available until \"Collected Works of A.\u00a0M.\u00a0Turing\" was published in 1992.\nA study conducted in 2023 confirmed Turing's mathematical model hypothesis. Presented by the American Physical Society, the experiment involved growing chia seeds in even layers within trays, later adjusting the available moisture. Researchers experimentally tweaked the factors which appear in the Turing equations, and, as a result, patterns resembling those seen in natural environments emerged. This is believed to be the first time that experiments with living vegetation have verified Turing's mathematical insight.\nPersonal life.\nTreasure.\nIn the 1940s, Turing became worried about losing his savings in the event of a German invasion. In order to protect it, he bought two silver bars weighing and worth \u00a3250 (in 2022, \u00a38,000 adjusted for inflation, \u00a348,000 at spot price) and buried them in a wood near Bletchley Park. Upon returning to dig them up, Turing found that he was unable to break his own code describing where exactly he had hidden them. This, along with the fact that the area had been renovated, meant that he never regained the silver.\nEngagement.\nIn 1941, Turing proposed marriage to Hut 8 colleague Joan Clarke, a fellow mathematician and cryptanalyst, but their engagement was short-lived. After admitting his homosexuality to his fianc\u00e9e, who was reportedly \"unfazed\" by the revelation, Turing decided that he could not go through with the marriage.\nChess.\nTuring invented a hybrid chess sport, earlier than chess boxing, referred to as \"round-the-house chess\", one player makes a chess move, then that player runs around the house, and the other player must make a chess move before the first player returns.&lt;ref name=\"scienceblogs/turings-chess\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHomosexuality and indecency conviction.\nIn December 1951, Turing met Arnold Murray, a 19-year-old unemployed man. Turing was walking along Manchester's Oxford Road when he met Murray just outside the Regal Cinema and invited him to lunch. The two agreed to meet again and in January 1952 began an intimate relationship. On 23 January, Turing's house in Wilmslow was burgled. Murray told Turing that he and the burglar were acquainted, and Turing reported the crime to the police. During the investigation, he acknowledged a sexual relationship with Murray. Homosexual acts were criminal offences in the United Kingdom at that time, and both men were charged with \"gross indecency\" under Section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885. Initial committal proceedings for the trial were held on 27 February during which Turing's solicitor \"reserved his defence\", i.e., did not argue or provide evidence against the allegations. The proceedings were held at the Sessions House in Knutsford.\nTuring was later convinced by the advice of his brother and his own solicitor, and he entered a plea of guilty. The case, \"Regina v. Turing and Murray,\" was brought to trial on 31 March 1952. Turing was convicted and given a choice between imprisonment and probation. His probation would be conditional on his agreement to undergo hormonal physical changes designed to reduce libido, known as \"chemical castration\". He accepted the option of injections of what was then called stilboestrol (now known as diethylstilbestrol or DES), a synthetic oestrogen; this feminization of his body was continued for the course of one year. The treatment rendered Turing impotent and caused breast tissue to form. In a letter, Turing wrote that \"no doubt I shall emerge from it all a different man, but quite who I've not found out\". Murray was given a conditional discharge.\nTuring's conviction led to the removal of his security clearance and barred him from continuing with his cryptographic consultancy for GCHQ, the British signals intelligence agency that had evolved from GC&amp;CS in 1946, though he kept his academic post. His trial took place only months after the defection to the Soviet Union of Guy Burgess and Donald Maclean, in summer 1951, after which the Foreign Office started to consider anyone known to be homosexual as a potential security risk.\nTuring was denied entry into the United States after his conviction in 1952, but was free to visit other European countries. In the summer of 1952 he visited Norway which was more tolerant of homosexuals. Among the various men he met there was one named Kjell Carlson. Kjell intended to visit Turing in the UK but the authorities intercepted Kjell's postcard detailing his travel arrangements and were able to intercept and deport him before the two could meet. It was also during this time that Turing started consulting a psychiatrist, Franz Greenbaum, with whom he got on well and who subsequently became a family friend.\nDeath.\nOn 8 June 1954, at his house at 43 Adlington Road, Wilmslow, Turing's housekeeper found him dead. A post mortem was held that evening, which determined that he had died the previous day at age 41 with cyanide poisoning cited as the cause of death. When his body was discovered, an apple lay half-eaten beside his bed, and although the apple was not tested for cyanide, it was speculated that this was the means by which Turing had consumed a fatal dose.\nTuring's brother, John, identified the body the following day and took the advice given by Franz Greenbaum to accept the verdict of the inquest, as there was little prospect of establishing that the death was accidental. The inquest was held the following day, which determined the cause of death to be suicide. His nephew, writer Dermot Turing, does not believe that his conviction or hormone treatment had anything to do with his suicide. He points out that the conviction ended in 1952 and the treatment the following year. Furthermore, no physiological evidence was found that the treatment had any impact on his uncle's mental health, and he had just made a list of tasks he needed to perform when he got back to his office after a public holiday. Turing may have inhaled cyanide fumes from an electroplating experiment in his spare room, and he often ate an apple before bed, leaving it half eaten.\nTuring's remains were cremated at Woking Crematorium just two days later on 12 June 1954, with just his mother, brother, and Lyn Newman attending, and his ashes were scattered in the gardens of the crematorium, just as his father's had been. Turing's mother was on holiday in Italy at the time of his death and returned home after the inquest. She never accepted the verdict of suicide.\nPhilosopher Jack Copeland has questioned various aspects of the coroner's historical verdict. He suggested an alternative explanation for the cause of Turing's death: the accidental inhalation of cyanide fumes from an apparatus used to electroplate gold onto spoons. The potassium cyanide was used to dissolve the gold. Turing had such an apparatus set up in his tiny spare room. Copeland noted that the autopsy findings were more consistent with inhalation than with ingestion of the poison. Turing also habitually ate an apple before going to bed, and it was not unusual for the apple to be discarded half-eaten. Furthermore, Turing had reportedly borne his legal setbacks and hormone treatment (which had been discontinued a year previously) \"with good humour\" and had shown no sign of despondency before his death. He even set down a list of tasks that he intended to complete upon returning to his office after the holiday weekend. Turing's mother believed that the ingestion was accidental, resulting from her son's careless storage of laboratory chemicals. Turing biographer Andrew Hodges theorised that Turing deliberately made his death look accidental in order to shield his mother from the knowledge that he had killed himself.\nDoubts on the suicide thesis have been also cast by John W. Dawson Jr. who, in his review of Hodges' book, recalls \"Turing's vulnerable position in the Cold War political climate\" and points out that \"Turing was found dead by a maid, who discovered him 'lying neatly in his bed'\u2014hardly what one would expect of \"a man fighting for life against the suffocation induced by cyanide poisoning.\" Turing had given no hint of suicidal inclinations to his friends and had made no effort to put his affairs in order.\nHodges and a later biographer, David Leavitt, have both speculated that Turing was re-enacting a scene from the Walt Disney film \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" (1937), his favourite fairy tale. Both men noted that (in Leavitt's words) he took \"an especially keen pleasure in the scene where the Wicked Queen immerses her apple in the poisonous brew\".\nIt has also been suggested that Turing's belief in fortune-telling may have caused his depressed mood. As a youth, Turing had been told by a fortune-teller that he would be a genius. In mid-May 1954, shortly before his death, Turing again decided to consult a fortune-teller during a day-trip to St Annes-on-Sea with the Greenbaum family. According to the Greenbaums' daughter, Barbara:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But it was a lovely sunny day and Alan was in a cheerful mood and off we went\u00a0... Then he thought it would be a good idea to go to the Pleasure Beach at Blackpool. We found a fortune-teller's tent and Alan said he'd like to go in[,] so we waited around for him to come back\u00a0... And this sunny, cheerful visage had shrunk into a pale, shaking, horror-stricken face. Something had happened. We don't know what the fortune-teller said but he obviously was deeply unhappy. I think that was probably the last time we saw him before we heard of his suicide.\nGovernment apology and pardon.\nIn August 2009, British programmer John Graham-Cumming started a petition urging the British government to apologise for Turing's prosecution as a homosexual. The petition received more than 30,000 signatures. The prime minister, Gordon Brown, acknowledged the petition, releasing a statement on 10 September 2009 apologising and describing the treatment of Turing as \"appalling\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thousands of people have come together to demand justice for Alan Turing and recognition of the appalling way he was treated. While Turing was dealt with under the law of the time and we can't put the clock back, his treatment was of course utterly unfair and I am pleased to have the chance to say how deeply sorry I and we all are for what happened to him\u00a0... So on behalf of the British government, and all those who live freely thanks to Alan's work I am very proud to say: we're sorry, you deserved so much better.\nIn December 2011, William Jones and his member of Parliament, John Leech, created an e-petition requesting that the British government pardon Turing for his conviction of \"gross indecency\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We ask the HM Government to grant a pardon to Alan Turing for the conviction of \"gross indecency\". In 1952, he was convicted of \"gross indecency\" with another man and was forced to undergo so-called \"organo-therapy\"\u2014chemical castration. Two years later, he killed himself with cyanide, aged just 41. Alan Turing was driven to a terrible despair and early death by the nation he'd done so much to save. This remains a shame on the British government and British history. A pardon can go some way to healing this damage. It may act as an apology to many of the other gay men, not as well-known as Alan Turing, who were subjected to these laws.\nThe petition gathered over 37,000 signatures, and was submitted to Parliament by the Manchester MP John Leech but the request was discouraged by Justice Minister Lord McNally, who said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A posthumous pardon was not considered appropriate as Alan Turing was properly convicted of what at the time was a criminal offence. He would have known that his offence was against the law and that he would be prosecuted. It is tragic that Alan Turing was convicted of an offence that now seems both cruel and absurd\u2014particularly poignant given his outstanding contribution to the war effort. However, the law at the time required a prosecution and, as such, long-standing policy has been to accept that such convictions took place and, rather than trying to alter the historical context and to put right what cannot be put right, ensure instead that we never again return to those times.\nJohn Leech, the MP for Manchester Withington (2005\u201315), submitted several bills to Parliament and led a high-profile campaign to secure the pardon. Leech made the case in the House of Commons that Turing's contribution to the war made him a national hero and that it was \"ultimately just embarrassing\" that the conviction still stood. Leech continued to take the bill through Parliament and campaigned for several years, gaining the public support of numerous leading scientists, including Stephen Hawking.\nOn 26 July 2012, a bill was introduced in the House of Lords to grant a statutory pardon to Turing for offences under section 11 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act 1885, of which he was convicted on 31 March 1952. Late in the year in a letter to \"The Daily Telegraph\", the physicist Stephen Hawking and 10 other signatories including the Astronomer Royal Lord Rees, President of the Royal Society Sir Paul Nurse, Lady Trumpington (who worked for Turing during the war) and Lord Sharkey (the bill's sponsor) called on Prime Minister David Cameron to act on the pardon request. The government indicated it would support the bill, and it passed its third reading in the House of Lords in October.\nAt the bill's second reading in the House of Commons on 29 November 2013, Conservative MP Christopher Chope objected to the bill, delaying its passage. The bill was due to return to the House of Commons on 28 February 2014, but before the bill could be debated in the House of Commons, the government elected to proceed under the royal prerogative of mercy. On 24 December 2013, Queen Elizabeth II signed a pardon for Turing's conviction for \"gross indecency\", with immediate effect. Announcing the pardon, Lord Chancellor Chris Grayling said Turing deserved to be \"remembered and recognised for his fantastic contribution to the war effort\" and not for his later criminal conviction. The Queen pronounced Turing pardoned in August 2014. It was only the fourth royal pardon granted since the conclusion of the Second World War. Pardons are normally granted only when the person is technically innocent, and a request has been made by the family or other interested party; neither condition was met in regard to Turing's conviction.\nIn September 2016, the government announced its intention to expand this retroactive exoneration to other men convicted of similar historical indecency offences, in what was described as an \"Alan Turing law\". The Alan Turing law is now an informal term for the law in the United Kingdom, contained in the Policing and Crime Act 2017, which serves as an amnesty law to retroactively pardon men who were cautioned or convicted under historical legislation that outlawed homosexual acts. The law applies in England and Wales. Due to his repeated attempts to bring attention to the issue, Leech is now regularly described as the \"architect\" of Turing's pardon and subsequently the Alan Turing Law, which went on to secure pardons for 75,000 other men and women. At the British premiere of a film based on Turing's life, \"The Imitation Game\", the producers thanked Leech for bringing the topic to public attention and securing Turing's pardon.\nOn 19 July 2023, following an apology to LGBT veterans from the UK Government, Defence Secretary Ben Wallace suggested Turing should be honoured with a permanent statue on the fourth plinth of Trafalgar Square, describing Turing as \"probably the greatest war hero, in my book, of the Second World War, [whose] achievements shortened the war, saved thousands of lives, helped defeat the Nazis. And his story is a sad story of a society and how it treated him.\"\nSee also.\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1996, a copy was released to the National Archives and Records Administration.&lt;ref name=\"turingarchive/amt-b-27b\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Then a copy was released to National Archives, Kew.&lt;ref name=\"discovery.NA.uk/C6136632\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Mahon's account is first-hand from October 1941. Also published as a book chapter (), and a volume in a series.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPapers\nInterviews\nArticles\nWebsites\nEvents\nSherborne School"}
{"id": "1209", "revid": "166386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1209", "title": "Area", "text": "Size of a two-dimensional surface\nArea is the measure of a region's size on a surface. The area of a plane region or \"plane area\" refers to the area of a shape or planar lamina, while \"surface area\" refers to the area of an open surface or the boundary of a three-dimensional object. Area can be understood as the amount of material with a given thickness that would be necessary to fashion a model of the shape, or the amount of paint necessary to cover the surface with a single coat. It is the two-dimensional analogue of the length of a curve (a one-dimensional concept) or the volume of a solid (a three-dimensional concept).\nTwo different regions may have the same area (as in squaring the circle); by synecdoche, \"area\" sometimes is used to refer to the region, as in a \"polygonal area\".\nThe area of a shape can be measured by comparing the shape to squares of a fixed size. In the International System of Units (SI), the standard unit of area is the square metre (written as m2), which is the area of a square whose sides are one metre long. A shape with an area of three square metres would have the same area as three such squares. In mathematics, the unit square is defined to have area one, and the area of any other shape or surface is a dimensionless real number.\nThere are several well-known formulas for the areas of simple shapes such as triangles, rectangles, and circles. Using these formulas, the area of any polygon can be found by dividing the polygon into triangles. For shapes with curved boundary, calculus is usually required to compute the area. Indeed, the problem of determining the area of plane figures was a major motivation for the historical development of calculus.\nFor a solid shape such as a sphere, cone, or cylinder, the area of its boundary surface is called the surface area. Formulas for the surface areas of simple shapes were computed by the ancient Greeks, but computing the surface area of a more complicated shape usually requires multivariable calculus.\nArea plays an important role in modern mathematics. In addition to its obvious importance in geometry and calculus, area is related to the definition of determinants in linear algebra, and is a basic property of surfaces in differential geometry. In analysis, the area of a subset of the plane is defined using Lebesgue measure, though not every subset is measurable if one supposes the axiom of choice. In general, area in higher mathematics is seen as a special case of volume for two-dimensional regions.\nArea can be defined through the use of axioms, defining it as a function of a collection of certain plane figures to the set of real numbers. It can be proved that such a function exists.\nFormal definition.\nAn approach to defining what is meant by \"area\" is through axioms. \"Area\" can be defined as a function from a collection M of a special kinds of plane figures (termed measurable sets) to the set of real numbers, which satisfies the following properties:\nIt can be proved that such an area function actually exists.\nUnits.\nEvery unit of length has a corresponding unit of area, namely the area of a square with the given side length. Thus areas can be measured in square metres (m2), square centimetres (cm2), square millimetres (mm2), square kilometres (km2), square feet (ft2), square yards (yd2), square miles (mi2), and so forth. Algebraically, these units can be thought of as the squares of the corresponding length units.\nThe SI unit of area is the square metre, which is considered an SI derived unit.\nConversions.\nCalculation of the area of a square whose length and width are 1 metre would be:\n1 metre \u00d7 1 metre = 1\u00a0m2\nand so, a rectangle with different sides (say length of 3 metres and width of 2 metres) would have an area in square units that can be calculated as:\n3 metres \u00d7 2 metres = 6\u00a0m2. This is equivalent to 6 million square millimetres. Other useful conversions are:\nNon-metric units.\nIn non-metric units, the conversion between two square units is the square of the conversion between the corresponding length units.\n1 foot = 12 inches,\nthe relationship between square feet and square inches is\n1 square foot = 144 square inches,\nwhere 144 = 122 = 12 \u00d7 12. Similarly:\nIn addition, conversion factors include:\nOther units including historical.\nThere are several other common units for area. The are was the original unit of area in the metric system, with:\nThough the are has fallen out of use, the hectare is still commonly used to measure land:\nOther uncommon metric units of area include the tetrad, the hectad, and the myriad.\nThe acre is also commonly used to measure land areas, where\nAn acre is approximately 40% of a hectare.\nOn the atomic scale, area is measured in units of barns, such that:\nThe barn is commonly used in describing the cross-sectional area of interaction in nuclear physics.\nIn South Asia (mainly Indians), although the countries use SI units as official, many South Asians still use traditional units. Each administrative division has its own area unit, some of them have same names, but with different values. There's no official consensus about the traditional units values. Thus, the conversions between the SI units and the traditional units may have different results, depending on what reference that has been used.\nSome traditional South Asian units that have fixed value:\nHistory.\nCircle area.\nIn the 5th century BCE, Hippocrates of Chios was the first to show that the area of a disk (the region enclosed by a circle) is proportional to the square of its diameter, as part of his quadrature of the lune of Hippocrates, but did not identify the constant of proportionality. Eudoxus of Cnidus, also in the 5th century BCE, also found that the area of a disk is proportional to its radius squared.\nSubsequently, Book I of Euclid's \"Elements\" dealt with equality of areas between two-dimensional figures. The mathematician Archimedes used the tools of Euclidean geometry to show that the area inside a circle is equal to that of a right triangle whose base has the length of the circle's circumference and whose height equals the circle's radius, in his book \"Measurement of a Circle\". (The circumference is 2\u03c0\"r\", and the area of a triangle is half the base times the height, yielding the area \u03c0\"r\"2 for the disk.) Archimedes approximated the value of \u03c0 (and hence the area of a unit-radius circle) with his doubling method, in which he inscribed a regular triangle in a circle and noted its area, then doubled the number of sides to give a regular hexagon, then repeatedly doubled the number of sides as the polygon's area got closer and closer to that of the circle (and did the same with circumscribed polygons).\nQuadrilateral area.\nIn the 7th century CE, Brahmagupta developed a formula, now known as Brahmagupta's formula, for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral (a quadrilateral inscribed in a circle) in terms of its sides. In 1842, the German mathematicians Carl Anton Bretschneider and Karl Georg Christian von Staudt independently found a formula, known as Bretschneider's formula, for the area of any quadrilateral.\nGeneral polygon area.\nThe development of Cartesian coordinates by Ren\u00e9 Descartes in the 17th century allowed the development of the surveyor's formula for the area of any polygon with known vertex locations by Gauss in the 19th century.\nAreas determined using calculus.\nThe development of integral calculus in the late 17th century provided tools that could subsequently be used for computing more complicated areas, such as the area of an ellipse and the surface areas of various curved three-dimensional objects.\nArea formulas.\nPolygon formulas.\nFor a non-self-intersecting (simple) polygon, the Cartesian coordinates formula_1 (\"i\"=0, 1, ..., \"n\"-1) of whose \"n\" vertices are known, the area is given by the surveyor's formula:\nformula_2\nwhere when \"i\"=\"n\"-1, then \"i\"+1 is expressed as modulus \"n\" and so refers to 0.\nRectangles.\nThe most basic area formula is the formula for the area of a rectangle. Given a rectangle with length l and width w, the formula for the area is:\n\"A\" \n \"lw\" \u00a0(rectangle).\nThat is, the area of the rectangle is the length multiplied by the width. As a special case, as \"l\" \n \"w\" in the case of a square, the area of a square with side length s is given by the formula:\n\"A\" \n \"s\"2 \u00a0(square).\nThe formula for the area of a rectangle follows directly from the basic properties of area, and is sometimes taken as a definition or axiom. On the other hand, if geometry is developed before arithmetic, this formula can be used to define multiplication of real numbers.\nDissection, parallelograms, and triangles.\nMost other simple formulas for area follow from the method of dissection.\nThis involves cutting a shape into pieces, whose areas must sum to the area of the original shape.\nFor an example, any parallelogram can be subdivided into a trapezoid and a right triangle, as shown in figure to the left. If the triangle is moved to the other side of the trapezoid, then the resulting figure is a rectangle. It follows that the area of the parallelogram is the same as the area of the rectangle:\n\"A\" \n \"bh\" \u00a0(parallelogram).\nHowever, the same parallelogram can also be cut along a diagonal into two congruent triangles, as shown in the figure to the right. It follows that the area of each triangle is half the area of the parallelogram:\nformula_3 \u00a0(triangle).\nSimilar arguments can be used to find area formulas for the trapezoid as well as more complicated polygons.\nArea of curved shapes.\nCircles.\nThe formula for the area of a circle (more properly called the area enclosed by a circle or the area of a disk) is based on a similar method. Given a circle of radius \"r\", it is possible to partition the circle into sectors, as shown in the figure to the right. Each sector is approximately triangular in shape, and the sectors can be rearranged to form an approximate parallelogram. The height of this parallelogram is \"r\", and the width is half the circumference of the circle, or \u03c0\"r\". Thus, the total area of the circle is \u03c0\"r\"2:\n\"A\" \n \u03c0\"r\"2 \u00a0(circle).\nThough the dissection used in this formula is only approximate, the error becomes smaller and smaller as the circle is partitioned into more and more sectors. The limit of the areas of the approximate parallelograms is exactly \u03c0\"r\"2, which is the area of the circle.\nThis argument is actually a simple application of the ideas of calculus. In ancient times, the method of exhaustion was used in a similar way to find the area of the circle, and this method is now recognized as a precursor to integral calculus. Using modern methods, the area of a circle can be computed using a definite integral:\nformula_4\nEllipses.\nThe formula for the area enclosed by an ellipse is related to the formula of a circle; for an ellipse with semi-major and semi-minor axes \"x\" and \"y\" the formula is:\nformula_5\nNon-planar surface area.\nMost basic formulas for surface area can be obtained by cutting surfaces and flattening them out (see: developable surfaces). For example, if the side surface of a cylinder (or any prism) is cut lengthwise, the surface can be flattened out into a rectangle. Similarly, if a cut is made along the side of a cone, the side surface can be flattened out into a sector of a circle, and the resulting area computed.\nThe formula for the surface area of a sphere is more difficult to derive: because a sphere has nonzero Gaussian curvature, it cannot be flattened out. The formula for the surface area of a sphere was first obtained by Archimedes in his work \"On the Sphere and Cylinder\". The formula is:\n\"A\" \n 4\"\u03c0r\"2 \u00a0(sphere), \nwhere \"r\" is the radius of the sphere. As with the formula for the area of a circle, any derivation of this formula inherently uses methods similar to calculus.\nformula_12\nformula_13 where formula_14 is the curve with the greater y-value.\nformula_16\nformula_19\n or the \"z\"-component of\nformula_20\n(For details, see .) This is the principle of the planimeter mechanical device.\nGeneral formulas.\nBounded area between two quadratic functions.\nTo find the bounded area between two quadratic functions, we first subtract one from the other, writing the difference as\nformula_21\nwhere \"f\"(\"x\") is the quadratic upper bound and \"g\"(\"x\") is the quadratic lower bound. \nBy the area integral formulas above and Vieta's formula, we can obtain that\nformula_22\nThe above remains valid if one of the bounding functions is linear instead of quadratic.\nGeneral formula for surface area.\nThe general formula for the surface area of the graph of a continuously differentiable function formula_36 where formula_37 and formula_38 is a region in the xy-plane with the smooth boundary:\n formula_39\nAn even more general formula for the area of the graph of a parametric surface in the vector form formula_40 where formula_41 is a continuously differentiable vector function of formula_42 is:\n formula_43\nList of formulas.\nThe above calculations show how to find the areas of many common shapes.\nThe areas of irregular (and thus arbitrary) polygons can be calculated using the \"Surveyor's formula\" (shoelace formula).\nRelation of area to perimeter.\nThe isoperimetric inequality states that, for a closed curve of length \"L\" (so the region it encloses has perimeter \"L\") and for area \"A\" of the region that it encloses,\nformula_44\nand equality holds if and only if the curve is a circle. Thus a circle has the largest area of any closed figure with a given perimeter.\nAt the other extreme, a figure with given perimeter \"L\" could have an arbitrarily small area, as illustrated by a rhombus that is \"tipped over\" arbitrarily far so that two of its angles are arbitrarily close to 0\u00b0 and the other two are arbitrarily close to 180\u00b0.\nFor a circle, the ratio of the area to the circumference (the term for the perimeter of a circle) equals half the radius \"r\". This can be seen from the area formula \"\u03c0r\"2 and the circumference formula 2\"\u03c0r\".\nThe area of a regular polygon is half its perimeter times the apothem (where the apothem is the distance from the center to the nearest point on any side).\nFractals.\nDoubling the edge lengths of a polygon multiplies its area by four, which is two (the ratio of the new to the old side length) raised to the power of two (the dimension of the space the polygon resides in). But if the one-dimensional lengths of a fractal drawn in two dimensions are all doubled, the spatial content of the fractal scales by a power of two that is not necessarily an integer. This power is called the fractal dimension of the fractal.\nArea bisectors.\nThere are an infinitude of lines that bisect the area of a triangle. Three of them are the medians of the triangle (which connect the sides' midpoints with the opposite vertices), and these are concurrent at the triangle's centroid; indeed, they are the only area bisectors that go through the centroid. Any line through a triangle that splits both the triangle's area and its perimeter in half goes through the triangle's incenter (the center of its incircle). There are either one, two, or three of these for any given triangle.\nAny line through the midpoint of a parallelogram bisects the area.\nAll area bisectors of a circle or other ellipse go through the center, and any chords through the center bisect the area. In the case of a circle they are the diameters of the circle.\nOptimization.\nGiven a wire contour, the surface of least area spanning (\"filling\") it is a minimal surface. Familiar examples include soap bubbles.\nThe question of the filling area of the Riemannian circle remains open.\nThe circle has the largest area of any two-dimensional object having the same perimeter.\nA cyclic polygon (one inscribed in a circle) has the largest area of any polygon with a given number of sides of the same lengths.\nA version of the isoperimetric inequality for triangles states that the triangle of greatest area among all those with a given perimeter is equilateral.\nThe triangle of largest area of all those inscribed in a given circle is equilateral; and the triangle of smallest area of all those circumscribed around a given circle is equilateral.\nThe ratio of the area of the incircle to the area of an equilateral triangle, formula_45, is larger than that of any non-equilateral triangle.\nThe ratio of the area to the square of the perimeter of an equilateral triangle, formula_46 is larger than that for any other triangle.\n*Routh's theorem, a generalization of the one-seventh area triangle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1210", "revid": "43659501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1210", "title": "Astronomical unit", "text": "Mean distance between Earth and the Sun\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe astronomical unit (symbol: au or AU) is a unit of length defined to be exactly equal to . Historically, the astronomical unit was conceived as the average Earth-Sun distance (the average of Earth's aphelion and perihelion), before its modern redefinition in 2012.\nThe astronomical unit is used primarily for measuring distances within the Solar System or around other stars. It is also a fundamental component in the definition of another unit of astronomical length, the parsec. One au is approximately equivalent to 499 light-seconds.\nHistory of symbol usage.\nA variety of unit symbols and abbreviations have been in use for the astronomical unit. In a 1976 resolution, the International Astronomical Union\u00a0(IAU) had used the symbol \"A\" to denote a length equal to the astronomical unit. In the astronomical literature, the symbol AU is common. In 2006, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) had recommended ua as the symbol for the unit, from the French \"unit\u00e9 astronomique\". In the non-normative Annex\u00a0C to ISO 80000-3:2006 (later withdrawn), the symbol of the astronomical unit was also ua.\nIn 2012, the IAU, noting \"that various symbols are presently in use for the astronomical unit\", recommended the use of the symbol \"au\". The scientific journals published by the American Astronomical Society and the Royal Astronomical Society subsequently adopted this symbol. In the 2014 revision and 2019 edition of the SI Brochure, the BIPM used the unit symbol \"au\". ISO\u00a080000-3:2019, which replaces ISO\u00a080000-3:2006, does not mention the astronomical unit.\nDevelopment of unit definition.\nEarth's orbit around the Sun is an ellipse. The semi-major axis of this elliptic orbit is defined to be half of the straight line segment that joins the perihelion and aphelion. The centre of the Sun lies on this straight line segment, but not at its midpoint. Because ellipses are well-understood shapes, measuring the points of its extremes defined the exact shape mathematically, and made possible calculations for the entire orbit as well as predictions based on observation. In addition, it mapped out exactly the largest straight-line distance that Earth traverses over the course of a year, defining times and places for observing the largest parallax (apparent shifts of position) in nearby stars. Knowing Earth's shift and a star's shift enabled the star's distance to be calculated. But all measurements are subject to some degree of error or uncertainty, and the uncertainties in the length of the astronomical unit only increased uncertainties in the stellar distances. Improvements in precision have always been a key to improving astronomical understanding. Throughout the twentieth century, measurements became increasingly precise and sophisticated, and ever more dependent on accurate observation of the effects described by Einstein's theory of relativity and upon the mathematical tools it used.\nImproving measurements were continually checked and cross-checked by means of improved understanding of the laws of celestial mechanics, which govern the motions of objects in space. The expected positions and distances of objects at an established time are calculated (in au) from these laws, and assembled into a collection of data called an ephemeris. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory HORIZONS System provides one of several ephemeris computation services.\nIn 1976, to establish a more precise measure for the astronomical unit, the IAU formally adopted a new definition. Although directly based on the then-best available observational measurements, the definition was recast in terms of the then-best mathematical derivations from celestial mechanics and planetary ephemerides. It stated that \"the astronomical unit of length is that length (\"A\") for which the Gaussian gravitational constant (\"k\") takes the value when the units of measurement are the astronomical units of length, mass and time\". Equivalently, by this definition, one au is \"the radius of an unperturbed circular Newtonian orbit about the sun of a particle having infinitesimal mass, moving with an angular frequency of \"; or alternatively that length for which the heliocentric gravitational constant (the product \"G\"M\u2609) is equal to ()2\u00a0au3/d2, when the length is used to describe the positions of objects in the Solar System.\nSubsequent explorations of the Solar System by space probes made it possible to obtain precise measurements of the relative positions of the inner planets and other objects by means of radar and telemetry. As with all radar measurements, these rely on measuring the time taken for photons to be reflected from an object. Because all photons move at the speed of light in vacuum, a fundamental constant of the universe, the distance of an object from the probe is calculated as the product of the speed of light and the measured time. However, for precision the calculations require adjustment for things such as the motions of the probe and object while the photons are transiting. In addition, the measurement of the time itself must be translated to a standard scale that accounts for relativistic time dilation. Comparison of the ephemeris positions with time measurements expressed in Barycentric Dynamical Time\u00a0(TDB) leads to a value for the speed of light in astronomical units per day (of ). By 2009, the IAU had updated its standard measures to reflect improvements, and calculated the speed of light at (TDB).\nIn 1983, the CIPM modified the International System of Units (SI) to make the metre defined as the distance travelled in a vacuum by light in 1\u00a0/\u00a0. This replaced the previous definition, valid between 1960 and 1983, which was that the metre equalled a certain number of wavelengths of a certain emission line of krypton-86. (The reason for the change was an improved method of measuring the speed of light.) The speed of light could then be expressed exactly as \"c\"0 = , a standard also adopted by the IERS numerical standards. From this definition and the 2009 IAU standard, the time for light to traverse an astronomical unit is found to be \"\u03c4\"A = , which is slightly more than 8\u00a0minutes 19\u00a0seconds. By multiplication, the best IAU 2009 estimate was \"A\"\u00a0= \"c\"0\"\u03c4\"A\u00a0= , based on a comparison of Jet Propulsion Laboratory and IAA\u2013RAS ephemerides.\nIn 2006, the BIPM reported a value of the astronomical unit as . In the 2014 revision of the SI\u00a0Brochure, the BIPM recognised the IAU's 2012 redefinition of the astronomical unit as .\nThis estimate was still derived from observation and measurements subject to error, and based on techniques that did not yet standardize all relativistic effects, and thus were not constant for all observers. In 2012, finding that the equalization of relativity alone would make the definition overly complex, the IAU simply used the 2009 estimate to redefine the astronomical unit as a conventional unit of length directly tied to the metre (exactly ). The new definition recognizes as a consequence that the astronomical unit has reduced importance, limited in use to a convenience in some applications.\nThis definition makes the speed of light, defined as exactly , equal to exactly \u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\u00a0\u00f7\u00a0 or about , some 60 parts per trillion less than the 2009 estimate.\nUsage and significance.\nWith the definitions used before 2012, the astronomical unit was dependent on the heliocentric gravitational constant, that is the product of the gravitational constant, \"G\", and the solar mass, M\u2609. Neither \"G\" nor M\u2609 can be measured to high accuracy separately, but the value of their product is known very precisely from observing the relative positions of planets (Kepler's third law expressed in terms of Newtonian gravitation). Only the product is required to calculate planetary positions for an ephemeris, so ephemerides are calculated in astronomical units and not in SI units.\nThe calculation of ephemerides also requires a consideration of the effects of general relativity. In particular, time intervals measured on Earth's surface (Terrestrial Time, TT) are not constant when compared with the motions of the planets: the terrestrial second (TT) appears to be longer near January and shorter near July when compared with the \"planetary second\" (conventionally measured in TDB). This is because the distance between Earth and the Sun is not fixed (it varies between and ) and, when Earth is closer to the Sun (perihelion), the Sun's gravitational field is stronger and Earth is moving faster along its orbital path. As the metre is defined in terms of the second and the speed of light is constant for all observers, the terrestrial metre appears to change in length compared with the \"planetary metre\" on a periodic basis.\nThe metre is defined to be a unit of proper length. Indeed, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) notes that \"its definition applies only within a spatial extent sufficiently small that the effects of the non-uniformity of the gravitational field can be ignored\". As such, a distance within the Solar System without specifying the frame of reference for the measurement is problematic. The 1976 definition of the astronomical unit was incomplete because it did not specify the frame of reference in which to apply the measurement, but proved practical for the calculation of ephemerides: a fuller definition that is consistent with general relativity was proposed, and \"vigorous debate\" ensued until August 2012 when the IAU adopted the current definition of 1 astronomical unit = metres.\nThe astronomical unit is typically used for stellar system scale distances, such as the size of a protostellar disk or the heliocentric distance of an asteroid, whereas other units are used for other distances in astronomy. The astronomical unit is too small to be convenient for interstellar distances, where the parsec and light-year are widely used. The parsec (parallax arcsecond) is defined in terms of the astronomical unit, being the distance of an object with a parallax of . The light-year is often used in popular works, but is not an approved non-SI unit and is rarely used by professional astronomers.\nWhen simulating a numerical model of the Solar System, the astronomical unit provides an appropriate scale that minimizes (overflow, underflow and truncation) errors in floating point calculations.\nHistory.\nMany early measurements of the Earth-Sun distance are wildly incorrect, primarily because the measurements rely on the ratio of the size of the Earth to the distance of the Sun. Since this ratio is 1/12000, small errors in the size of the Earth lead to large errors in the Earth-Sun distance. \nAround 280 BC, Aristarchus carefully measured the Moon-Earth-Sun angle when the Moon is in its first quarter and used this to estimate the distance to the Sun. The exact timing and angle measurement are essential. He estimated the angle at as (the true value being close to ) and reported in \"On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and Moon\" the distance to the Sun is 18 to 20 times the distance to the Moon, whereas the true ratio is about . Depending on the distance that Aristarchus used for the distance to the Moon, his calculated distance to the Sun would fall between and Earth radii.\nHipparchus gave an estimate of the distance of Earth from the Sun, quoted by Pappus as equal to 490 Earth radii. According to the conjectural reconstructions of Noel Swerdlow and G. J. Toomer, this was derived from his assumption of a \"least perceptible\" solar parallax of .\nA Chinese mathematical treatise, the \"Zhoubi Suanjing\" (c.\u20091st century BCE), shows how the distance to the Sun can be computed geometrically, using the different lengths of the noontime shadows observed at three places \"li\" apart and the assumption that Earth is flat.\nIn the 2nd century CE, Ptolemy estimated the mean distance of the Sun as times Earth's radius. To determine this value, Ptolemy started by measuring the Moon's parallax, finding what amounted to a horizontal lunar parallax of 1\u00b0\u00a026\u2032, which was much too large. He then derived a maximum lunar distance of Earth radii. Because of cancelling errors in his parallax figure, his theory of the Moon's orbit, and other factors, this figure was approximately correct. He then measured the apparent sizes of the Sun and the Moon and concluded that the apparent diameter of the Sun was equal to the apparent diameter of the Moon at the Moon's greatest distance, and from records of lunar eclipses, he estimated this apparent diameter, as well as the apparent diameter of the shadow cone of Earth traversed by the Moon during a lunar eclipse. Given these data, the distance of the Sun from Earth can be trigonometrically computed to be Earth radii. This gives a ratio of solar to lunar distance of approximately 19, matching Aristarchus's figure. Although Ptolemy's procedure is theoretically workable, it is very sensitive to small changes in the data, so much so that changing a measurement by a few per cent can make the solar distance infinite.\nAfter Greek astronomy was transmitted to the medieval Islamic world, astronomers made some changes to Ptolemy's cosmological model, but did not greatly change his estimate of the Earth\u2013Sun distance. For example, in his introduction to Ptolemaic astronomy, al-Fargh\u0101n\u012b gave a mean solar distance of Earth radii, whereas in his \"zij\", al-Batt\u0101n\u012b used a mean solar distance of Earth radii. Subsequent astronomers, such as al-B\u012br\u016bn\u012b, used similar values. Later in Europe, Copernicus and Tycho Brahe also used comparable figures ( and Earth radii), and so Ptolemy's approximate Earth\u2013Sun distance survived through the 16th century.\nBy the 17th century the problems with the measurement techniques came to be understood.\nJohannes Kepler was the first to realize that Ptolemy's estimate must be significantly too low (according to Kepler, at least by a factor of three) in his \"Rudolphine Tables\" (1627). Kepler's laws of planetary motion allowed astronomers to calculate the relative distances of the planets from the Sun, and rekindled interest in measuring the absolute value for Earth (which could then be applied to the other planets). The invention of the telescope allowed far more accurate measurements of angles than is possible with the naked eye. Flemish astronomer Godefroy Wendelin repeated Aristarchus\u2019 measurements in 1635, and found that Ptolemy's value was too low by a factor of at least eleven. \nA somewhat more accurate estimate can be obtained by observing the transit of Venus. By measuring the transit in two different locations, one can accurately calculate the parallax of Venus and from the relative distance of Earth and Venus from the Sun, the solar parallax \u03b1 (which cannot be measured directly due to the brightness of the Sun). Jeremiah Horrocks had attempted to produce an estimate based on his observation of the 1639 transit (published in 1662), giving a solar parallax of , similar to Wendelin's figure. The solar parallax is related to the Earth\u2013Sun distance as measured in Earth radii by\n formula_1\nThe smaller the solar parallax, the greater the distance between the Sun and Earth: a solar parallax of is equivalent to an Earth\u2013Sun distance of Earth radii.\nChristiaan Huygens believed that the distance was even greater: by comparing the apparent sizes of Venus and Mars, he estimated a value of about Earth radii, equivalent to a solar parallax of . Although Huygens' estimate is remarkably close to modern values, it is often discounted by historians of astronomy because of the many unproven (and incorrect) assumptions he had to make for his method to work; the accuracy of his value seems to be based more on luck than good measurement, with his various errors cancelling each other out.\nJean Richer and Giovanni Domenico Cassini measured the parallax of Mars between Paris and Cayenne in French Guiana when Mars was at its closest to Earth in 1672. They arrived at a figure for the solar parallax of , equivalent to an Earth\u2013Sun distance of about Earth radii. They were also the first astronomers to have access to an accurate and reliable value for the radius of Earth, which had been measured by their colleague Jean Picard in 1669 as \"toises\". This same year saw another estimate for the astronomical unit by John Flamsteed, which accomplished it alone by measuring the martian diurnal parallax. Another colleague, Ole R\u00f8mer, discovered the finite speed of light in 1676: the speed was so great that it was usually quoted as the time required for light to travel from the Sun to the Earth, or \"light time per unit distance\", a convention that is still followed by astronomers today.\nA better method for observing Venus transits was devised by James Gregory and published in his \"Optica Promata\" (1663). It was strongly advocated by Edmond Halley and was applied to the transits of Venus observed in 1761 and 1769, and then again in 1874 and 1882. Transits of Venus occur in pairs, but less than one pair every century, and observing the transits in 1761 and 1769 was an unprecedented international scientific operation including observations by James Cook and Charles Green from Tahiti. Despite the Seven Years' War, dozens of astronomers were dispatched to observing points around the world at great expense and personal danger: several of them died in the endeavour. The various results were collated by J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande to give a figure for the solar parallax of . Karl Rudolph Powalky had made an estimate of in 1864.\nAnother method involved determining the constant of aberration. Simon Newcomb gave great weight to this method when deriving his widely accepted value of for the solar parallax (close to the modern value of ), although Newcomb also used data from the transits of Venus. Newcomb also collaborated with A. A. Michelson to measure the speed of light with Earth-based equipment; combined with the constant of aberration (which is related to the light time per unit distance), this gave the first direct measurement of the Earth\u2013Sun distance in metres. Newcomb's value for the solar parallax (and for the constant of aberration and the Gaussian gravitational constant) were incorporated into the first international system of astronomical constants in 1896, which remained in place for the calculation of ephemerides until 1964. The name \"astronomical unit\" appears first to have been used in 1903.\nThe discovery of the near-Earth asteroid 433 Eros and its passage near Earth in 1900\u20131901 allowed a considerable improvement in parallax measurement. Another international project to measure the parallax of 433 Eros was undertaken in 1930\u20131931.\nDirect radar measurements of the distances to Venus and Mars became available in the early 1960s. Along with improved measurements of the speed of light, these showed that Newcomb's values for the solar parallax and the constant of aberration were inconsistent with one another.\nDevelopments.\nThe unit distance A (the value of the astronomical unit in metres) can be expressed in terms of other astronomical constants:\nformula_2\nwhere G is the Newtonian constant of gravitation, M\u2609 is the solar mass, k is the numerical value of Gaussian gravitational constant and D is the time period of one day.\nThe Sun is constantly losing mass by radiating away energy, so the orbits of the planets are steadily expanding outward from the Sun. This has led to calls to abandon the astronomical unit as a unit of measurement.\nAs the speed of light has an exact defined value in SI units and the Gaussian gravitational constant k is fixed in the astronomical system of units, measuring the light time per unit distance is exactly equivalent to measuring the product G\u00d7M\u2609 in SI units. Hence, it is possible to construct ephemerides entirely in SI units, which is increasingly becoming the norm.\nA 2004 analysis of radiometric measurements in the inner Solar System suggested that the secular increase in the unit distance was much larger than can be accounted for by solar radiation, + metres per century.\nThe measurements of the secular variations of the astronomical unit are not confirmed by other authors and are quite controversial.\nFurthermore, since 2010, the astronomical unit has not been estimated by the planetary ephemerides.\nExamples.\nThe following table contains some distances given in astronomical units. It includes some examples with distances that are normally not given in astronomical units, because they are either too short or far too long. Distances normally change over time. Examples are listed by increasing distance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1212", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1212", "title": "Artist", "text": "Person creating art or practicing the arts\nAn artist is a person engaged in creating art, or practicing the arts. The most common usage in everyday speech and academic discourse refers to a practitioner in the visual arts only.\nHowever, the term is also very widely used in the entertainment business to refer to actors, musicians, singers, dancers , and other performers. The French word artiste is sometimes used in English in this context, although this has become old-fashioned. The use of the term \"artist\" to describe writers is valid, but less common, and mostly restricted to contexts such as critics' reviews; \"author\" is generally used instead.\nWhile the use of the word 'artist' is common, there is no agreed upon definition of art\u2014this makes the definition of who is and is not an artist indeterminate. Artists and philosophers still debate their interpretation of art's definition\u2014on what does and does not count as art.\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am only pointing out that my project, like Collingwood's, Osborne's, and others', is \"metaphysical\" in nature. I am interested in trying to find out what a work of art \"is\" and what it is \"essentially\".\u2014\u200a\nDictionary definitions.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines the older, broader meanings of the word \"artist\":\nThe Britannica Dictionary defines \"artist\" as:\nThe Cambridge Dictionary defines the word as:\nEtymology \u2013 history of the term.\nAncient Greece (1100 BC-330 AD).\nThe Greek word (; , ), often translated as \"art\", implies mastery of any sort of craft.\nIn Greek culture, each of the nine Muses oversaw a different field of human creation:\nNo muse was identified with the visual arts of painting and sculpture. In ancient Greece, sculptors and painters were held in low regard, the work often performed by slaves and mostly regarded as mere manual labour.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Even if you should become a Pheidias or a Polykleitos and should create many marvellous works, everyone will praise your skill for sure, but none of your admirers, if he had sense, would want to be like you; for whoever you might become, you would still be considered a laborer, a man who lives by his hands and has nothing but his hands.\u2014\u200a\nThe word \"art\" derives from the Latin \"\" (stem \"art-\"), which, although literally defined means \"skill method\" or \"technique\", also conveys a connotation of beauty.\nEurope Middle Ages (500 \u2013 1500).\nDuring the Middle Ages the word \"artist\" already existed in some countries such as Italy, but the meaning was something resembling \"craftsman\", while the word \"artisan\" was still unknown. An artist was someone able to do a work better than others, so the skilled excellency was underlined, rather than the activity field. In this period, some \"artisanal\" products (such as textiles) were much more precious and expensive than paintings or sculptures.\nThe first division into major and minor arts dates back at least to the works of Leon Battista Alberti (1404\u20131472): \"De re aedificatoria, De statua, De pictura\", which focused on the importance of the intellectual skills of the artist rather than the manual skills (even if in other forms of art there was a project behind).\nEurope 17th Century (1600-1700).\nWith the academies in Europe (second half of 17th century) the gap between fine and applied arts was definitely set.\nModern Day.\nMany contemporary definitions of \"artist\" and \"art\" are highly contingent on culture, resisting aesthetic prescription; in the same way, the features constituting beauty and the beautiful cannot be standardized easily without moving into kitsch.\nArtists' definitions.\nSome artists explain their beliefs about art or in being an artist. These beliefs may compel them to take actions outside of the act(s) of creating art but are still related to their work.\nDoechii (Jaylah Ji'mya Hickmon) is an American singer, song writer, and rapper who won Best Female Artist in 2025 at the BET Awards. She stated her position as an artist requires civic responsibility while receiving this award.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I feel it's my responsibility as an artist to use this moment to speak up for all oppressed people. For Black people, for Latino people, for trans people, for the people in Gaza. We all deserve to live in hope and not in fear, and I hope we stand together, my brothers and my sisters, against hate, and we protest against it.\u2014\u200a\nA single artist may create an art manifesto to explain their work while multiple may join or start art movements of ideologically aligned people to create a set of guidelines or rules to follow when making art.\nOne of them is the Manifesto of Futurism, created by an Italian poet called Filippo Tommaso Marinetti in 1909. It lists 11 declarations of what Futurism means and then goes on to explain in further detail. He discussed the progress of automobiles, steamers, and aeroplanes and how it created new beauty\u2014speed. He believed literature would be absorbed, not overshadowed, by such progress. Literature and poetry would become an aggressive force against the world.\nThis manifesto partially inspired people to choose fascism in Italy. \"From the 1920s to the 1940s he [Filippo Tommaso Marinetti] allied himself with the Fascist leader Benito Mussolini. Sharing a vision of a new Italy empowered by national and cultural supremacy, they relied on each other for inspiration and collaboration. Marinetti hoped that by supporting Fascism, Futurism would win the backing of the regime, become the official art of the state...\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;9. We will glorify war \u2014 the only true hygiene of the world \u2014 militarism, patriotism, the destructive gesture of anarchist, the beautiful Ideas which kill, and the scorn of woman. 10. We will destroy museums, libraries and fight against moralism, feminism and all utilitarian cowardice.\u2014\u200a\nEducation and Employment.\nIndia.\n17th Century (1600-1700).\nIn 1556 a new leader was given control of Delhi who would create a major shift in the design, construction, and aesthetics of Indian art\u201412 year old Akbar. He formed a royal manuscript atelier (modern-day term: artist collective) consisting of 30 painters and 70 assistants from Central Asia, India, and Persia. Their earliest works had them work in teams to create large pieces for public instead of private viewing. \"Each illumination focuses on a single dramatic episode, which retains its primacy even if it is set among a host of subsidiary vignettes.\"\nUnited States of America.\nModern Day.\nThe US Bureau of Labor Statistics classifies many visual artists as either \"craft artists\" or \"fine artists\". A craft artist makes handmade functional works of art, such as pottery or clothing. A fine artist makes paintings, illustrations (such as book illustrations or medical illustrations), sculptures, or similar artistic works primarily for their aesthetic value.\nThe main source of skill for both craft artists and fine artists is long-term repetition and practice. Many fine artists have studied their art form at university, and some have a master's degree in fine arts. Artists may also study on their own or receive on-the-job training from an experienced artist.\nThe number of available jobs as an artist is increasing more slowly than in other fields. About half of US artists are self-employed. Others work in a variety of industries. For example, a pottery manufacturer will employ craft artists, and book publishers will hire illustrators.\nIn the US, craft and fine artists have a median income of approximately US$56,260 per year. This compares to US$61,000 for all art-related fields, including related jobs such as graphic designers, multimedia artists, animators, and fashion designers. Many artists work part-time as artists and hold a second job.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1213", "revid": "2859835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1213", "title": "Actaeon", "text": "Greek mythical character\nIn Greek mythology, Actaeon (; \"Aktai\u014dn\") was the son of the priestly herdsman Aristaeus in Boeotia, and a famous Theban hero. Through his mother Autonoe he was a member of the ruling House of Cadmus. Like Achilles in a later generation, he was trained by the centaur Chiron.\nHe succumbed to the fatal wrath of Artemis (later his myth became attached to tales of Artemis' Roman counterpart Diana), but the surviving details of his transgression vary: \"the only certainty is in what Aktaion suffered, his pathos, and what Artemis did: the hunter became the hunted; he was transformed into a stag, and his raging hounds, struck with a 'wolf's frenzy' (Lyssa), tore him apart as they would a stag.\"\nMany depictions\u2014both in ancient art and in Renaissance and post-Renaissance art\u2014show either the moment of transgression and transformation, or his killing by his own hounds.\nStory.\nAmong others, John Heath has observed, \"The unalterable kernel of the tale was a hunter's transformation into a deer and his death in the jaws of his hunting dogs. But authors were free to suggest different motives for his death.\" In the version that was offered by the Hellenistic poet Callimachus, which has become the standard setting, Artemis was bathing in the woods when the hunter Actaeon stumbled across her, thus seeing her naked. He stopped and stared, amazed at her ravishing beauty. Once seen, Artemis got revenge on Actaeon: she forbade him speech \u2013 if he tried to speak, he would be changed into a stag \u2013 for the unlucky profanation of her virginity's mystery.\nUpon hearing the call of his hunting party, he cried out to them and immediately transformed. At this, he fled deep into the woods, and doing so he came upon a pond and, seeing his reflection, groaned. His own hounds then turned upon him and pursued him, not recognizing him. In an endeavour to save himself, he raised his eyes (and would have raised his arms, had he had them) toward Mount Olympus. The gods did not heed his desperation, and he was torn to pieces. An element of the earlier myth made Actaeon the familiar hunting companion of Artemis, no stranger. In an embroidered extension of the myth, the hounds were so upset with their master's death, that Chiron made a statue so lifelike that the hounds thought it was Actaeon.\nThere are various other versions of his transgression: The Hesiodic \"Catalogue of Women\" and pseudo-Apollodoran \"Bibliotheke\" state that his offense was that he was a rival of Zeus for Semele, his mother's sister, whereas in Euripides' \"Bacchae\" he has boasted that he is a better hunter than Artemis:\nFurther materials, including fragments that belong with the Hesiodic \"Catalogue of Women\" and at least four Attic tragedies, including a \"Toxotides\" of Aeschylus, have been lost. Diodorus Siculus (4.81.4), in a variant of Actaeon's \"hubris\" that has been largely ignored, has it that Actaeon wanted to marry Artemis. Other authors say the hounds were Artemis' own; some lost elaborations of the myth seem to have given them all names and narrated their wanderings after his loss. A number of ancient Greek vases depicting the metamorphosis and death of Actaeon include the goddess Lyssa in the scene, infecting his dogs with rabies and setting them against him.\nAccording to the Latin version of the story told by the Roman Ovid having accidentally seen Diana (Artemis) on Mount Cithaeron while she was bathing, he was changed by her into a stag, and pursued and killed by his fifty hounds. This version also appears in Callimachus' Fifth Hymn, as a mythical parallel to the blinding of Tiresias after he sees Athena bathing.\nThe literary testimony of Actaeon's myth is largely lost, but Lamar Ronald Lacy, deconstructing the myth elements in what survives and supplementing it by iconographic evidence in late vase-painting, made a plausible reconstruction of an ancient Actaeon myth that Greek poets may have inherited and subjected to expansion and dismemberment. His reconstruction opposes a too-pat consensus that has an archaic Actaeon aspiring to Semele, a classical Actaeon boasting of his hunting prowess and a Hellenistic Actaeon glimpsing Artemis' bath. Lacy identifies the site of Actaeon's transgression as a spring sacred to Artemis at Plataea where Actaeon was a \" hero archegetes\" (\"hero-founder\") The righteous hunter, the companion of Artemis, seeing her bathing naked in the spring, was moved to try to make himself her consort, as Diodorus Siculus noted, and was punished, in part for transgressing the hunter's \"ritually enforced deference to Artemis\" (Lacy 1990:42).\nThe \"bed of Actaeon\".\nIn the second century AD, the traveller Pausanias was shown a spring on the road in Attica leading to Plataea from Eleutherae, just beyond Megara \"and a little farther on a rock. It is called the bed of Actaeon, for it is said that he slept thereon when weary with hunting and that into this spring he looked while Artemis was bathing in it.\"\n\"As to Act\u00e6on there is a tradition at Orchomenus, that a spectre which sat on a stone injured their land. And when they consulted the oracle at Delphi, the god bade them bury in the ground whatever remains they could find of Act\u00e6on: he also bade them to make a brazen copy of the spectre and fasten it with iron to the stone. This I have myself seen, and they annually offer funeral rites to Act\u00e6on.\"\nParallels in Akkadian and Ugarit poems.\nIn the standard version of the \"Epic of Gilgamesh\" (tablet vi) there is a parallel, in the series of examples Gilgamesh gives Ishtar of her mistreatment of her serial lovers:\nYou loved the herdsman, shepherd and chief shepherd Who was always heaping up the glowing ashes for you, And cooked ewe-lambs for you every day. But you hit him and turned him into a wolf, His own herd-boys hunt him down\nAnd his dogs tear at his haunches. Actaeon, torn apart by dogs incited by Artemis, finds another Near Eastern parallel in the Ugaritic hero Aqht, torn apart by eagles incited by Anath who wanted his hunting bow.\nThe virginal Artemis of classical times is not directly comparable to Ishtar of the many lovers, but the mytheme of Artemis shooting Orion, was linked to her punishment of Actaeon by T.C.W. Stinton; the Greek context of the mortal's reproach to the amorous goddess is translated to the episode of Anchises and Aphrodite. Daphnis too was a herdsman loved by a goddess and punished by her: see Theocritus' First Idyll.\nSymbolism regarding Actaeon.\nIn Greek Mythology, Actaeon is widely thought to symbolize ritual human sacrifice in attempt to please a God or Goddess: the dogs symbolize the sacrificers and Actaeon symbolizes the sacrifice.\nActaeon may symbolize human curiosity or irreverence.\nThe myth is seen by Jungian psychologist Wolfgang Giegerich as a symbol of spiritual transformation and/or enlightenment.\nActaeon often symbolizes a cuckold, as when he is turned into a stag, he becomes \"horned\". This is alluded to in Shakespeare's \"Merry Wives\", Robert Burton's \"Anatomy of Melancholy\", and others.\nCultural depictions.\nThe two main scenes are Actaeon surprising Artemis/Diana, and his death. In classical art Actaeon is normally shown as fully human, even as his hounds are killing him (sometimes he has small horns), but in Renaissance art he is often given a deer's head with antlers even in the scene with Diana, and by the time he is killed he has at the least this head, and has often completely transformed into the shape of a deer.\nNames of dogs.\nNotes:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1214", "revid": "11554730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1214", "title": "Anglicanism", "text": "Major branch of Protestantism\nAnglicanism, also known as Episcopalianism in some countries, is a Western Christian tradition which developed from the practices, liturgy, and identity of the Church of England following the English Reformation, in the context of the Protestant Reformation in Europe. It is one of the largest branches of Christianity, with around 110 million adherents within the Anglican Communion, and more than 400,000 outside of the Anglican Communion, worldwide as of 2025.\nAdherents of Anglicanism are called \"Anglicans\"; they are also called \"Episcopalians\" in some countries. Most are members of national or regional ecclesiastical provinces of the international Anglican Communion, one of the largest Christian bodies in the world, and the world's third-largest Christian communion. The provinces within the Anglican Communion have historically been in full communion with the See of Canterbury and thus with the archbishop of Canterbury, whom the communion refers to as its (Latin, 'first among equals'). The archbishop calls the decennial Lambeth Conference, chairs the meeting of primates, and is the president of the Anglican Consultative Council. Some churches that are not part of the Anglican Communion or recognised by it also call themselves Anglican, including those that are within the Continuing Anglican movement and Anglican realignment.\nAnglicans base their Christian faith on the Bible, traditions of the apostolic church, apostolic succession (\"historic episcopate\"), and the writings of the Church Fathers, as well as historically, the \"Thirty-nine Articles\" and \"The Books of Homilies\". \nAnglicanism forms a branch of Western Christianity, having declared its independence from the Holy See through the Act of Supremacy in 1534, a separation later consolidated by the Elizabethan Religious Settlement. Many of the Anglican formularies of the mid-16th century correspond closely to those of historical Protestantism. In the first half of the 17th century, the Church of England and the associated Church of Ireland were presented by some Anglican divines as comprising a distinct Christian tradition, with theologies, structures, and forms of worship representing a different kind of middle way, or \"via media\", originally between Lutheranism and Calvinism, and later between Protestantism and Catholicism \u2013 a perspective that came to be highly influential in later theories of Anglican identity and expressed in the description of Anglicanism as \"catholic and reformed\". The degree of distinction between Protestant and Catholic tendencies within Anglicanism is routinely a matter of debate both within specific Anglican churches and the Anglican Communion. The \"Book of Common Prayer\" is unique to Anglicanism, the collection of services in one prayer book used for centuries. The book is acknowledged as a principal tie that binds the Anglican Communion as a liturgical tradition.\nAfter the American Revolution, Anglican congregations in the United States and British North America (which would later form the basis for the modern country of Canada) were each reconstituted into autonomous churches with their own bishops and self-governing structures; these were known as the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States and the Church of England in the Dominion of Canada. Through the expansion of the British Empire and the activity of Christian missions, this model was adopted as the model for many newly formed churches, especially in Africa, Australasia, and the Asia-Pacific. In the 19th century, the term \"Anglicanism\" was coined to describe the common religious tradition of these churches and also that of the Scottish Episcopal Church, which, though originating earlier within the Church of Scotland, had come to be recognised as sharing this common identity. By the 21st century, the global centre of Anglicanism had shifted to the Global South, particularly sub-Saharan Africa, with 63,497,000 baptised Anglicans in Africa and 23,322,000 baptised Anglicans in Europe in 2020.\nTerminology.\nThe word \"Anglican\" originates in , a phrase from Magna Carta dated 15 June 1215, meaning 'the English Church shall be free'. Adherents of Anglicanism are called \"Anglicans\". As an adjective, \"Anglican\" is used to describe the people, institutions, churches, liturgical traditions, and theological concepts developed by the Church of England.\nAs a noun, an Anglican is a church member in the Anglican Communion. The word is also used by followers of separated groups that have left the communion or have been founded separately from it. The word originally referred only to the teachings and rites of Christians throughout the world in communion with the see of Canterbury but has come to sometimes be extended to any church following those traditions or rites rather than actual membership in the Anglican Communion.\nAlthough the term \"Anglican\" is found referring to the Church of England as far back as the 16th century, its use did not become general until the latter half of the 19th century. In British parliamentary legislation referring to the English Established Church, there is no need for a description; it is simply the Church of England, though the word \"Protestant\" is used in many legal acts specifying the succession to the Crown and qualifications for office. When the Union with Ireland Act created the United Church of England and Ireland, it is specified that it shall be one \"Protestant Episcopal Church\", thereby distinguishing its form of church government from the Presbyterian polity that prevails in the Church of Scotland.\nThe word \"Episcopal\" (\"of or pertaining to bishops\") is preferred in the title of the Episcopal Church (the province of the Anglican Communion covering the United States) and the Scottish Episcopal Church, though the full name of the former is \"The Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States of America\". Elsewhere, however, the term \"Anglican Church\" came to be preferred as it distinguished these churches from others that maintain an episcopal polity.\nDefinition.\nIn its structures, theology, and forms of worship, Anglicanism emerged as a distinct Christian tradition representing a middle ground between Lutheran and Reformed varieties of Protestantism; after the Oxford Movement, Anglicanism has often been characterized as representing a \"via media\" ('middle way') between Protestantism as a whole, and Catholicism.\nThe faith of Anglicans is founded in the Scriptures and the Gospels, the traditions of the Apostolic Church, the historical episcopate, the first four ecumenical councils, and the early Church Fathers, especially those active during the five initial centuries of Christianity, according to the \"quinquasaecularist\" principle proposed by the English bishop Lancelot Andrewes and the Lutheran dissident Georg Calixtus.\nAnglicans understand the Old and New Testaments as \"containing all things necessary for salvation\" and as being the rule and ultimate standard of faith. Reason and tradition are seen as valuable means to interpret scripture (a position first formulated in detail by Richard Hooker), but there is no full mutual agreement among Anglicans about \"exactly how\" scripture, reason, and tradition interact (or ought to interact) with each other. Anglicans understand the Apostles' Creed as the baptismal symbol and the Nicene Creed as the sufficient statement of the Christian faith.\nAnglicans believe the catholic and apostolic faith is revealed in Holy Scripture and the ecumenical creeds (Apostles', Nicene and Athanasian) and interpret these in light of the Christian tradition of the historic church, scholarship, reason, and experience. Anglicans celebrate the traditional sacraments, with special emphasis being given to the Eucharist, also called Holy Communion, the Lord's Supper, or the Mass. The Eucharist is central to worship for most Anglicans as a communal offering of prayer and praise in which the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus Christ are proclaimed through prayer, reading of the Bible, singing, giving God thanks over the bread and wine for the innumerable benefits obtained through the passion of Christ; the breaking of the bread, the blessing of the cup, and the partaking of the body and blood of Christ as instituted at the Last Supper. The consecrated bread and wine, which are considered by Anglican formularies to be the true body and blood of Christ in a spiritual manner and as outward symbols of an inner grace given by Christ which to the repentant convey forgiveness and cleansing from sin. While many Anglicans celebrate the Eucharist in similar ways to the predominant Latin Catholic tradition, a considerable degree of liturgical freedom is permitted, and worship styles range from simple to elaborate.\nUnique to Anglicanism is the \"Book of Common Prayer\" (BCP), the collection of services which worshippers in most Anglican churches have used for centuries. It was called \"common prayer\" originally because it was intended for use in all Church of England churches, which had previously followed differing local liturgies. The term was kept when the church became international because all Anglicans used to share in its use around the world. In 1549, the first \"Book of Common Prayer\" was compiled by Thomas Cranmer, the then archbishop of Canterbury. While it has since undergone many revisions and Anglican churches in different countries have developed other service books, the BCP is still acknowledged as one of the ties that bind Anglicans together.\nIdentity.\nEarly history.\nAccording to legend, the founding of Christianity in Britain is commonly attributed to Joseph of Arimathea and is commemorated at Glastonbury Abbey. Many of the early Church Fathers wrote of the presence of Christianity in Roman Britain, with Tertullian stating \"those parts of Britain into which the Roman arms had never penetrated were become subject to Christ\". Saint Alban, who was executed in AD 209, is the first Christian martyr in the British Isles. For this reason he is venerated as the British protomartyr. The historian Heinrich Zimmer writes that \"Just as Britain was a part of the Roman Empire, so the British Church formed (during the fourth century) a branch of the Catholic Church of the West; and during the whole of that century, from the Council of Arles (316) onward, took part in all proceedings concerning the Church.\"\nAfter Roman troops withdrew from Britain, the \"absence of Roman military and governmental influence and overall decline of Roman imperial political power enabled Britain and the surrounding isles to develop distinctively from the rest of the West. A new culture emerged around the Irish Sea among the Celtic peoples with Celtic Christianity at its core. What resulted was a form of Christianity distinct from Rome in many traditions and practices.\"\nThe historian Charles Thomas, in addition to the Celticist Heinrich Zimmer, writes that the distinction between sub-Roman and post-Roman Insular Christianity, also known as Celtic Christianity, began to become apparent around AD 475, with the Celtic churches allowing married clergy, observing Lent and Easter according to their own calendar, and having a different tonsure; moreover, like the Eastern Orthodox and the Oriental Orthodox churches, the Celtic churches operated independently of the Pope's authority, as a result of their isolated development in the British Isles.\nIn what is known as the Gregorian mission, Pope Gregory\u00a0I sent Augustine of Canterbury to the British Isles in AD 596, with the purpose of evangelising the pagans there (who were largely Anglo-Saxons), as well as to reconcile the Celtic churches in the British Isles to the See of Rome. In Kent, Augustine persuaded the Anglo-Saxon king \"\u00c6thelberht and his people to accept Christianity\". Augustine, on two occasions, \"met in conference with members of the Celtic episcopacy, but no understanding was reached between them\".\nEventually, the \"Christian Church of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Northumbria convened the Synod of Whitby in 663/664 to decide whether to follow Celtic or Roman usages\". This meeting, with King Oswiu as the final decision maker, \"led to the acceptance of Roman usage elsewhere in England and brought the English Church into close contact with the Continent\". As a result of assuming Roman usages, the Celtic Church surrendered its independence, and, from this point on, the Church in England \"was no longer purely Celtic, but became Anglo-Roman-Celtic\". The theologian Christopher L. Webber writes that \"Although \"the Roman form of Christianity became the dominant influence in Britain as in all of western Europe, Anglican Christianity has continued to have a distinctive quality because of its Celtic heritage.\"\nFollowing the Synod of Whitby, tensions between Rome and the English king would gradually escalate, due in part to royal assertions that it was the custom of England for the king to exercise authority over the Church. In the late 1000s, William the Conqueror (William I) refused to swear fealty to the Pope citing English tradition, controlled appointments to ecclesiastical offices (a power historically reserved to the Pope) and forbade papal legates to enter England without royal permission. In 1164, under Henry II, the Constitutions of Clarendon, citing English custom, required royal assent for excommunications and mandated that ecclesiastical court appeals terminate with the king rather than the Pope. The Magna Carta in 1215, asserting that \"the English Church shall be free, and shall have its rights undiminished, and its liberties unimpaired\" would be annulled by Pope Innocent III, but reissued in both 1216 and 1225. Under Edward I, in 1279, the Statute of Mortmain required royal approval to grant or transfer land to the Church. Additionally, Edward I would reject Pope Boniface VIII's bull \"Clericis Laicos\" which forbade secular taxation of clergy. Per the king's orders, non-compliant clergy were punished by law and church property was seized. The 1351 Statute of Provisors, under Edward III, prohibited papal appointments to English benefices, reserving the power for the king. The 1353 Statute of Praemunire prohibited appeals to papal courts for either ecclesiastical or temporal matters. To date, neither the Statute of Provisors nor the Statute of Praemunire has been repealed. In 1401, Henry IV's statute \"De Heretico Comburendo\" would transfer heresy trials from ecclesiastical to secular courts, further cementing the tradition of English kings claiming authority over English ecclesiastical matters. English delegates to the Councils of Pisa (1409), Constance (1414\u20131418), and Basel (1431\u20131445) would voice support for conciliarism in an attempt to limit the powers of the Pope over-against the bishops of the Church.\nThe Church in England remained united with Rome until the English Parliament passed the Act of Supremacy in 1534, declaring King Henry VIII the \"Supreme Head\" of the Church of England. This act culminated centuries of English monarchs asserting authority over ecclesiastical matters, from William I's refusal of papal fealty (1070s) to the Statutes of Provisors (1351) and Praemunire (1353). Henry and his theologians, including Thomas Cranmer, cited these historical customs to justify royal supremacy, arguing that the crown traditionally governed the Church. The immediate catalyst was Henry's need to annul his 24-year marriage to Catherine of Aragon, which he believed was invalid based on biblical prohibitions (Leviticus 20:21) and the lack of a male heir, seen as divine judgment. When Pope Clement VII, under pressure from Emperor Charles V, refused the annulment, Henry acted to resolve the issue domestically, supported by legislative steps like the Submission of the Clergy (1534) and Act in Restraint of Appeals (1533). The break with Rome reflected a mix of theological conviction, historical precedent, and political necessity, fulfilling a longstanding English desire for ecclesiastical autonomy while addressing immediate dynastic concerns. This laid the foundation for the development of Anglicanism as a distinct national church.\nThe English Church under Henry VIII continued to maintain Catholic doctrines and liturgical celebrations of the sacraments despite its separation from Rome. With little exception, Henry VIII allowed no changes during his lifetime. Under King Edward VI (1547\u20131553), however, the church in England first began to undergo what is known as the English Reformation, in the course of which it acquired a number of characteristics that would subsequently become recognised as constituting its distinctive \"Anglican\" identity.\nDevelopment.\nWith the Elizabethan Settlement of 1559, the Protestant identity of the English and Irish churches was affirmed by means of parliamentary legislation which mandated allegiance and loyalty to the English Crown in all their members. The Elizabethan church began to develop distinct religious traditions, assimilating some of the theology of Reformed churches with the services in the \"Book of Common Prayer\" (which drew extensively on the Sarum Rite native to England), under the leadership and organisation of a continuing episcopate. Over the years, these traditions themselves came to command adherence and loyalty. The Elizabethan Settlement stopped the radical Protestant tendencies under Edward VI by combining the more radical elements of the 1552 prayer book with the conservative \"Catholic\" 1549 prayer book into the 1559 \"Book of Common Prayer\". From then on, Protestantism was in a \"state of arrested development\", regardless of the attempts to detach the Church of England from its \"idiosyncratic anchorage in the medieval past\" by various groups which tried to push it towards a more Reformed theology and governance in the years 1560\u20131660.\nAlthough two important constitutive elements of what later would emerge as Anglicanism were present in 1559 \u2013 scripture, the historic episcopate, the \"Book of Common Prayer\", the teachings of the First Four Ecumenical Councils as the yardstick of catholicity, the teaching of the Church Fathers and Catholic bishops, and informed reason \u2013 neither the laypeople nor the clergy perceived themselves as Anglicans at the beginning of Elizabeth I's reign, as there was no such identity. Neither does the term \"via media\" appear until the 1627 to describe a church which refused to identify itself definitely as Catholic or Protestant, or as both, \"and had decided in the end that this is virtue rather than a handicap\".\nHistorical studies on the period 1560\u20131660 written before the late 1960s tended to project the predominant conformist spirituality and doctrine of the 1660s on the ecclesiastical situation one hundred years before, and there was also a tendency to take polemically binary partitions of reality claimed by contestants studied (such as the dichotomies Protestant-\"Popish\" or \"Laudian\"-\"Puritan\") at face value. Since the late 1960s, these interpretations have been criticised. Studies on the subject written during the last forty-five years have, however, not reached any consensus on how to interpret this period in English church history. The extent to which one or several positions concerning doctrine and spirituality existed alongside the more well-known and articulate Puritan movement and the Durham House Party, and the exact extent of continental Calvinism among the English elite and among the ordinary churchgoers from the 1560s to the 1620s are subjects of current and ongoing debate.\nIn 1662, under King Charles II, a revised \"Book of Common Prayer\" was produced, which was acceptable to high churchmen as well as some Puritans and is still considered authoritative to this day. In so far as Anglicans derived their identity from both parliamentary legislation and ecclesiastical tradition, a crisis of identity could result wherever secular and religious loyalties came into conflict \u2013 and such a crisis indeed occurred in 1776 with the United States Declaration of Independence, most of whose signatories were, at least nominally, Anglican. For these American patriots, even the forms of Anglican services were in doubt, since the Prayer Book rites of Matins, Evensong, and Holy Communion all included specific prayers for the British royal family. Consequently, the conclusion of the War of Independence eventually resulted in the creation of two new Anglican churches, the Episcopal Church in the United States in those states that had achieved independence; and in the 1830s, the Church of England in Canada became independent from the Church of England in those North American colonies which had remained under British control and to which many Loyalist churchmen had migrated.\nReluctantly, legislation was passed in the British Parliament (the Consecration of Bishops Abroad Act 1786) to allow bishops to be consecrated for an American church outside of allegiance to the British Crown (since no dioceses had ever been established in the former American colonies). Both in the United States and in Canada, the new Anglican churches developed novel models of self-government, collective decision-making, and self-supported financing; that would be consistent with separation of religious and secular identities.\nIn the following century, two further factors acted to accelerate the development of a distinct Anglican identity. From 1828 and 1829, Dissenters and Catholics could be elected to the House of Commons, which consequently ceased to be a body drawn purely from the established churches of Scotland, England, and Ireland; but which nevertheless, over the following ten years, engaged in extensive reforming legislation affecting the interests of the English and Irish churches; which, by the Acts of Union of 1800, had been reconstituted as the United Church of England and Ireland (a union which was dissolved in 1871). The propriety of this legislation was bitterly contested by the Oxford Movement (Tractarians), who in response developed a vision of Anglicanism as religious tradition deriving ultimately from the ecumenical councils of the patristic church. Those within the Church of England opposed to the Tractarians, and to their revived ritual practices, introduced a stream of bills in parliament aimed to control innovations in worship. This only made the dilemma more acute, with consequent continual litigation in the secular and ecclesiastical courts.\nOver the same period, Anglican churches engaged vigorously in Christian missions, resulting in the creation, by the end of the century, of over ninety colonial bishoprics, which gradually coalesced into new self-governing churches on the Canadian and American models. However, the case of John Colenso, Bishop of Natal, reinstated in 1865 by the English Judicial Committee of the Privy Council over the heads of the Church in South Africa, demonstrated acutely that the extension of episcopacy had to be accompanied by a recognised Anglican ecclesiology of ecclesiastical authority, distinct from secular power.\nConsequently, at the instigation of the bishops of Canada and South Africa, the first Lambeth Conference was called in 1867; to be followed by further conferences in 1878 and 1888, and thereafter at ten-year intervals. The various papers and declarations of successive Lambeth Conferences have served to frame the continued Anglican debate on identity, especially as relating to the possibility of ecumenical discussion with other churches. This ecumenical aspiration became much more of a possibility, as other denominational groups rapidly followed the example of the Anglican Communion in founding their own transnational alliances: the Alliance of Reformed Churches, the Ecumenical Methodist Council, the International Congregational Council, and the Baptist World Alliance.\nTheories.\nAnglicanism was seen as a middle way, or \"via media\", between two branches of Protestantism, Lutheranism and Reformed Christianity. In their rejection of absolute parliamentary authority, the Tractarians, especially John Henry Newman, looked back to the writings of 17th-century Anglican divines, finding in these texts the idea of the English church as a \"via media\" between the Protestant and Catholic traditions. This view was associated \u2013 especially in the writings of Edward Bouverie Pusey \u2013 with the theory of Anglicanism as one of three \"branches\" (alongside the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Churches) historically arising out of the common tradition of the earliest ecumenical councils. Newman himself subsequently rejected his theory of the \"via media\", as essentially historicist and static and hence unable to accommodate any dynamic development within the church. Nevertheless, the aspiration to ground Anglican identity in the writings of the 17th-century divines and in faithfulness to the traditions of the Church Fathers reflects a continuing theme of Anglican ecclesiology, most recently in the writings of Henry Robert McAdoo.\nThe Tractarian formulation of the theory of the \"via media\" between Protestantism and Catholicism was essentially a party platform, and not acceptable to Anglicans outside the confines of the Oxford Movement. However, this theory of the via media was reworked in the ecclesiological writings of Frederick Denison Maurice, in a more dynamic form that became widely influential. Both Maurice and Newman saw the Church of England of their day as sorely deficient in faith; but whereas Newman had looked back to a distant past when the light of faith might have appeared to burn brighter, Maurice looked forward to the possibility of a brighter revelation of faith in the future. Maurice saw the Protestant and Catholic strands within the Church of England as contrary but complementary, both maintaining elements of the true church, but incomplete without the other; such that a true catholic and evangelical church might come into being by a union of opposites.\nCentral to Maurice's perspective was his belief that the collective elements of family, nation, and church represented a divine order of structures through which God unfolds his continuing work of creation. Hence, for Maurice, the Protestant tradition had maintained the elements of national distinction which were amongst the marks of the true universal church, but which had been lost within contemporary Catholicism in the internationalism of centralised papal authority. Within the coming universal church that Maurice foresaw, national churches would each maintain the six signs of catholicity: baptism, Eucharist, the creeds, Scripture, an episcopal ministry, and a fixed liturgy (which could take a variety of forms in accordance with divinely ordained distinctions in national characteristics). This vision of a becoming universal church as a congregation of autonomous national churches proved highly congenial in Anglican circles; and Maurice's six signs were adapted to form the Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888.\nIn the latter decades of the 20th century, Maurice's theory, and the various strands of Anglican thought that derived from it, have been criticised by Stephen Sykes, who argues that the terms \"Protestant\" and \"Catholic\" as used in these approaches are synthetic constructs denoting ecclesiastic identities unacceptable to those to whom the labels are applied. Hence, the Catholic Church does not regard itself as a party or strand within the universal church \u2013 but rather identifies itself as the universal church. Moreover, Sykes criticises the proposition, implicit in theories of \"via media\", that there is no distinctive body of Anglican doctrines, other than those of the universal church; accusing this of being an excuse not to undertake systematic doctrine at all.\nContrariwise, Sykes notes a high degree of commonality in Anglican liturgical forms and in the doctrinal understandings expressed within those liturgies. He proposes that Anglican identity might rather be found within a shared consistent pattern of prescriptive liturgies, established and maintained through canon law, and embodying both a historic deposit of formal statements of doctrine, and also framing the regular reading and proclamation of scripture. Sykes nevertheless agrees with those heirs of Maurice who emphasise the incompleteness of Anglicanism as a positive feature, and quotes with qualified approval the words of Michael Ramsey:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For while the Anglican church is vindicated by its place in history, with a strikingly balanced witness to Gospel and Church and sound learning, its greater vindication lies in its pointing through its own history to something of which it is a fragment. Its credentials are its incompleteness, with the tension and the travail of its soul. It is clumsy and untidy, it baffles neatness and logic. For it is not sent to commend itself as 'the best type of Christianity,' but by its very brokenness to point to the universal Church wherein all have died.\nDoctrine.\n\"Catholic and reformed\".\nThe distinction between Reformed and Catholic, and the coherence of the two, is a matter of debate within the Anglican Communion. The Oxford Movement of the mid-19th century revived and extended doctrinal, liturgical, and pastoral practices similar to those of Roman Catholicism. This extends beyond the ceremony of high church services to even more theologically significant territory, such as sacramental theology (see Anglican sacraments). While Anglo-Catholic practices, particularly liturgical ones, have become more common within the tradition over the last century, there are also places where practices and beliefs resonate more closely with the evangelical movements of the 1730s (see Sydney Anglicanism).\nGuiding principles.\nFor high-church Anglicans, doctrine is neither established by a magisterium, nor derived from the theology of an eponymous founder (such as Calvinism), nor summed up in a confession of faith beyond the ecumenical creeds, such as the Lutheran Book of Concord. For them, the earliest Anglican theological documents are its prayer books, which they see as the products of profound theological reflection, compromise, and synthesis. They emphasise the \"Book of Common Prayer\" as a key expression of Anglican doctrine. The principle of looking to the prayer books as a guide to the parameters of belief and practice is called by the Latin name \"lex orandi, lex credendi\" (\"the law of prayer is the law of belief\").\nWithin the prayer books are the fundamentals of Anglican doctrine: the Apostles' and Nicene creeds, the Athanasian Creed (now rarely used), the scriptures (via the lectionary), the sacraments, daily prayer, the catechism, and apostolic succession in the context of the historic threefold ministry. For some low-church and evangelical Anglicans, the 16th-century Reformed Thirty-Nine Articles form the basis of doctrine.\nDistinctives of Anglican belief.\nThe Thirty-Nine Articles played a significant role in Anglican doctrine and practice. Following the passing of the 1604 canons, all Anglican clergy had to formally subscribe to the articles. Today, however, the articles are no longer binding, but are seen as a historical document which has played a significant role in the shaping of Anglican identity. The degree to which each of the articles has remained influential varies.\nOn the doctrine of justification, for example, there is a wide range of beliefs within the Anglican Communion, with some Anglo-Catholics arguing for a faith with good works and the sacraments. At the same time, however, some evangelical Anglicans ascribe to the Reformed emphasis on \"sola fide\" (\"faith alone\") in their doctrine of justification (see Sydney Anglicanism). Still other Anglicans adopt a nuanced view of justification, taking elements from the early Church Fathers, Catholicism, Protestantism, liberal theology, and latitudinarian thought.\nArguably, the most influential of the original articles has been Article VI on the \"sufficiency of scripture\", which says that \"Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation: so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an article of the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to salvation.\" This article has informed Anglican biblical exegesis and hermeneutics since earliest times.\nAnglicans look for authority in their \"standard divines\" (see below). Historically, the most influential of these \u2013 apart from Cranmer \u2013 has been the 16th-century cleric and theologian Richard Hooker, who after 1660 was increasingly portrayed as the founding father of Anglicanism. Hooker's description of Anglican authority as being derived primarily from scripture, informed by reason (the intellect and the experience of God) and tradition (the practices and beliefs of the historical church), has influenced Anglican self-identity and doctrinal reflection perhaps more powerfully than any other formula. The analogy of the \"three-legged stool\" of scripture, reason, and tradition is often incorrectly attributed to Hooker. Rather, Hooker's description is a hierarchy of authority, with scripture as foundational and reason and tradition as vitally important, but secondary, authorities.\nFinally, the extension of Anglicanism into non-English cultures, the growing diversity of prayer books, and the increasing interest in ecumenical dialogue have led to further reflection on the parameters of Anglican identity. Many Anglicans look to the Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral of 1888 as the \"sine qua non\" of communal identity. In brief, the quadrilateral's four points are the scriptures as containing all things necessary to salvation; the creeds (specifically, the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds) as the sufficient statement of Christian faith; the dominical sacraments of Baptism and Holy Communion; and the historic episcopate.\nDivines.\nWithin the Anglican tradition, \"divines\" are clergy of the Church of England whose theological writings have been considered standards for faith, doctrine, worship, and spirituality, and whose influence has permeated the Anglican Communion in varying degrees through the years. While there is no authoritative list of these Anglican divines, there are some whose names would likely be found on most lists \u2013 those who are commemorated in lesser feasts of the Anglican churches and those whose works are frequently anthologised.\nThe corpus produced by Anglican divines is diverse. What they have in common is a commitment to the faith as conveyed by scripture and the \"Book of Common Prayer\", thus regarding prayer and theology in a manner akin to that of the Apostolic Fathers. On the whole, Anglican divines view the \"via media\" of Anglicanism not as a compromise, but as \"a positive position, witnessing to the universality of God and God's kingdom working through the fallible, earthly \"ecclesia Anglicana\"\".\nThese theologians regard scripture as interpreted through tradition and reason as authoritative in matters concerning salvation. Reason and tradition, indeed, are extant in and presupposed by scripture, thus implying co-operation between God and humanity, God and nature, and between the sacred and secular. Faith is thus regarded as incarnational and authority as dispersed.\nAmongst the early Anglican divines of the 16th and 17th centuries, the names of Thomas Cranmer, John Jewel, Matthew Parker, Richard Hooker, Lancelot Andrewes, and Jeremy Taylor predominate. The influential character of Hooker's \"Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity\" cannot be overestimated. Published in 1593 and subsequently, Hooker's eight-volume work is primarily a treatise on church-state relations, but it deals comprehensively with issues of biblical interpretation, soteriology, ethics, and sanctification. Throughout the work, Hooker makes clear that theology involves prayer and is concerned with ultimate issues and that theology is relevant to the social mission of the church.\nThe 17th century saw the rise of two important movements in Anglicanism: Cambridge Platonism, with its mystical understanding of reason as the \"candle of the Lord\", and the Evangelical Revival, with its emphasis on the personal experience of the Holy Spirit. The Cambridge Platonist movement evolved into a school called Latitudinarianism, which emphasised reason as the barometer of discernment and took a stance of indifference towards doctrinal and ecclesiological differences.\nThe Evangelical Revival, influenced by such figures as John Wesley and Charles Simeon, re-emphasised the importance of justification through faith and the consequent importance of personal conversion. Some in this movement, such as Wesley and George Whitefield, took the message to the United States, influencing the First Great Awakening and creating an Anglo-American movement called Methodism that would eventually break away, structurally, from the Anglican churches after the American Revolution.\nBy the 19th century, there was a renewed interest in pre-Reformation English religious thought and practice. Theologians such as John Keble, Edward Bouverie Pusey, and John Henry Newman had widespread influence in the realm of polemics, homiletics and theological and devotional works, not least because they largely repudiated the old high-church tradition and replaced it with a dynamic appeal to antiquity which looked beyond the Reformers and Anglican formularies. Their work is largely credited with the development of the Oxford Movement, which sought to reassert Catholic identity and practice in Anglicanism.\nIn contrast to this movement, clergy such as the Bishop of Liverpool, J. C. Ryle, sought to uphold the distinctly Reformed identity of the Church of England. He was not a servant of the status quo, but argued for a lively religion which emphasised grace, holy and charitable living, and the plain use of the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" (interpreted in a partisan evangelical way) without additional rituals. Frederick Denison Maurice, through such works as \"The Kingdom of Christ\", played a pivotal role in inaugurating another movement, Christian socialism. In this, Maurice transformed Hooker's emphasis on the incarnational nature of Anglican spirituality to an imperative for social justice.\nIn the 19th century, Anglican biblical scholarship began to assume a distinct character, represented by the so-called \"Cambridge triumvirate\" of Joseph Lightfoot, F. J. A. Hort, and Brooke Foss Westcott. Their orientation is best summed up by Westcott's observation that \"Life which Christ is and which Christ communicates, the life which fills our whole beings as we realise its capacities, is active fellowship with God.\"\nThe earlier part of the 20th century is marked by Charles Gore, with his emphasis on natural revelation, and William Temple's focus on Christianity and society, while, from outside England, Robert Leighton, Archbishop of Glasgow, and several clergy from the United States have been suggested, such as William Porcher DuBose, John Henry Hobart (1775\u20131830, Bishop of New York 1816\u201330), William Meade, Phillips Brooks, and Charles Brent.\nChurchmanship.\n\"Churchmanship\" can be defined as the manifestation of theology in the realms of liturgy, piety and, to some extent, spirituality. Anglican diversity in this respect has tended to reflect the diversity in the tradition's Reformed and Catholic identity. Different individuals, groups, parishes, dioceses and provinces may identify more closely with one or the other, or some mixture of the two.\nThe range of Anglican belief and practice became particularly divisive during the 19th century, when some clergy were disciplined and even imprisoned on charges of introducing illegal ritual while, at the same time, others were criticised for engaging in public worship services with ministers of Reformed churches. Resistance to the growing acceptance and restoration of traditional Catholic ceremonial by the mainstream of Anglicanism ultimately led to the formation of small breakaway churches such as the Free Church of England in England (1844) and the Reformed Episcopal Church in North America (1873).\nAnglo-Catholic (and some broad-church) Anglicans celebrate public liturgy in ways that understand worship to be something very special and of utmost importance. Vestments are worn by the clergy, sung settings are often used, and incense may be used. Nowadays, in most Anglican churches, the Eucharist is celebrated in a manner similar to the usage of Roman Catholics and some Lutherans, though, in many churches, more traditional, \"pre\u2013Vatican II\" models of worship are common (e.g., an \"eastward orientation\" at the altar). Whilst many Anglo-Catholics derive much of their liturgical practice from that of the pre-Reformation English church, others more closely follow traditional Roman Catholic practices.\nThe Eucharist may sometimes be celebrated in the form known as High Mass, with a priest, deacon and subdeacon (usually actually a layman) dressed in traditional vestments, with incense and sanctus bells and prayers adapted from the Roman Missal or other sources by the celebrant. Such churches may also have forms of eucharistic adoration such as Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament. In terms of personal piety, some Anglicans may recite the Rosary and Angelus, be involved in a devotional society dedicated to \"Our Lady\" (the Blessed Virgin Mary) and seek the intercession of the saints.\nIn recent decades, the prayer books of several provinces have, out of deference to a greater agreement with Eastern Conciliarism (and a perceived greater respect accorded Anglicanism by Eastern Orthodoxy than by Roman Catholicism), instituted a number of historically Eastern and Oriental Orthodox elements in their liturgies, including introduction of the Trisagion and deletion of the filioque clause from the Nicene Creed.\nFor their part, those evangelical (and some broad-church) Anglicans who emphasise the more Protestant aspects of the Church stress the Reformation theme of salvation by grace through faith. They emphasise the two dominical sacraments of Baptism and Eucharist, viewing the other five as \"lesser rites\". Some evangelical Anglicans may even tend to take the inerrancy of scripture literally, adopting the view of Article VI that it contains all things necessary to salvation in an explicit sense. Worship in churches influenced by these principles tends to be significantly less elaborate, with greater emphasis on the Liturgy of the Word (the reading of the scriptures, the sermon, and the intercessory prayers).\nThe Order for Holy Communion may be celebrated bi-weekly or monthly (in preference to the daily offices), by priests attired in choir habit, or more regular clothes, rather than Eucharistic vestments. Ceremony may be in keeping with their view of the provisions of the 17th-century Puritans \u2013 being a Reformed interpretation of the Ornaments Rubric \u2013 no candles, no incense, no bells, and a minimum of manual actions by the presiding celebrant (such as touching the elements at the Words of Institution).\nIn the early 21st century, there has been a growth of charismatic worship among Anglicans. Both Anglo-Catholics and evangelicals have been affected by this movement such that it is not uncommon to find typically charismatic postures, music, and other themes evident during the services of otherwise Anglo-Catholic or evangelical parishes.\nThe spectrum of Anglican beliefs and practice is too large to be fit into these labels. Many Anglicans locate themselves somewhere in the spectrum of the broad-church tradition and consider themselves an amalgam of evangelical and Catholic. Such Anglicans stress that Anglicanism is the \"via media\" (middle way) between the two major strains of Western Christianity and that Anglicanism is like a \"bridge\" between the two strains.\nSacramental doctrine and practice.\nIn accord with its prevailing self-identity as a \"via media\" or \"middle path\" of Western Christianity, Anglican sacramental theology expresses elements in keeping with its status as being both a church in the Catholic tradition as well as a Reformed church. With respect to sacramental theology, the Catholic heritage is perhaps most strongly asserted in the importance Anglicanism places on the sacraments as a means of grace, sanctification, and salvation, as expressed in the church's liturgy and doctrine.\nOf the seven sacraments, all Anglicans recognise Baptism and the Eucharist as being directly instituted by Christ. The other five \u2013 Confession/Absolution, Matrimony, Confirmation, Holy Orders (also called Ordination), and Anointing of the Sick (also called Unction) \u2013 are regarded variously as full sacraments by Anglo-Catholics and many high church and some broad-church Anglicans, but merely as \"sacramental rites\" by other broad-church and low-church Anglicans, especially evangelicals associated with Reform UK and the Diocese of Sydney.\nEucharistic theology.\nAnglican eucharistic theology is divergent in practice, reflecting the essential comprehensiveness of the tradition. A few low-church Anglicans take a strictly memorialist (Zwinglian) view of the sacrament. In other words, they see Holy Communion as a memorial to Christ's suffering, and participation in the Eucharist as both a re-enactment of the Last Supper and a foreshadowing of the heavenly banquet \u2013 the fulfilment of the eucharistic promise.\nOther low-church Anglicans believe in the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist but deny that the presence of Christ is carnal or is necessarily localised in the bread and wine. Despite explicit criticism in the Thirty-Nine Articles, many high-church or Anglo-Catholic Anglicans hold, more or less, the Catholic view of the real presence as expressed in the doctrine of transubstantiation, seeing the Eucharist as a liturgical representation of Christ's atoning sacrifice with the elements actually transformed into Christ's body and blood.\nThe majority of Anglicans, however, have in common a belief in the real presence, defined in one way or another. To that extent, they are in the company of the continental reformer Martin Luther and Calvin rather than Ulrich Zwingli. The Catechism of the American BCP of 1976 repeats the standard Anglican view (\"The outward and visible sign in the Eucharist is the bread and wine\"...\"The inward and spiritual grace in the Holy Communion is the Body and Blood of Christ given to his people, and received by faith\") without further definition. It should be remembered that Anglicanism has no official doctrine on this matter, believing it is wiser to leave the Presence a mystery. The faithful can believe privately whatever explanation they favour, be it transubstantiation, consubstantiation, receptionism, or virtualism (the two most congenial to Anglicans for centuries until the Oxford Movement), each of which espouses belief in the real presence in one way or another, or memorialism, which has never been an option with Anglicans.\nA famous Anglican aphorism regarding Christ's presence in the sacrament, commonly misattributed to Queen Elizabeth\u00a0I, is first found in print in a poem by John Donne:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nHe was the word that spake it,\nHe took the bread and brake it:\nAnd what that word did make it,\nI do believe and take it.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAn Anglican position on the eucharistic sacrifice (\"Sacrifice of the Mass\") was expressed in the response \"Saepius officio\" of the archbishops of Canterbury and York to Pope Leo XIII's papal encyclical \"Apostolicae curae\": viz. that the Prayer Book contained a strong sacrificial theology. Later revisions of the Prayer Book influenced by the Scottish Canon of 1764 first adopted by the Protestant Episcopal Church in 1789 made this assertion quite evident: \"we do make and celebrate before thy Divine Majesty with these thy holy gifts, which we now \"offer\" unto thee, the memorial thy Son has commanded us to make\", which is repeated in the 1929 English BCP and included in such words or others such as \"present\" or \"show forth\" in subsequent revisions.\nAnglican and Roman Catholic representatives declared that they had \"substantial agreement on the doctrine of the Eucharist\" in the \"Windsor Statement on Eucharistic Doctrine\" by the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Consultation (1971) and the Elucidation of the ARCIC Windsor Statement (1979). The final response (1991) to these documents by the Vatican made it plain that it did not consider the degree of agreement reached to be satisfactory.\nPractices.\nIn Anglicanism there is a distinction between liturgy, which is the formal public and communal worship of the church, and personal prayer and devotion, which may be public or private. Liturgy is regulated by the prayer books and consists of the Eucharist (some call it Holy Communion or Mass), the other six sacraments, and the daily offices such as Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer.\n\"Book of Common Prayer\".\nThe \"Book of Common Prayer\" (BCP) is the foundational prayer book of Anglicanism. The original book of 1549 (revised in 1552) was one of the instruments of the English Reformation, replacing the various \"uses\" or rites in Latin that had been used in different parts of the country with a single compact volume in the language of the people, so that \"now from henceforth all the Realm shall have but one use\". Suppressed under Queen Mary\u00a0I, it was revised in 1559, and then again in 1662, after the Restoration of Charles II. This version was made mandatory in England and Wales by the Act of Uniformity and was in standard use until the mid-20th century.\nWith British colonial expansion from the 17th century onwards, Anglican churches were planted around the globe. These churches at first used and then revised the \"Book of Common Prayer\" until they, like their parent church, produced prayer books which took into account the developments in liturgical study and practice in the 19th and 20th centuries, which come under the general heading of the Liturgical Movement.\nWorship.\nAnglican worship services are open to all visitors. Anglican worship originates principally in the reforms of Thomas Cranmer, who aimed to create a set order of service like that of the pre-Reformation church but less complex in its seasonal variety and said in English rather than Latin. This use of a set order of service is not unlike the Catholic tradition. Traditionally, the pattern was that laid out in the \"Book of Common Prayer\". Although many Anglican churches now use a wide range of modern service books written in the local language, the structures of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" are largely retained. Churches which call themselves Anglican will have identified themselves so because they use some form or variant of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" in the shaping of their worship.\nAnglican worship, however, is as diverse as Anglican theology. A contemporary \"low church\" service may differ little from the worship of many mainstream non-Anglican Protestant churches. The service is constructed around a sermon focused on Biblical exposition and opened with one or more Bible readings and closed by a series of prayers (both set and extemporised) and hymns or songs. A \"high church\" or Anglo-Catholic service, by contrast, is usually a more formal liturgy celebrated by clergy in distinctive vestments and may be almost indistinguishable from a Roman Catholic service, often resembling the \"pre\u2013Vatican II\" Tridentine rite.\nBetween these extremes are a variety of styles of worship, often involving a robed choir and the use of the organ to accompany the singing and to provide music before and after the service. Anglican churches tend to have pews or chairs, and it is usual for the congregation to kneel for some prayers but to stand for hymns and other parts of the service such as the Gloria, Collect, Gospel reading, Creed and either the Preface or all of the Eucharistic Prayer. Anglicans may genuflect or cross themselves in the same way as Roman Catholics.\nOther more traditional Anglicans tend to follow the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" and retain the use of the King James Bible. This is typical in many Anglican cathedrals and particularly in royal peculiars such as the Savoy Chapel and the Queen's Chapel. These Anglican church services include classical music instead of songs, hymns from the New English Hymnal (usually excluding modern hymns such as \"Lord of the Dance\"), and are generally non-evangelical and formal in practice. Until the mid-20th century the main Sunday service was typically Morning Prayer, but the Eucharist has once again become the standard form of Sunday worship in most Anglican churches; this again is similar to Roman Catholic practice. Other common Sunday services include an early morning Eucharist without music, an abbreviated Eucharist following a service of morning prayer, and a service of Evening Prayer, often called \"Evensong\" when sung, usually celebrated between 3:00 and 6:00 pm. The late-evening service of Compline was revived in parish use in the early 20th century. Many Anglican churches will also have daily morning and evening prayer, and some have midweek or even daily celebration of the Eucharist.\nAn Anglican service (whether or not a Eucharist) will include readings from the Bible that are generally taken from a standardised lectionary, which provides for much of the Bible (and some passages from the Apocrypha) to be read out loud in the church over a cycle of one, two, or three years (depending on which eucharistic and office lectionaries are used, respectively). The sermon (or homily) is typically about ten to twenty minutes in length, often comparably short to sermons in evangelical churches. Even in the most informal Anglican services, it is common for set prayers such as the weekly Collect to be read. There are also set forms for intercessory prayer, though this is now more often extemporaneous. In high and Anglo-Catholic churches there are generally prayers for the dead. Although Anglican public worship is usually ordered according to the canonically approved services, in practice many Anglican churches use forms of service outside these norms. Liberal churches may use freely structured or experimental forms of worship, including patterns borrowed from ecumenical traditions such as those of the Taiz\u00e9 Community or the Iona Community.\nAnglo-Catholic parishes might use the modern Roman Catholic liturgy of the Mass or more traditional forms, such as the Tridentine Mass (which is translated into English in the English Missal), the Anglican Missal, or, less commonly, the Sarum Rite. Catholic devotions such as the Rosary, Angelus, and Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament are also common among Anglo-Catholics.\nEucharistic discipline.\nOnly baptised persons are eligible to receive communion, although in many churches communion is restricted to those who have not only been baptised but also confirmed. In many Anglican provinces, however, all baptised Christians are now often invited to receive communion and some dioceses have regularised a system for admitting baptised young people to communion before they are confirmed.\nThe discipline of fasting before communion is practised by some Anglicans. Most Anglican priests require the presence of at least one other person for the celebration of the Eucharist (referring back to Christ's statement in Matthew 18:20, \"When two or more are gathered in my name, I will be in the midst of them.\"), though some Anglo-Catholic priests (like Roman Catholic priests) may say private Masses. As in the Roman Catholic Church, it is a canonical requirement to use fermented wine for communion.\nUnlike in Roman Catholicism, the consecrated bread and wine are normally offered to the congregation at a eucharistic service (\"communion in both kinds\"). This practice is becoming more frequent in the Roman Catholic Church as well, especially through the Neocatechumenal Way. In some churches, the sacrament is reserved in a tabernacle or aumbry with a lighted candle or lamp nearby. In Anglican churches, only a priest or a bishop may be the celebrant at the Eucharist.\nDaily office.\nAll Anglican prayer books contain offices for Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer (called Evensong when sung chorally). In the original \"Book of Common Prayer\", these were derived from combinations of the ancient monastic offices of Matins and Lauds; and Vespers and Compline, respectively. The prayer offices have an important place in Anglican history.\nPrior to the Catholic revival of the 19th century, which eventually restored the Eucharist as the principal Sunday liturgy, and especially during the 18th century, a morning service combining Matins, the Litany, and ante-Communion comprised the usual expression of common worship, while Matins and Evensong were sung daily in cathedrals and some collegiate chapels. This nurtured a tradition of distinctive Anglican chant applied to the canticles and psalms used at the offices (although plainsong is often used as well).\nIn some official and many unofficial Anglican service books, these offices are supplemented by other offices such as the Little Hours of Prime and prayer during the day such as (Terce, Sext, None, and Compline). Some Anglican monastic communities have a Daily Office based on that of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" but with additional antiphons and canticles, etc., for specific days of the week, specific psalms, etc. See, for example, Order of the Holy Cross and Order of St Helena, editors, \"A Monastic Breviary\" (Wilton, Conn.: Morehouse-Barlow, 1976). The All Saints Sisters of the Poor, with convents in Catonsville, Maryland, and elsewhere, use an elaborated version of the Anglican Daily Office. The Society of St. Francis publishes \"Celebrating Common Prayer\", which has become especially popular for use among Anglicans.\nIn England, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and some other Anglican provinces, the modern prayer books contain four offices:\nIn addition, most prayer books include a section of prayers and devotions for family use. In the US, these offices are further supplemented by an \"Order of Worship for the Evening\", a prelude to or an abbreviated form of Evensong, partly derived from Orthodox prayers. In the United Kingdom, the publication of \"Daily Prayer\", the third volume of \"Common Worship\", was published in 2005. It retains the services for Morning and Evening Prayer and Compline and includes a section entitled \"Prayer during the Day\". \"A New Zealand Prayer Book\" of 1989 provides different outlines for Matins and Evensong on each day of the week, as well as \"Midday Prayer\", \"Night Prayer\" and \"Family Prayer\".\nSome Anglicans who pray the office on daily basis use the present Divine Office of the Roman Catholic Church. In many cities, especially in England, Anglican and Roman Catholic priests and lay people often meet several times a week to pray the office in common. A small but enthusiastic minority use the Anglican Breviary, or other translations and adaptations of the pre\u2013Vatican II Roman Rite and Sarum Rite, along with supplemental material from cognate western sources, to provide such things as a common of Octaves, a common of Holy Women, and other additional material. Others may privately use idiosyncratic forms borrowed from a wide range of Christian traditions.\n\"Quires and Places where they sing\".\nIn the late medieval period, many English cathedrals and monasteries had established small choirs of trained lay clerks and boy choristers to perform polyphonic settings of the Mass in their Lady chapels. Although these \"Lady Masses\" were discontinued at the Reformation, the associated musical tradition was maintained in the Elizabethan Settlement through the establishment of choral foundations for daily singing of the Divine Office by expanded choirs of men and boys. This resulted from an explicit addition by Elizabeth herself to the injunctions accompanying the 1559 \"Book of Common Prayer\" (that had itself made no mention of choral worship) by which existing choral foundations and choir schools were instructed to be continued, and their endowments secured. Consequently, some thirty-four cathedrals, collegiate churches, and royal chapels maintained paid establishments of lay singing men and choristers in the late 16th century.\nAll save four of these have \u2013 with interruptions during the Commonwealth and the COVID-19 pandemic \u2013 continued daily choral prayer and praise to this day. In the Offices of Morning Prayer and Evening Prayer in the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\", these choral establishments are specified as \"Quires and Places where they sing\".\nFor nearly three centuries, this round of daily professional choral worship represented a tradition entirely distinct from that embodied in the intoning of Parish Clerks, and the singing of \"west gallery choirs\" which commonly accompanied weekly worship in English parish churches. In 1841, the rebuilt Leeds Parish Church established a surpliced choir to accompany parish services, drawing explicitly on the musical traditions of the ancient choral foundations. Over the next century, the Leeds example proved immensely popular and influential for choirs in cathedrals, parish churches, and schools throughout the Anglican communion. More or less extensively adapted, this choral tradition also became the direct inspiration for robed choirs leading congregational worship in a wide range of Christian denominations.\nIn 1719, the cathedral choirs of Gloucester, Hereford, and Worcester combined to establish the annual Three Choirs Festival, the precursor for the multitude of summer music festivals since. By the 20th century, the choral tradition had become for many the most accessible face of worldwide Anglicanism \u2013 especially as promoted through the regular broadcasting of choral evensong by the BBC; and also in the annual televising of the festival of Nine Lessons and Carols from King's College, Cambridge. Composers closely concerned with this tradition include Edward Elgar, Ralph Vaughan Williams, Gustav Holst, Charles Villiers Stanford, and Benjamin Britten. A number of important 20th-century works by non-Anglican composers were originally commissioned for the Anglican choral tradition \u2013 for example, the \"Chichester Psalms\" of Leonard Bernstein and the \"Nunc dimittis\" of Arvo P\u00e4rt.\nCommunion.\nPrinciples of governance.\nContrary to popular misconception, the British monarch is not the constitutional \"head\" of the Church of England but is, in law, the church's \"supreme governor\", nor does the monarch have any role in provinces outside England. The role of the crown in the Church of England is practically limited to the appointment of bishops, including the archbishop of Canterbury, and even this role is limited, as the church presents the government with a short list of candidates from which to choose. This process is accomplished through collaboration with and consent of ecclesial representatives \"(see Ecclesiastical Commissioners)\". Although the monarch has no constitutional role in Anglican churches in other parts of the world, the prayer books of several countries where the monarch is head of state contain prayers for him or her as sovereign.\nA characteristic of Anglicanism is that it has no international juridical authority. All forty-two provinces of the Anglican Communion are autonomous, each with their own primate and governing structure. These provinces may take the form of national churches (such as in Canada, Uganda or Japan) or a collection of nations (such as the West Indies, Central Africa or South Asia), or geographical regions (such as Vanuatu and Solomon Islands) etc. Within these provinces there may exist subdivisions, called ecclesiastical provinces, under the jurisdiction of a metropolitan archbishop.\nAll provinces of the Anglican Communion consist of dioceses, each under the jurisdiction of a bishop. In the Anglican tradition, bishops must be consecrated according to the strictures of apostolic succession, which Anglicans consider one of the marks of catholicity. Apart from bishops, there are two other orders of ordained ministry: deacon and priest.\nNo requirement is made for clerical celibacy, though many Anglo-Catholic priests have traditionally been bachelors. Because of innovations that occurred at various points after the latter half of the 20th century, women may be ordained as deacons in almost all provinces, as priests in most and as bishops in many. Anglican religious orders and communities, suppressed in England during the Reformation, have re-emerged, especially since the mid-19th century, and now have an international presence and influence.\nGovernment in the Anglican Communion is synodical, consisting of three houses of laity (usually elected parish representatives), clergy and bishops. National, provincial and diocesan synods maintain different scopes of authority, depending on their canons and constitutions. Anglicanism is not congregational in its polity: it is the diocese, not the parish church, which is the smallest unit of authority in the church. \"(See Episcopal polity)\".\nArchbishop of Canterbury.\nThe archbishop of Canterbury has a precedence of honour over the other primates of the Anglican Communion, and for a province to be considered a part of the communion means specifically to be in full communion with the see of Canterbury \u2013 though this principle is currently subject to considerable debate, especially among those in the so-called Global South, including American Anglicans. The archbishop is, therefore, recognised as the (lat. \"first amongst equals\") even though no direct authority in any province outside of England is exercised by the archbishop. Rowan Williams, the archbishop of Canterbury from 2002 to 2012, was the first archbishop appointed from outside the Church of England since the Reformation as he was formerly the archbishop of Wales. On October 3, 2025, the monarch of the UK appointed Sarah Mullally as the archbishop of Canterbury making her the first woman to serve in the role and the first woman to be the \"first among equals\" and an \"instrument of communion\" within the Anglican Communion. On October 16, 2025, the Chair of GAFCON, Laurent Mbanda, the Primate of Rwanda, announced that GAFCON no longer recognises the Archbishop of Canterbury as an Instrument of Communion.\nAs spiritual head of the communion, the archbishop of Canterbury maintains a certain moral authority and has the right to determine which churches will be in communion with the see. The archbishop hosts and chairs both the Lambeth Conferences of Anglican Communion bishops and the Anglican Communion Primates' Meeting and is responsible for the invitations to them. The archbishop also acts as the president of the secretariat of the Anglican Communion Office and its deliberative body, the Anglican Consultative Council.\nConferences.\nThe Anglican Communion has no international juridical organisation. All international bodies are consultative and collaborative, and their resolutions are not legally binding on the autonomous provinces of the communion. There are three international bodies of note.\nOrdained ministry.\nLike the Roman Catholic Church and the Orthodox churches, the Anglican Communion maintains the threefold ministry of deacons, presbyters (usually called \"priests\"), and bishops.\nEpiscopate.\nBishops, who possess the fullness of Christian priesthood, are the successors of the apostles. Primates, archbishops, and metropolitans are all bishops and members of the historical episcopate who derive their authority through apostolic succession \u2013 an unbroken line of bishops that can be traced back to the 12 apostles of Jesus. The churches of the Anglican Communion have traditionally held that ordination in the historic episcopate is a core element in the validity of clerical ordinations. The Roman Catholic Church, however, does not recognise Anglican orders (see \"Apostolicae curae\"). Some Eastern Orthodox churches have issued statements to the effect that Anglican orders could be accepted, yet have still reordained former Anglican clergy; other Eastern Orthodox churches have rejected Anglican orders altogether. In 1922, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, Meletius IV, followed by the Synod of Constantinople, issued a statement recognising Anglican Holy Orders within the Anglican Communion as valid through apostolic succession. Following Constantinople, five other autocephalous Orthodox jurisdictions recognised the validity of Anglican Holy Orders, including Alexandria, Jerusalem, Cyprus, Greece and Romania. Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware explains this apparent discrepancy as follows:Anglican clergy who join the Orthodox Church are reordained; but [some Orthodox churches hold that] if Anglicanism and Orthodoxy were to reach full unity in the faith, perhaps such reordination might not be found necessary. It should be added, however, that a number of individual Orthodox theologians hold that under no circumstances would it be possible to recognise the validity of Anglican Orders.\nPriesthood.\nBishops are assisted by priests and deacons. Most ordained ministers in the Anglican Communion are priests, who usually work in parishes within a diocese. Priests are in charge of the spiritual life of parishes and are usually called the rector or vicar. A curate (or, more correctly, an \"assistant curate\") is a priest or deacon who assists the parish priest. Non-parochial priests may earn their living by any vocation, although employment by educational institutions or charitable organisations is most common. Priests also serve as chaplains of hospitals, schools, prisons, and in the armed forces.\nAn archdeacon is a priest or deacon responsible for administration of an archdeaconry, which is often the name given to the principal subdivisions of a diocese. An archdeacon represents the diocesan bishop in his or her archdeaconry. In the Church of England, the position of archdeacon can only be held by someone in priestly orders who has been ordained for at least six years. In some other parts of the Anglican Communion, the position can also be held by deacons. In parts of the Anglican Communion where women cannot be ordained as priests or bishops but can be ordained as deacons, the position of archdeacon is effectively the most senior office to which an ordained woman can be appointed.\nA dean is a priest who is the principal cleric of a cathedral or other collegiate church and the head of the chapter of canons. If the cathedral or collegiate church has its own parish, the dean is usually also rector of the parish. However, in the Church of Ireland, the roles are often separated, and most cathedrals in the Church of England do not have associated parishes. In the Church in Wales, however, most cathedrals are parish churches and their deans are now also vicars of their parishes.\nThe Anglican Communion recognises Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox ordinations as valid. Outside the Anglican Communion, Anglican ordinations (at least of male priests) are recognised by the Old Catholic Church, Porvoo Communion Lutherans, and various Independent Catholic churches.\nDiaconate.\nIn Anglican churches, deacons often work directly in ministry to the marginalised inside and outside the church: the poor, the sick, the hungry, the imprisoned. Unlike Orthodox and most Roman Catholic deacons who may be married only before ordination, deacons are permitted to marry freely both before and after ordination, as are priests. Most deacons are preparing for priesthood and usually only remain as deacons for about a year before being ordained priests. However, there are some deacons who remain so.\nMany provinces of the Anglican Communion ordain both men and women as deacons. Many of those provinces that ordain women to the priesthood previously allowed them to be ordained only to the diaconate. The effect of this was the creation of a large and overwhelmingly female diaconate for a time, as most men proceeded to be ordained priest after a short time as a deacon.\nDeacons, in some dioceses, can be granted licences to solemnise matrimony, usually under the instruction of their parish priest and bishop. They sometimes officiate at Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament in churches which have this service. Deacons are not permitted to preside at the Eucharist (but can lead worship with the distribution of already consecrated communion where this is permitted), absolve sins, or pronounce a blessing. It is the prohibition against deacons pronouncing blessings that leads some to believe that deacons cannot solemnise matrimony.\nLaity.\nAll baptised members of the church are called Christian faithful, truly equal in dignity and in the work to build the church. Some non-ordained people also have a formal public ministry, often on a full-time and long-term basis \u2013 such as lay readers (also known as readers), churchwardens, vergers, and sextons. Other lay positions include acolytes (male or female, often children), lay eucharistic ministers (also known as chalice bearers), and lay eucharistic visitors (who deliver consecrated bread and wine to \"shut-ins\" or members of the parish who are unable to leave home or hospital to attend the Eucharist). Lay people also serve on the parish altar guild (preparing the altar and caring for its candles, linens, flowers, etc.), in the choir and as cantors, as ushers and greeters, and on the church council (called the \"vestry\" in some countries), which is the governing body of a parish.\nReligious orders.\nA small yet influential aspect of Anglicanism is its religious orders and communities. Shortly after the beginning of the Catholic Revival in the Church of England, there was a renewal of interest in re-establishing religious and monastic orders and communities. One of Henry VIII's earliest acts was their dissolution and seizure of their assets. In 1841, Marian Rebecca Hughes became the first woman to take the vows of religion in communion with the Province of Canterbury since the Reformation.\nIn 1848, Priscilla Lydia Sellon became the superior of the Society of the Most Holy Trinity at Devonport, Plymouth, the first organised religious order. Sellon is called \"the restorer, after three centuries, of the religious life in the Church of England\". For the next one hundred years, religious orders for both men and women proliferated throughout the world, becoming a numerically small but disproportionately influential feature of global Anglicanism.\nAnglican religious life at one time boasted hundreds of orders and communities, and thousands of religious. An important aspect of Anglican religious life is that most communities of both men and women lived their lives consecrated to God under the vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, or, in Benedictine communities, Stability, Conversion of Life, and Obedience, by practising a mixed life of reciting the full eight services of the Breviary in choir, along with a daily Eucharist, plus service to the poor. The mixed life, combining aspects of the contemplative orders and the active orders, remains to this day a hallmark of Anglican religious life. Another distinctive feature of Anglican religious life is the existence of some mixed-gender communities.\nSince the 1960s, there has been a sharp decline in the number of professed religious in most parts of the Anglican Communion, especially in North America, Europe, and Australia. Many once large and international communities have been reduced to a single convent or monastery with memberships of elderly men or women. In the last few decades of the 20th century, novices have for most communities been few and far between. Some orders and communities have already become extinct. There are, however, still thousands of Anglican religious working today in approximately 200 communities around the world, and religious life in many parts of the Communion \u2013 especially in developing nations \u2013 flourishes.\nThe most significant growth has been in the Melanesian countries of the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and Papua New Guinea. The Melanesian Brotherhood, founded at Tabalia, Guadalcanal, in 1925 by Ini Kopuria, is now the largest Anglican Community in the world, with over 450 brothers in the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, and the United Kingdom. The Sisters of the Church, started by Mother Emily Ayckbowm in England in 1870, has more sisters in the Solomons than all their other communities. The Community of the Sisters of Melanesia, started in 1980 by Sister Nesta Tiboe, is a growing community of women in the Solomon Islands.\nThe Society of Saint Francis, founded as a union of various Franciscan orders in the 1920s, has experienced great growth in the Solomon Islands. Other communities of religious have been started by Anglicans in Papua New Guinea and in Vanuatu. Most Melanesian Anglican religious are in their early to mid-20s. Vows may be temporary, and it is generally assumed that brothers, at least, will leave and marry in due course, making the average age 40 to 50 years younger than their brothers and sisters in other countries. Growth of religious orders, especially for women, is marked in certain parts of Africa.\nWorldwide distribution.\nAs of 2024, there are around 110 million Anglicans worldwide. Of these, as of 2020, around 95 million are members of the Anglican Communion (excluding united churches).\nThis makes the Anglican Communion the third largest Christian communion in the world, after the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church. \nThe 11 provinces in Africa saw growth in the last two decades. There are 63,497,000 baptised members in Africa, 23,322,000 in Europe, 3,698,000 in Oceania, 2,219,000 in North America, 958,000 in Latin America, and 909,000 in Asia (excluding the United churches). In most industrialised countries, church attendance has decreased since the 19th century. Anglicanism's presence in the rest of the world is due to large-scale emigration, the establishment of expatriate communities, or the work of missionaries.\nThe Church of England has been a church of missionaries since the 17th century, when the Church first left English shores with colonists who founded what would become the United States, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa, and established Anglican churches. For example, an Anglican chaplain, Robert Wolfall, with Martin Frobisher's Arctic expedition, celebrated the Eucharist in 1578 in Frobisher Bay.\nThe first Anglican church in the Americas was built at Jamestown, Virginia, in 1607. By the 18th century, missionaries worked to establish Anglican churches in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. The great Church of England missionary societies were founded; for example, the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) in 1698, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (SPG) in 1701, and the Church Mission Society (CMS) in 1799. In the 19th century, social-oriented evangelism with societies were founded and developed, including the Church Pastoral Aid Society (CPAS) in 1836, Mission to Seafarers in 1856, Girls' Friendly Society (GFS) in 1875, Mothers' Union in 1876, and Church Army in 1882, all carrying out a personal form of evangelism.\nIn the 20th century, the Church of England developed new forms of evangelism, including the Alpha course in 1990, which was developed and propagated from Holy Trinity Brompton Church in London. In the 21st century, there has been renewed effort to reach children and youth. Fresh expressions is a Church of England missionary initiative to youth begun in 2005, and has ministries at a skate park through the efforts of St George's Church, Benfleet, Essex, the Diocese of Chelmsford, or youth groups with evocative names, like the C.L.A.W (Christ Little Angels \u2013 Whatever!) youth group at Coventry Cathedral. For those who prefer not to actually visit a brick and mortar church, there are Internet ministries, such as the Diocese of Oxford's online Anglican i-Church, which was founded on the web in 2005.\nEcumenism.\nAnglican interest in ecumenical dialogue can be traced back to the time of the Reformation and dialogues with both Orthodox and Lutheran churches in the 16th century. In the 19th century, with the rise of the Oxford Movement, there arose greater concern for reunion of the churches of \"Catholic confession\". This desire to work towards full communion with other denominations led to the development of the Chicago-Lambeth Quadrilateral, approved by the third Lambeth Conference of 1888. The four points (the sufficiency of scripture, the historic creeds, the two dominical sacraments, and the historic episcopate) were proposed as a basis for discussion, although they have frequently been taken as a non-negotiable bottom-line for any form of reunion.\nTheological diversity.\nAnglicanism in general has always sought a balance between the emphases of Catholicism and Protestantism, while tolerating a range of expressions of evangelicalism and ceremony. Clergy and laity from all Anglican churchmanship traditions have been active in the formation of the Continuing movement.\nWhile there are high church, broad-church and low-church Continuing Anglicans, many Continuing churches are Anglo-Catholic with highly ceremonial liturgical practices. Others belong to a more evangelical or low-church tradition and tend to support the Thirty-nine Articles and simpler worship services. Morning Prayer, for instance, is often used instead of the Holy Eucharist for Sunday worship services, although this is not necessarily true of all low-church parishes.\nMost Continuing churches in the United States reject the 1979 revision of the \"Book of Common Prayer\" by the Episcopal Church and use the 1928 version for their services instead. In addition, Anglo-Catholic bodies may use the Anglican Missal, Anglican Service Book or English Missal when celebrating Mass.\nInternal conflict.\nA changing focus on social issues after the World War II led to Lambeth Conference resolutions countenancing contraception and the remarriage of divorced persons. Eventually, most provinces approved the ordination of women. In more recent years, some jurisdictions have permitted the ordination of people in same-sex relationships and authorised rites for the blessing of same-sex unions (see Homosexuality and Anglicanism). \"The more liberal provinces that are open to changing Church doctrine on marriage in order to allow for same-sex unions include Brazil, Canada, New Zealand, Scotland, South India, South Africa, the US and Wales\", while the more conservative provinces are primarily located in the Global South.\nThe lack of social consensus among and within provinces of diverse cultural traditions has resulted in considerable conflict and even schism concerning some or all of these developments, as was the case in the Anglican realignment. More conservative elements within and outside of Anglicanism (primarily African churches and factions within North American Anglicanism) have opposed these changes, while some liberal and moderate Anglicans see this opposition as representing a new fundamentalism within Anglicanism and \"believe a split is inevitable and preferable to continued infighting and paralysis.\" Some Anglicans opposed to various liberalising changes, in particular the ordination of women, have become Roman Catholics or Orthodox. Others have, at various times, joined the Continuing Anglican movement or departed for non-Anglican evangelical churches.\nContinuum.\nThe term \"Continuing Anglicanism\" refers to a number of church bodies which have formed outside of the Anglican Communion in the belief that traditional forms of Anglican faith, worship, and order have been unacceptably revised or abandoned within some Anglican Communion churches in recent decades. They therefore claim that they are \"continuing\" traditional Anglicanism.\nThe modern Continuing Anglican movement principally dates to the Congress of St. Louis, held in the United States in 1977, where participants rejected changes that had been made in the Episcopal Church's \"Book of Common Prayer\" and also the Episcopal Church's approval of the ordination of women to the priesthood. More recent changes in the North American churches of the Anglican Communion, such as the introduction of same-sex marriage rites and the ordination of gay and lesbian people to the priesthood and episcopate, have created further separations.\nContinuing churches have generally been formed by people who have left the Anglican Communion. The original Anglican churches are charged by the Continuing Anglicans with being greatly compromised by secular cultural standards and liberal theology. Many Continuing Anglicans believe that the faith of some churches in communion with the archbishop of Canterbury has become unorthodox and therefore have not sought to also be in communion with him. The original continuing parishes in the United States were found mainly in metropolitan areas. Since the late 1990s, a number have appeared in smaller communities, often as a result of a division in the town's existing Episcopal churches. The 2007\u201308 \"Directory of Traditional Anglican and Episcopal Parishes\", published by the Fellowship of Concerned Churchmen, contained information on over 900 parishes affiliated with either the Continuing Anglican churches or the Anglican realignment movement, a more recent wave of Anglicans withdrawing from the Anglican Communion's North American provinces.\nSocial activism.\nA concern for social justice can be traced to very early Anglican beliefs, relating to an intertwined theology of God, nature, and humanity. The Anglican theologian Richard Hooker wrote in his book \"The Works of that Learned and Judicious Divine\" that \"God hath created nothing simply for itself, but each thing in all things, and of every thing each part in other have such interest, that in the whole world nothing is found whereunto any thing created can say, 'I need thee not.'\" Such statements demonstrate a theological Anglican interest in social activism, which has historically appeared in movements such as evangelical Anglican William Wilberforce\u2019s campaign against slavery in the 18th century, or 19th century issues concerning industrialisation.\nWorking conditions and Christian socialism.\nLord Shaftesbury, a devout evangelical, campaigned to improve the conditions in factories, in mines, for chimney sweeps, and for the education of the very poor. For years, he was chairman of the Ragged School Board. Frederick Denison Maurice was a leading figure advocating reform, founding so-called \"producer's co-operatives\" and the Working Men's College. His work was instrumental in the establishment of the Christian socialist movement, although he himself was not in any real sense a socialist but \"a Tory paternalist with the unusual desire to theorize his acceptance of the traditional obligation to help the poor\", influenced Anglo-Catholics such as Charles Gore, who wrote that \"the principle of the incarnation is denied unless the Christian spirit can be allowed to concern itself with everything that interests and touches human life.\" Anglican focus on labour issues culminated in the work of William Temple in the 1930s and 1940s.\"\nPacifism.\nA question of whether or not Christianity is a pacifist religion has remained a matter of debate for Anglicans. The leading Anglican spokesman for pacifist ideas, from 1914 to 1945, was Ernest Barnes, bishop of Birmingham from 1924 to 1953. He opposed both world wars. In 1937, the Anglican Pacifist Fellowship emerged as a distinct reform organisation, seeking to make pacifism a clearly defined part of Anglican theology. The group rapidly gained popularity amongst Anglican intellectuals, including Vera Brittain, Evelyn Underhill, and the former British political leader George Lansbury. Furthermore, Dick Sheppard, who during the 1930s was one of Britain's most famous Anglican priests due to his landmark sermon broadcasts for BBC Radio, founded the Peace Pledge Union, a secular pacifist organisation for the non-religious that gained considerable support throughout the 1930s.\nWhilst never actively endorsed by Anglican churches, many Anglicans unofficially have adopted the Augustinian \"Just War\" doctrine. The Anglican Pacifist Fellowship remains highly active throughout the Anglican world. It rejects this doctrine of \"just war\" and seeks to reform the Church by reintroducing the pacifism inherent in the beliefs of many of the earliest Christians and present in their interpretation of Christ's Sermon on the Mount. The principles of the Anglican Pacifist Fellowship are often formulated as a statement of belief that \"Jesus' teaching is incompatible with the waging of war ... that a Christian church should never support or justify war ... [and] that our Christian witness should include opposing the waging or justifying of war.\"\nConfusing the matter was that the 37th Article of Religion in the \"Book of Common Prayer\" states that \"it is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the Magistrate, to wear weapons, and serve in the wars.\" Therefore, the Lambeth Council in the modern era has sought to provide a clearer position by repudiating modern war and developed a statement that has been affirmed at each subsequent meeting of the council.\nThis statement was strongly reasserted when \"the 67th General Convention of the Episcopal Church reaffirms the statement made by the Anglican Bishops assembled at Lambeth in 1978 and adopted by the 66th General Convention of the Episcopal Church in 1979, calling \"Christian people everywhere ... to engage themselves in non-violent action for justice and peace and to support others so engaged, recognising that such action will be controversial and may be personally very costly... this General Convention, in obedience to this call, urges all members of this Church to support by prayer and by such other means as they deem appropriate, those who engaged in such non-violent action, and particularly those who suffer for conscience' sake as a result; and be it further Resolved, that this General Convention calls upon all members of this Church seriously to consider the implications for their own lives of this call to resist war and work for peace for their own lives.\"\nOpposition to apartheid.\nThe focus on other social issues became increasingly diffuse after World War II. The growing independence and strength of Anglican churches in the Global South brought new emphasis to issues of global poverty, the inequitable distribution of resources, and the lingering effects of colonialism. In this regard, figures such as Desmond Tutu and Ted Scott were instrumental in mobilising Anglicans worldwide against the apartheid policies of South Africa.\nAbortion and euthanasia.\nWhile individual Anglicans and member churches within the Communion differ in practice over the circumstances in which abortion should or should not be permitted, Lambeth Conference resolutions have consistently held to a conservative view on the issue. The 1930 Conference, the first to be held since the initial legalisation of abortion in Europe (in Russia in 1920), stated: \"The Conference further records its abhorrence of the sinful practice of abortion.\"\nThe 1958 Conference's \"Family in Contemporary Society\" report affirmed the following position on abortion and was commended by the 1968 Conference:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the strongest terms Christians reject the practice of induced abortion or infanticide, which involves the killing of a life already conceived (as well as a violation of the personality of the mother), save at the dictate of strict and undeniable medical necessity ... the sacredness of life is, in Christian eyes, an absolute which should not be violated.\nThe subsequent Lambeth Conference, in 1978, made no change to this position and commended the need for \"programmes at diocesan level, involving both men and women ... to emphasise the sacredness of all human life, the moral issues inherent in clinical abortion, and the possible implications of genetic engineering.\"\nIn the context of debates around and proposals for the legalisation of euthanasia and assisted suicide, the 1998 Conference affirmed that \"life is God-given and has intrinsic sanctity, significance and worth\".\nOrdinariates within the Roman Catholic Church.\nOn 4 November 2009, Pope Benedict XVI issued an apostolic constitution, \"Anglicanorum Coetibus\", to allow groups of former Anglicans to enter into full communion with the Roman Catholic Church as members of personal ordinariates. 20 October 2009 announcement of the imminent constitution mentioned:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Today's announcement of the Apostolic Constitution is a response by Pope Benedict XVI to a number of requests over the past few years to the Holy See from groups of Anglicans who wish to enter into full visible communion with the Roman Catholic Church, and are willing to declare that they share a common Catholic faith and accept the Petrine ministry as willed by Christ for his Church.\nPope Benedict XVI approved, within the apostolic constitution, a canonical structure that provides for personal ordinariates which will allow former Anglicans to enter full communion with the Roman Catholic Church while preserving elements of distinctive Anglican spiritual patrimony.\nFor each personal ordinariate, the ordinary may be a former Anglican bishop or priest. It was expected that provision would be made to allow the retention of aspects of Anglican liturgy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1216", "revid": "49983941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1216", "title": "Athens", "text": "Capital and largest city of Greece\nAthens is the capital and largest city of Greece. A significant coastal urban area in the Mediterranean, Athens is also the capital of the Attica region and is the southernmost capital on the European mainland. With its urban area's population numbering over 3.6 million, it is the eighth-largest urban area in the European Union (EU). The Municipality of Athens (also City of Athens), which constitutes a small administrative unit of the entire urban area, had a population of 643,452 in 2021, within its official limits, and a land area of .\nAthens is one of the world's oldest cities, with its recorded history spanning over 3,400 years, and its earliest human presence beginning somewhere between the 11th and 7th millennia BCE. According to Greek mythology the city was named after Athena, the ancient Greek goddess of wisdom, but modern scholars generally agree that the goddess took her name after the city. Classical Athens was one of the most powerful city-states in ancient Greece. It was a centre for democracy, the arts, education and philosophy, and was highly influential throughout the European continent, particularly in Ancient Rome. For this reason it is often regarded as the cradle of Western civilisation and the birthplace of democracy in its own right independently from the rest of Greece.\nIn modern times Athens is a large cosmopolitan metropolis and central to economic, financial, industrial, maritime, political and cultural life in Greece. It is a Beta (+) \u2013 \nstatus global city according to the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, and is one of the biggest economic centres in Southeast Europe. It also has a large financial sector, and its port Piraeus is both the second-busiest passenger port in Europe and the thirteenth-largest container port in the world. The Athens metropolitan area extends beyond its administrative municipal city limits as well as its urban agglomeration, with a population of 3,638,281 in 2021 over an area of .\nThe heritage of the Classical Era is still evident in the city, represented by ancient monuments, and works of art, the most famous of all being the Parthenon, considered a key landmark of early Western culture. Athens retains Roman, Byzantine and a smaller number of Ottoman monuments, while its historical urban core features elements of continuity through its millennia of history. Athens contains two World Heritage Sites recognised by UNESCO: the Acropolis of Athens and the medieval Daphni Monastery. Athens is home to several museums and cultural institutions, such as the National Archeological Museum, featuring the world's largest collection of ancient Greek antiquities, the Acropolis Museum, the Museum of Cycladic Art, the Benaki Museum and the Byzantine and Christian Museum. Athens was the host city of the first modern-day Olympic Games in 1896, and 108 years later it hosted the 2004 Summer Olympics, making it one of five cities to have hosted the Summer Olympics on more than one occasion.\nEtymology and names.\nIn Ancient Greek the name of the city was (\"Ath\u00eanai\", in Classical Attic), which is a plural word. In earlier Greek, such as Homeric Greek, the name had been current in the singular form though, as (\"Ath\u1e17n\u0113\"). It was possibly rendered in the plural later on, like those of (\"Th\u00eabai\") and (\"\u039cuk\u00eanai\"). The root of the word is probably not of Greek or Indo-European origin, and is possibly a remnant of the Pre-Greek substrate of Attica. \nIn classical antiquity it was debated whether Athens took its name from its patron goddess Athena (Attic , \"Ath\u0113n\u00e2\", Ionic , \"Ath\u1e17n\u0113\", and Doric , \"Ath\u0101\u0301n\u0101\") or Athena took her name from the city. Modern scholars now generally agree that the goddess takes her name from the city, because the ending -\"ene\" is common in names of locations, but rare for personal names.\nAccording to the ancient Athenian founding myth, Athena, the goddess of wisdom and war, competed against Poseidon, the God of the Seas, for patronage of the yet-unnamed city; they agreed that whoever gave the Athenians the better gift would become their patron and appointed Cecrops, the king of Athens, as the judge. According to the account given by Pseudo-Apollodorus, Poseidon struck the ground with his trident and a salt water spring welled up. In an alternative version of the myth from Virgil's poem \"Georgics\", Poseidon instead gave the Athenians the first horse. In both versions, Athena offered the Athenians the first domesticated olive tree. \nCecrops accepted this gift and declared Athena the patron goddess of Athens. Eight different etymologies, now commonly rejected, have been proposed since the 17th century. Christian Lobeck proposed as the root of the name the word (\"\u00e1thos\") or (\"\u00e1nthos\") meaning \"flower\", to denote Athens as the \"flowering city\". Ludwig von D\u00f6derlein proposed the stem of the verb , stem \u03b8\u03b7- (\"th\u00e1\u014d\", \"th\u0113-\", \"to suck\") to denote Athens as having fertile soil. \nAthenians were called cicada-wearers () because they used to wear pins of golden cicadas. A symbol of being autochthonous (earth-born), because the legendary founder of Athens, Erechtheus was an autochthon or of being musicians, because the cicada is a \"musician\" insect. In classical literature the city was sometimes referred to as the City of the Violet Crown, first documented in Pindar's \u1f30\u03bf\u03c3\u03c4\u03ad\u03c6\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9 \u1f08\u03b8\u1fb6\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9 (\"iost\u00e9phanoi Ath\u00e2nai\"), or as (\"t\u00f2 klein\u00f2n \u00e1sty\", \"the glorious city\").\nDuring the medieval period, the name of the city was rendered once again in the singular as . Variant names included Setines, Satine, and Astines, all derivations involving false splitting of prepositional phrases. King Alphonse X of Castile gives the pseudo-etymology 'the one without death/ignorance'. In Ottoman Turkish, it was called \u0622\u062a\u064a\u0646\u0627\u200e \"\u0100t\u012bn\u0101\". .\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe oldest known human presence in Athens is the Cave of Schist, which has been dated to between the 11th and 7th millennia BC. Athens has been continuously inhabited for at least 5,000 years (3000 BC). By 1400\u00a0BC, the settlement had become an important centre of the Mycenaean civilisation, and the Acropolis was the site of a major Mycenaean fortress, whose remains can be recognised from sections of the characteristic Cyclopean walls. Unlike other Mycenaean centres, such as Mycenae and Pylos, it is not known whether Athens suffered destruction in about 1200\u00a0BC, an event often attributed to a Dorian invasion, and the Athenians always maintained that they were pure Ionians with no Dorian element. However, Athens, like many other Bronze Age settlements, went into economic decline for around 150 years afterwards. Iron Age burials, in the Kerameikos and other locations, are often richly provided for and demonstrate that from 900\u00a0BC onwards Athens was one of the leading centres of trade and prosperity in the region.\nClassical Athens.\nBy the sixth century BC, widespread social unrest led to the reforms of Solon. These would pave the way for the eventual introduction of democracy by Cleisthenes in 508\u00a0BC. Athens had by this time become a significant naval power with a large fleet, and helped the rebellion of the Ionian cities against Persian rule. In the ensuing Greco-Persian Wars Athens, together with Sparta, led the coalition of Greek states that would eventually repel the Persians, defeating them decisively at Marathon under the leadership of Miltiades in 490\u00a0BC, and crucially at Salamis under the leadership of Themistocles in 480\u00a0BC. However, this did not prevent Athens from being captured and sacked twice by the Persians within one year, after a heroic but ultimately failed resistance at Thermopylae by Spartans and other Greeks led by King Leonidas, after both Boeotia and Attica fell to the Persians.\nThe decades that followed became known as the Golden Age of Athenian democracy, during which time Athens became the leading city of Ancient Greece, with its cultural achievements laying the foundations for Western civilisation. The playwrights Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides flourished in Athens during this time, as did the historians Herodotus and Thucydides, the physician Hippocrates, and the philosophers Socrates and Plato. Guided by Pericles, who promoted the arts and fostered democracy, Athens embarked on an ambitious building program that saw the construction of the Acropolis of Athens (including the Parthenon), as well as empire-building via the Delian League. Originally intended as an association of Greek city-states, which were led by Cimon, to continue the fight against the Persians, the league soon turned into a vehicle for Athens's own imperial ambitions. The resulting tensions brought about the Peloponnesian War (431\u2013404\u00a0BC), in which Athens was defeated by its rival Sparta.\nNonetheless the city reemerged soon as a major power in the Greek world, forming the Second Athenian League during the time of the Spartan and Theban hegemonies. By the mid-4th century BC the northern Greek kingdom of Macedon was becoming dominant in Greek affairs. In 338\u00a0BC the armies of Philip II and his son Alexander the Great defeated an alliance of some of the Greek city-states led by Athens and Thebes at the Battle of Chaeronea. After this defeat, Athens joined the Hellenic League under Philip and then Alexander.\nRoman Empire.\nLater, under Rome, Athens was given the status of a free city because of its widely admired schools. In the second century AD, the Roman emperor Hadrian, himself an Athenian citizen, ordered the construction of a library, a gymnasium, an aqueduct which is still in use, several temples and sanctuaries, a bridge and financed the completion of the Temple of Olympian Zeus.\nIn the early 4th century AD the Eastern Roman Empire began to be governed from Constantinople, and with the construction and expansion of the imperial city, many of Athens's works of art were taken by the emperors to adorn it. The Empire became Christianised, and the use of Latin declined in favour of exclusive use of Greek; in the Roman imperial period, both languages had been used. In the later Roman period, Athens was ruled by the emperors continuing until the 13th century, its citizens identifying themselves as citizens of the Roman Empire (\"Rhomaioi\"). The conversion of the empire from paganism to Christianity greatly affected Athens, resulting in reduced reverence for the city. Ancient monuments such as the Parthenon, Erechtheion and the Hephaisteion (Theseion) were converted into churches. As the empire became increasingly anti-pagan, Athens became a provincial town and experienced fluctuating fortunes.\nThe city remained an important centre of learning, especially of Neoplatonism\u2014with notable pupils including Gregory of Nazianzus, Basil of Caesarea and the Roman emperor Julian (r.\u2009355\u00a0\u2013\u00a0363)\u2014and consequently a centre of paganism. Christian items do not appear in the archaeological record until the early 5th century. The sack of the city by the Herules in 267 and by the Visigoths under their king Alaric I (r.\u2009395\u00a0\u2013\u00a0410) in 396, however, dealt a heavy blow to the city's fabric and fortunes, and Athens was henceforth confined to a small fortified area that embraced a fraction of the ancient city. The emperor Justinian I (r.\u2009527\u00a0\u2013\u00a0565) banned the teaching of philosophy by pagans in 529, an event whose impact on the city is much debated, but is generally taken to mark the end of the ancient history of Athens.\nByzantine Athens.\nAthens was sacked by the Slavs in 582, but remained in imperial hands thereafter, as highlighted by the visit of the emperor Constans II (r.\u2009641\u00a0\u2013\u00a0668) in 662/3 and its inclusion in the Theme of Hellas. The city was threatened by Saracen raids in the 8th\u20139th centuries\u2014in 896, Athens was raided and possibly occupied for a short period, an event which left some archaeological remains and elements of Arabic ornamentation in contemporary buildings\u2014but there is also evidence of a mosque existing in the city at the time. In the great dispute over Byzantine Iconoclasm, Athens is commonly held to have supported the iconophile position, chiefly due to the role played by Empress Irene of Athens in the ending of the first period of Iconoclasm at the Second Council of Nicaea in 787. A few years later, another Athenian, Theophano, became empress as the wife of Staurakios (r. 811\u2013812).\nInvasion of the empire by the Turks after the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, and the ensuing civil wars, largely passed the region by and Athens continued its provincial existence unharmed. When the Byzantine Empire was rescued by the resolute leadership of the three Komnenos emperors Alexios, John and Manuel, Attica and the rest of Greece prospered. Archaeological evidence tells us that the medieval town experienced a period of rapid and sustained growth, starting in the 11th century and continuing until the end of the 12th century.\nThe Agora (marketplace) had been deserted since late antiquity, began to be built over, and soon the town became an important centre for the production of soaps and dyes. The growth of the town attracted the Venetians, and various other traders who frequented the ports of the Aegean, to Athens. This interest in trade appears to have further increased the economic prosperity of the town.\nThe 11th and 12th centuries were the Golden Age of Byzantine art in Athens. Almost all of the most important Middle Byzantine churches in and around Athens were built during these two centuries, and this reflects the growth of the town in general. This medieval prosperity did not last.\nDuchy of Athens.\nIn 1204, the Fourth Crusade conquered Athens and the city was not recovered from the Latins before it was taken by the Ottoman Turks. It did not become Greek in government again until the 19th century.\nFrom 1204 until 1458, Athens was ruled by Latins in three separate periods, following the Crusades. The \"Latins\", or \"Franks\", were western Europeans and followers of the Latin Church brought to the Eastern Mediterranean during the Crusades. Along with rest of Byzantine Greece, Athens was part of the series of feudal fiefs, similar to the Crusader states established in Syria and on Cyprus after the First Crusade. This period is known as the \"Frankokratia\".\nOttoman Athens.\nThe first Ottoman attack on Athens, which involved a short-lived occupation of the town, came in 1397, under the Ottoman generals Yaqub Pasha and Timurtash. In 1458, Athens was captured by the Ottomans under the personal leadership of Sultan Mehmed II. As the Ottoman Sultan rode into the city, he was greatly struck by the beauty of its ancient monuments and issued a \"firman\" (imperial edict) forbidding their looting or destruction, on pain of death. The Parthenon was converted into the main mosque of the city.\nUnder Ottoman rule, Athens was denuded of any importance and its population severely declined, leaving it as a \"small country town\" (Franz Babinger). From the early 17th century, Athens came under the jurisdiction of the Kizlar Agha, the chief black eunuch of the Sultan's harem. The city had originally been granted by Sultan Ahmed I (r.\u20091603\u00a0\u2013\u00a01617) to Basilica, one of his favourite concubines, who hailed from the city, in response of complaints of maladministration by the local governors. After her death, Athens came under the purview of the Kizlar Agha.\nThe Turks began a practice of storing gunpowder and explosives in the Parthenon and Propylaea. In 1640, a lightning bolt struck the Propylaea, causing its destruction. In 1687, during the Morean War, the Acropolis was besieged by the Venetians under Francesco Morosini, and the temple of Athena Nike was dismantled by the Ottomans to fortify the Parthenon. A shot fired during the bombardment of the Acropolis caused a powder magazine in the Parthenon to explode (26 September), and the building was severely damaged, giving it largely the appearance it has today. The Venetian occupation of Athens lasted for six months, and both the Venetians and the Ottomans participated in the looting of the Parthenon. One of its western pediments was removed, causing even more damage to the structure. During the Venetian occupation, the two mosques of the city were converted into Catholic and Protestant churches, but on 9 April 1688 the Venetians abandoned Athens again to the Ottomans.\nModern history.\nIn 1822 a Greek insurgency captured the city, but it fell to the Ottomans again in 1826 (though Acropolis held till June 1827). Again the ancient monuments suffered badly. The Ottoman forces remained in possession until March 1833, when they withdrew.\nFollowing the Greek War of Independence and the establishment of the Greek Kingdom, Athens was chosen to replace Nafplio as the second capital of the newly independent Greek state in 1834, largely because of historical and sentimental reasons. At the time, after the extensive destruction it had suffered during the war of independence, it was reduced to a town of about 4,000 people (less than half its earlier population) in a loose swarm of houses along the foot of the Acropolis. The first King of Greece, King Otto of Bavaria, commissioned the architects Stamatios Kleanthis and Eduard Schaubert to design a modern city plan fit for the capital of a state.\nThe first modern city plan consisted of a triangle defined by the Acropolis, the ancient cemetery of Kerameikos and the new palace of the Bavarian king (now housing the Greek Parliament), so as to highlight the continuity between modern and ancient Athens. Neoclassicism, the international style of this epoch, was the architectural style through which Bavarian, French and Greek architects such as Hansen, Klenze, Boulanger or Kaftantzoglou designed the first important public buildings of the new capital. \nIn 1896, Athens hosted the first modern Olympic Games. In the 1920s a number of Greek refugees, expelled from Asia Minor after the Greco-Turkish War and Population exchange between Greece and Turkey, swelled Athens's population. After World War II and the Civil War ended, Athen's population boomed in the 1950s and 1960s.\nIn the 1980s it became evident that smog from factories and an ever-increasing fleet of cars, as well as a lack of adequate free space due to congestion, had evolved into the city's most important challenge. A series of anti-pollution measures taken by the city's authorities in the 1990s, combined with a substantial improvement of the city's infrastructure (including the Attiki Odos motorway, the expansion of the Athens Metro, and the new Athens International Airport), considerably alleviated pollution and transformed Athens into a much more functional city. Athens hosted the 2004 Summer Olympics. Further urban improvements began in the 2020s along the coastal zone, including the Hellenikon Park development and the Faliro Delta upgrade, adding to the Stavros Niarchos Centre. The Hellenikon Park development will feature the Hard Rock Hotel &amp; Casino Athens, the first integrated resort in continental Europe and the Riviera Tower.\nGeography.\nAthens sprawls across the central plain of Attica that is often referred to as the Athens Basin or the Attica Basin (). The basin is bounded by four large mountains: Mount Aigaleo to the west, Mount Parnitha to the north, Mount Pentelicus to the northeast and Mount Hymettus to the east. Beyond Mount Aegaleo lies the Thriasian plain, which forms an extension of the central plain to the west. The Saronic Gulf lies to the southwest. Mount Parnitha is the tallest of the four mountains (), and has been declared a national park. The Athens urban area spreads over from Agios Stefanos in the north to Varkiza in the south. The city is located in the north temperate zone, 38 degrees north of the equator.\nAthens is built around a large number of hills. Lycabettus is one of the tallest hills of the city proper and provides a view of the entire Attica Basin. The meteorology of Athens is deemed to be one of the most complex in the world because its mountains cause a temperature inversion phenomenon which, along with the Greek government's difficulties controlling industrial pollution, was responsible for the air pollution problems the city has faced. This issue is not unique to Athens; for instance, Los Angeles and Mexico City also suffer from similar atmospheric inversion problems.\nThe Cephissus river, the Ilisos and the Eridanos stream are the historical rivers of Athens.\nEnvironment.\nBy the late 1970s the pollution of Athens had become so destructive that according to the then Greek Minister of Culture, Constantine Trypanis, \"...the carved details on the five the caryatids of the Erechtheum had seriously degenerated, while the face of the horseman on the Parthenon's west side was all but obliterated.\" A series of measures taken by the authorities of the city throughout the 1990s resulted in the improvement of air quality; the appearance of smog (or \"nefos\" as the Athenians used to call it) has become less common.\nMeasures taken by the Greek authorities throughout the 1990s have improved the quality of air over the Attica Basin. Nevertheless, air pollution still remains an issue for Athens, particularly during the hottest summer days. In late June 2007, the Attica region experienced a number of brush fires, including a blaze that burned a significant portion of a large forested national park in Mount Parnitha, considered critical to maintaining a better air quality in Athens all year round. Damage to the park has led to worries over a stalling in the improvement of air quality in the city.\nThe major waste management efforts undertaken in the last decade, particularly the plant built on the small island of Psytalia, have greatly improved water quality in the Saronic Gulf, and the coastal waters of Athens are now accessible again to swimmers.\nParks.\nParnitha National Park is punctuated by well-marked paths, gorges, springs, torrents and caves dotting the protected area. Hiking and mountain-biking in all four mountains are popular outdoor activities for residents of the city. The National Garden of Athens was completed in 1840 and is a green refuge of 15.5 hectares in the centre of the Greek capital. Located between the Parliament and Zappeion buildings, the latter of which maintains its own garden of seven hectares. Parts of the City Centre have been redeveloped under a masterplan called the \"Unification of Archeological Sites of Athens\", which has also gathered funding from the EU to help enhance the project. \nThe landmark Dionysiou Areopagitou Street has been pedestrianised, forming a scenic route. The route starts from the Temple of Olympian Zeus at Vasilissis Olgas Avenue, continues under the southern slopes of the Acropolis near Plaka, and finishes just beyond the Temple of Hephaestus in Thiseio. The route in its entirety provides visitors with views of the Parthenon and the Agora, the meeting point of ancient Athenians, away from the busy City Centre.\nThe hills of Athens also provide green space. Lycabettus, Philopappos hill and the area around it, including Pnyx and Ardettos hill, are planted with pines and other trees, with the character of a small forest rather than typical metropolitan parkland. Also to be found is the Pedion tou Areos (\"Field of Mars\") of 27.7 hectares, near the National Archaeological Museum.\nClimate.\nAthens has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"). The climate in Athens can be considered warmer than some cities that are similar or even less distant from the equator such as Seoul, Melbourne, Buenos Aires and Cape Town. According to the meteorological station near the city centre which is operated by the National Observatory of Athens, the downtown area has a simple mean annual temperature of while parts of the urban agglomeration may reach up to , being affected by the urban heat island effect.. Fog is rare in the city centre, but somewhat more frequent in areas to the east, close to Mt. Hymettus. Advection fog can occur in spring, especially along the coastline.\nThe southern section of the Athens metropolitan area (i.e., Elliniko, Athens Riviera) lies in the transitional zone between Mediterranean (\"Csa\") and hot semi-arid climate (\"BSh\"), with its port-city of Piraeus being the most extreme example, receiving just per year. The areas to the south generally see less extreme temperature variations as their climate is moderated by the Saronic gulf. The northern part of the city (i.e., Kifissia), owing to its higher elevation, features moderately lower temperatures and slightly increased precipitation year-round. The generally dry climate of the Athens basin compared to the precipitation amounts seen in a typical Mediterranean climate is due to the rain shadow effect caused by the Pindus mountain range and the Dirfys and Parnitha mountains, substantially drying the westerly and northerly winds respectively.\nSnowfall is not very common. It usually does not cause heavy disruption to daily life, in contrast to the northern parts of the city, where blizzards occur on a somewhat more regular basis. The most recent examples include the snowstorms of 16 February 2021 and 24 January 2022, when the entire urban area was blanketed in snow, apart, in the second case, to many areas adjacent to Piraeus.\nAthens may get particularly hot in the summer, owing partly to the strong urban heat island effect characterising the city. In fact, Athens has been referred to as the hottest city in mainland Europe, and is the first city in Europe to appoint a chief heat officer to deal with severe heat waves. Temperatures of 47.5\u00b0C and over have been reported in several locations of the metropolitan area, including within the urban agglomeration. Metropolitan Athens was until 2021 the holder of the World Meteorological Organization record for the highest temperature ever recorded in Europe with which was recorded in the areas of Elefsina and Tatoi on 10 July 1977.\nAdministration.\nAthens became the capital of Greece in 1834, following Nafplion, which was the provisional capital from 1829. The municipality (city) of Athens is also the capital of the Attica region. The term \"Athens\" can refer either to the municipality of Athens, to Greater Athens or urban area, or to the entire Athens Metropolitan Area.\nThe large city centre () of the Greek capital falls directly within the Municipality of Athens (), which is the largest in population size in Greece and forms the core of the Athens urban area is made up of a series of smaller Municipal Communities, followed by the Municipality of Piraeus, which forms a significant city centre on its own within the Athens urban area and it is the second largest in population size within it.\nAthens Urban Area.\nThe Athens Urban Area (), also known as Urban Area of the Capital () or Greater Athens (), today consists of 40 municipalities: 35 of them divided in four regional units (Central Athens, North Athens, West Athens, South Athens), and a further 5 municipalities which make up the regional unit of Piraeus. The Athens urban area spans over , with a population of 3,059,764 people as of 2021.\nAthens metropolitan area.\nThe Athens metropolitan area spans within the Attica region and includes a total of 58 municipalities, which are organised in seven regional units (those outlined above, along with East Attica and West Attica), having reached a population of 3,638,281 according to the 2021 census. Athens and Piraeus municipalities serve as the two metropolitan centres of the Athens Metropolitan Area. There are also some inter-municipal centres serving specific areas. For example, Kifissia and Glyfada serve as inter-municipal centres for northern and southern suburbs respectively.\nThe Athens Metropolitan Area consists of 58 densely populated municipalities, sprawling around the Municipality of Athens (the City Centre) in virtually all directions. For the Athenians, all the urban municipalities surrounding the City Centre are called suburbs. According to their geographic location in relation to the City of Athens, the suburbs are divided into four zones; the northern suburbs (including Agios Stefanos, Dionysos, Ekali, Nea Erythraia, Kifissia, Kryoneri, Maroussi, Pefki, Lykovrysi, Metamorfosi, Nea Ionia, Nea Filadelfeia, Irakleio, Vrilissia, Melissia, Penteli, Chalandri, Agia Paraskevi, Gerakas, Pallini, Galatsi, Psychiko and Filothei); the southern suburbs (including Alimos, Nea Smyrni, Moschato, Tavros, Agios Ioannis Renti, Kallithea, Piraeus, Agios Dimitrios, Palaio Faliro, Elliniko, Glyfada, Lagonisi, Saronida, Argyroupoli, Ilioupoli, Varkiza, Voula, Vari and Vouliagmeni); the eastern suburbs (including Zografou, Dafni, Vyronas, Kaisariani, Cholargos and Papagou); and the western suburbs (including Peristeri, Ilion, Egaleo, Koridallos, Agia Varvara, Keratsini, Perama, Nikaia, Drapetsona, Chaidari, Petroupoli, Agioi Anargyroi, Ano Liosia, Aspropyrgos, Eleusina, Acharnes and Kamatero).\nThe Athens city coastline, extending from the major commercial port of Piraeus to the southernmost suburb of Varkiza for some , is also connected to the City Centre by tram.\nIn the northern suburb of Maroussi, the upgraded main Olympic Complex (known by its Greek acronym OAKA) dominates the skyline. The area has been redeveloped according to a design by the Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava, with steel arches, landscaped gardens, fountains, futuristic glass, and a landmark new blue glass roof which was added to the main stadium. A second Olympic complex, next to the sea at the beach of Palaio Faliro, also features modern stadia, shops and an elevated esplanade. Work is underway to transform the grounds of the old Athens Airport \u2013 named Elliniko \u2013 in the southern suburbs, into one of the largest landscaped parks in Europe, to be named the Hellenikon Metropolitan Park.\nMany of the southern suburbs (such as Alimos, Palaio Faliro, Elliniko, Glyfada, Voula, Vouliagmeni and Varkiza) known as the Athens Riviera, host a number of sandy beaches, most of which are operated by the Greek National Tourism Organisation and require an entrance fee. Casinos operate on both Mount Parnitha (Regency Casino Mont Parnes), some from downtown Athens (accessible by car or cable car), and the nearby town of Loutraki (accessible by car via the Athens \u2013 Corinth National Highway, or the Athens Suburban Railway).\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nThe concept of a partner city is used under different names in different countries, but they mean the same thing, that two cities in different countries assist each other as partners. Athens has quite a number of partners, whether as a \"twin\", a \"sister\", or a \"partner.\"\nDemographics.\nThe Municipality of Athens had a population of 643,452 people in 2021. In the 2021 Population and Housing Census, the four regional units that make up the former Athens prefecture have a combined population of 2,611,713 . They, together with the regional unit of Piraeus (sometimes referred to as Greater Piraeus) make up the dense Athens Urban Area, or Greater Athens, which reaches a total population of 3,059,764 inhabitants (in 2021).\nThe municipality (centre) of Athens is the most populous in Greece, with a population of 643,452 people (in 2021) and an area of , forming the core of the Athens Urban Area within the Attica Basin. The incumbent Mayor of Athens is Charis Doukas of PASOK. The municipality is divided into seven municipal districts which are mainly used for administrative purposes.\nFor the Athenians the most popular way of dividing the downtown is through its neighbourhoods such as Pagkrati, Ampelokipoi, Goudi, Exarcheia, Patisia, Ilisia, Petralona, Plaka, Anafiotika, Koukaki, Kolonaki and Kypseli, each with its own distinct history and characteristics.\nRomani people are concentrated in Acharnes, Ano Liosia, Agia Varvara, Zefeiri and Kamatero.\nThere is a large Albanian community in Athens.\nMetropolitan Area.\nThe Athens Metropolitan Area, with an area of and inhabited by 3,744,059 people in 2021, consists of the Athens Urban Area with the addition of the towns and villages of East and West Attica, which surround the dense urban area of the Greek capital. It actually sprawls over the whole peninsula of Attica, which is the best part of the region of Attica, excluding the islands.\nSafety.\nAthens ranks in the lowest percentage for the risk on frequency and severity of terrorist attacks according to the EU Global Terrorism Database (EIU 2007\u20132016 calculations). The city also ranked 35th in Digital Security, 21st on Health Security, 29th on Infrastructure Security and 41st on Personal Security globally in a 2017 The Economist Intelligence Unit report. It also ranks as a very safe city (39th globally out of 162 cities overall) on the ranking of the safest and most dangerous countries. As November 2024 the crime index from Numbeo places Athens at 55.40 (moderate), while its safety index is at 44.60. According to a Mercer 2019 Quality of Living Survey, Athens ranks 89th on the Mercer Quality of Living Survey ranking.\nEconomy.\nAthens is the financial capital of Greece. According to data from 2014, Athens as a metropolitan economic area produced US$130\u00a0billion as GDP in PPP, which consists of nearly half of the production for the whole country. Athens was ranked 102nd in that year's list of global economic metropolises, while GDP per capita for the same year was 32,000 US dollars.\nAthens is one of the major economic centres in south-eastern Europe and is considered a regional economic power. The port of Piraeus, where big investments by COSCO have already been delivered during the recent decade, the completion of the new Cargo Centre in Thriasion, the expansion of the Athens Metro and the Athens Tram, as well as the Hellenikon metropolitan park redevelopment in Elliniko and other urban projects, are the economic landmarks of the upcoming years.\nProminent Greek companies such as Hellas Sat, Hellenic Aerospace Industry, Mytilineos Holdings, Titan Cement, Hellenic Petroleum, Papadopoulos E.J., Folli Follie, Jumbo S.A., OPAP, and Cosmote have their headquarters in the metropolitan area of Athens. Multinational companies such as Ericsson, Sony, Siemens, Motorola, Samsung, Microsoft, Teleperformance, Novartis, Mondelez and Coca-Cola also have their regional research and development headquarters in the city. The banking sector is represented by National Bank of Greece, Alpha Bank, Eurobank, and Piraeus Bank, while the Bank of Greece is also situated in the City Centre. The Athens Stock Exchange was severely hit by the Greek government-debt crisis and the decision of the government to proceed into capital controls during summer 2015. As a whole the economy of Athens and Greece was strongly affected, while data showed a change from long recession to growth of 1.4% from 2017 onwards.\nTourism is also a leading contributor to the economy of the city, as one of Europe's top destinations for city-break tourism, and also the gateway for excursions to both the islands and other parts of the mainland. Greece attracted 26.5\u00a0million visitors in 2015, 30.1\u00a0million visitors in 2017, and over 33\u00a0million in 2018, making Greece one of the most visited countries in Europe and the world, and contributing 18% to the country's GDP. Athens welcomed more than 5\u00a0million tourists in 2018, and 1.4\u00a0million were \"city-breakers\"; this was an increase by over a million city-breakers since 2013.\nTourism.\nAthens has been a destination for travellers since antiquity. Over the 2000s, the city's infrastructure and social amenities have improved, in part because of its successful bid to stage the 2004 Olympic Games. \nThe Greek Government, aided by the EU, has funded major infrastructure projects such as the state-of-the-art Eleftherios Venizelos International Airport, the expansion of the Athens Metro system, and the new Attiki Odos Motorway. \nIn recent years, Athens has become more dynamic with the addition of numerous new bars and caf\u00e9s and a growing presence of street art and graffiti, enhancing its urban edge and adding more tourist options alongside the city's archaeological sites and museums.\nTransport.\nAthens is the country's major transportation hub. The city has Greece's largest airport and its largest port; Piraeus, too, is the largest container transport port in the Mediterranean, and the largest passenger port in Europe.\nAthens is a major national hub for Intercity (Ktel) and international buses, as well as for domestic and international rail transport. Public transport is serviced by a variety of transportation means, making up the country's largest mass transit system. Transport for Athens operates a large bus and trolleybus fleet, the city's Metro, a Suburban Railway service and a tram network, connecting the southern suburbs to the city centre.\nBus transport.\nOSY () (Odikes Sygkoinonies S.A.), a subsidiary company of OASA (Athens urban transport organisation), is the main operator of buses and trolleybuses in Athens. As of 2017, its network consists of around 322 bus lines, spanning the Athens Metropolitan Area, and making up a fleet of 2,375 buses and trolleybuses. Of those 2,375, 619 buses run on compressed natural gas, making up the largest fleet of natural gas-powered buses in Europe, and 354 are electric-powered (trolleybuses). All of the 354 trolleybuses are equipped to run on diesel in case of power failure.\nInternational links are provided by a number of private companies. National and regional bus links are provided by KTEL from two InterCity Bus Terminals; Kifissos Bus Terminal A and Liosion Bus Terminal B, both located in the north-western part of the city. \"Kifissos\" provides connections towards Peloponnese, North Greece, West Greece and some Ionian Islands, whereas \"Liosion\" is used for most of Central Greece. Both of these terminals will be replaced by a new Intercity Bus Terminal under construction in Eleonas due to be completed by 2027.\nRailways.\nAthens is the hub of the country's national railway system (OSE), connecting the capital with major cities across Greece and abroad (Istanbul, Sofia, Belgrade and Bucharest).\nThe Athens Suburban Railway, referred to as the \"Proastiakos\", connects Athens International Airport to the city of Kiato, west of Athens, via Larissa station, the city's central rail station and the port of Piraeus. The length of Athens's commuter rail network extends to , and is expected to stretch to by 2010.\nThe Athens Metro is operated by STASY S.A. () (Statheres Sygkoinonies S.A.), a subsidiary company of OASA (Athens urban transport organisation), which provides public transport throughout the Athens Urban Area. While its main purpose is transport, it also houses Greek artefacts found during the construction of the system. The Athens Metro runs three metro lines, namely Line 1 (Green Line), Line 2 (Red Line) and Line 3 (Blue Line) lines, of which the first was constructed in 1869, and the other two largely during the 1990s, with the initial new sections opened in January 2000. Line 1 mostly runs at ground level and the other two (Line 2 &amp; 3) routes run entirely underground. A fleet of 42 trains, using 252 carriages, operates on the network, with a daily occupancy of 1,353,000 passengers.\n\"Line 1\" (Green Line) serves 24 stations, and is the oldest line of the Athens metro network. It runs from Piraeus station to Kifissia station and covers a distance of . There are transfer connections with the Blue Line 3 at Monastiraki station and with the Red Line 2 at Omonia and Attiki stations. \"Line 2\" (Red Line) runs from Anthoupoli station to Elliniko station and covers a distance of . The line connects the western suburbs of Athens with the southeast suburbs, passing through the centre of Athens. The Red Line has transfer connections with the Green Line 1 at Attiki and Omonia stations. There are also transfer connections with the Blue Line 3 at Syntagma station and with the tram at Syntagma, Syngrou Fix and Neos Kosmos stations. \"Line 3\" (Blue Line) runs from Dimotiko Theatro station, through the central Monastiraki and Syntagma stations to Doukissis Plakentias avenue in the northeastern suburb of Halandri. It then ascends to ground level and continues to Athens International Airport Eleftherios Venizelos using the suburban railway infrastructure, extending its total length to . The spring 2007 extension from Monastiraki westwards to Egaleo connected some of the main night life hubs of the city, namely those of Gazi (Kerameikos station) with Psirri (Monastiraki station) and the city centre (Syntagma station).The new stations Maniatika, Piraeus and Dimotiko Theatro, were completed on 10 October 2022, connecting the biggest port of Greece, the Port of Piraeus, with Athens International Airport, the biggest airport of Greece.\nThe Athens Tram is operated by STASY S.A. (Statheres Sygkoinonies S.A.), a subsidiary company of Transport for Athens (OASA). It has a fleet of 35 Sirio type vehicles and 25 Alstom Citadis type vehicles which serve 48 stations, employ 345 people with an average daily occupancy of 65,000 passengers. The tram network spans a total length of and covers ten Athenian suburbs. The network runs from Syntagma Square to the southwestern suburb of Palaio Faliro, where the line splits in two branches; the first runs along the Athens coastline toward the southern suburb of Voula, while the other heads toward Piraeus. The network covers the majority of the Athens coastline.\nAthens International Airport.\nAthens is served by the Athens International Airport (ATH), located near the town of Spata, in the eastern Messoghia plain, some east of the centre of Athens. The airport, awarded the \"European Airport of the Year 2004\" Award, is intended as an expandable hub for air travel in southeastern Europe and was constructed in 51 months, costing 2.2\u00a0billion euros. It employs a staff of 14,000.\nFerry.\nThe Port of Piraeus is the largest port in Greece and one of the largest in Europe. Rafina and Lavrio act as alternative ports of Athens, connects the city with numerous Greek islands of the Aegean Sea, Evia while also serving the cruise ships that arrive.\nMotorways.\nTwo main motorways of Greece begin in Athens, namely the A1/E75, heading north towards Greece's second largest city, Thessaloniki; and the border crossing of Evzones and the A8/E94 heading west, towards Greece's third largest city, Patras, which incorporated the GR-8A. Before their completion much of the road traffic used the GR-1 and the GR-8.\nAthens's Metropolitan Area is served by the Attiki Odos toll motorway network: its main section, the A6, extends from the western industrial suburb of Elefsina to Athens International Airport; while two beltways, namely the Aigaleo Beltway (A65) and the Hymettus Beltway (A62) serve parts of western and eastern Athens respectively. The span of the Attiki Odos in all its length is , making it the largest metropolitan motorway network in all of Greece.\nEducation.\nLocated on Panepistimiou Street, the old campus of the University of Athens, the National Library, and the Athens Academy form the \"Athens Trilogy\" built in the mid-19th century. The largest and oldest university in Athens is the National and Kapodistrian University of Athens. Most of the functions of NKUA along National Technical University of Athens have been transferred to a campus in the eastern suburb of Zografou. The National Technical University of Athens old campus is located on Patision Street.\nThe University of West Attica is the second largest university in Athens. The seat of the university is located in the western area of Athens, where the philosophers of Ancient Athens delivered lectures. All the activities of UNIWA are carried out in the modern infrastructure of the three University Campuses within the metropolitan region of Athens (Egaleo Park, Ancient Olive Groove and Athens), which offer modern teaching and research spaces, entertainment and support facilities for all students. Other universities that lie within Athens are the Athens University of Economics and Business, the Panteion University, the Agricultural University of Athens and the University of Piraeus.\nThere are overall ten state-supported Institutions of Higher (or Tertiary) education located in the Athens Urban Area, these are by chronological order: Athens School of Fine Arts (1837), National Technical University of Athens (1837), National and Kapodistrian University of Athens (1837), Agricultural University of Athens (1920), Athens University of Economics and Business (1920), Panteion University of Social and Political Sciences (1927), University of Piraeus (1938), Harokopio University of Athens (1990), School of Pedagogical and Technological Education (2002), University of West Attica (2018). There are also several other private \"colleges\", as they called formally in Greece, as the establishment of private universities is prohibited by the constitution. Many of them are accredited by a foreign state or university such as the American College of Greece and the Athens Campus of the University of Indianapolis.\nCulture.\nArchaeological hub and museums.\nThe city is a world centre of archaeological research. Alongside national academic institutions, such as the Athens University and the Archaeological Society, it is home to multiple archaeological museums, taking in the National Archaeological Museum, the Cycladic Museum, the Epigraphic Museum, the Byzantine &amp; Christian Museum, as well as museums at the ancient Agora, Acropolis, Kerameikos, and the Kerameikos Archaeological Museum. The city is also the setting for the Demokritos laboratory for Archaeometry, alongside regional and national archaeological authorities forming part of the Greek Department of Culture.\nAthens hosts 17 Foreign Archaeological Institutes which promote and facilitate research by scholars from their home countries. As a result, Athens has more than a dozen archaeological libraries and three specialised archaeological laboratories, and is the venue of several hundred specialised lectures, conferences and seminars, as well as dozens of archaeological exhibitions each year. At any given time, hundreds of international scholars and researchers in all disciplines of archaeology are to be found in the city.\nAthens's most important museums include:\nArchitecture.\nAthens incorporates architectural styles ranging from Greco-Roman and Neoclassical to Modern. They are often to be found in the same areas, as Athens is not marked by a uniformity of architectural style. A visitor will quickly notice the absence of tall buildings: Athens has very strict height restriction laws in order to ensure the Acropolis Hill is visible throughout the city. Despite the variety in styles, there is evidence of continuity in elements of the architectural environment throughout the city's history.\nFor the greatest part of the 19th century Neoclassicism dominated Athens, as well as some deviations from it such as Eclecticism, especially in the early 20th century. Thus, the Old Royal Palace was the first important public building to be built, between 1836 and 1843. Later in the mid and late 19th century, Theophil Freiherr von Hansen and Ernst Ziller took part in the construction of many neoclassical buildings such as the Athens Academy and the Zappeion Hall. Ziller also designed many private mansions in the centre of Athens which gradually became public, usually through donations, such as Schliemann's Iliou Melathron.\nBeginning in the 1920s, modern architecture including Bauhaus and Art Deco began to exert an influence on almost all Greek architects, and buildings both public and private were constructed in accordance with these styles. Localities with a great number of such buildings include Kolonaki, and some areas of the centre of the city; neighbourhoods developed in this period include Kypseli.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s during the extension and development of Athens, other modern movements such as the International style played an important role. The centre of Athens was largely rebuilt, leading to the demolition of a number of neoclassical buildings. The architects of this era employed materials such as glass, marble and aluminium, and many blended modern and classical elements. After World War II, internationally known architects to have designed and built in the city included Walter Gropius, with his design for the US Embassy, and, among others, Eero Saarinen, in his postwar design for the east terminal of the Ellinikon Airport.\nUrban sculpture.\nAcross the city numerous statues or busts are to be found. Apart from the neoclassicals by Leonidas Drosis at the Academy of Athens (Plato, Socrates, Apollo and Athena), others in notable categories include the statue of Theseus by Georgios Fytalis at Thiseion; depictions of philhellenes such as Lord Byron, George Canning, and William Gladstone; the equestrian statue of Theodoros Kolokotronis by Lazaros Sochos in front of the Old Parliament; statues of Ioannis Kapodistrias, Rigas Feraios and Adamantios Korais at the university; of Evangelos Zappas and Konstantinos Zappas at the Zappeion; Ioannis Varvakis at the National Garden; the\" Woodbreaker\" by Dimitrios Filippotis; the equestrian statue of Alexandros Papagos in the Papagou district; and various busts of fighters of Greek independence at the Pedion tou Areos. A significant landmark is also the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Syntagma.\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nAthens is home to 148 theatrical stages, more than any other city in the world, including the ancient Odeon of Herodes Atticus, home to the Athens Festival, which runs from May to October each year. In addition to a large number of multiplexes, Athens plays host to open air garden cinemas. The city also supports music venues, including the Athens Concert Hall (\"Megaro Moussikis\"), which attracts world class artists. The Athens Planetarium, located in Andrea Syngrou Avenue, in Palaio Faliro is one of the largest and best equipped digital planetaria in the world. The Stavros Niarchos Foundation Cultural Center, inaugurated in 2016, will house the National Library of Greece and the Greek National Opera. In 2018 Athens was designated as the World Book Capital by UNESCO.\nRestaurants, tavernas and bars can be found in the entertainment hubs in Plaka and the Trigono areas of the historic centre, the inner suburbs of Gazi and Psyrri are especially busy with nightclubs and bars, while Kolonaki, Exarchia, Kypseli, Metaxourgeio, Koukaki and Pangrati offer more of a cafe and restaurant scene. The coastal suburbs of Microlimano, Alimos and Glyfada include many tavernas, beach bars and busy summer clubs.\nThe most successful songs during the period 1870\u20131930 were the Athenian serenades (\u0391\u03b8\u03b7\u03bd\u03b1\u03ca\u03ba\u03ad\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03ac\u03b4\u03b5\u03c2), based on the Heptanesean kant\u00e1dhes (\u03ba\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03ac\u03b4\u03b5\u03c2 'serenades'; sing.: \u03ba\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03ac\u03b4\u03b1) and the songs performed on stage (\u03b5\u03c0\u03b9\u03b8\u03b5\u03c9\u03c1\u03b7\u03c3\u03b9\u03b1\u03ba\u03ac \u03c4\u03c1\u03b1\u03b3\u03bf\u03cd\u03b4\u03b9\u03b1 'theatrical revue songs') in revues, musical comedies, operettas and nocturnes that were dominating Athens's theatre scene.\nIn 1922, following the Greek-Turkish war, Greek genocide and later population exchange suffered by the Greek population of Asia Minor, many ethnic Greeks fled to Athens. They settled in poor neighbourhoods and brought with them Rebetiko music, making it also popular in Greece, and which later became the base for the La\u00efko music. Other forms of song popular today in Greece are elafrolaika, entechno, dimotika, and skyladika. Greece's most notable, and internationally famous, composers of Greek song, mainly of the entechno form, are Manos Hadjidakis and Mikis Theodorakis. Both composers have achieved fame abroad for their composition of film scores.\nThe renowned American-born Greek soprano Maria Callas spent her teenage years in Athens, where she settled in 1937. Her professional opera career started in 1940 in Athens, with the Greek National Opera. In 2018, the city's municipal Olympia Theatre was renamed the \"Olympia City Music Theatre 'Maria Callas'\" and in 2023, the Municipality inaugurated the Maria Callas Museum, housing it in a neoclassical building on 44 Mitropoleos street.\nSports.\nAthens has a long tradition in sports and sporting events, serving as home to the most important clubs in Greek sport and housing a large number of sports facilities. The city has also been host to sports events of international importance.\nAthens has hosted the Summer Olympic Games twice, in 1896 and 2004. The 2004 Summer Olympics required the development of the Athens Olympic Stadium, which has since gained a reputation as one of the most beautiful stadiums in the world, and one of its most interesting modern monuments. The biggest stadium in the country, it hosted two finals of the UEFA Champions League, in 1994 and 2007. Other major stadiums are the Karaiskakis Stadium located in the nearby city of Piraeus, a sports and entertainment complex, host of the 1971 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup Final, and Agia Sophia Stadium located in Nea Filadelfeia, host of the 2024 UEFA Europa Conference League final.\nThe EuroLeague final has been hosted twice in 1985 and in 1993 at the Peace and Friendship Stadium, most known as SEF, a large indoor arena, and the third time in 2007 at the Olympic Indoor Hall. Events in other sports such as athletics, volleyball, water polo etc., have been hosted in the capital's venues.\nGreater Athens is home to three widely supported and successful multi-sport clubs, Panathinaikos, originated in the city of Athens, Olympiacos, originated in the port city of Piraeus and AEK, originated in the suburban town of Nea Filadelfeia. In football, Olympiacos is the dominant force at the national level and the only Greek club to have won a European competition, the 2023\u201324 UEFA Europa Conference League, Panathinaikos made it to the 1971 European Cup Final, while AEK Athens is the other member of the big three. These clubs also have successful basketball teams; Panathinaikos and Olympiacos are considered among the top powers in Europe, having won the EuroLeague seven and three times respectively, whilst AEK Athens was the first Greek team to win a European trophy in any team sport.\nOther notable clubs within the region are Athinaikos, Panionios, Atromitos, Apollon, Panellinios, Egaleo F.C., Ethnikos Piraeus, Maroussi BC and Peristeri B.C. Athenian clubs have also had domestic and international success in other sports.\nThe Athens area encompasses a variety of terrain, notably hills and mountains rising around the city, and the capital is the only major city in Europe to be bisected by a mountain range. Four mountain ranges extend into city boundaries and thousands of kilometres of trails criss-cross the city and neighbouring areas, providing exercise and wilderness access on foot and on bicycle.\nBeyond Athens and across the prefecture of Attica, outdoor activities include skiing, rock climbing, hang gliding and windsurfing. Numerous outdoor clubs serve these sports, including the Athens Chapter of the Sierra Club, which leads over 4,000 outings annually in the area.\nAthens was awarded the 2004 Summer Olympics on 5 September 1997 in Lausanne, Switzerland, after having lost a previous bid to host the 1996 Summer Olympics, to Atlanta, United States. It was to be the second time Athens would host the games, following the inaugural event of 1896. After an unsuccessful bid in 1990, the 1997 bid was radically improved, including an appeal to Greece's Olympic history. In the last round of voting, Athens defeated Rome with 66 votes to 41. Prior to this round, the cities of Buenos Aires, Stockholm and Cape Town had been eliminated from competition, having received fewer votes. Although the heavy cost was criticised, estimated at US$1.5\u00a0billion, Athens was transformed into a more functional city that enjoys modern technology both in transportation and in modern urban development. The games welcomed over 10,000 athletes from 202 countries.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "1217", "revid": "26523380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1217", "title": "Anguilla", "text": "British Overseas Territory in the Leeward Islands\nAnguilla is a British Overseas Territory in the Caribbean. It is one of the most northerly of the Leeward Islands in the Lesser Antilles, lying east of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands and directly north of Saint Martin. The territory consists of the main island of Anguilla, approximately long by wide at its widest point, together with a number of much smaller islands and cays with no permanent population. The territory's capital is The Valley. The total land area of the territory is , with a population of approximately ().\nEtymology.\nThe native Arawak name for the island was \"Malliouhana\".\nIn reference to the island's shape, the Italian \"\", meaning \"eel\" (in turn, from the Latin diminutive of \"anguis\", \"snake\") was used as its name. Anguillan tradition holds that Christopher Columbus named the island.\nHistory.\nAnguilla was first settled by Indigenous American peoples who migrated from South America. The earliest Native American artefacts found on Anguilla have been dated to around 1300\u00a0BC; remains of settlements date from AD\u00a0600.\nThere are two known petroglyph sites in Anguilla: Big Spring and Fountain Cavern. The rock ledges of Big Spring contain more than 100 petroglyphs (dating back to AD\u00a0600\u20131200), the majority consisting of three indentations that form faces.\nPrecisely when Anguilla was first seen by Europeans is uncertain: some sources claim that Columbus sighted the island during his second voyage in 1493, while others state that the first European explorer was the French Huguenot nobleman and merchant Ren\u00e9 Goulaine de Laudonni\u00e8re in 1564. The Dutch West India Company established a fort on the island in 1631. However, the Company later withdrew after its fort was destroyed by the Spanish in 1633.\nTraditional accounts state that Anguilla was first colonised by English settlers from Saint Kitts beginning in 1650. The settlers focused on planting tobacco, and to a lesser extent cotton. The French temporarily took over the island in 1666 but returned it to English control under the terms of the Treaty of Breda the next year. Major John Scott, who visited in September 1667, wrote of leaving the island \"in good condition\" and noted that in July 1668, \"200 or 300 people fled thither in time of war\". The French attacked again in 1688, 1745 and 1798, causing much destruction but failing to capture the island.\nIt is likely that the early European settlers brought enslaved Africans with them. Historians confirm that African slaves lived in the region in the early 17th century, such as slaves from Senegal living on St Kitts in the mid-1600s. By 1672 a slave depot existed on the island of Nevis, serving the Leeward Islands. While the time of African arrival in Anguilla is difficult to place precisely, archival evidence indicates a substantial African presence of at least 100 enslaved people by 1683; these seem to have come from Central Africa as well as West Africa. The slaves were forced to work on the sugar plantations which had begun to replace tobacco as Anguilla's main crop. Over time, the African slaves and their descendants came to vastly outnumber the white settlers. The African slave trade was eventually terminated within the British Empire in 1807, and slavery outlawed completely in 1834. Many planters subsequently sold up or left the island.\nDuring the early colonial period, Anguilla was administered by the British through Antigua; in 1825, it was placed under the administrative control of nearby Saint Kitts. Anguilla was federated with St Kitts and Nevis in 1882, against the wishes of many Anguillans. Economic stagnation, and the severe effects of several droughts in the 1890s and later the Great Depression of the 1930s led many Anguillans to emigrate for better prospects elsewhere.\nFull adult suffrage was introduced to Anguilla in 1952. After a brief period as part of the West Indies Federation (1958\u20131962), the island of Anguilla became part of the associated state of Saint Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla with full internal autonomy in 1967. However many Anguillans had no wish to be a part of this union, and resented the dominance of St Kitts within it. On 30 May, 1967, Anguillans forcibly ejected the St Kitts police force from the island and declared their separation from St Kitts following a referendum. The events, led by Atlin Harrigan and Ronald Webster among others, became known as the Anguillan Revolution; its goal was not independence per se, but rather independence from Saint Kitts and Nevis and a return to being a British colony.\nWith negotiations failing to break the deadlock, a second referendum confirming Anguillans' desire for separation from St Kitts was held and the Republic of Anguilla was declared unilaterally, with Ronald Webster as president. Efforts by British envoy William Whitlock failed to break the impasse and 300 British troops were subsequently sent in March 1969. British authority was restored, and confirmed by the Anguilla Act 1971 (c. 63) of July 1971. In 1980, Anguilla was finally allowed to formally secede from Saint Kitts and Nevis and become a separate British Crown colony (now a British overseas territory). Since then, Anguilla has been politically stable, and has seen a large growth in its tourism and offshore financing sectors.\nGeography and geology.\nAnguilla is a flat, low-lying island of coral and limestone in the Caribbean Sea, measuring some 16 miles (26\u00a0km) long and 3.5 miles (6\u00a0km) in width. It lies to the east of Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands and directly north of Saint Martin, separated from that island by the Anguilla Channel. The soil is generally thin and poor, supporting scrub, tropical and forest vegetation. The terrain is generally low-lying, with the highest terrain located in the vicinity of The Valley; Crocus Hill, Anguilla's highest peak at , lies in the western regions of the town.\nAnguilla is noted for its ecologically important coral reefs and beaches. Apart from the main island of Anguilla itself, the territory includes a number of other smaller islands and cays, mostly tiny and uninhabited:\nIn Anguilla, forest cover is around 61% of the total land area, equivalent to 5,500 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, which was unchanged from 1990.\nGeology.\nAnguilla (and the wider Anguilla Bank) is of volcanic origin, lying on the Lesser Antilles volcanic island arc, and tuffs and volcaniclastic breccias of Eocene age are exposed locally on the island. The island was largely submerged during the Miocene, leading to the formation of the reefal limestone Anguilla Formation, which was subsequently tectonically uplifted and covers most of the island today. Since the late Pleistocene, however, Anguilla has undergone tectonic subsidence at a rate of around 1\u20132\u00a0mm/yr.\nClimate.\nTemperature.\nNortheastern trade winds keep this tropical island relatively cool and dry. Average annual temperature is . July\u2013October is its hottest period, December\u2013February, its coolest.\nRainfall.\nRainfall averages annually, although the figures vary from season to season and year to year. The island is subject to both sudden tropical storms and hurricanes, which occur in the period from July to November. The island suffered damage from Hurricane Luis in 1995, severe flooding from Hurricane Lenny in 1999 and severe damage from Hurricane Irma in 2017, which remains the most powerful hurricane to hit the island.\nGovernance.\nPolitical system.\nAnguilla is an internally self-governing overseas territory of the United Kingdom. Its politics take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic dependency, whereby the Premier is the head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. A governor is appointed by the British government to represent the King.\nThe United Nations Committee on Decolonization includes Anguilla on the United Nations list of non-self-governing territories. The territory's constitution is the Anguilla Constitutional Order 1 April 1982 (amended 1990). Executive power is exercised by the government, with legislative power being vested in both the government and the House of Assembly. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nDefence.\nAs a British overseas territory, the UK is responsible for Anguilla's military defence, although there are no active garrisons or armed forces present in the territory. Since 2020, the Royal Navy has forward-deployed the offshore patrol vessel HMS \"Medway\" long-term to the Caribbean for patrol and sovereignty protection duties. In October 2023, the destroyer HMS Dauntless (which had temporarily replaced \"Medway\" on her normal Caribbean tasking), visited the territory in order to assist local authorities in preparing for the climax of the hurricane season.\nAnguilla had a small marine police force, comprising around 32 personnel, which operated one VT Halmatic M160-class fast patrol boat. Policing on the island is the responsibility of the Royal Anguilla Police Force.\nPopulation.\nDemographics.\nThe majority of residents (90.08%) are of West African ancestry, most of whom are the descendants of enslaved people transported from Africa. Minorities include whites at 3.74% and people of mixed race at 4.65% (figures from 2001 census). Of the population, 72% is Anguillan while 28% is non-Anguillan (2001 census). Of the non-Anguillan population, many are citizens of the United States, United Kingdom, St Kitts &amp; Nevis, the Dominican Republic, and Jamaica.\nThe years 2006 and 2007 saw an influx of large numbers of Chinese, Indian and Mexican workers, brought in as labour for major tourist developments due to the local population not being large enough to support the labour requirements.\nReligion.\nChristian churches did not have a consistent or strong presence during the initial period of English colonisation; spiritual and religious practices of Europeans and Africans tended to reflect their regional origins. As early as 1813, Christian ministers formally ministered to enslaved Africans and promoted literacy among converts. The Wesleyan (Methodist) Missionary Society of England built churches and schools from 1817.\nAccording to the 2001 census, Christianity is Anguilla's predominant religion, with 29% of the population practising Anglicanism; another 23.9% are Methodist. Other churches on the island include Seventh-day Adventist, Baptist, Roman Catholic (served by the Diocese of Saint John's\u2013Basseterre, with the See at Saint John on Antigua and Barbuda) and a small community of Jehovah's Witnesses (0.7%). Between 1992 and 2001, the number of followers of the Church of God and Pentecostals increased considerably. There are at least 15 churches on the island. Although a minority on the island, Anguilla is an important location to followers of Rastafarian religion as the birthplace of Robert Athlyi Rogers, author of the \"Holy Piby\" which had a strong influence on Rastafarian and other Africa-centre belief systems. More recently, a Muslim cultural centre has opened on the island.\nLanguages.\nToday most people in Anguilla speak a British-influenced variety of standard English. Other languages are also spoken on the island, including varieties of Spanish, Chinese and the languages of other immigrant communities. However, the most common language other than Standard English is the island's own English-lexifier Creole language (not to be confused with Antillean Creole ('French Creole'), spoken in French islands such as Martinique and Guadeloupe). It is referred to locally by terms such as \"dialect\" (pronounced \"dialek\"), Anguilla Talk or \"Anguillian\". It has its main roots in early varieties of English and West African languages, and is similar to the dialects spoken in English-speaking islands throughout the Eastern Caribbean in terms of its structural features.\nLinguists who are interested in the origins of Anguillan and other Caribbean Creoles point out that some of its grammatical features can be traced to African languages while others can be traced to European languages. Three areas have been identified as significant for the identification of the linguistic origins of those forced migrants who arrived before 1710: the Gold Coast, the Slave Coast and the Windward Coast.\nSociohistorical information from Anguilla's archives suggest that Africans and Europeans formed two distinct, but perhaps overlapping speech communities in the early phases of the island's colonisation. \"Anguillian\" is believed to have emerged as the language of the masses as time passed, slavery was abolished and locals began to see themselves as \"belonging\" to Anguillan society.\nEducation.\nThere are six government primary schools, one government secondary school (Albena Lake Hodge Comprehensive School), and two private schools. There is a single library, the Edison L. Hughes Education &amp; Library Complex of the Anguilla Public Library. A branch of the Saint James School of Medicine was established in 2011 in Anguilla. It is a private, for-profit medical school headquartered in Park Ridge, Illinois.\nThere is a University of the West Indies Open campus site in the island.\nCulture.\nThe island's cultural history begins with the native Taino, Arawak and Carib. Their artefacts have been found around the island, telling of life before European settlers arrived.\nAnguillan culture has also been built through immigration. Many European families have moved to the island and have affected the formalities of the Anguillan people.\nSimilar to nearby islands, Anguillans geography and location require a cultural reliance on the ocean. The island's abundance of sea life has led to the incorporation of many fish and crustacean into daily life. They have become a part of the local cuisine, opened up opportunities for ecotourism, and introduced celebrations such as Lobster Fest and boat races.\nAs throughout the Caribbean, holidays are a cultural fixture. Anguilla's most important holidays are of historic as much as cultural importance \u2013 particularly the anniversary of the emancipation (previously August Monday in the Park), celebrated as the Summer Festival, or Carnival, the sailboat races, and Lobster Fest. British festivities, such as the King's Birthday, are also celebrated.\nMusic in Anguilla presents itself as an important part of its culture as well. All different genres of music are played at the celebrations mentioned above. This music represents the deep history of talent that Anguillans have displayed for decades.\nThe Anguilla National Trust (ANT) was established in 1989 and opened its current office in 1991 charged with the responsibility of preserving the heritage of the island, including its cultural heritage.\nThe Heritage Collection Museum used to showcase the history and artefacts of Anguilla, but in 2024 the collection was handed over to the Anguilla National Museum.\nCuisine.\nAnguillan cuisine is influenced by native Caribbean, West African, Spanish, French, and English cuisines. Seafood is abundant, including prawns, shrimp, crab, spiny lobster, conch, mahi-mahi, red snapper, marlin, and grouper. Salt cod is a staple food eaten on its own and used in stews, casseroles and soups. Livestock is limited due to the small size of the island and people there use poultry, pork, goat, and mutton, along with imported beef. Goat is the most commonly eaten meat, used in a variety of dishes. The official national food of Anguilla is pigeon peas and rice.\nA significant amount of the island's produce is imported due to limited land suitable for agriculture production; much of the soil is sandy and infertile. The agriculture produce of Anguilla includes tomatoes, peppers, limes and other citrus fruits, onion, garlic, squash, pigeon peas, and callaloo. Starch staple foods include imported rice and other foods that are imported or locally grown, including yams, sweet potatoes and breadfruit.\nAnguilla celebrates its cuisine at annual island-wide and village festivals including https:// over Easter weekend, https:// in May and https:// around Anguilla's Whit Monday.\nLiterature.\nThe Anguilla National Trust has programmes encouraging Anguillan writers and the preservation of the island's history. In 2015, \"Where I See The Sun \u2013 Contemporary Poetry in Anguilla\" A New Anthology by Lasana M. Sekou was published by House of Nehesi Publishers. Among the forty three poets in the collection are Rita Celestine-Carty, Bankie Banx, John T. Harrigan, Patricia J. Adams, Fabian Fahie, Dr. Oluwakemi Linda Banks, and Reuel Ben Lewi.\nMusic.\nVarious Caribbean musical genres are popular on the island, such as soca and calypso, but reggae most deeply roots itself in Anguillan society. Anguilla has produced many artists and groups in this genre.\nReggae has shown itself to be the most popular genre in Anguilla. The most successful of reggae artists originating in Anguilla come from the Banks family. Bankie \"Banx\" and his son Omari Banks have had many chart-topping songs listened to around the world. The two musicians continue to provide live performances across the island quite often.\nBritish Dependency has also gained popularity throughout the 21st century. The band, who began in Anguilla, boasts the island's first female bass player. Performing alongside The Wailers on tour, British Dependency have earned attention from an American audience.\nOne of many musical events that take place in Anguilla is Moonsplash. Moonsplash is an annual reggae music festival that has occurred in Anguilla for 33 consecutive years and proves to be the oldest independent musical event in the Caribbean. Along with its longstanding history, it is the largest festival annually alongside carnival.\nWhile not many soca and calypso artists have gained extreme popularity, the genres are still widely listened to across the island.\nSports.\nBoat racing has deep roots in Anguillan culture and is the national sport. There are regular sailing regattas on national holidays, such as Carnival, which are contested by locally built and designed boats. These boats have names and have sponsors that print their logo on their sails.\nAs in many other former British colonies, cricket is also a popular sport. Anguilla is the home of Omari Banks, who played for the West Indies Cricket Team, while Cardigan Connor played first-class cricket for English county side Hampshire and was 'chef de mission' (team manager) for Anguilla's Commonwealth Games team in 2002. Other noted players include Chesney Hughes, who played for Derbyshire County Cricket Club in England.\nRugby union is represented in Anguilla by the Anguilla Eels RFC, who were formed in April 2006. The Eels have been finalists in the St. Martin tournament in November 2006 and semi-finalists in 2007, 2008, 2009 and Champions in 2010. The Eels were formed in 2006 by Scottish club national second row Martin Welsh, Club Sponsor and President of the AERFC Ms. Jacquie Ruan, and Canadian standout Scrumhalf Mark Harris (Toronto Scottish RFC).\nAnguilla is the birthplace of sprinter Zharnel Hughes who has represented Great Britain since 2015, and England at the 2018 Commonwealth Games. He won the 100 metres at the 2018 European Athletics Championships, the 4 x 100 metres at the same championships, and the 4 x 100 metres for England at the 2018 Commonwealth Games. He also won a 4 \u00d7 100 m relay team gold at the 2022 Birmingham Commonwealth Games and a silver on the 4 \u00d7 100 m relay for Great Britain at the 2020 Olympic Games. In 2023 he broke the British record for the 100m sprint, with a time of 9.83 seconds.\nShara Proctor, British Long Jump Silver Medalist at the World Championships in Beijing, first represented Anguilla in the event until 2010 when she began to represent Great Britain and England. Under the Anguillan Flag she achieved several medals in the NACAC games.\nKeith Connor, triple jumper, is also an Anguillan. He represented Great Britain and England and achieved several international titles including Commonwealth and European Games gold medals and an Olympic bronze medal. Connor later became Head Coach of Australia Athletics.\nNatural history.\nWildlife.\nAnguilla has habitat for the Cuban tree frogs (\"Osteopilus septentrionalis\"). The red-footed tortoise (\"Chelonoidis carbonaria\") is a species of tortoise found here, which originally came from South America. Hurricanes in the mid-90s led to over-water dispersal of the green iguanas (\"Iguana iguana\") to Anguilla. All three animals are introductions.\nFive species of bats are known in the literature from Anguilla \u2013 the threatened insular single leaf bat (\"Monophyllus plethodon\"), the Antillean fruit-eating bat (\"Brachyphylla cavernarum\"), the Jamaican fruit bat (\"Artibeus jamaicensis\"), the Mexican funnel-eared bat (\"Natalus stramineus\"), and the velvety free-tailed bat (\"Molossus molossus\").\nEconomy.\nAnguilla's thin arid soil being largely unsuitable for agriculture, the island has few land-based natural resources. Its main industries are tourism, offshore incorporation and management, offshore banking, captive insurance and fishing.\nAnguilla's currency is the East Caribbean dollar, though the US dollar is also widely accepted. The exchange rate is fixed to the US dollar at US$1 = EC$2.70.\nThe economy, and especially the tourism sector, suffered a setback in late 1995 due to the effects of Hurricane Luis in September. Hotels were hit particularly hard but a recovery occurred the following year. Another economic setback occurred during the aftermath of Hurricane Lenny in 2000. Before the 2008 worldwide crisis, the economy of Anguilla was growing strongly, especially the tourism sector, which was driving major new developments in partnerships with multi-national companies. Anguilla's tourism industry received a major boost when it was selected to host the World Travel Awards in December 2014. Known as \"the Oscars of the travel industry\", the awards ceremony was held at the CuisinArt Resort and Spa and was hosted by Vivica A. Fox. Anguilla was voted the World's Leading Luxury Island Destination from a short list of top-tier candidates such as St. Barts, the Maldives, and Mauritius. The economy, including the tourism sector, suffered its biggest setback in late 2017 due to the effects of Hurricane Irma in September, which was the most powerful hurricane to hit the island and which caused major material damage of $320\u00a0million. A lot of infrastructure was damaged, which was repaired in 2018/19 and the economy began to recover in 2019. However, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020/21, caused a setback in the economy.\nAnguilla's financial system comprises seven banks, two money services businesses, more than 40 company managers, more than 50 insurers, 12 brokers, more than 250 captive intermediaries, more than 50 mutual funds, and eight trust companies.\nAnguilla has become a popular tax haven, having no capital gains, estate, profit, sales, or corporate taxes. In April 2011, faced with a mounting deficit, it introduced a 3% \"Interim Stabilisation Levy\", Anguilla's first form of income tax. Anguilla also has a 0.75% property tax.\nAnguilla aims to obtain 15% of its energy from solar power to become less reliant on expensive imported diesel. The Climate &amp; Development Knowledge Network is helping the government gather the information it needs to change the territory's legislation, so that it can integrate renewables into its grid. Barbados has also made good progress in switching to renewables, but many other Small Island Developing States are still at the early stages of planning how to integrate renewable energy into their grids. \"For a small island we're very far ahead,\" said Beth Barry, Coordinator of the Anguilla Renewable Energy Office. \"We've got an Energy Policy and a draft Climate Change policy and have been focusing efforts on the question of sustainable energy supply for several years now. As a result, we have a lot of information we can share with other islands.\"\nAccording to a Bloomberg report, due to a skyrocketing interest in artificial intelligence, Anguilla was expected to profit in 2023 from a surge in demand for web addresses ending with the country's top-level domain .ai. The total number of registrations of .ai domain names had already doubled in 2022, and according to Vince Cate, who has managed the top-level domain, Anguilla will bring in as much as $30 million in domain-registration fees for 2023. As of 2024[ [update]], the government reported 105.5 million East Caribbean dollars (US$39m), about the quarter of the total, and expects this to increase by another 25% next year.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nAnguilla is served by Clayton J. Lloyd International Airport (prior to 4 July 2010 known as Wallblake Airport). The primary runway at the airport is in length and can accommodate moderate-sized aircraft. Regional scheduled passenger services connect to various other Caribbean islands via local airlines.\nIn December 2021 Anguilla inaugurated its first ever international regular commercial jet service flight to and from the mainland U.S. American Eagle operating on behalf of American Airlines began nonstop Embraer 175 regional jet service to Anguilla from Miami in an aviation watershed moment for Anguilla with the airport also currently attempting to attract other international air carriers.\nOther airlines currently serving the airport include Tradewind Aviation and Cape Air which provide scheduled air service to San Juan, Puerto Rico. Several other small airlines serve the airport as well.\nThe airport can handle large narrow-body jets such as the Boeing 737 and Airbus A320 and has growing private jet service flights with a new private jet terminal being built.\nRoad.\nAside from taxis, there is no public transport on the island. Cars drive on the left and most roads are unsealed. There is no rail network.\nBoat.\nThere are regular ferries from Saint Martin to Anguilla. It is a 20-minute crossing from Marigot, St. Martin, to Blowing Point, Anguilla.\nThere is also a charter service which offers boat trips from Blowing Point, Anguilla, to Princess Juliana Airport.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral information.\nLat. Long. "}
{"id": "1220", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1220", "title": "Anguilla/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "1221", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1221", "title": "Anguilla/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "1223", "revid": "14984434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1223", "title": "Telecommunications in Anguilla", "text": "This article is about communications systems in Anguilla.\nTelephone.\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use: 6,200 (2002)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 212\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular: 1,800 (2002)\n\"country comparison to the world:\" 211\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"Domestic:\" Modern internal telephone system\n&lt;br&gt;\"International:\" EAST CARIBBEAN FIBRE SYSTEM ECFS (cable system)\n\" microwave radio relay to island of Saint Martin (Guadeloupe and Netherlands Antilles)\"\nMobile phone (GSM).\nMobile phone operators:\nFLOW (Anguilla) Ltd. \u2013 GSM and UMTS 850 and 1900\u00a0MHz, LTE 700\u00a0MHz with Island-wide coverage \nDigicel (Anguilla) Ltd. \u2013 GSM and UMTS 850 to 1900\u00a0MHz, LTE 700\u00a0MHz\nMobiles: ? (2007)\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 7, shortwave 0 (2007)\nRadios: 3,000 (1997)\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcast stations: 1 (1997)\nTelevisions: 1,000 (1997)\nInternet.\nInternet country code: .ai (Top level domain)\nInternet Service Providers (ISPs): 2 (FLOW \u2013 https://, Digicel Anguilla \u2013 https:// )\nInternet hosts: 269 (2012) \n\"country comparison to the world:\" 192\nInternet: users: 12,377 (2018) \n\"country comparison to the world:\" 206\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
