{"id": "9954", "revid": "44841399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9954", "title": "Eurovision Song Contest", "text": "Annual international song competition\nThe Eurovision Song Contest (), often known simply as Eurovision, is an international song competition organised annually by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) among its members since 1956. Each participating broadcaster submits an original song representing its country to be performed and broadcast live to all of them via the Eurovision and Euroradio networks, and then casts votes for the other countries' songs to determine a winner.\nThe contest was inspired by and based on the Italian Sanremo Music Festival, held in the Italian Riviera since 1951. Eurovision has been held annually since 1956 (except for 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic), making it the longest-running international music competition on television and one of the world's longest-running television programmes. Active members of the EBU and invited associate members are eligible to compete; broadcasters from 52 countries have participated at least once. Each participating broadcaster sends an original song of three minutes duration or less to be performed live by a singer, or group of up to six people, aged 16 or older of its choice. Each country awards 1\u20138, 10, and 12 points to their ten favourite songs, based on the views of an assembled group of music professionals and their viewing public, with the song receiving the most points declared the winner. Other performances feature alongside the competition, including specially-commissioned opening and interval acts and guest performances by musicians and other personalities, with past acts including Cirque du Soleil, Madonna, Justin Timberlake, Mika, Rita Ora, and the first performance of \"Riverdance\". Originally consisting of a single evening event, the contest has expanded as broadcasters from new countries joined (including countries outside of Europe, such as Israel, Morocco, and Australia), leading to the introduction of relegation procedures in the 1990s, before the creation of semi-finals in the 2000s. Germany has competed more times than any other country, having participated in all but one edition, while Ireland and Sweden both hold the record for the most victories, with seven wins each in total.\nTraditionally held in the country that won the preceding year's event, the contest provides an opportunity to promote the host country and city as a tourist destination. Thousands of spectators attend each year, along with journalists who cover all aspects of the contest, including rehearsals in venue, press conferences with the competing acts, in addition to other related events and performances in the host city. Alongside the generic Eurovision logo, a unique theme is typically developed for each event. The contest has aired in countries across all continents; it has been available online via the official Eurovision website since 2001. Eurovision ranks among the world's most watched non-sporting events every year, with hundreds of millions of viewers globally. Performing at the contest has often provided artists with a local career boost and in some cases long-lasting international success. Several of the best-selling music artists in the world have competed in past editions, including ABBA, C\u00e9line Dion, Julio Iglesias, Cliff Richard, and Olivia Newton-John; some of the world's best-selling singles have received their first international performance on the Eurovision stage.\nWhile having gained popularity with the viewing public in both participating and non-participating countries, the contest has also been the subject of criticism for its artistic quality, as well as a perceived political aspect to the event. Concerns have been raised regarding political friendships and rivalries between countries potentially having an impact on the results. Controversial moments have included participating broadcasters withdrawing at a late stage, censorship of broadcast segments by broadcasters, disqualification of contestants, as well as political events impacting participation. The contest has also been criticised for an over-abundance of elaborate stage shows at the cost of artistic merit. Eurovision has gained popularity for its camp appeal, its musical span of ethnic and international styles, as well as emergence as part of LGBTQ culture, resulting in a large, active fanbase and an influence on popular culture. The popularity of the contest has led to the creation of several similar events, either organised by the EBU or created by external organisations; several special events have been organised by the EBU to celebrate select anniversaries or as a replacement due to cancellation.\nOrigins and history.\nThe European Broadcasting Union (EBU) was formed in 1950 among 23 broadcasting organisations. The word \"Eurovision\" was first used by British journalist George Campey in the \"Evening Standard\" in 1951, when he referred to a British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) programme being relayed by Dutch television. Following several events broadcast internationally via their Eurovision transmission network in the early 1950s, including the coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953, an EBU committee, headed by Marcel Bezen\u00e7on, was formed in January 1955 to investigate new initiatives for cooperation between broadcasters, which approved for further study a European song competition from an idea initially proposed by (RAI) manager Sergio Pugliese. The EBU's general assembly agreed to the organising of the song contest in October 1955, under the initial title of the \"European Grand Prix\", and accepted a proposal by the Swiss Broadcasting Corporation (SRG SSR) to host the event in Lugano in the spring of 1956. The Italian Sanremo Music Festival, held since 1951, was used as a basis for the initial planning of the contest, with several amendments and additions given its international nature. The Eurovision Song Contest was developed as a way of putting transnational live television to the test, promoting television, as well as encouraging the production of original songs.\nBroadcasters from seven countries participated in the first contest, with each country represented by two songs; the only time in which multiple entries per country were permitted. The winning song was \"\", representing the host country Switzerland and performed by Lys Assia. Voting during the first contest was held behind closed doors, with only the winner being announced on stage; the use of a scoreboard and public announcement of the voting, inspired by the BBC's \"Festival of British Popular Songs\", began in 1957. The tradition of the winning broadcaster hosting the following year's contest, which has since become a standard feature of the event, began in 1958. Technological developments have transformed the contest: colour broadcasts began in 1968; satellite broadcasts in 1985; and streaming in 2000. Broadcasts in began in 2005 and in high-definition in 2007, with ultra-high-definition tested for the first time in 2022.\nBy the 1960s, between 16 and 18 countries were regularly competing each year. Countries from outside the traditional boundaries of Europe began entering the contest, and countries in Western Asia and North Africa started competing in the 1970s and 1980s. Apart from Yugoslavia (a member of the non-aligned movement and not seen as part of the Eastern Bloc at the time) no socialist or communist country ever participated. Only after the end of the Cold War did other countries from Central and Eastern Europe participate for the first time \u2013 some of those countries having gained or regained their independence in the course of the breakup of Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet Union. As a consequence, more broadcasters were now applying than could feasibly participate in a one-night-event of reasonable length. Numerous solutions to this problem were tried out over the years. The 1993 contest included a contest called which was a pre-qualifying round for seven of these new countries, and from 1994, relegation systems were introduced to manage the number of competing entries, with the poorest performing countries barred from entering the following year's contest. From 2004, the contest expanded to become a multi-programme event, with a semi-final at the 49th contest allowing all interested countries to compete each year; a second semi-final was added to each edition from 2008.\nThere have been 69 contests as of 2025,[ [update]] making Eurovision the longest-running annual international televised music competition as determined by \"Guinness World Records\". The contest has been listed as one of the longest-running television programmes in the world and among the world's most watched non-sporting events. Broadcasters from a total of 52 countries have taken part in at least one edition, with a record 43 countries participating in a single contest, first in 2008 and subsequently in 2011 and 2018.\nEurovision had been held every year until 2020, when that year's contest was cancelled in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. No competitive event was able to take place due to uncertainty caused by the spread of the virus in Europe and the various restrictions imposed by the governments of the participating countries. In its place a special broadcast, \"\", was produced by the organisers, which honoured the songs and artists that would have competed in 2020 in a non-competitive format.\nNaming.\nThe contest has been known by different names in various languages. The first contest was officially named the in Italian, the in French, and the \"Grand Prix of the Eurovision Song Competition\" in English, Similar variations, such as in Swedish or in Dutch, were unofficially used in some editions. The names \"Eurovision Song Contest\" and in French became a standard in subsequent decades. The contest was briefly rebranded as \"Eurosong\" in English for the 1996 edition, but this was reverted the following year. The names were not standardised until 2004, when the contest was rebranded. The official brand guidelines specify that translations of the name may be used depending on national tradition and brand recognition in the competing countries, but that the official name \"Eurovision Song Contest\" is always preferred.\nOn only four occasions has the name used for the official logo of the contest not been in English or French: the Italian names and were used when Italy hosted the 1965 and 1991 contests respectively; and the Dutch name was used when the Netherlands hosted in 1976 and 1980.\nFormat.\nOriginal songs representing participating countries are performed in a live television programme broadcast via the Eurovision and Euroradio networks simultaneously to all countries. A \"country\" as a participant is represented by one television broadcaster from that country, a member of the EBU, and is typically that country's national public broadcasting organisation. The programme is staged by one of the participant broadcasters and is transmitted from an auditorium in the selected host city. Since 2008, each contest is typically formed of three live television shows held over one week: two semi-finals are held on the Tuesday and Thursday, followed by a final on the Saturday. All participating countries compete in one of the two semi-finals, except for the host country of that year's contest and the \"Big Five\"\u2014the countries whose broadcasters are the contest's biggest financial contributors: France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. The remaining countries are split between the two semi-finals, and the 10 highest-scoring entries in each qualify to produce 26 entries competing in the final. Since the introduction of the semi-final round in 2004, Luxembourg and Ukraine are the only countries outside of the \"Big Five\" to have qualified for the final of every contest they have competed in.\nEach participating broadcaster has sole discretion over the process it may employ to select its entry for the contest. Typical methods in which participants are selected include a televised national final using a jury and/or public vote; an internal selection by a committee appointed by the broadcaster; and a mixed format where some decisions are made internally and the public are engaged in others. Among the most successful televised selection shows is in Sweden, first established in 1959 and now one of the most watched television shows in the country each year.\nEach show typically begins with an opening act consisting of music and/or dance performances by invited artists, which contributes to a unique theme and identity created for that year's event; since 2013, the opening of the contest's final has included a \"Flag Parade\", with competing artists entering the stage behind their country's flag in a similar manner to the procession of competing athletes at the Olympic Games opening ceremony. Viewers are welcomed by one or more presenters who provide key updates during the show, conduct interviews with competing acts from the green room, and guide the voting procedure in English and French. Competing acts perform sequentially, and after all songs have been performed, viewers are invited to vote for their favourite performances\u2014except for the performance of their own country\u2014via telephone, SMS, and the official Eurovision app. The public vote comprises 50% of the final result alongside the views of a jury of music industry professionals from each country. An interval act is invariably featured during this voting period, which on several occasions has included a well-known personality from the host country or an internationally recognised figure. The results of the voting are subsequently announced; in the semi-finals, the 10 highest-ranked countries are announced in a random order, with the full results undisclosed until after the final. In the final, the presenters call upon a representative spokesperson for each country in turn who announces their jury's points, while the results of the public vote are subsequently announced by the presenters. In recent years, it has been tradition that the first country to announce its jury points is the previous host, whereas the last country is the current host. The qualifying acts in the semi-finals, and the winning delegation in the final are invited back on stage; in the final, a trophy is awarded to the winning performers and songwriters by the previous year's winner, followed by a reprise of the winning song. The full results of the competition, including detailed results of the jury and public vote, are released online shortly after the final, and the participating broadcaster of the winning entry is traditionally given the honour of organising the following year's event.\nParticipation.\nActive members (as opposed to associate members) of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) are eligible to participate; active members are those who are located in states that fall within the European Broadcasting Area (EBA), or are member states of the Council of Europe. Active members include media organisations whose broadcasts are often made available to at least 98% of households in their own country which are equipped to receive such transmissions. Associate member broadcasters may be eligible to compete, dependent on approval by the contest's reference group.\nThe EBA is defined by the International Telecommunication Union as encompassing the geographical area between the boundary of ITU Region 1 in the west, the meridian 40\u00b0 East of Greenwich in the east, and parallel 30\u00b0 North in the south. Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and the parts of Iraq, Jordan, Syria, Turkey, and Ukraine lying outside these limits are also included in the EBA.\nEligibility to participate in the contest is therefore not limited to broadcasters from countries in Europe, as several states geographically outside the boundaries of the continent or which span more than one continent are included in the EBA. Broadcasters from countries in these groups have taken part in past editions, including countries in Western Asia such as Israel and Cyprus, countries which span Europe and Asia like Russia and Turkey, and North African countries such as Morocco.\nAustralia became the first country without an active EBU member broadcaster to compete, following an invitation by the contest's reference group to associate member Special Broadcasting Service (SBS) ahead of the contest's 60th edition in 2015. Initially announced as a \"one-off\" for the anniversary edition, SBS was invited back the following year and has subsequently participated every year since. Australia is also the only country from outside the EBA to ever participate.\nEBU members wishing to participate must fulfil conditions as laid down in the rules of the contest, a separate copy of which is drafted annually. A maximum of 44 countries can take part in any one contest. Broadcasters must have paid the EBU a participation fee in advance of the deadline specified in the rules for the year in which they wish to participate; this fee is different for each country based on its size and viewership.\nBroadcasters from fifty-two countries have participated at least once. These countries are listed here alongside the year in which they made their debut:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHosting.\nThe winning broadcaster traditionally hosts the following year's event, with some exceptions since 1958. Hosting the contest can be seen as a unique opportunity for promoting the host country as a tourist destination and can provide benefits to the local economy and tourism sectors of the host city. However, there is a perception reflected in popular culture that some broadcasters wish to avoid the costly burden of hosting\u00a0\u2013 sometimes resulting in them sending deliberately subpar entries with no chance of winning. Preparations for each year's contest typically begin at the conclusion of the previous year's contest, with the head of delegation of the winning country receiving a welcome package of information related to hosting the contest at the winner's press conference. Eurovision is a non-profit event, and financing is typically achieved through a fee from each participating broadcaster, contributions from the host broadcaster and the host city, and commercial revenues from sponsorships, ticket sales, televoting, and merchandise.\nThe host broadcaster will subsequently select a host city, typically a national or regional capital city, which must meet certain criteria set out in the contest's rules. The host venue must be able to accommodate at least 10,000 spectators, a press centre for 1,500 journalists, should be within easy reach of an international airport and with hotel accommodation available for at least 2,000 delegates, journalists, and spectators. A variety of different venues have been used, from small theatres and television studios to large arenas and stadiums. The largest host venue is Parken Stadium in Copenhagen, which was attended by almost 38,000 spectators in 2001. With a population of 1,500 at the time of the 1993 contest, Millstreet, Ireland, remains the smallest hosting settlement, although its Green Glens Arena is capable of hosting up to 8,000 spectators.\nUnlike the Olympic Games or FIFA World Cup, whose host venues are announced several years in advance, there is usually no purpose-built infrastructure whose construction is justified with the needs of hosting the Eurovision Song Contest. However, the 2012 edition, hosted in Baku, Azerbaijan, was held at Baku Crystal Hall, a venue that had not existed when Azerbaijan won the previous year. Every other edition has been held in pre-existing venues, but renovations or modifications have sometimes been undertaken in the year prior which are justified with the needs of the contest.\nEurovision logo and theme.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \n2004\u20132014 logo \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \n2015\u20132025 logo \nUntil 2004, each edition of the contest used its own logo and visual identity as determined by the respective host broadcaster. To create a consistent visual identity, the EBU introduced a generic logo ahead of the 2004 contest. This is typically accompanied by a unique theme artwork designed for each individual contest by the host broadcaster, with the flag of the host country placed prominently in the centre of the Eurovision heart. The original logo was designed by the London-based agency JM International, and received revamps in 2014 by the Amsterdam-based Cityzen Agency for the contest's 60th edition, and in 2025 by the Sheffield-based studio Pals for the 70th edition.\nAn individual theme is utilised by contest producers when constructing the visual identity of each edition of the contest, including the stage design, the opening and interval acts, and the \"postcards\". The short video postcards are interspersed between the entries and were first introduced in 1970, initially as an attempt to \"bulk up\" the contest after a number of countries decided not to compete, but has since become a regular part of the show and usually highlight the host country and introduce the competing acts. A unique slogan for each edition, first introduced in 2002, was also an integral part of each contest's visual identity, which was replaced by a permanent slogan from 2024 onwards. The permanent slogan, \"United by Music\", had previously served as the slogan for the 2023 contest before being retained for all future editions as part of the contest's global brand strategy.\nPreparations.\nPreparations in the host venue typically begin approximately six weeks before the final, to accommodate building works and technical rehearsals before the arrival of the competing artists. Delegations will typically arrive in the host city two to three weeks before the live show, and each participating broadcaster appoints a head of delegation, responsible for coordinating the movements of their delegation and being their representative to the EBU. Members of each country's delegation include performers, composers, lyricists, a Head of Press, and\u2014in the years where a live orchestra was present\u2014a conductor. Present if desired is a commentator, who provides commentary of the event for their radio and/or television feed in their own language in dedicated booths situated around the back of the arena behind the audience.\nEach delegation conducts two individual rehearsals behind closed doors, the first for 30 minutes and the second for 20 minutes. Individual rehearsals for the semi-finalists commence the week before the live shows, with countries typically rehearsing in the order in which they will perform during the contest; rehearsals for the host country and the \"Big Five\" automatic finalists are held towards the end of the week. Following rehearsals, delegations meet with the show's production team to review footage of the rehearsal and raise any special requirements or changes. \"Meet and greet\" sessions with accredited fans and press are held during these rehearsal weeks. Each live show is preceded by three dress rehearsals, where the whole show is run in the same way as it will be presented on TV. The second dress rehearsal, alternatively called the \"jury show\" or \"evening preview show\" and held the night before the broadcast, is used as a recorded back-up in case of technological failure, and performances during this show are used by the professional jury in each country to determine their votes. Until 2025, the delegations from the qualifying countries in each semi-final attended a qualifiers' press conference after their respective semi-final. The winning delegation attends a winners' press conference following the final.\nA welcome reception is typically held at a venue in the host city on the Sunday preceding the live shows, which includes a red carpet ceremony for all the participating countries and is usually broadcast online. Accredited delegates, press and fans have access to an official nightclub, the \"EuroClub\", and some delegations will hold their own parties. The \"Eurovision Village\" is an official fan zone open to the public free of charge, with live performances by the contest's artists and screenings of the live shows on big screens.\nRules.\nThe contest is organised annually by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), together with the host broadcaster in co-production with all the participating broadcasters. The event is monitored by an executive supervisor appointed by the EBU, and by the reference group which represents all participating broadcasters, who are each represented by a head of delegation. The most recent executive supervisor was Martin \u00d6sterdahl, who took over the role from Jon Ola Sand in May 2020 and served until June 2025, after which Martin Green took over on an interim basis. A detailed set of rules is written by the EBU for each contest and approved by the reference group. These rules have changed over time, and typically outline, among other points, the eligibility of the competing songs, the format of the contest, and the voting system to be used to determine the winner and how the results will be presented.\nSong eligibility and languages.\nAll competing songs must have a duration of three minutes or less. This rule applies only to the version performed during the live shows. In order to be considered eligible, competing songs in a given year's contest must not have been released commercially before the first day of September of the previous year. All competing entries must include vocals and lyrics of some kind; a cappella songs and purely instrumental pieces are not allowed. Competing entries may be performed in any language, be that natural or constructed, and participating broadcasters are free to decide the language in which their entry may be performed.\nRules specifying in which language a song may be performed have changed over time. No restrictions were originally enacted when the contest was first founded; however, following criticism over the 1965 Swedish entry being performed in English, a new rule was introduced for the 1966 contest restricting songs to be performed only in an official language of the country it represented. This rule was first abolished in 1973, and subsequently reinstated for most countries in 1977, with only Belgium and Germany permitted freedom of language as their selection processes for that year's contest had already commenced. The language rule was once again abolished ahead of the 1999 contest.\nThere is no restriction on the national origin, country of residence or age of the songwriter(s). Furthermore, unlike performers who may only represent one country in any given year, songwriters are free to enter multiple songs in a single year sung by different acts. For example, the entries of Germany and Luxembourg in 1980 were either written or co-written by Ralph Siegel, who was involved in some form in the writing of dozens of entries throughout his 40-year long career, both advancing to the final and failing to make it past the national selection, including \"\", the winning entry for Germany in 1982.\nArtist eligibility and performances.\nThe rules for the first contest specified that only solo performers were permitted to enter; this criterion was changed the following year to permit duos to compete, and groups were subsequently permitted for the first time in 1971. Currently the number of people permitted on stage during competing performances is limited to a maximum of six, and no live animals are allowed. Since 1990, all contestants must be aged 16 or over on the day of the live show in which they perform. Sandra Kim, the winner for Belgium in 1986 at the age of 13, shall remain the contest's youngest winner while this rule remains in place. There is no limit on the nationality or country of birth of the competing artists, and participating broadcasters are free to select an artist from any country; several winning artists have subsequently held a different nationality or were born in a different country to that which they represented. No performer may compete for more than one country in a given year. There is no restriction regarding performers who have participated in past events competing again \u2013 whether for the same country or a different one. It is even possible for a winning performer to try and defend their title in the next edition, as happened when Lys Assia competed for Switzerland in 1957 after winning in 1956, or when Lena competed for Germany in 2011 after winning in 2010. However, in the history of the contest only two individuals have won more than once as a performer\u00a0\u2013 Johnny Logan for Ireland in 1980 and 1987, and Loreen for Sweden in 2012 and 2023.\nFrom 1956 to 1998, a live orchestra formed an integral part of the contest, providing accompaniment to all the acts performing. Pre-recorded backing tracks were first allowed for competing acts in 1973, but any pre-recorded instruments were required to be seen being \"performed\" on stage. In 1997, all instrumental music was allowed to be pre-recorded, although the host country was still required to provide an orchestra. In 1999, the rules were changed again, making the orchestra an optional requirement; the host broadcaster of that year's contest, the Israel Broadcasting Authority (IBA), subsequently decided not to provide an orchestra, resulting in all acts using backing tracks for the first time.\nThe main vocals of competing songs must be performed live during the contest. Previously live backing vocals were also required; since 2021 these may optionally be pre-recorded\u00a0\u2013 this change has been implemented in an effort to introduce flexibility following the cancellation of the 2020 edition and to facilitate modernisation.\nRunning order.\nSince 2013, the order in which the competing countries perform has been determined by the contest's producers, and submitted to the executive supervisor and reference group for approval before public announcement. This was changed from a random draw used in previous years in order to provide a better experience for television viewers and ensure all entries stand out by avoiding instances where songs of a similar style or tempo are performed in sequence.\nSince the creation of a second semi-final in 2008, a semi-final allocation draw is held each year. Countries are placed into pots based on their geographical location and voting history in recent contests, and are assigned to compete in one of the two semi-finals through a random draw. Countries are then randomly assigned to compete in either the first or second half of their respective semi-final, and once all competing songs have been selected the producers then determine the running order for the semi-finals. The automatic qualifiers are assigned at random to a semi-final for the purposes of voting rights.\nSemi-final qualifiers make a draw at random during the qualifiers' press conference to determine whether they will perform during the first, second half, or a producer-determined position in the final, while the automatic finalists randomly draw their competing half or producer-determined position in the run-up to the final, except for the host country, whose exact performance position is determined in a separate draw. The running order for the final is then decided following the second semi-final by the producers. The running orders are decided with the competing songs' musical qualities, stage performance, prop, and lighting set-up, and other production considerations taken into account.\nVoting.\nThe results of the contest are determined by a positional voting system, with its upcoming version set to be implemented in 2026. Each country awards two sets of 1\u20138, 10, and 12 points to the ten favourite songs as voted for by its general public and assembled jury, with the most preferred song receiving 12 points. The points from the viewing public are based on the votes cast via telephone, SMS, or the official Eurovision app, while the points from the jury are awarded by a panel comprising seven music professionals. A Rest of the World vote was introduced in 2023, allowing viewers in non-participating countries to vote via an online platform, with these votes aggregated and awarded as one set of points from an \"extra country\" for the overall public vote. This system is a modification of that used since 1975, when the \"12 points\" system was first introduced but with one set of points per country. National juries and the public in each country are not allowed to vote for their own country, a rule first introduced in 1957.\nHistorically, each country's points were determined by a jury, consisting at various times of members of the public, music professionals, or both in combination. With advances in telecommunication technology, televoting was first introduced to the contest in 1997 on a trial basis, with broadcasters in five countries allowing the viewing public to determine their votes for the first time. From 1998, televoting was extended to almost all competing countries, and subsequently became mandatory from 2004. A jury was reintroduced for the final in 2009, with each country's points comprising both the votes of the jury and public in an equal split; this mix of jury and public voting was expanded into the semi-finals from 2010, and was used until 2023, when full public voting was reintroduced to determine the results of the semi-finals. The mix of jury and public voting continues to be used in the final, and is set to return to the semi-finals from 2026.\nShould two or more countries finish with the same number of points, a tie-break procedure is employed to determine the final placings. As of 2016,[ [update]] a combined national televoting and jury result is calculated for each country, and the country which has obtained more points from the public voting following this calculation is deemed to have placed higher.\nPresentation of the votes.\nSince 1957, each country's votes have been announced during a special voting segment as part of the contest's broadcast, with a selected spokesperson assigned to announce the results of their country's vote. This spokesperson is typically well known in their country; previous spokespersons have included former Eurovision artists and presenters. Historically, the announcements were made through telephone lines from the countries of origin, with satellite links employed for the first time in 1994, allowing the spokespersons to be seen visually by the audience and TV spectators.\nScoring is done by both a national jury and a national televote. Each country's jury votes are consecutively added to the totals scoreboard as they are called upon by the contest presenter(s). The scoreboard was historically placed at the side of the stage and updated manually as each country gave their votes; in 1988 a computer graphics scoreboard was introduced. The jury points from 1\u20138 and 10 are displayed on screen and added automatically to the scoreboard, then the country's spokesperson announces which country will receive the 12 points. Once jury points from all countries have been announced, the presenter(s) announce the total public points received for each finalist, with the votes for each country being consolidated and announced as a single value. Since 2019, the public points have been revealed in ascending order based on the jury vote, with the country that received the fewest points from the jury being the first to receive their public points. A full breakdown of the results across all shows is published on the official Eurovision website after the final, including each country's televoting ranking and the votes of its jury and individual jury members. Each country's individual televoting points in the final are typically displayed on-screen by that country's broadcaster following the announcement of the winner.\nBroadcasting.\nParticipating broadcasters are required to air live the semi-final in which they compete, or in the case of the automatic finalists the semi-final in which they are required to vote, and the final, in its entirety; this includes all competing songs, the voting recap containing short clips of the performances, the voting procedure or semi-final qualification reveal, and the reprise of the winning song in the final. Since 1999, broadcasters who wished to do so were given the opportunity to provide advertising during short, non-essential hiatuses in the show's schedule. In exceptional circumstances, such as due to developing emergency situations, participating broadcasters may delay or postpone broadcast of the event. Should a broadcaster fail to air a show as expected in any other scenario they may be subject to sanctions by the EBU. Many broadcasters that are unable to compete have aired the contest in their markets.\nAs broadcasters join and leave the Eurovision feed transmitted by the EBU, the EBU/Eurovision network logo ident (not to be confused with the logo of the song contest itself) is displayed. The accompanying theme tune is the Prelude \"(Marche en rondeau)\" to Marc-Antoine Charpentier's \"Te Deum\". Originally, the same logo was used for both the Eurovision network and the EBU, but they now have two different logos; the latest Eurovision network logo was introduced in 2012, and when the ident is transmitted at the start and end of programmes it is this Eurovision network logo that appears.\nThe EBU now holds the recordings of all but two editions of the contest in its archives, following a project initiated in 2011 to collate footage and related materials of all editions ahead of the event's 60th edition in 2015. The only footage available of the 1956 contest is a Kinescope recording of Lys Assia's reprise of her winning song. No full recording of the 1964 contest is known to exist, with conflicting reports of the fate of any copies that may have survived. Audio recordings of both contests do, however, exist, and some short pieces of footage from both events have survived. Until 2004, the host broadcaster owned the copyright of the contest that they produced, with the EBU owning the copyright of all subsequent editions.\nExpansion of the contest.\nFrom the original seven countries which entered the first contest in 1956, the number of competing countries has steadily grown over time. 18 countries participated in the contest's tenth edition in 1965, and by 1990, 22 countries were regularly competing each year.\nBesides slight modifications to the voting system and other contest rules, no fundamental changes to the contest's format were introduced until the events in Europe in the late 1980s and early 1990s led to the breakup of Yugoslavia, with the subsequent admission into the EBU of the broadcasters of the countries that emerged from the breakup, and to the merger in 1993 of the EBU with its Eastern European counterpart, the International Radio and Television Organisation (OIRT), which further expanded the number of broadcasters by including those from countries of the former Eastern Bloc. These events impacted the contest as they expanded the number of broadcasters eligible to participate with those from new countries.\nPre-selections and relegation.\nBroadcasters from 29 countries registered to take part in the 1993 contest, a figure the EBU considered unable to fit reasonably into a single television show. A pre-selection method was subsequently introduced for the first time in order to reduce the number of competing entries, with the seven new countries from Central and Eastern Europe participating in , held in Ljubljana, Slovenia, one month before the event. Following a vote amongst the seven competing countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia were chosen to head to the contest in Millstreet, Ireland, whilst Estonia, Hungary, Romania and Slovakia were forced to wait another year before being allowed to compete for the first time. A new relegation system was introduced for entry into the 1994 contest, with the lowest-placed countries being forced to sit out the following year's event to be replaced by countries which had not competed in the previous contest. The bottom seven countries in 1993 were required to miss the following year's contest, and were replaced by the four unsuccessful countries in and new entries from Lithuania, Poland, and Russia.\nThis system was used again in 1994 for qualification for the 1995 contest, but a new system was introduced for the 1996 contest, when an audio-only qualification round was held in the months before the contest in Oslo, Norway; this system was primarily introduced in an attempt to appease Germany, one of Eurovision's biggest markets and financial contributors, which would have otherwise been relegated under the previous system. 29 countries competed for 22 places in the main contest alongside the automatically qualified Norwegian hosts. However, Germany would ultimately still miss out, and joined Hungary, Romania, Russia, Denmark, Israel, and Macedonia as one of the seven countries to be absent from the Oslo contest. As of 2025[ [update]] this is the only contest Germany has not participated in. For the 1997 contest, a similar relegation system to that used between 1993 and 1995 was introduced, with each country's average scores in the preceding five contests being used as a measure to determine which countries would be relegated. This was subsequently changed again in 2001, back to the same system used between 1993 and 1995 where only the results from that year's contest would count towards relegation.\nThe \"Big Five\".\nIn 1999, an exemption from relegation was introduced for France, Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom, giving them an automatic right to compete in the 2000 contest and in all subsequent editions. This group, as the highest-paying EBU members which significantly fund the contest each year, subsequently became known as the \"Big Four\" countries. This group was expanded in 2011 when Italy began competing again, becoming the \"Big Five\". Originally brought in to ensure that the financial contributions of the contest's biggest financial backers would not be missed, since the introduction of the semi-finals in 2004 the \"Big Five\" countries have now automatically qualified for the final alongside the host country, and have not been required to compete in the semi-finals.\nThere remains debate on whether this status prejudices the countries' results, based on reported antipathy over their automatic qualification and the potential disadvantage of having spent less time on stage through not competing in the semi-finals; however, this status appears to be more complex given that the results of the \"Big Five\" countries can vary widely. This status has caused consternation from other competing countries, and was cited, among other aspects, as a reason why Turkey had ceased participating after 2012. In response to the criticism on less stage time from these countries, since 2024 the entries from the \"Big Five\" countries, along with the host country, have been performed live in one of the two semi-finals outside of the competition for qualification, a change which was announced as giving these countries \"a fairer playing field\" in the final.\nIntroduction of semi-finals.\nAn influx of new broadcasters applying for the 2003 contest resulted in the introduction of a semi-final from 2004, with the contest becoming a two-day event. The top 10 countries in each year's final would qualify automatically to the following year's final, alongside the \"Big Four\", meaning all other countries would compete in the semi-final to compete for 10 qualification spots. The 2004 contest saw a record 36 countries competing, with new entries from Albania, Andorra, Belarus, and Serbia and Montenegro and the return of previously relegated countries. The format of this semi-final remained similar to the final proper, taking place a few days before the final; following the performances and the voting window, the names of the 10 countries with the highest number of points, which would therefore qualify for the final, were announced at the end of the show, revealed in a random order by the contest's presenters.\nThe single semi-final continued to be held between 2005 and 2007; however, with 42 countries competing in the 2007 contest, that year's semi-final had 28 entries competing for 10 spots in the final. Following criticism over the mainly Central and Eastern European qualifiers at the 2007 event and the poor performance of entries from Western European countries, a second semi-final was subsequently introduced for the 2008 contest, with all countries now competing in one of the two semi-finals, with only the host country and the \"Big Four\", and subsequently the \"Big Five\" from 2011, qualifying automatically. 10 qualification spots would be available in each of the semi-finals, and a new system to split the competing countries between the two semi-finals was introduced based on their geographic location and previous voting patterns, in an attempt to reduce the impact of bloc voting and to make the outcome less predictable.\nEntries and participants.\n The contest has been used as a launching point for artists who went on to achieve worldwide fame, and several of the world's best-selling artists are counted among past Eurovision Song Contest participants and winning artists. ABBA, the winners for Sweden in 1974, have sold an estimated 380 million albums and singles since their contest win brought them to worldwide attention, with their winning song \"Waterloo\" selling over five million records. C\u00e9line Dion's win for Switzerland in 1988 helped launch her international career, particularly in the Anglophone market, and she would go on to sell an estimated 200 million records worldwide. Julio Iglesias was relatively unknown when he represented Spain in 1970 and placed fourth, but worldwide success followed his Eurovision appearance, with an estimated 100 million records sold during his career. Australian-British singer Olivia Newton-John represented the United Kingdom in 1974, placing fourth behind ABBA, but went on to sell an estimated 100 million records, win four Grammy Awards, and star in the critically and commercially successful musical film \"Grease\".\nA number of performers have competed in the contest after having already achieved considerable success. These include winning artists Lulu, Toto Cutugno, and Katrina and the Waves, and other acts that competed such as Nana Mouskouri, Cliff Richard, Baccara, Umberto Tozzi, Plastic Bertrand, t.A.T.u., Las Ketchup, Patricia Kaas, Engelbert Humperdinck, Bonnie Tyler, Gabry Ponte, Flo Rida, and Melody. Many well-known composers and lyricists have penned entries of varying success over the years, including Serge Gainsbourg, Goran Bregovi\u0107, Diane Warren, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Pete Waterman, and Tony Iommi, as well as producers Timbaland and Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo.\nPast participants have contributed to other fields in addition to their music careers. The Netherlands' Annie M.G. Schmidt, lyricist of the first entry performed at Eurovision, has gained a worldwide reputation for her stories and earned the Hans Christian Andersen Award for children's literature. French \"y\u00e9-y\u00e9 girls\" Fran\u00e7oise Hardy and contest winner France Gall are household names of 1960s pop culture, with Hardy also being a pioneer of street style fashion trends and an inspiration for the global youthquake movement. Figures who carved a career in politics and gained international acclaim for humanitarian achievements include contest winner Dana as a two-time Irish presidential candidate and Member of the European Parliament (MEP); Nana Mouskouri as Greek MEP and a UNICEF international goodwill ambassador; contest winner Ruslana as member of Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine's parliament and a figure of the Orange Revolution and Euromaidan protests, who gained global honours for leadership and courage; and North Macedonia's Esma Red\u017eepova as member of political parties and a two-time Nobel Peace Prize nominee.\nCompeting songs have occasionally gone on to become successes for their original performers and other artists, and some of the best-selling singles globally received their first international performances at Eurovision. \"Save Your Kisses for Me\", the winning song for the United Kingdom in 1976 performed by Brotherhood of Man, went on to sell over six million singles, more than any other winning song. \", also known as \", third-placed song for Italy in 1958 performed by Domenico Modugno, is the only Eurovision entry to win a Grammy Award. It was the first Grammy winner for both Record of the Year and Song of the Year and it has since been recorded by various artists, topped the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the United States and achieved combined sales of over 22 million copies worldwide. \"\", runner-up for Spain in 1973 performed by Mocedades, became the first Spanish-language song to reach the top 10 of the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, and the Grammy-nominated \"Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit\", which came eighth for the United Kingdom in 1996 performed by Gina G, sold 790,000 records and achieved success across Europe and the US, reaching number 1 on the UK Singles Chart and peaking at number 12 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100.\nThe turn of the century has also seen numerous competing songs becoming successes. \"Euphoria\", Loreen's winning song for Sweden in 2012, achieved Europe-wide success, reaching number one in several countries and by 2014 had become the most downloaded Eurovision song to date. The video for \"Occidentali's Karma\" by Francesco Gabbani, which placed sixth for Italy in 2017, became the first Eurovision song to reach more than 200 million views on YouTube, while \"\" by Mahmood, the runner-up for Italy in 2019, was the most-streamed Eurovision song on Spotify until it was overtaken by that year's winner for the Netherlands, \"Arcade\" by Duncan Laurence, following viral success on TikTok in late 2020 and early 2021; \"Arcade\" later became the first Eurovision song since \"Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit\" and the first Eurovision winning song since \"Save Your Kisses for Me\" to chart on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, eventually peaking at number 30. The 2021 contest saw the next major breakthrough success from Eurovision, with M\u00e5neskin, that year's winners for Italy with \"\", attracting worldwide attention across their repertoire immediately following their victory.\nJohnny Logan was the first artist to have won multiple contests as a performer, winning for Ireland in 1980 with \"What's Another Year\", written by Shay Healy, and in 1987 with the self-penned \"Hold Me Now\". Logan was also the winning songwriter for Ireland in 1992 with \"Why Me?\" performed by Linda Martin, and has therefore achieved three contest victories as either a performer or writer. Four further songwriters have each written two contest-winning songs: Willy van Hemert, Yves Dessca, Rolf L\u00f8vland, and Brendan Graham. Following their introduction in 2004, Alexander Rybak became the first artist to win multiple Eurovision semi-finals, finishing in first at the second semi-finals for Norway in 2009 and 2018; he remains the only entrant to have done so to date.\nWinners.\n72 songs from 27 countries have won the Eurovision Song Contest as of 2025.[ [update]] Ireland and Sweden have recorded the most wins with seven each, followed by France, Luxembourg, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands with five each. Of the 52 countries to have taken part, 24 have yet to win. Only one contest has featured multiple winners in a single year: in 1969, four entries finished the contest with an equal number of points and were all declared winners, as allowed by the rules at the time. A majority of winning songs have been performed in English, particularly since the rule requiring native-language songs was abolished in 1999: since then, only seven winning songs have been performed either fully or partially in a language other than English.\nOnly one country has won the contest on its first appearance: Serbia won in 2007 with its first participation as an independent country; since Switzerland had won the inaugural contest in 1956 with its second entry in that contest. Other countries have had relatively short waits before winning their first contest, with Ukraine winning on its second appearance in 2004 and Latvia winning with its third entry in 2002. Conversely, some countries have had considerable gaps between their debut entry and their first win: Greece recorded its first win in 2005, 31 years after its first appearance, while Finland ended a 45-year losing streak in 2006. Portugal holds the record for the most contest entries prior to its first win in 2017, coming 53 years after it first competed. Other countries have also had large gaps between their winning entries: Switzerland went 32 years between winning in 1956 and 1988, and a further 36 years between then and winning in 2024; Denmark had a 37-year gap between its wins in 1963 and 2000; the Netherlands had a 44-year gap between its wins in 1975 and 2019; and Austria achieved its second win in 2014, 48 years after its first win in 1966.\nThe United Kingdom holds the record for runner-up placements, having finished second sixteen times. Norway has finished last on a record twelve occasions, including scoring \"nul points\" four times; it shares the record for receiving this score with Austria. Countries have recorded back-to-back wins on four occasions: Spain in 1968 and 1969; Luxembourg in 1972 and 1973; Israel in 1978 and 1979; and Ireland in 1992, 1993, and 1994, becoming the first and only country to date to win three times in a row. Additionally, Ireland later won in 1996, giving it a record four wins in the span of five years.\nThe winning artist(s), songwriter(s), and broadcaster, receive a medal or a trophy, which since 2008 has followed a standard design: a handmade trophy of sandblasted glass with painted details in the shape of a 1950s-style microphone, designed by Kjell Engman of the Swedish-based glassworks Kosta Boda. The award is typically presented by the previous year's winner; others who have handed out the award in the past include representatives from the host broadcaster or the EBU, and politicians; in 2007, the fictional character Joulupukki (the original Santa Claus in Finland) presented the award to the winner Marija \u0160erifovi\u0107.\nInterval acts and guest appearances.\nAlongside the song contest and appearances from local and international personalities, performances from non-competing artists and musicians have been included since the first edition, and have become a staple of the live show. These performances have varied widely, previously featuring music, art, dance, and circus performances, and past participants are regularly invited to perform, with the reigning champion traditionally returning each year to perform the previous year's winning song.\nThe contest's opening performance and the main interval act, held following the competing song and before the announcement of the voting results, has become a memorable part of the contest and has included both internationally known artists and local stars. Contest organisers have previously used these performances as a way to explore their country's culture and history, such as in \"4,000 Years of Greek Song\" at the 2006 contest held in Greece; other performances have been more comedic in nature, featuring parody and humour, as was the case with \"Love Love Peace Peace\" in 2016, a humorous ode to the history and spectacle of the contest itself. \"Riverdance\", which later became one of the most successful dance productions in the world, first began as the interval performance at the 1994 contest in Ireland; the seven-minute performance of traditional Irish music and dance was later expanded into a full stage show that has been seen by over 25 million people worldwide and provided a launchpad for its lead dancers Michael Flatley and Jean Butler.\nAmong other artists who have performed in a non-competitive manner are Danish Europop group Aqua in 2001, Finnish cello metal band Apocalyptica in 2007, Russian pop duo t.A.T.u. in 2009, and American entertainers Justin Timberlake and Madonna in 2016 and 2019 respectively. Other notable artists, including Charlie Rivel (1973), Cirque du Soleil (2009), Alexandrov Ensemble (2009), Vienna Boys' Choir (1967 and 2015), and Fire of Anatolia (2004), also performed on the Eurovision stage, and there have been guest appearances from well-known faces from outside the world of music, including actors, athletes, and serving astronauts and cosmonauts. Guest performances have been used as a channel in response to global events happening concurrently with the contest. The 1999 contest in Israel closed with all competing acts performing a rendition of Israel's 1979 winning song \"Hallelujah\" as a tribute to the victims of the Kosovo War, a dance performance entitled \"The Grey People\" in 2016's first semi-final was devoted to the 2015 European migrant crisis, the 2022 contest featured known anti-war songs \"Fragile\", \"People Have the Power\", and \"Give Peace a Chance\" in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine that year, and an interval act in 2023's first semi-final alluded to the refugee crisis caused by the aforementioned invasion.\nCriticism and controversy.\nThe contest has been the subject of considerable criticism regarding both its musical content and what has been reported to be a political element to the event, and several controversial moments have been witnessed over the course of its history. British historian Tony Judt wrote in 2006 that the contest in the 1970s and 1980s became \"the most widely celebrated object of ridicule\" on public television, because it \"was so stunningly banal in conception and execution as to defy parody.\" Judt dismissed the artists who entered the contest as \"a stream of inept performers\" who would in most cases return to \"the obscurity from whence they briefly emerged.\"\nMusical style and presentation.\nCriticism has been levied against the musical quality of competing entries, with a perception that certain music styles seen as being presented more often than others in an attempt to appeal to as many potential voters as possible among the international audience. By the 2000s, power ballads, folk rhythms, and bubblegum pop have been considered staples of the contest, leading to allegations that the event has become formulaic. Other traits in competing entries which have regularly been mocked by media and viewers include an abundance of key changes and lyrics about love and/or peace, as well as the pronunciation of English by non-native users of the language. Given Eurovision is principally a television show, over the years competing performances have attempted to attract the viewers' attention through means other than music, and elaborate lighting displays, pyrotechnics, and extravagant on-stage theatrics and costumes having become a common sight; criticism of these tactics have been levied as being a method of distracting the viewer from the weak musical quality of some of the competing entries.\nWhile many of these traits are ridiculed in the media and elsewhere, for others these traits are celebrated and considered an integral part of what makes the contest appealing. Although many of the competing acts each year will fall into some of the categories above, the contest has seen a diverse range of musical styles in its history, including rock, heavy metal, jazz, country, electronic, R&amp;B, hip hop, and avant-garde.\nPolitical controversies.\nAs artists and songs ultimately represent a country, the contest has seen several controversial moments where political tensions between competing countries as a result of frozen conflicts, and in some cases open warfare, are reflected in the performances and voting.\nThe conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan has affected the contest on numerous occasions. Conflicts between the two countries at Eurovision escalated quickly since both countries began competing in the late 2000s, resulting in fines and disciplinary action for both countries' broadcasters over political stunts, and a forced change of title for one competing song due to allegations of political subtext. Interactions between Russia and Ukraine in the contest had originally been positive, but as political relations soured between the two countries so, too, have relations at Eurovision become more complex. Complaints were levied against the winning song for Ukraine in 2016, \"1944\", whose lyrics referenced the deportation of the Crimean Tatars, but which the Russian delegation claimed had a greater political meaning in light of Russia's annexation of Crimea. As Ukraine prepared to host the following year's contest, Russia's selected representative, Yuliya Samoylova, was barred from entering the country due to having previously entered Crimea illegally according to Ukrainian law. Channel One Russia eventually pulled out of the contest after offers for Samoylova to perform remotely were refused by the broadcaster, resulting in the EBU reprimanding the Public Broadcasting Company of Ukraine (UA:PBC). In the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine and subsequent protests from other participating countries, Russia was barred from competing in the 2022 contest, which Ukraine went on to win.\nThe planned entry from Georgia in 2009, \"We Don't Wanna Put In\", caused controversy as the lyrics appeared to criticise Vladimir Putin, in a move seen as opposition to the then-Russian prime minister in the aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War. After requests by the EBU for changes to the lyrics were refused, the Georgian Public Broadcaster (GPB) subsequently withdrew from the event. The planned entry from Belarus in 2021, \"Ya nauchu tebya (I'll Teach You)\", also caused controversy in the wake of demonstrations against disputed election results, resulting in the Belarusian Television and Radio Company (BTRC) being disqualified when the aforementioned song and another potential song were deemed to breach the contest's rules on neutrality and politicisation.\nIsrael's participation in the contest has resulted in several controversial moments in the past, with the country's first appearance in 1973, less than a year after the Munich massacre, resulting in an increased security presence at the venue in Luxembourg City. Its first win in 1978 proved controversial for Arab states broadcasting the contest which would typically cut to advertisements when Israel performed due to a lack of recognition of the country, and when it became apparent Israel would win, many of these broadcasters cut the feed before the end of the voting. Broadcasters from Arab states which are eligible to compete have largely not participated, with Morocco the only Arab state to have entered Eurovision, competing for the first, and to date only time, in 1980 when Israel was absent.\nIsrael's participation has been criticised by those who oppose current government policies in the state as well as on the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict, with calls raised by various political groups for a boycott ahead of the 2019 contest in Tel Aviv, including proponents of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement in response to the country's policies towards Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as groups who take issue with perceived pinkwashing in Israel. Others campaigned against a boycott, asserting that any cultural boycott would be antithetical to advancing peace in the region. Following the outbreak of the Gaza war in October 2023, the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict once again impacted the contest, with renewed calls for Israel's exclusion ahead of the 2024 event. \"Hurricane\", Israel's entry for that year's contest, was accepted by the EBU, although it was required to undergo rewrites as the EBU objected to the political nature of the original lyrics, which made reference to the 7 October attacks. Israel's second-place finish and win in the public vote in 2025 was contested by several participating countries.\nPolitical and geographical voting.\nThe contest has been described as containing political elements in its voting process, a perception that countries will give votes more frequently and in higher quantities to other countries based on political relationships, rather than the musical merits of the songs themselves. Numerous studies and academic papers have been written on this subject, which have corroborated that certain countries form \"clusters\" or \"cliques\" by frequently voting in the same way; one study concludes that voting blocs can play a crucial role in deciding the winner of the contest, with evidence that on at least two occasions bloc voting was a pivotal factor in the vote for the winning song. Other views on these \"blocs\" argue that certain countries will allocate high points to others based on similar musical tastes, shared cultural links and a high degree of similarity and mutual intelligibility between languages, and are therefore more likely to appreciate and vote for the competing songs from these countries based on these factors, rather than political relationships specifically.&lt;ref name=\"Spierdijk/Vellekoop\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Analysis on other voting patterns have revealed examples which indicate voting preferences among countries based on shared religion, as well as \"patriotic voting\", particularly since the introduction of televoting in 1997, where foreign nationals vote for their country of origin.\nVoting patterns in the contest have been reported by news publishers, including \"The Economist\", \"The Times\", and \"BBC News\". Criticism of the voting system was at its highest in the mid-2000s, resulting in a number of calls for countries to boycott the contest over reported voting biases, particularly following the 2007 contest where Eastern European countries occupied the top 15 places in the final and dominated the qualifying spaces. The poor performance of the entries from more traditional Eurovision countries had subsequently been discussed in European national parliaments. In response to this criticism, the EBU introduced a second semi-final in 2008, with countries split based on geographic proximity and voting history, and juries of music professionals were reintroduced in 2009, in an effort to reduce the impacts of bloc voting.\nLGBTQ visibility.\nEurovision has had a long-held fan base in the LGBTQ community, and contest organisers have actively worked to include these fans in the event since the 1990s. Paul Oscar became the contest's first openly gay artist to compete when he represented Iceland in 1997. Dana International, representing Israel in 1998, was the contest's first trans performer, and became the first LGBTQ artist to win the contest. In 2021, Nikkie de Jager became the first trans person to host the contest.\nSeveral open members of the LGBTQ community have since gone on to compete and win: Conchita Wurst, the drag persona of openly gay Thomas Neuwirth, won for Austria in 2014. Marija \u0160erifovi\u0107, who won for Serbia in 2007, subsequently came out publicly as a lesbian in 2013. Openly bisexual performer Duncan Laurence was the winner for the Netherlands in 2019; and rock band M\u00e5neskin, which won for Italy in 2021, features openly lesbian Victoria De Angelis as its bassist, who at the time of the contest also identified as bisexual. Nemo, who represented Switzerland in 2024, was the first non-binary winner.\nPast competing songs and performances have included references and allusions to same-sex relationships; \"Nous les amoureux\", the winning song for Luxembourg in 1961, contained references to the difficulties faced by a homosexual relationship; Krista Siegfrids' performance of \"Marry Me\" for Finland in 2013 included a same-sex kiss with one of her female backing dancers; and Ryan O'Shaughnessy's performance of \"Together\" for Ireland in 2018 featured two male dancers portraying a same-sex relationship. Drag performers, such as Verka Serduchka for Ukraine in 2007, DQ for Denmark in 2007, Sestre for Slovenia in 2002, have appeared, including Wurst winning in 2014.\nVarious political ideologies across Europe have clashed in the Eurovision setting, particularly on LGBTQ rights. Dana International's selection for the 1998 contest was marked by objections and death threats from orthodox religious sections of Israeli society, and at the contest her accommodation was reportedly in the only hotel in Birmingham with bulletproof windows. (TRT) from Turkey, once a regular participant in the contest and a one-time winner, first pulled out of the contest in 2013, citing dissatisfaction in the voting rules; more recently when asked about returning to the contest it has cited LGBTQ performances as another reason for its continued boycott, refusing to broadcast the 2013 event over Finland's same sex kiss. LGBTQ visibility in the contest has been cited as a deciding factor for the non-participation of (MTVA) from Hungary since 2020, although no official reason was given. The rise of anti-LGBTQ rhetoric in Europe led to a marked increase in booing from contest audiences in protest, particularly since the introduction of a \"gay propaganda\" law in Russia in 2013. Conchita Wurst's win was met with criticism on the Russian political stage, with several conservative politicians voicing displeasure in the result. Clashes on LGBTQ visibility in the contest have occurred in countries which do not compete, such as in China, where broadcasting rights were terminated during the 2018 contest due to censorship of \"abnormal sexual relationships and behaviours\" that went against Chinese broadcasting guidelines.\nCultural influence.\nThe Eurovision Song Contest has amassed a global following and sees annual audience figures of between 100 and 200 million in the 21st century, though figures as high as 700 million for the 1980s were reported by some sources. The contest has become a cultural influence worldwide since its first years. It is regularly described as having kitsch appeal, and is included as a topic of parody in television sketches and in stage performances at the Edinburgh Fringe and Melbourne Comedy festivals amongst others. Several films have been created which celebrate the contest, including 1972 Spanish musical , Eytan Fox's 2013 Israeli comedy \"Cupcakes\", and Netflix's 2020 musical comedy, \"\", produced with backing from the EBU and starring Will Ferrell and Rachel McAdams.\nEurovision has a large online following and multiple independent websites, news blogs and fan clubs are dedicated to the event. One of the oldest and largest Eurovision fan clubs is the (OGAE), founded in 1984 in Finland and grew into a network of over 40 national branches worldwide. National branches regularly host events to promote and celebrate Eurovision, and several participating broadcasters work closely with these branches when preparing their entries.\nIn the run-up to each year's contest, smaller events are regularly hosted in several countries between the conclusion of the national selection shows in March and the contest proper in May, known as the \"pre-parties\". These events typically feature the artists which will go on to compete at that year's contest, and consist of performances at a venue and meet-and-greets with fans and the press. \"Eurovision in Concert\", held annually in Amsterdam, was one of the first of these events to be created, holding its first edition in 2008. Other events held regularly include the \"London Eurovision Party\" in London and \"PrePartyES\" in Madrid. Several community events have been held virtually, particularly since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in Europe in 2020, among these \"EurovisionAgain\", an initiative where fans watched and discussed past contests in sync on YouTube and other social media platforms. Launched during the first COVID-19 lockdowns, the event subsequently became a top trend on Twitter across Europe and facilitated over in donations for UK-based LGBTQ charities.\nSpecial events and related competitions.\nSeveral anniversary events, and related contests under the \"Eurovision Live Events\" brand, have been organised by the EBU with its member broadcasters. In addition, participating broadcasters have occasionally commissioned special Eurovision programmes for their home audiences, and a number of other imitator contests have been developed outside of the EBU framework, on both a national and international level.\nThe EBU has held several events to mark selected anniversaries in the contest's history: \"Songs of Europe\", held in 1981 to celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary, had live performances and video recordings of all Eurovision Song Contest winners up to 1981; ' was organised in 2005 to celebrate the event's fiftieth anniversary, and featured a contest to determine the most popular song from among 14 selected entries from the contest's first 50 years; and in 2015 the event's sixtieth anniversary was marked by \"Eurovision Song Contest's Greatest Hits\", a concert of performances by past Eurovision artists and video montages of performances and footage from previous contests. Following the cancellation of the 2020 contest, the EBU organised a special non-competitive broadcast, ', which provided a showcase for the songs that would have taken part in the competition.\nOther contests organised by the EBU include Eurovision Young Musicians, a classical music competition for European musicians between the ages of 12 and 21; Eurovision Young Dancers, a dance competition for non-professional performers between the ages of 16 and 21; Eurovision Choir, a choral competition for non-professional European choirs produced in partnership with the Interkultur Foundation and modelled after the World Choir Games; and the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, a similar song contest for singers aged between 9 and 14 representing their countries. The Eurovision Dance Contest was an event featuring pairs of dancers performing ballroom and Latin dancing, which took place for two editions, in 2007 and 2008.\nSimilar international music competitions have been organised externally to the EBU. The Sopot International Song Festival has been held annually since 1961; between 1977 and 1980, under the patronage of the International Radio and Television Organisation (OIRT), an Eastern European broadcasting union similar to the EBU, it was rebranded as the Intervision Song Contest. An Ibero-American contest, the OTI Festival, was held by the (OTI) between 1972 and 2000 among hispanophone and lusophone broadcasters in Europe and the Americas; and a contest for countries and autonomous regions with Turkic links, the Turkvision Song Contest, has been organised since 2013. Similarly, an adaptation of the contest for artists in the United States, the \"American Song Contest\", was held in 2022 and featured songs representing U.S. states and territories. Further adaptations of the contest were also announced for Canada and Latin America in 2022, though development on the former had been halted by 2023. An adaptation for Asia entered development in 2016.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9955", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9955", "title": "Nitrox", "text": "Breathing gas, mixture of nitrogen and oxygen\nNitrox refers to any gas mixture composed (excepting trace gases) of nitrogen and oxygen. It is usually used for mixtures that contain less than 78% nitrogen by volume. In the usual application, underwater diving, nitrox is normally distinguished from air and handled differently. The most common use of nitrox mixtures containing oxygen in higher proportions than atmospheric air is in scuba diving, where the reduced partial pressure of nitrogen is advantageous in reducing nitrogen uptake in the body's tissues, thereby extending the practicable underwater dive time by reducing the decompression requirement, or reducing the risk of decompression sickness (also known as \"the bends\"). The two most common recreational diving nitrox mixes are 32% and 36% oxygen, which have maximum operating depths of about 110 feet (34 meters) and 95 feet (29 meters) respectively.\nNitrox is used to a lesser extent in surface-supplied diving, as these advantages are reduced by the more complex logistical requirements for nitrox compared to the use of simple low-pressure compressors for breathing gas supply. Nitrox can also be used in hyperbaric treatment of decompression illness, usually at pressures where pure oxygen would be hazardous. Nitrox is not a safer gas than compressed air in all respects; although its use can reduce the risk of decompression sickness, it increases the risks of oxygen toxicity and fire.\nThough not generally referred to as nitrox, an oxygen-enriched air mixture is routinely provided at normal surface ambient pressure as oxygen therapy to patients with compromised respiration and circulation.\nPhysiological effects under pressure.\nDecompression benefits.\nReducing the proportion of nitrogen by increasing the proportion of oxygen reduces the risk of decompression sickness for the same dive profile, or allows extended dive times without increasing the need for decompression stops for the same risk. The significant aspect of extended no-stop time when using nitrox mixtures is reduced risk in a situation where breathing gas supply is compromised, as the diver can make a direct ascent to the surface with an acceptably low risk of decompression sickness. The exact values of the extended no-stop times vary depending on the decompression model used to derive the tables, but as an approximation, it is based on the partial pressure of nitrogen at the dive depth. This principle can be used to calculate an equivalent air depth (EAD) with the same partial pressure of nitrogen as the mix to be used, and this depth is less than the actual dive depth for oxygen enriched mixtures. The equivalent air depth is used with air decompression tables to calculate decompression obligation and no-stop times. The Goldman decompression model predicts a significant risk reduction by using nitrox (more so than the PADI tables suggest).\nNitrogen narcosis.\nControlled tests have not shown breathing nitrox to reduce the effects of nitrogen narcosis, as oxygen seems to have similarly narcotic properties under pressure to nitrogen; thus one should not expect a reduction in narcotic effects due only to the use of nitrox. Nonetheless, there are people in the diving community who insist that they feel reduced narcotic effects at depths breathing nitrox. This may be due to a dissociation of the subjective and behavioural effects of narcosis. Although oxygen appears chemically more narcotic at the surface, relative narcotic effects at depth have never been studied in detail, but it is known that different gases produce different narcotic effects as depth increases. Helium has no narcotic effect, but results in HPNS when breathed at high pressures, which does not happen with gases that have greater narcotic potency. However, because of risks associated with oxygen toxicity, divers do not usually use nitrox at greater depths where more pronounced narcosis symptoms are more likely to occur. For deep diving, trimix or heliox gases are typically used; these gases contain helium to reduce the amount of narcotic gases in the mixture.\nOxygen toxicity.\nDiving with and handling nitrox raise a number of potentially fatal dangers due to the high partial pressure of oxygen (ppO2). Nitrox is not a deep-diving gas mixture owing to the increased proportion of oxygen, which becomes toxic when breathed at high pressure. For example, the maximum operating depth of nitrox with 36% oxygen, a popular recreational diving mix, is to ensure a maximum ppO2 of no more than . The exact value of the maximum allowed ppO2 and maximum operating depth varies depending on factors such as the training agency, the type of dive, the breathing equipment and the level of surface support, with professional divers sometimes being allowed to breathe higher ppO2 than those recommended to recreational divers.\nTo dive safely with nitrox, the diver must learn good buoyancy control, a vital part of scuba diving in its own right, and a disciplined approach to preparing, planning and executing a dive to ensure that the ppO2 is known, and the maximum operating depth is not exceeded. Many dive shops, dive operators, and gas blenders (individuals trained to blend gases) require the diver to present a nitrox certification card before selling nitrox to divers.Additionally, it is strongly encouraged for divers to confirm the percentage of oxygen in their tank before every dive, regardless of the specified amount on their tank. This is done by expelling a small amount of air from the diver's tank into an oxygen analyzer. This is to further limit the possibility of oxygen toxicity due to errors in previous testing.\nSome training agencies, such as PADI and Technical Diving International, teach the use of two depth limits to protect against oxygen toxicity. The shallower depth is called the \"maximum operating depth\" and is reached when the partial pressure of oxygen in the breathing gas reaches . The deeper depth, called the \"contingency depth\", is reached when the partial pressure reaches . Diving at or beyond this level exposes the diver to a greater risk of central nervous system (CNS) oxygen toxicity. This can be extremely dangerous since its onset is often without warning and can lead to drowning, as the regulator may be spat out during convulsions, which occur in conjunction with sudden unconsciousness (general seizure induced by oxygen toxicity).\nDivers trained to use nitrox may memorise the acronym VENTID-C or sometimes ConVENTID, (which stands for Vision (blurriness), Ears (ringing sound), Nausea, Twitching, Irritability, Dizziness, and Convulsions). However, evidence from non-fatal oxygen convulsions indicates that most convulsions are not preceded by any warning symptoms at all. Further, many of the suggested warning signs are also symptoms of nitrogen narcosis, and so may lead to misdiagnosis by a diver. A solution to either is to ascend to a shallower depth.\nCarbon dioxide retention.\nUse of nitrox may cause a reduced ventilatory response, and when breathing dense gas at the deeper limits of the usable range, this may result in carbon dioxide retention when exercise levels are high, with an increased risk of loss of consciousness.\nOther effects.\nThere is anecdotal evidence that the use of nitrox reduces post-dive fatigue, particularly in older and or obese divers; however a double-blind study to test this found no statistically significant reduction in reported fatigue. There was, however, some suggestion that post-dive fatigue is due to sub-clinical decompression sickness (DCS) (i.e. micro bubbles in the blood insufficient to cause symptoms of DCS); the fact that the study mentioned was conducted in a dry chamber with an ideal decompression profile may have been sufficient to reduce sub-clinical DCS and prevent fatigue in both nitrox and air divers. In 2008, a study was published using wet divers at the same depth no statistically significant reduction in reported fatigue was seen.\nFurther studies with a number of different dive profiles, and also different levels of exertion, would be necessary to fully investigate this issue. For example, there is much better scientific evidence that breathing high-oxygen gases increases exercise tolerance, during aerobic exertion. Though even moderate exertion while breathing from the regulator is a relatively uncommon occurrence in recreational scuba, as divers usually try to minimize it in order to conserve gas, episodes of exertion while regulator-breathing do occasionally occur in recreational diving. Examples are surface-swimming a distance to a boat or beach after surfacing, where residual \"safety\" cylinder gas is often used freely, since the remainder will be wasted anyway when the dive is completed, and unplanned contingencies due to currents or buoyancy problems. It is possible that these so-far un-studied situations have contributed to some of the positive reputation of nitrox.\nA 2010 study using critical flicker fusion frequency and perceived fatigue criteria found that diver alertness after a dive on nitrox was significantly better than after an air dive.\nUses.\nUnderwater diving.\nEnriched Air Nitrox, nitrox with an oxygen content above 21%, is mainly used in scuba diving to reduce the proportion of nitrogen in the breathing gas mixture. The main benefit is reduced decompression risk. To a considerably lesser extent it is also used in surface supplied diving, where the logistics are relatively complex, similar to the use of other diving gas mixtures like heliox and trimix.\nTraining and certification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Recreational nitrox certification (Nitrox diver) allows the diver to use a single nitrox gas mixture with 40% or less oxygen by volume on a dive without obligatory decompression. The reason for using nitrox on this type of dive profile can be to extend the no-decompression limit, and for shorter dives, to reduce the decompression stress. The course is short, with a theory module on the risks of oxygen toxicity and the calculation of maximum operating depth, and a practical module of generally two dives using nitrox. It is one of the most popular further training programmes for entry level divers as it makes longer dives possible at a large number of popular sites. Gases suitable for this application may be referred to as recreational nitrox.\nAdvanced nitrox certification (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Advanced nitrox diver) requires competence to carry two nitrox mixtures in separate scuba sets, and to use the richer mix for accelerated decompression at the end of the dive, switching gases underwater at the correct planned depth and selecting the new gas on the dive computer if one is carried. For the purposes of the certification any mixture from air to nominally 100% oxygen may be used, though at least one agency prefers to limit oxygen fraction to 80% as they consider this has a lower risk for acute oxygen toxicity.\nTherapeutic recompression.\nNitrox50 is used as one of the options in the first stages of therapeutic recompression using the Comex therapeutic table CX 30 for treatment of vestibular or general decompression sickness. Nitrox is breathed at 30\u00a0msw and 24\u00a0msw and the ascents from these depths to the next stop. At 18\u00a0m the gas is switched to oxygen for the rest of the treatment.\nMedicine, mountaineering and unpressurised aircraft.\nThe use of oxygen at high altitudes or as oxygen therapy may be as supplementary oxygen, added to the inspired air, which would technically be a use of nitrox, blended on site, but this is not normally referred to as such, as the gas provided for the purpose is oxygen.\nTerminology.\nNitrox is known by many names: Enriched\u00a0Air\u00a0Nitrox, Oxygen\u00a0Enriched\u00a0Air, Nitrox, EANx or Safe\u00a0Air. Since the word is a compound contraction or coined word and not an acronym, it should not be written in all upper case characters as \"NITROX\", but may be initially capitalized when referring to specific mixtures such as Nitrox32, which contains 68% nitrogen and 32% oxygen. When one figure is stated, it refers to the oxygen percentage, not the nitrogen percentage. The original convention, Nitrox68/32 became shortened as the first figure is redundant.\nThe term \"nitrox\" was originally used to refer to the breathing gas in a seafloor habitat where the oxygen has to be kept to a lower fraction than in air to avoid long term oxygen toxicity problems. It was later used by Dr Morgan Wells of NOAA for mixtures with an oxygen fraction higher than air, and has become a generic term for binary mixtures of nitrogen and oxygen with any oxygen fraction, and in the context of recreational and technical diving, now usually refers to a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen with more than 21% oxygen. \"Enriched Air Nitrox\" or \"EAN\", and \"Oxygen Enriched Air\" are used to emphasize richer than air mixtures. In \"EANx\", the \"x\" was originally the x of nitrox, but has come to indicate the percentage of oxygen in the mix and is replaced by a number when the percentage is known; for example, a 40% oxygen mix is called EAN40. The two most popular blends are EAN32 and EAN36, developed by NOAA for scientific diving, and also named Nitrox I and Nitrox II, respectively, or Nitrox68/32 and Nitrox64/36. These two mixtures were first utilized to the depth and oxygen limits for scientific diving designated by NOAA at the time.\nThe term Oxygen Enriched Air (OEN) was accepted by the (American) scientific diving community, but although it is probably the most unambiguous and simply descriptive term yet proposed, it was resisted by the recreational diving community, sometimes in favour of less appropriate terminology.\nIn its early days of introduction to non-technical divers, nitrox has occasionally also been known by detractors by less complimentary terms, such as \"devil gas\" or \"voodoo gas\" (a term now sometimes used with pride).\nAmerican Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) uses the term \"SafeAir\", which they define as any oxygen-enriched air mixture with O2 concentrations between 22% and 50% that meet their gas quality and handling specifications, and specifically claim that these mixtures are safer than normally produced breathing air for the end user not envolved to the mix production which. Considering the complexities and hazards of mixing, handling, analyzing, and using oxygen-enriched air, this name is considered inappropriate by those who consider that it is not inherently \"safe\", but merely has decompression advantages.\nMOD.\nMaximum Operating Depth (MOD) is the maximum safe depth at which a given nitrox mixture can be used. MOD depends on the allowed partial pressure of oxygen, which is related to exposure time and the acceptable risk assumed for central nervous system oxygen toxicity. Acceptable maximum ppO2 varies depending on the application:\nHigher values are used by commercial and military divers in special circumstances, often when the diver uses surface supplied breathing apparatus, or for treatment in a chamber, where the airway is relatively secure.\nChoice of mixture.\nThe two most common recreational diving nitrox mixes contain 32% and 36% oxygen, which have maximum operating depths (MODs) of and respectively when limited to a maximum partial pressure of oxygen of . Divers may calculate an equivalent air depth to determine their decompression requirements or may use nitrox tables or a nitrox-capable dive computer.\nNitrox with more than 40% oxygen is uncommon within recreational diving. There are two main reasons for this: the first is that all pieces of diving equipment that come into contact with mixes containing higher proportions of oxygen, particularly at high pressure, need special cleaning and servicing to reduce the risk of fire. The second reason is that richer mixes extend the time the diver can stay underwater without needing decompression stops far further than the duration permitted by the capacity of typical diving cylinders. For example, based on the PADI nitrox recommendations, the maximum operating depth for EAN45 would be and the maximum dive time available at this depth even with EAN36 is nearly 1 hour 15 minutes: a diver with a breathing rate of 20 litres per minute using twin 10-litre, 230-bar (about double 85 cu. ft.) cylinders would have completely emptied the cylinders after 1 hour 14 minutes at this depth.\nUse of nitrox mixtures containing 50% to 80% oxygen is common in technical diving as decompression gas, which by virtue of its lower partial pressure of inert gases such as nitrogen and helium, allows for more efficient (faster) elimination of these gases from the tissues than leaner oxygen mixtures.\nIn deep open circuit technical diving, where hypoxic gases are breathed during the bottom portion of the dive, a Nitrox mix with 50% or less oxygen called a \"travel mix\" is sometimes breathed during the beginning of the descent in order to avoid hypoxia. Normally, however, the most oxygen-lean of the diver's decompression gases would be used for this purpose, since descent time spent reaching a depth where bottom mix is no longer hypoxic is normally small, and the distance between this depth and the MOD of any nitrox decompression gas is likely to be very short, if it occurs at all.\nBest mix.\nThe composition of a nitrox mix can be optimized for a given planned dive profile. This is termed \"Best mix\", for the dive, and provides the maximum no-decompression time compatible with acceptable oxygen exposure. An acceptable maximum partial pressure of oxygen is selected based on depth and planned bottom time, and this value is used to calculate the oxygen content of the best mix for the dive:\nformula_1\nProduction.\nThere are several methods of production:\nCylinder markings to identify contents.\nAny diving cylinder containing a blend of gasses other than standard air is required by most diver training organizations, and some national governments, to be clearly marked to indicate the current gas mixture. In practice it is common to use a printed adhesive label to indicate the type of gas (in this case nitrox), and to add a temporary label to specify the analysis of the current mix.\nRegional standards and conventions.\nEuropean Union.\nWithin the EU, valves with M26x2 outlet thread are recommended for cylinders with increased oxygen content. Regulators for use with these cylinders require compatible connectors, and are not directly connectable with cylinders for compressed air.\nGermany.\nA nitrox cylinder is specially cleaned and identified. According to EN 144-3 the cylinder colour is overall white with the letter N on opposite sides of the cylinder. The fraction of oxygen in the bottle is checked after filling and marked on the cylinder.\nSouth Africa.\nSouth African National Standard 10019:2008 specifies the colour of all scuba cylinders as Golden yellow with French gray shoulder. This applies to all underwater breathing gases except medical oxygen, which must be carried in cylinders that are Black with a White shoulder. Nitrox cylinders must be identified by a transparent, self-adhesive label with green lettering, fitted below the shoulder. In effect this is green lettering on a yellow cylinder, with a gray shoulder. The composition of the gas must also be specified on the label. In practice this is done by a small additional self-adhesive label marked with the measured oxygen fraction, which is changed when a new mix is filled.\nThe 2021 revision of SANS 10019 changed the colour specification to Light navy grey for the shoulder, and a different label specification which includes hazard symbols for high-pressure and oxidising materials.\nUnited States.\nEvery nitrox cylinder should also have a sticker stating whether or not the cylinder is \"oxygen clean\" and suitable for partial pressure blending. Any oxygen-clean cylinder may have any mix up to 100% oxygen inside. If by some accident an oxygen-clean cylinder is filled at a station that does not supply gas to oxygen-clean standards it is then considered contaminated and must be re-cleaned before a gas containing more than 40% oxygen may again be added. Cylinders marked as 'not oxygen clean' may only be filled with oxygen-enriched air mixtures from membrane or stick blending systems where the gas is mixed before being added to the cylinder, and to an oxygen fraction not exceeding 40% by volume.\nHazards.\nNitrox can be a hazard to the blender and to the user, for different reasons.\nFire and toxic cylinder contamination from oxygen reactions.\nPartial pressure blending using pure oxygen decanted into the cylinder before topping up with air may involve very high oxygen fractions and oxygen partial pressures during the decanting process, which constitute a relatively high fire hazard. This procedure requires care and precautions by the operator, and decanting equipment and cylinders which are clean for oxygen service, but the equipment is relatively simple and inexpensive. Partial pressure blending using pure oxygen is often used to provide nitrox on live-aboard dive boats, but it is also used in some dive shops and clubs.\nAny gas which contains a significantly larger percentage of oxygen than air is a fire hazard, and such gases can react with hydrocarbons or lubricants and sealing materials inside the filling system to produce toxic gases, even if a fire is not apparent. Some organisations exempt equipment from oxygen-clean standards if the oxygen fraction is limited to 40% or less.\nAmong recreational training agencies, only ANDI subscribes to the guideline of requiring oxygen cleaning for equipment used with more than 23% oxygen fraction. The USCG, NOAA, U.S. Navy, OSHA, and the other recreational training agencies accept the limit as 40% as no accident or incident has been known to occur when this guideline has been properly applied. Tens of thousands of recreational divers are trained each year and the overwhelming majority of these divers are taught the \"over 40% rule\". Most nitrox fill stations which supply pre-mixed nitrox will fill cylinders with mixtures below 40% without certification of cleanliness for oxygen service. Luxfer cylinders specify oxygen cleaning for all mixtures exceeding 23.5% oxygen.\nThe following references for oxygen cleaning specifically cite the \"over 40%\" guideline that has been in widespread use since the 1960s, and consensus at the 1992 Enriched Air Workshop was to accept that guideline and continue the status quo.\nMuch of the confusion appears to be a result of misapplying PVHO (pressure vessel for human occupancy) guidelines which prescribe a maximum ambient oxygen content of 25% when a human is sealed into a pressure vessel (chamber). The concern here is for a fire hazard to a living person who could be trapped in an oxygen-rich burning environment.\nOf the three commonly applied methods of producing enriched air mixes \u2013 continuous blending, partial pressure blending, and membrane separation systems \u2013 only partial pressure blending would require the valve and cylinder components to be oxygen cleaned for mixtures with less than 40% oxygen. The other two methods ensure that the equipment is never subjected to greater than 40% oxygen content.\nIn a fire, the pressure in a gas cylinder rises in direct proportion to its absolute temperature. If the internal pressure exceeds the mechanical limitations of the cylinder and there are no means to safely vent the pressurized gas to the atmosphere, the vessel will fail mechanically. If the vessel contents are ignitable or a contaminant is present this event may result in a \"fireball\".\nIncorrect gas mix.\nUse of a gas mix that differs from the planned mix introduces an increased risk of decompression sickness or an increased risk of oxygen toxicity, depending on the error. It may be possible to simply recalculate the dive plan or set the dive computer accordingly, but in some cases the planned dive may not be practicable.\nMany training agencies such as PADI, CMAS, SSI and NAUI train their divers to personally check the oxygen percentage content of each nitrox cylinder before every dive. If the oxygen percentage deviates by more than 1% from the planned mix, the diver must either recalculate the dive plan with the actual mix, or else abort the dive to avoid increased risk of oxygen toxicity or decompression sickness. Under IANTD and ANDI rules for use of nitrox, which are followed by dive resorts around the world, filled nitrox cylinders are signed out personally in a blended gas records book, which contains, for each cylinder and fill, the cylinder number, the measured oxygen fraction by percentage, the calculated maximum operating depth for that mix, and the signature of the receiving diver, who should have personally measured the oxygen fraction before taking delivery. All of these steps reduce risk but increase complexity of operations as each diver must use the specific cylinder they have checked out. In South Africa, the national standard for handling and filling portable cylinders with pressurised gases (SANS 10019) requires that the cylinder be labelled with a sticker identifying the contents as nitrox, and specifying the oxygen fraction. Similar requirements may apply in other countries.\nHistory.\nIn 1874, Henry Fleuss made what was possibly the first Nitrox dive using a rebreather.\nIn 1911, Draeger of Germany tested an injector operated rebreather backpack for a standard diving suit. This concept was produced and marketed as the DM20 oxygen rebreather system and the DM40 nitrox rebreather system, in which air from one cylinder and oxygen from a second cylinder were mixed during injection through a nozzle which circulated the breathing gas through the scrubber and the rest of the loop. The DM40 was rated for depths up to 40m.\nChristian J. Lambertsen proposed calculations for nitrogen addition to prevent oxygen toxicity in divers utilizing nitrogen\u2013oxygen rebreather diving.\nIn World War II or soon after, British commando frogmen and clearance divers started occasionally diving with oxygen rebreathers adapted for semi-closed-circuit nitrox (which they called \"mixture\") diving by fitting larger cylinders and carefully setting the gas flow rate using a flow meter. These developments were kept secret until independently duplicated by civilians in the 1960s.\nLambertson published a paper on nitrox in 1947.\nIn the 1950s, the United States Navy (USN) documented enriched oxygen gas procedures for military use of what we today call nitrox, in the US Navy Diving Manual.\nIn 1955, E. Lanphier described the use of nitrogen\u2013oxygen diving mixtures, and the equivalent air depth method for calculating decompression from air tables.\nIn the 1960s, A. Galerne used on-line blending for commercial diving.\nIn 1970, Morgan Wells, who was the first director of the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Diving Center, began instituting diving procedures for oxygen-enriched air. He introduced the concept of Equivalent Air Depth (EAD). He also developed a process for mixing oxygen and air which he called a continuous blending system. For many years Wells' invention was the only practical alternative to partial pressure blending. In 1979 NOAA published Wells' procedures for the scientific use of nitrox in the NOAA Diving Manual.\nIn 1985 Dick Rutkowski, a former NOAA diving safety officer, formed IAND (International Association of Nitrox Divers) and began teaching nitrox use for recreational diving. This was considered dangerous by some, and met with heavy skepticism by the diving community.\nIn 1989, the Harbor Branch Oceanographic institution workshop addressed blending, oxygen limits and decompression issues.\nIn 1991, Bove, Bennett and \"Skin Diver\" magazine took a stand against nitrox use for recreational diving. \"Skin Diver\" editor Bill Gleason dubbed nitrox the \"Voodoo Gas\". The annual DEMA show (held in Houston, Texas that year) banned nitrox training providers from the show. This caused a backlash, and when DEMA relented, a number of organizations took the opportunity to present nitrox workshops outside the show.\nIn 1992, the Scuba Diving Resources Group organised a workshop where some guidelines were established, and some misconceptions addressed.\nIn 1992, BSAC banned its members from using nitrox during BSAC activities. IAND's name was changed to the International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD), the T being added when the European Association of Technical Divers (EATD) merged with IAND. In the early 1990s, these agencies were teaching nitrox, but the main scuba agencies were not. Additional new organizations, including the American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) \u2013 which invented the term \"Safe Air\" for marketing purposes \u2013 and Technical Diving International (TDI) were begun. NAUI became the first existing major recreational diver training agency to sanction nitrox.\nIn 1993, the Sub-Aqua Association was the first UK recreational diving training agency to acknowledge and endorse the Nitrox training their members had undertaken with one of the tech agencies. The SAA's first recreational Nitrox qualification was issued in April 1993. The SAA's first Nitrox instructor was Vic Bonfante and he was certified in September 1993.\nMeanwhile, diving stores were finding a purely economic reason to offer nitrox: not only was an entire new course and certification needed to use it, but instead of cheap or free tank fills with compressed air, dive shops found they could charge premium amounts of money for custom-gas blending of nitrox to their ordinary, moderately experienced divers. With the new dive computers which could be programmed to allow for the longer bottom-times and shorter residual nitrogen times that nitrox gave, the incentive for the sport diver to use the gas increased.\nIn 1993, \"Skin Diver\" magazine, the leading recreational diving publication at the time, published a three-part series arguing that nitrox was unsafe for sport divers. DiveRite manufactured the first nitrox-compatible dive computer, called the Bridge, the aquaCorps TEK93 conference was held in San Francisco, and a practicable oil limit of 0.1\u00a0mg/m3 for oxygen compatible air was set. The Canadian armed forces issued EAD tables with an upper PO2 of 1.5 ATA.\nIn 1994, John Lamb and Vandagraph launched the first oxygen analyzer built specifically for Nitrox and mixed-gas divers, at the Birmingham Dive Show.\nIn 1994, BSAC reversed its policy on Nitrox and announced BSAC nitrox training to start in 1995.\nIn 1996, the Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) announced full educational support for nitrox. While other mainline scuba organizations had announced their support of nitrox earlier, it was PADI's endorsement that established nitrox as a standard recreational diving option.\nIn 1997, ProTec started with Nitrox 1 (recreational) and Nitrox 2 (technical). A German ProTec Nitrox manual (ref to the 6th edition) has been published.\nIn 1999, a survey by R.W. Hamilton showed that over hundreds of thousands of nitrox dives, the DCS record is good. Nitrox had become popular with recreational divers, but not used much by commercial divers who tend to use surface supplied breathing apparatus. The OSHA accepted a petition for a variance from the commercial diving regulations for recreational scuba instructors.\nThe 2001 edition of the \"NOAA Diving Manual\" included a chapter intended for Nitrox training.\nIn nature.\nAt times in the geological past, the Earth's atmosphere contained much more than 20% oxygen: e.g. up to 35% in the Upper Carboniferous period. This let animals absorb oxygen more easily and influenced their evolutionary patterns."}
{"id": "9956", "revid": "1316902700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9956", "title": "Erik Satie", "text": "French composer and pianist (1866\u20131925)\nEric Alfred Leslie Satie (born 17 May 1866\u00a0\u2013 1 July 1925), better known as Erik Satie, was a French composer and pianist. The son of a French father and a British mother, he studied at the Paris Conservatoire but was undistinguished and did not obtain a diploma. In the 1880s he worked as a pianist in caf\u00e9-cabarets in Montmartre, Paris, and began composing works, mostly for solo piano, such as his \"Gymnop\u00e9dies\" and \"Gnossiennes\". He also wrote music for a Rosicrucian sect to which he was briefly attached.\nFollowing a period of sparse compositional productivity, Satie entered Paris's second music academy, the Schola Cantorum, as a mature student. His studies there were more successful than those at the Conservatoire. From about 1910 he became the focus of successive groups of young composers attracted by his unconventionality and originality. Among them were the group known as Les Six. A meeting with Jean Cocteau in 1915 led to the creation of the ballet \"Parade\" (1917) for Sergei Diaghilev, with music by Satie, sets and costumes by Pablo Picasso, and choreography by L\u00e9onide Massine.\nSatie's example guided a new generation of French composers away from post-Wagnerian Impressionism towards a sparer, terser style. During his lifetime, he influenced Maurice Ravel, Claude Debussy, and Francis Poulenc, and he is seen as an influence on more recent composers such as John Cage and John Adams. His harmony is often characterised by unresolved chords; he sometimes dispensed with bar-lines, as in his \"Gnossiennes\"; and his melodies are generally simple and often reflect his love of old church music. He gave some of his later works absurd titles, such as \"V\u00e9ritables Pr\u00e9ludes flasques (pour un chien)\" (\"True Flabby Preludes (for a Dog)\", 1912), \"Croquis et agaceries d'un gros bonhomme en bois\" (\"Sketches and Exasperations of a Big Wooden Man\", 1913) and \"Sonatine bureaucratique\" (\"Bureaucratic Sonatina\", 1917). Most of his works are brief, and the majority are for solo piano. Exceptions include his \"symphonic drama\" \"Socrate\" (1919) and two late ballets \"Mercure\" and \"Rel\u00e2che\" (1924).\nSatie never married, and his home for most of his adult life was a single small room, first in Montmartre and, from 1898 to his death, in Arcueil, a suburb of Paris. He adopted various images over the years, including a period in quasi-priestly dress, another in which he always wore identically coloured velvet suits, and is known for his last persona, in neat bourgeois costume, with bowler hat, wing collar, and umbrella. He was a lifelong heavy drinker, and died of cirrhosis of the liver at the age of 59.\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nSatie was born on 17 May 1866 in Honfleur, Normandy, the first child of Alfred Satie and his wife Jane Leslie (n\u00e9e\u00a0Anton). Jane Satie was an English Protestant of Scottish descent; Alfred Satie, a shipping broker, was a Roman Catholic. A year later, the Saties had a daughter, Olga, and in 1869 a second son, Conrad. The children were baptised in the Anglican church.\nAfter the Franco-Prussian War Alfred Satie sold his business and the family moved to Paris, where he set up as a music publisher. In 1872 Jane Satie died and Eric and his brother were sent back to Honfleur to be brought up by Alfred's parents. The boys were rebaptised as Roman Catholics and educated at a local boarding school, where Satie excelled in history and Latin but nothing else. In 1874 he began taking music lessons with a local organist, Gustave Vinot, a former pupil of Louis Niedermeyer. Vinot stimulated Satie's love of old church music, and in particular Gregorian chant.\nIn 1878 Satie's grandmother died, and the two boys returned to Paris to be informally educated by their father. Satie did not attend a school, but his father took him to lectures at the and engaged a tutor to teach Eric Latin and Greek. Before the boys returned to Paris from Honfleur, Alfred had met a piano teacher and salon composer, Eug\u00e9nie Barnetche, whom he married in January 1879, to the dismay of the twelve-year-old Satie, who did not like her.\nEug\u00e9nie Satie resolved that her elder stepson should become a professional musician, and in November 1879 enrolled him in the preparatory piano class at the Paris Conservatoire. Satie strongly disliked the institution, which he described as \"a vast, very uncomfortable, and rather ugly building; a sort of district prison with no beauty on the inside \u2013 nor on the outside, for that matter\". He studied solfeggio with Albert Lavignac and piano with \u00c9mile Decombes, who had been a pupil of Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin. In 1880 Satie took his first examinations as a pianist: he was described as \"gifted but indolent\". The following year Decombes called him \"the laziest student in the Conservatoire\". In 1882 he was expelled from the Conservatoire for his unsatisfactory performance.\nIn 1884 Satie wrote his first known composition, a short Allegro for piano, composed while on holiday in Honfleur. He signed himself \"Erik\" on this and subsequent compositions, though he continued to use \"Eric\" on other documents until 1906. In 1885, he was readmitted to the Conservatoire, in the intermediate piano class of his stepmother's former teacher, Georges Mathias. He made little progress: Mathias described his playing as \"insignificant and laborious\" and Satie himself as \"worthless. Three months just to learn the piece. Cannot sight-read properly.\" Satie became fascinated by aspects of religion. He spent much time in Notre-Dame de Paris contemplating the stained glass windows and in the National Library examining obscure medieval manuscripts. His friend Alphonse Allais later dubbed him \"Esot\u00e9rik Satie\". From this period comes \"Ogives\", a set of four piano pieces inspired by Gregorian chant and Gothic church architecture.\nKeen to leave the Conservatoire, Satie volunteered for military service and joined the 33rd Infantry Regiment in November 1886. He found army life no more to his liking than the Conservatoire, and deliberately contracted acute bronchitis by standing in the open, bare-chested, on a winter night. After three months' convalescence, he was invalided out of the army.\nMontmartre.\nIn 1887, at the age of 21, Satie moved from his father's residence to lodgings in the 9th arrondissement. By this time he had started what was to be an enduring friendship with the romantic poet Contamine de Latour, whose verse he set in some of his early compositions, which Satie senior published. His lodgings were close to the popular cabaret on the southern edge of Montmartre where he became an habitu\u00e9 and then a resident pianist. The Chat Noir was known as the \"temple de la 'convention farfelue'\" \u2013 the temple of zany convention, and, as the biographer Robert Orledge puts it, Satie, \"free from his restrictive upbringing \u2026 enthusiastically embraced the reckless bohemian lifestyle and created for himself a new persona as a long-haired man-about-town in frock coat and top hat\". This was the first of several personas that Satie adopted over the years.\nIn the late 1880s Satie styled himself on at least one occasion \"Erik Satie \u2013 gymnop\u00e9diste\", and his works from this period include the three \"Gymnop\u00e9dies\" (1888) and the first \"Gnossiennes\" (1889 and 1890). He earned a modest living as a pianist and conductor at the Chat Noir, before falling out with the proprietor and moving to become second pianist at the nearby Auberge du Clou. There he became a close friend of Claude Debussy, who proved a kindred spirit in his experimental approach to composition. Both were bohemians, enjoying the same caf\u00e9 society and struggling to survive financially. At the Auberge du Clou Satie first encountered the flamboyant, self-styled \"S\u00e2r\" Jos\u00e9phin P\u00e9ladan, for whose mystic sect, the Ordre de la Rose-Croix Catholique du Temple et du Graal, he was appointed composer. This gave him scope for experiment, and P\u00e9ladan's salons at the fashionable Galerie Durand-Ruel gained Satie his first public hearings. Frequently short of money, Satie moved from his lodgings in the 9th arrondissement to a small room in the rue Cortot not far from Sacre-Coeur, so high up the Butte Montmartre that he said he could see from his window all the way to the Belgian border.\nBy mid-1892 Satie had composed the first pieces in a compositional system of his own making ('), provided incidental music to a chivalric esoteric play (two '), had a hoax published (announcing the premiere of his non-existent \", an anti-Wagnerian opera), and broken away from P\u00e9ladan, starting with the \"Uspud\"\" project, a \"Christian Ballet\", in collaboration with Latour. He challenged the musical establishment by proposing himself \u2013 unsuccessfully \u2013 for the seat in the Acad\u00e9mie des Beaux-Arts made vacant by the death of Ernest Guiraud. Between 1893 and 1895, Satie, wearing quasi-priestly dress, was the founder and only member of the Eglise M\u00e9tropolitaine d'Art de J\u00e9sus Conducteur. From his \"Abbatiale\" in the rue Cortot, he published scathing attacks on his artistic enemies.\nIn 1893 Satie had what is believed to be his only love affair, a five-month liaison with the painter Suzanne Valadon. After their first night together, he proposed marriage. They did not marry, but Valadon moved to a room next to Satie's at the rue Cortot. Satie became obsessed with her, calling her his Biqui and writing impassioned notes about \"her whole being, lovely eyes, gentle hands, and tiny feet\". During their relationship Satie composed the \"Danses gothiques\" as a means of calming his mind, and Valadon painted his portrait, which she gave him. After five months she moved away, leaving him devastated. He said later that he was left with \"nothing but an icy loneliness that fills the head with emptiness and the heart with sadness\".\nIn 1895 Satie changed his image once again, this time to that of \"the Velvet Gentleman\". From the proceeds of a small legacy, he bought seven identical dun-coloured suits. Orledge comments that this change \"marked the end of his Rose+Croix period and the start of a long search for a new artistic direction\".\nMove to Arcueil.\nIn 1898, in search of somewhere cheaper and quieter than Montmartre, Satie moved to a room in the southern suburbs, in the commune of Arcueil-Cachan, from the centre of Paris. This remained his home for the rest of his life. No visitors were ever admitted. He joined the Socialist Party after the assassination of Jean Jaur\u00e8s (he later switched his membership to the Communist Party after its founding, but adopted a thoroughly bourgeois image: the biographer Pierre-Daniel Templier, writes, \"With his umbrella and bowler hat, he resembled a quiet school teacher. Although a Bohemian, he looked very dignified, almost ceremonious\".\nSatie earned a living as a cabaret pianist, adapting more than a hundred compositions of popular music for piano or piano and voice, adding some of his own. The most popular of these were ', text by Henry Pacory; ', text by Vincent Hyspa; ', a waltz; \"La Diva de l'Empire\", text by Dominique Bonnaud/Numa Bl\u00e8s; ', a march; ', text by Contamine de Latour (lost, but the music later reappears in '); and others. Between 1898 and 1908, he composed and arranged the music for around thirty Hyspa texts. These songs, which caricatured current political events, enabled Satie to explore the use of quotations for humorous purposes that characterises his work. In his later years Satie rejected all his cabaret music as vile and against his nature. Only a few compositions that he took seriously remain from this period: \"Jack in the Box\", music to a pantomime by Jules Depaquit (called a \"\" by Satie); ', a short comic opera to a text by \"Lord Cheminot\" (Latour); ' (\"The Dreamy Fish\"), piano music to accompany a lost tale by Cheminot, and a few others that were mostly incomplete. Few were presented, and none published at the time.\nA decisive change in Satie's musical outlook came after he heard the premiere of Debussy's opera \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\" in 1902. He found it \"absolutely astounding\", and he re-evaluated his own music. In a determined attempt to improve his technique, and against Debussy's advice, he enrolled as a mature student at Paris's second main music academy, the Schola Cantorum in October 1905, continuing his studies there until 1912. The institution was run by Vincent d'Indy, who emphasised orthodox technique rather than creative originality. Satie studied counterpoint with Albert Roussel and composition with d'Indy, and was a much more conscientious and successful student than he had been at the Conservatoire in his youth.\nIn 1911, when he was in his mid-forties, Satie came to the notice of the musical public in general. That January Maurice Ravel played some early Satie works at a concert by the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 musicale ind\u00e9pendante, a forward-looking group set up by Ravel and others as a rival to the conservative Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 nationale de musique. Satie was suddenly seen as \"the precursor and apostle of the musical revolution now taking place\"; he became a focus for young composers. Debussy, having orchestrated the first and third \"Gymnop\u00e9dies\", conducted them in concert. The publisher Demets asked for new works from Satie, who was finally able to give up his cabaret work and devote himself to composition. Works such as the cycle \"Sports et divertissements\" (1914) were published in de luxe editions. The press began to write about Satie's music, and a leading pianist, Ricardo Vi\u00f1es, took him up, giving celebrated first performances of some Satie pieces.\nLast years.\nSatie became the focus of successive groups of young composers, who he first encouraged and then distanced himself from, sometimes rancorously, when their popularity threatened to eclipse his or they otherwise displeased him. First were the \"jeunes\" \u2013 those associated with Ravel \u2013 and then a group known at first as the \"nouveaux jeunes\", later called Les Six, including Georges Auric, Louis Durey, Arthur Honegger, and Germaine Tailleferre, joined later by Francis Poulenc and Darius Milhaud. Satie dissociated himself from the second group in 1918, and in the 1920s became the focal point of another set of young composers including Henri Cliquet-Pleyel, Roger D\u00e9sormi\u00e8re, Maxime Jacob and Henri Sauguet, who became known as the \"Arcueil School\". As well as turning against Ravel, Auric and Poulenc in particular, Satie quarrelled with his old friend Debussy in 1917, resentful of the latter's failure to appreciate his recent compositions. The rupture lasted for the remaining months of Debussy's life, and when he died the following year, Satie refused to attend the funeral. A few of his prot\u00e9g\u00e9s escaped his displeasure, and Milhaud and D\u00e9sormi\u00e8re were among those who remained friends with him to the last.\nThe First World War restricted concert-giving to some extent, but Orledge comments that the war years brought \"Satie's second lucky break\", when Jean Cocteau heard Vi\u00f1es and Satie perform the \"Trois morceaux\" in 1916. This led to the commissioning of the ballet \"Parade\", premiered in 1917 by Sergei Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, with music by Satie, sets and costumes by Pablo Picasso, and choreography by L\u00e9onide Massine. This was a \"succ\u00e8s de scandale\", with jazz rhythms and instrumentation including parts for typewriter, steamship whistle and siren. It firmly established Satie's name before the public, and thereafter his career centred on the theatre, writing mainly to commission.\nIn October 1916, Satie received a commission from the Princesse de Polignac, Winnaretta Singer, funding what Orledge considers the composer's masterpiece, the symphonic drama \"Socrate\" (1917\u20131918). A chamber oratorio, it is a musical setting of excerpts from Plato's Socratic dialogues in the eclecticist philosopher and Hegel popularizer Victor Cousin's somewhat lyrical translation. Composition was interrupted in 1917 by music critic Jean Poueigh's libel suit and the threat of jail. Satie called \"Socrate\" \"a return to classical simplicity with a modern sensibility\" at its premiere. Igor Stravinsky, whom Satie admired, praised the work.\nIn his later years Satie was in demand as a journalist, making contributions to the \"Revue musicale\", \"Action\", \"L'Esprit nouveau\", the \"Paris-Journal\" and other publications from the Dadaist \"391\" to the English-language magazines \"Vanity Fair\" and \"The Transatlantic Review\". As he contributed anonymously or under pen names to some publications it is not certain how many titles he wrote for, but \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" lists 25. Satie's habit of embellishing the scores of his compositions with all kinds of written remarks became so established that he had to insist that they must not be read out during performances.\nIn 1920 there was a festival of Satie's music at the Salle \u00c9rard in Paris. In 1924 the ballets \"Mercure\", with choreography by Massine and d\u00e9cor by Picasso, and \"Rel\u00e2che\" (\"Cancelled\"), in collaboration with Francis Picabia and Ren\u00e9 Clair, both provoked headlines with their first night scandals. Satie's music for the latter is a comedic bricolage of high art and popular music from the cabaret, one of its many playful \"cancellations\". Auric called it \"a miserable pastiche\", but Satie christened it \"obsc\u00e8ne\" and touted it as \"pornographic\", writing in the concert program:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The music for \"Rel\u00e2che\"? I was portraying people \"out on a spree\". Using popular themes for the purpose. These themes were powerfully \"evocative\". ... \"Faint-hearts\"\u2014and other \"moralists\"\u2014will reproach me for making use of these ... There is only one judge I defer to: the public. It will recognize these themes and will not be shocked in the least to hear them. ... Aren't they \"human\", after all? ... Let anyone who dreads such \"evocations\" retire.\nDespite being a musical iconoclast, and encourager of modernism, Satie was uninterested to the point of antipathy in innovations such as the telephone, the gramophone and the radio. He made no recordings, and as far as is known heard only a single radio broadcast (of Milhaud's music) and made only one telephone call. Although his personal appearance was immaculate, his room at Arcueil, according to Orledge, was \"squalid\", and after his death the scores of several important works believed lost were found among the accumulated rubbish. He was incompetent with money. Having depended to a considerable extent on the generosity of friends in his early years, he was little better off when he began to earn a good income from his compositions, as he spent or gave away money as soon as he received it. He liked children, and they liked him, but his relations with adults were seldom straightforward. One of his last collaborators, Picabia, said of him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Satie's case is extraordinary. He's a mischievous and cunning old artist. At least, that's how he thinks of himself. Myself, I think the opposite! He's a very susceptible man, arrogant, a real sad child, but one who is sometimes made optimistic by alcohol. But he's a good friend, and I like him a lot.\nThroughout his adult life Satie was a heavy drinker, and in 1925 his health collapsed. He was taken to the H\u00f4pital Saint-Joseph in Paris, diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver. He died there at 8:00\u00a0p.m. on 1 July, at the age of 59. He was buried in the cemetery at Arcueil.\nWorks.\nMusic.\nIn the view of the \"Oxford Dictionary of Music\", Satie's importance lay in \"directing a new generation of French composers away from Wagner\u2010influenced Impressionism towards a leaner, more epigrammatic style\". Debussy christened him \"the precursor\" because of his early harmonic innovations. Satie summed up his musical philosophy in 1917:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To have a feeling for harmony is to have a feeling for tonality\u2026 the melody is the Idea, the outline; as much as it is the form and the subject matter of a work. The harmony is an illumination, an exhibition of the object, its reflection.\nAmong his earliest compositions were sets of three \"Gymnop\u00e9dies\" (1888) and his \"Gnossiennes\" (1889 onwards) for piano. They evoke the ancient world by what the critics Roger Nichols and Paul Griffiths describe as \"pure simplicity, monotonous repetition, and highly original modal harmonies\".\nIt is possible that their simplicity and originality were influenced by Debussy; it is also possible that it was Satie who influenced Debussy. During the brief spell when Satie was composer to P\u00e9ladan's sect he adopted a similarly austere manner.\nWhile Satie was earning his living as a caf\u00e9 pianist in Montmartre he contributed songs and little waltzes. After moving to Arcueil he began to write works with quirky titles, such as the seven-movement suite \"Trois morceaux en forme de poire\" (\"Three Pear-shaped Pieces\") for piano four-hands (1903), simply phrased music that Nichols and Griffiths describe as \"a r\u00e9sum\u00e9 of his music since 1890\" \u2013 reusing some of his earlier work as well as popular songs of the time. He struggled to find his own musical voice. Orledge writes that this was partly because of his \"trying to ape his illustrious peers \u2026 we find bits of Ravel in his miniature opera \"Genevi\u00e8ve de Brabant\" and echoes of both Faur\u00e9 and Debussy in the \"Nouvelles pi\u00e8ces froides\" of 1907\".\nAfter concluding his studies at the Schola Cantorum in 1912 Satie composed with greater confidence and more prolifically. Orchestration, despite his studies with d'Indy, was never his strongest suit, but his grasp of counterpoint is evident in the opening bars of \"Parade\", and from the outset of his composing career he had original and distinctive ideas about harmony. In his later years he composed sets of short instrumental works with absurd titles, including \"V\u00e9ritables Pr\u00e9ludes flasques (pour un chien)\" (\"True Flabby Preludes (for a Dog)\", 1912), \"Croquis et agaceries d'un gros bonhomme en bois\" (\"Sketches and Exasperations of a Big Wooden Man\", 1913) and \"Sonatine bureaucratique\" (\"Bureaucratic Sonata\", 1917). \nIn his neat, calligraphic hand, Satie would write extensive instructions for his performers, and although his words appear at first sight to be humorous and deliberately nonsensical, Nichols and Griffiths comment, \"a sensitive pianist can make much of injunctions such as 'arm yourself with clairvoyance' and 'with the end of your thought'\". His \"Sonatine bureaucratique\" anticipates the neoclassicism soon adopted by Stravinsky. Despite his rancorous falling out with Debussy, Satie commemorated his long-time friend in 1920, two years after Debussy's death, in the anguished \"El\u00e9gie\", the first of the miniature song cycle \"Quatre petites m\u00e9lodies\". Orledge rates the cycle as the finest, though least known, of the four sets of short songs of Satie's last decade.\nSatie coined the term \"musique d'ameublement\" (\"furniture music\") and developed the concept as background music for easy listening. He composed \"Cin\u00e9ma\", an early example of film music, for Ren\u00e9 Clair's \"Entr'acte\" (the for \"Rel\u00e2che\"). This music was meant to support mood, not demand focused attention, an approach that echoed surrealism's appeal to the unconscious mind. Ren\u00e9 Magritte admired Satie's music and aesthetic. He and E. L. T. Mesens appeared on the playbill for \"Rel\u00e2che\".\nSatie is regarded by some writers as an influence on minimalism, which developed in the 1960s and later. The musicologist Mark Bennett and the composer Humphrey Searle have said that John Cage's music shows Satie's influence, and Searle and the writer Edward Strickland have used the term \"minimalism\" in connection with Satie's \"Vexations\", which the composer implied in his manuscript should be played over and over again 840 times. John Adams included a specific homage to Satie's music in his 1996 \"Century Rolls\".\nWritings.\nSatie wrote extensively for the press, but unlike his professional colleagues such as Debussy and Dukas he did not write primarily as a music critic. Much of his writing is connected to music tangentially if at all. His biographer Caroline Potter describes him as \"an experimental creative writer, a \"blagueur\" who provoked, mystified and amused his readers\". He wrote \"jeux d'esprit\" claiming to eat dinner in four minutes with a diet of exclusively white food (including bones and fruit mould), or to drink boiled wine mixed with fuchsia juice, or to be woken by a servant hourly throughout the night to have his temperature taken; he wrote in praise of Beethoven's non-existent but \"sumptuous\" Tenth Symphony, and the family of instruments known as the cephalophones, \"which have a compass of thirty octaves and are absolutely unplayable\".\nSatie grouped some of these writings under the general headings \"Cahiers d'un mammif\u00e8re\" (A Mammal's Notebook) and \"M\u00e9moires d'un amn\u00e9sique\" (Memoirs of an Amnesiac), indicating, as Potter comments, that \"these are not autobiographical writings in the conventional manner\". He claimed the major influence on his humour was Oliver Cromwell, adding \"I also owe much to Christopher Columbus, because the American spirit has occasionally tapped me on the shoulder and I have been delighted to feel its ironically glacial bite\".\nHis published writings include:\nLegacy.\nThe centenary of Satie's death was commemorated by the BBC which made him their composer of the week and broadcast a special Satie-Day Morning programme. A digital album called \"Satie: Discoveries\" was premiered. This included 27 previously unpublished works which had been researched by James Nye and Sato Matsui and performed on the piano by Alexandre Tharaud.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "9960", "revid": "1157612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9960", "title": "Elliptic integral", "text": "Special function defined by an integral\nIn integral calculus, an elliptic integral is one of a number of related functions defined as the value of certain integrals, which were first studied by Giulio Fagnano and Leonhard Euler (c.\u20091750). Their name originates from their connection with the problem of finding the arc length of an ellipse.\nModern mathematics defines an \"elliptic integral\" as any function \"f\" which can be expressed in the form\nformula_1\nwhere \"R\" is a rational function of its two arguments, \"P\" is a polynomial of degree 3 or 4 with no repeated roots, and \"c\" is a constant.\nIn general, integrals in this form cannot be expressed in terms of elementary functions. Exceptions to this general rule are when \"P\" has repeated roots, when \"R\"(\"x\", \"y\") contains no odd powers of \"y\", and when the integral is pseudo-elliptic. However, with the appropriate reduction formula, every elliptic integral can be brought into a form that involves integrals over rational functions and the three Legendre canonical forms, also known as the elliptic integrals of the first, second and third kind.\nBesides the Legendre form given below, the elliptic integrals may also be expressed in Carlson symmetric form. Additional insight into the theory of the elliptic integral may be gained through the study of the Schwarz\u2013Christoffel mapping. Historically, elliptic functions were discovered as inverse functions of elliptic integrals.\nArgument notation.\n\"Incomplete elliptic integrals\" are functions of two arguments; \"complete elliptic integrals\" are functions of a single argument. These arguments are expressed in a variety of different but equivalent ways as they give the same elliptic integral. Most texts adhere to a canonical naming scheme, using the following naming conventions.\nFor expressing one argument:\nEach of the above three quantities is completely determined by any of the others (given that they are non-negative). Thus, they can be used interchangeably.\nThe other argument can likewise be expressed as \"\u03c6\", the \"amplitude\", or as \"x\" or \"u\", where \"x\" = sin \"\u03c6\" = sn \"u\" and sn is one of the Jacobian elliptic functions.\nSpecifying the value of any one of these quantities determines the others. Note that \"u\" also depends on \"m\". Some additional relationships involving \"u\" include\nformula_2\nThe latter is sometimes called the \"delta amplitude\" and written as \u0394(\"\u03c6\") = dn \"u\". Sometimes the literature also refers to the \"complementary parameter\", the \"complementary modulus,\" or the \"complementary modular angle\". These are further defined in the article on quarter periods.\nIn this notation, the use of a vertical bar as delimiter indicates that the argument following it is the \"parameter\" (as defined above), while the backslash indicates that it is the modular angle. The use of a semicolon implies that the argument preceding it is the sine of the amplitude:\nformula_3\nThis potentially confusing use of different argument delimiters is traditional in elliptic integrals and much of the notation is compatible with that used in the reference book by Abramowitz and Stegun and that used in the integral tables by Gradshteyn and Ryzhik.\nThere are still other conventions for the notation of elliptic integrals employed in the literature. The notation with interchanged arguments, \"F\"(\"k\", \"\u03c6\"), is often encountered; and similarly \"E\"(\"k\", \"\u03c6\") for the integral of the second kind. Abramowitz and Stegun substitute the integral of the first kind, \"F\"(\"\u03c6\", \"k\"), for the argument \u03c6 in their definition of the integrals of the second and third kinds, unless this argument is followed by a vertical bar: i.e. \"E\"(\"F\"(\"\u03c6\", \"k\") | \"k\"2) for \"E\"(\"\u03c6\" | \"k\"2). Moreover, their complete integrals employ the \"parameter\" \"k\"2 as argument in place of the modulus \"k\", i.e. \"K\"(\"k\"2) rather than \"K\"(\"k\"). And the integral of the third kind defined by Gradshteyn and Ryzhik, \u03a0(\"\u03c6\", \"n\", \"k\"), puts the amplitude \u03c6 first and not the \"characteristic\" n.\nThus one must be careful with the notation when using these functions, because various reputable references and software packages use different conventions in the definitions of the elliptic functions. For example, Wolfram's Mathematica software and Wolfram Alpha define the complete elliptic integral of the first kind in terms of the parameter \"m\", instead of the elliptic modulus \"k\".\nIncomplete elliptic integral of the first kind.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind F is defined as\nformula_4\nThis is Legendre's trigonometric form of the elliptic integral; substituting \"t\" = sin \"\u03b8\" and \"x\" = sin \"\u03c6\", one obtains Jacobi's algebraic form:\nformula_5\nEquivalently, in terms of the amplitude and modular angle one has:\nformula_6\nWith \"x\" = sn(\"u\", \"k\") one has:\nformula_7\ndemonstrating that this Jacobian elliptic function is a simple inverse of the incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind has following addition theorem:\nformula_8\nThe elliptic modulus can be transformed that way:\nformula_9\nIncomplete elliptic integral of the second kind.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind \"E\" in Legendre's trigonometric form is\nformula_10\nSubstituting \"t\" = sin \"\u03b8\" and \"x\" = sin \"\u03c6\", one obtains Jacobi's algebraic form:\nformula_11\nEquivalently, in terms of the amplitude and modular angle:\nformula_12\nRelations with the Jacobi elliptic functions include\nformula_13\nThe meridian arc length from the equator to latitude \"\u03c6\" is written in terms of \"E\":\nformula_14\nwhere \"a\" is the semi-major axis, and \"e\" is the eccentricity.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind has following addition theorem:\nformula_15\nThe elliptic modulus can be transformed that way:\nformula_16\nIncomplete elliptic integral of the third kind.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the third kind \u03a0 is \nformula_17\nor\nformula_18\nThe number \"n\" is called the characteristic and can take on any value, independently of the other arguments. Note though that the value \u03a0(1; | \"m\") is infinite, for any \"m\".\nA relation with the Jacobian elliptic functions is\nformula_19\nThe meridian arc length from the equator to latitude \"\u03c6\" is also related to a special case of \u03a0:\nformula_20\nComplete elliptic integral of the first kind.\nElliptic Integrals are said to be 'complete' when the amplitude \"\u03c6\" = and therefore \"x\" = 1. The complete elliptic integral of the first kind \"K\" may thus be defined as\nformula_21\nor more compactly in terms of the incomplete integral of the first kind as\nformula_22\nIt can be expressed as a power series\nformula_23\nwhere \"P\"\"n\" is the Legendre polynomials, which is equivalent to\nformula_24\nwhere \"n\"!! denotes the double factorial. In terms of the Gauss hypergeometric function, the complete elliptic integral of the first kind can be expressed as\nformula_25\nThe complete elliptic integral of the first kind is sometimes called the quarter period. It can be computed very efficiently in terms of the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean:\nformula_26\nTherefore, the modulus can be transformed as:\nformula_27\nThis expression is valid for all formula_28 and 0 \u2264 \"k\" \u2264 1:\nformula_29\nRelation to the gamma function.\nIf \"k\"2 = \"\u03bb\"(\"i\"\u221a\"r\") and formula_30 (where \u03bb is the modular lambda function), then \"K\"(\"k\") is expressible in closed form in terms of the gamma function. For example, \"r\" = 2, \"r\" = 3 and \"r\" = 7 give, respectively,\nformula_31\nand\nformula_32\nand\nformula_33\nMore generally, the condition that\nformula_34\nbe in an imaginary quadratic field is sufficient. For instance, if \"k\" = \"e\"5\"\u03c0i\"/6, then = \"e\"2\"\u03c0i\"/3 and\nformula_35\nAsymptotic expressions.\nformula_36\nThis approximation has a relative precision better than for \"k\" &lt;. Keeping only the first two terms is correct to 0.01 precision for \"k\" &lt;.\nDifferential equation.\nThe differential equation for the elliptic integral of the first kind is\nformula_37\nA second solution to this equation is formula_38. This solution satisfies the relation\nformula_39\nContinued fraction.\nA continued fraction expansion is: \nformula_40\nwhere the nome is formula_41 in its definition.\nInverting the period ratio.\nHere, we use the complete elliptic integral of the first kind with the \"parameter\" formula_42 instead, because the squaring function introduces problems when inverting in the complex plane. So let\nformula_43\nand let\nformula_44\nformula_45\nbe the theta functions.\nThe equation\nformula_46\ncan then be solved (provided that a solution formula_42 exists) by\nformula_48\nwhich is in fact the modular lambda function.\nFor the purposes of computation, the error analysis is given by\nformula_49\nformula_50\nwhere formula_51 and formula_52.\nAlso\nformula_53\nwhere formula_54.\nComplete elliptic integral of the second kind.\nThe complete elliptic integral of the second kind \"E\" is defined as\nformula_55\nor more compactly in terms of the incomplete integral of the second kind \"E\"(\"\u03c6\",\"k\") as\nformula_56\nFor an ellipse with semi-major axis \"a\" and semi-minor axis \"b\" and eccentricity \"e\" = \u221a1 \u2212 \"b\"2/\"a\"2, the complete elliptic integral of the second kind \"E\"(\"e\") is equal to one quarter of the circumference \"C\" of the ellipse measured in units of the semi-major axis \"a\". In other words:\nformula_57\nThe complete elliptic integral of the second kind can be expressed as a power series\nformula_58\nwhich is equivalent to\nformula_59\nIn terms of the Gauss hypergeometric function, the complete elliptic integral of the second kind can be expressed as\nformula_60\nThe modulus can be transformed that way:\nformula_61\nComputation.\nLike the integral of the first kind, the complete elliptic integral of the second kind can be computed very efficiently using the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean.\nDefine sequences an and gn, where \"a\"0 = 1, \"g\"0 = \u221a1 \u2212 \"k\"2 = \"k\"\u2032 and the recurrence relations \"a\"\"n\" + 1 =, \"g\"\"n\" + 1 = \u221a\"an gn\" hold. Furthermore, define\nformula_62\nBy definition,\nformula_63\nAlso\nformula_64\nThen\nformula_65\nIn practice, the arithmetic-geometric mean would simply be computed up to some limit. This formula converges quadratically for all . To speed up computation further, the relation \"c\"\"n\" + 1 = can be used.\nFurthermore, if \"k\"2 = \"\u03bb\"(\"i\"\u221a\"r\") and formula_30 (where \u03bb is the modular lambda function), then \"E\"(\"k\") is expressible in closed form in terms of\nformula_67\nand hence can be computed without the need for the infinite summation term. For example, \"r\" = 1, \"r\" = 3 and \"r\" = 7 give, respectively,\nformula_68\nand\nformula_69\nand\nformula_70\nDerivative and differential equation.\nformula_71\nformula_72\nA second solution to this equation is \"E\"(\u221a1 \u2212 \"k\"2) \u2212 \"K\"(\u221a1 \u2212 \"k\"2).\nComplete elliptic integral of the third kind.\nThe complete elliptic integral of the third kind \u03a0 can be defined as\nformula_73\nNote that sometimes the elliptic integral of the third kind is defined with an inverse sign for the \"characteristic\" \"n\",\nformula_74\nJust like the complete elliptic integrals of the first and second kind, the complete elliptic integral of the third kind can be computed very efficiently using the arithmetic-geometric mean.\nPartial derivatives.\nformula_75\nJacobi zeta function.\nIn 1829, Jacobi defined the Jacobi zeta function:\nformula_76\nIt is periodic in formula_77 with minimal period formula_78. It is related to the Jacobi zn function by formula_79. In the literature (e.g. Whittaker and Watson (1927)), sometimes formula_80 means Wikipedia's formula_81. Some authors (e.g. King (1924)) use formula_80 for both Wikipedia's formula_80 and formula_81.\nLegendre's relation.\nThe Legendre's relation or \"Legendre Identity\" shows the relation of the integrals K and E of an elliptic modulus and its anti-related counterpart in an integral equation of second degree:\nFor two modules that are Pythagorean counterparts to each other, this relation is valid:\nformula_85\nFor example:\n formula_86\nAnd for two modules that are tangential counterparts to each other, the following relationship is valid:\n formula_87\nFor example:\n formula_88\nThe Legendre's relation for tangential modular counterparts results directly from the Legendre's identity for Pythagorean modular counterparts by using the Landen modular transformation on the Pythagorean counter modulus.\nSpecial identity for the lemniscatic case.\nFor the lemniscatic case, the elliptic modulus or specific eccentricity \u03b5 is equal to half the square root of two. Legendre's identity for the lemniscatic case can be proved as follows:\nAccording to the Chain rule these derivatives hold:\n formula_89\n formula_90\nBy using the Fundamental theorem of calculus these formulas can be generated:\n formula_91\n formula_92\nThe Linear combination of the two now mentioned integrals leads to the following formula:\n formula_93\n formula_94\nBy forming the original antiderivative related to x from the function now shown using the Product rule this formula results:\n formula_95\n formula_96\nIf the value formula_97 is inserted in this integral identity, then the following identity emerges:\n formula_98\n formula_99\nThis is how this lemniscatic excerpt from Legendre's identity appears:\n formula_100\nGeneralization for the overall case.\nNow the modular general case is worked out. For this purpose, the derivatives of the complete elliptic integrals are derived after the modulus formula_101 and then they are combined. And then the Legendre's identity balance is determined.\nBecause the derivative of the \"circle function\" is the negative product of the \"identical mapping function\" and the reciprocal of the circle function:\n formula_102\nThese are the derivatives of K and E shown in this article in the sections above:\n formula_103\n formula_104\nIn combination with the derivative of the circle function these derivatives are valid then:\n formula_105\n formula_106\nLegendre's identity includes products of any two complete elliptic integrals. For the derivation of the function side from the equation scale of Legendre's identity, the Product rule is now applied in the following:\n formula_107\n formula_108\n formula_109\nOf these three equations, adding the top two equations and subtracting the bottom equation gives this result:\n formula_110\nIn relation to the formula_101 the equation balance constantly gives the value zero.\nThe previously determined result shall be combined with the Legendre equation to the modulus formula_112 that is worked out in the section before:\n formula_100\nThe combination of the last two formulas gives the following result:\n formula_114\nBecause if the derivative of a continuous function constantly takes the value zero, then the concerned function is a constant function. This means that this function results in the same function value for each abscissa value formula_101 and the associated function graph is therefore a horizontal straight line.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9961", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9961", "title": "Epistle to the Romans", "text": "Book of the New Testament\nThe Epistle to the Romans is the sixth book in the New Testament, and the longest of the thirteen Pauline epistles. Biblical scholars agree that it was composed by Paul the Apostle to explain that salvation is offered through the gospel of Jesus Christ.\nRomans was likely written while Paul was staying in the house of Gaius in Corinth. The epistle was probably transcribed by Paul's amanuensis Tertius and is dated AD late 55 to early 57. Ultimately consisting of 16 chapters, versions of the epistle with only the first 14 or 15 chapters circulated early. Some of these recensions lacked all reference to the original audience of Christians in Rome, making it very general in nature. Other textual variants include subscripts explicitly mentioning Corinth as the place of composition and name Phoebe, a deacon of the church in Cenchreae, as the messenger who took the epistle to Rome.\nPrior to composing the epistle, Paul had evangelized the areas surrounding the Aegean Sea and was eager to take the gospel farther to Spain, a journey that would allow him to visit Rome on the way. The epistle can consequently be understood as a document outlining his reasons for the trip and preparing the church in Rome for his visit. Christians in Rome would have been of both Jewish and Gentile background and it is possible that the church suffered from internal strife between these two groups. Paul \u2013 a Hellenistic Jew and former Pharisee \u2013 shifts his argument to cater to both audiences and the church as a whole. Because the work contains material intended both for specific recipients as well as the general Christian public in Rome, scholars have had difficulty categorizing it as either a private letter or a public epistle.\nAlthough sometimes considered a treatise of (systematic) theology, Romans remains silent on many issues that Paul addresses elsewhere, but is nonetheless generally considered substantial, especially on justification and salvation. Proponents of both \"sola fide\" and the Roman Catholic position of the necessity of both faith and works find support in Romans.\nGeneral presentation.\nIn the opinion of Jesuit biblical scholar Joseph Fitzmyer, the book \"overwhelms the reader by the density and sublimity of the topic with which it deals, the gospel of the justification and salvation of Jew and Greek alike by the grace of God through faith in Jesus Christ, revealing the uprightness and love of God the Father.\"\nAnglican bishop N. T. Wright notes that Romans is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...neither a systematic theology nor a summary of Paul's lifework, but it is by common consent his masterpiece. It dwarfs most of his other writings, an Alpine peak towering over hills and villages. Not all onlookers have viewed it in the same light or from the same angle, and their snapshots and paintings of it are sometimes remarkably unalike. Not all climbers have taken the same route up its sheer sides, and there is frequent disagreement on the best approach. What nobody doubts is that we are here dealing with a work of massive substance, presenting a formidable intellectual challenge while offering a breathtaking theological and spiritual vision.\nAuthorship and dating.\nThe scholarly consensus is that Paul wrote the Epistle to the Romans. C. E. B. Cranfield, in the introduction to his commentary on Romans, says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The denial of Paul's authorship of Romans by such critics [...] is now rightly relegated to a place among the curiosities of NT scholarship. Today no responsible criticism disputes its Pauline origin. The evidence of its use in the Apostolic Fathers is clear, and before the end of the second century it is listed and cited as Paul's. Every extant early list of NT books includes it among his letters. The external evidence of authenticity could indeed hardly be stronger; and it is altogether borne out by the internal evidence, linguistic, stylistic, literary, historical and theological.\nThe letter was most probably written while Paul was in Corinth, probably while he was staying in the house of Gaius, and transcribed by Tertius, his amanuensis. There are a number of reasons why Corinth is considered most plausible. Paul was about to travel to Jerusalem on writing the letter, which matches Acts where it is reported that Paul stayed for three months in Greece. This probably implies Corinth as it was the location of Paul's greatest missionary success in Greece. Additionally, Phoebe was a deacon of the church in Cenchreae, a port to the east of Corinth, and would have been able to convey the letter to Rome after passing through Corinth and taking a ship from Corinth's west port. Erastus, mentioned in Romans 16:23, also lived in Corinth, being the city's commissioner for public works and city treasurer at various times, again indicating that the letter was written in Corinth.\nThe precise time at which it was written is not mentioned in the epistle, but it was obviously written when the collection for Jerusalem had been assembled and Paul was about to \"go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints\", that is, at the close of his second visit to Greece, during the winter preceding his last visit to that city. The majority of scholars writing on Romans propose the letter was written in late 55/early 56 or late 56/early 57. Early 55 and early 58 both have some support, while German New Testament scholar Gerd L\u00fcdemann argues for a date as early as 51/52 (or 54/55), following on from Knox, who proposed 53/54. L\u00fcdemann is the only serious challenge to the consensus of mid to late 50s.\nTextual variants.\nFourteen-chapter form.\nThere is strong, albeit indirect, evidence that a recension of Romans that lacked chapters 15 and 16 was widely used in the western half of the Roman Empire until the mid-4th century. This conclusion is partially based on the fact that a variety of Church Fathers, such as Origen and Tertullian, refer to a fourteen-chapter edition of Romans, either directly or indirectly. The fact that Paul's doxology is placed in various different places in different manuscripts of Romans also strengthens the case for an early fourteen-chapter recension. However, while there is some uncertainty, Harry Gamble concludes that the canonical sixteen-chapter recension is likely the earlier version of the text.\nThe Codex Boernerianus lacks the explicit references to the Roman church as the audience of the epistle found in Romans 1:7 and 1:15. There is evidence from patristic commentaries indicating that Boernerianus is not unique in this regard; many early, no longer extant manuscripts also lacked an explicit Roman addressee in chapter 1. It is notable that, when this textual variant is combined with the omission of chapters 15 and 16, there is no longer any clear reference to the Roman church throughout the entire epistle. Harry Gamble speculates that 1:7, 1:15, and chapters 15 and 16 may have been removed by a scribe in order to make the epistle more suitable for a \"general\" audience.\nFifteen-chapter form.\nIt is also possible that a fifteen-chapter form of Romans, omitting chapter 16, may have existed at an early date. Several scholars have argued, largely on the basis of internal evidence, that Chapter 16 represents a separate letter of Paul \u2013 possibly addressed to Ephesus \u2013 that was later appended to Romans.\nThere are a few different arguments for this conclusion. First of all, there is a concluding peace benediction at 15:33, which reads like the other Pauline benedictions that conclude their respective letters. Secondly, Paul greets a large number of people and families in chapter 16, in a way that suggests he was already familiar with them, whereas the material of chapters 1\u201315 presupposes that Paul has never met anyone from the Roman church. The fact that Papyrus 46 places Paul's doxology at the end of chapter 15 can also be interpreted as evidence for the existence of a fifteen-chapter recension of the epistle.\nSubscript.\nSome manuscripts have a subscript at the end of the Epistle:\nPaul's life in relation to his epistle.\nFor ten years before writing the letter (c.\u200947\u201357 AD), Paul had traveled around the territories bordering the Aegean Sea evangelizing. Churches had been planted in the Roman provinces of Galatia, Macedonia, Achaia and Asia. Paul, considering his task complete, wanted to preach the gospel in Spain, where he would not \"build upon another man's foundation\". This allowed him to visit Rome on the way, a long-time ambition of his. The letter to the Romans, in part, prepares them and gives reasons for his visit.\nIn addition to Paul's geographic location, his religious views are important. First, Paul was a Hellenistic Jew with a Pharisaic background (see Gamaliel), integral to his identity (see Paul the Apostle and Judaism). His concern for his people is one part of the dialogue and runs throughout the letter. Second, the other side of the dialogue is Paul's conversion and calling to follow Christ in the early 30s.\nThe churches in Rome.\nThe most probable ancient account of the beginning of Christianity in Rome is given by a 4th-century writer known as Ambrosiaster:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is established that there were Jews living in Rome in the times of the Apostles, and that those Jews who had believed [in Christ] passed on to the Romans the tradition that they ought to profess Christ but keep the law [Torah] [...] One ought not to condemn the Romans, but to praise their faith, because without seeing any signs or miracles and without seeing any of the apostles, they nevertheless accepted faith in Christ, although according to a Jewish rite.\nFrom Adam Clarke:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The occasion of writing the epistle: [...] Paul had made acquaintance with all circumstances of the Christians at Rome [...] and finding that it was [...] partly of heathens converted to Christianity, and partly of Jews, who had, with many remaining prejudices, believed in Jesus as the true Messiah, and that many contentions arose from the claims of the Gentiles to equal privileges with the Jews, and from absolute refusal of the Jews to admit these claims, unless the Gentile converts become circumcised; he wrote this epistle to adjust and settle these differences.\nAt this time, the Jews made up a substantial number in Rome, and their synagogues, frequented by many, enabled the Gentiles to become acquainted with the story of Jesus of Nazareth. Consequently, churches composed of both Jews and Gentiles were formed at Rome. According to Irenaeus, a 2nd-century Church Father, the church at Rome was founded directly by the apostles Peter and Paul. However, many modern scholars disagree with Irenaeus, holding that while little is known of the circumstances of the church's founding, it was not founded by Paul:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many of the brethren went out to meet Paul on his approach to Rome. There is evidence that Christians were then in Rome in considerable numbers and probably had more than one place of meeting.\u2014\u200a\nThe large number of names in Romans 16:3\u201315 of those then in Rome, and verses 5, 15 and 16, indicate there was more than one church assembly or company of believers in Rome. Verse 5 mentions a church that met in the house of Aquila and Priscilla. Verses 14 and 15 each mention groupings of believers and saints.\nJews were expelled from Rome because of disturbances around AD 49 by the edict of Claudius. Fitzmyer claims that both Jews and Jewish Christians were expelled as a result of their infighting. Claudius died around the year AD 54, and his successor, Emperor Nero, allowed the Jews back into Rome, but then, after the Great Fire of Rome of 64, Christians were persecuted. Fitzmyer argues that with the return of the Jews to Rome in 54 new conflict arose between the Gentile Christians and the Jewish Christians who had formerly been expelled. He also argues that this may be what Paul is referring to when he talks about the \"strong\" and the \"weak\" in Romans 15; this theory was originally put forth by W. Marxsen in \"Introduction to the New Testament: An Approach to its problems\" (1968) but is critiqued and modified by Fitzmyer. Fitzmyer's main contention is that Paul seems to be purposefully vague. Paul could have been more specific if he wanted to address this problem specifically. Keck thinks Gentile Christians may have developed a dislike of or looked down on Jews (see also Antisemitism and Responsibility for the death of Jesus), because they theologically rationalized that Jews were no longer God's people.\nStyle.\nScholars often have difficulty assessing whether Romans is a letter or an epistle, a relevant distinction in form-critical analysis:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A letter is something non-literary, a means of communication between persons who are separated from each other. Confidential and personal in nature, it is intended only for the person or persons to whom it is addressed, and not at all for the public or any kind of publicity...An Epistle is an artistic literary form, just like the dialogue, the oration, or the drama. It has nothing in common with the letter except its form: apart from that one might venture the paradox that the epistle is the opposite of a real letter. The contents of the epistle are intended for publicity\u2014they aim at interesting \"the public.\"\nJoseph Fitzmyer argues, from evidence put forth by Stirewalt, that the style of Romans is an \"essay-letter.\" Philip Melanchthon, a writer during the Reformation, suggested that Romans was (\"a summary of all Christian doctrine\"). While some scholars suggest, like Melanchthon, that it is a type of theological treatise, this view largely ignores chapters 14 and 15 of Romans. There are also many \"noteworthy elements\" missing from Romans that are included in other areas of the Pauline corpus. The breakdown of Romans as a treatise began with F.C. Baur in 1836 when he suggested \"this letter had to be interpreted according to the historical circumstances in which Paul wrote it.\"\nPaul sometimes uses a style of writing common in his time called a diatribe. He appears to be responding to a critic (probably an imaginary one based on Paul's encounters with real objections in his previous preaching), and the letter is structured as a series of arguments. In the flow of the letter, Paul shifts his arguments, sometimes addressing the Jewish members of the church, sometimes the Gentile membership and sometimes the church as a whole.\nPurposes of writing.\nTo review the current scholarly viewpoints on the purpose of Romans, along with a bibliography, see \"Dictionary of Paul and His Letters\". For a 16th-century \"Lollard\" reformer view, see the work of William Tyndale. In his prologue to his translation of Romans, which was largely taken from the prologue of German Reformer Martin Luther, Tyndale writes that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;.. this epistle is the principal and most excellent part of the new testament, and most pure evangelion, that is to say glad tidings and what we call the gospel, and also a light and a way in unto the whole scripture ... The sum and whole cause of the writings of this epistle, is, to prove that a man is justified by faith only: which proposition whoso denieth, to him is not only this epistle and all that Paul writeth, but also the whole scripture, so locked up that he shall never understand it to his soul's health. And to bring a man to the understanding and feeling that faith only justifieth, Paul proveth that the whole nature of man is so poisoned and so corrupt, yea and so dead concerning godly living or godly thinking, that it is impossible for her to keep the law in the sight of God.\nContents.\nPrologue (1:1\u201315).\nGreeting (1:1\u20137).\nThe introduction provides some general notes about Paul. He introduces his apostleship here and introductory notes about the gospel he wishes to preach to the church at Rome. Jesus' human line stems from David. Paul, however, does not limit his ministry to Jews. Paul's goal is that the Gentiles would also hear the gospel.\nPrayer of thanksgiving (1:8\u201315).\nPaul thanks God and commends the Romans for their faith. He also speaks of the past obstacles that have blocked his coming to Rome earlier.\nSalvation in the Christ (1:16\u20138:39).\nRighteousness of God (1:16\u201317).\nPaul announces that he is not \"ashamed\" () of his gospel because it holds power (). These two verses form a backdrop of themes for the rest of the book; first, that Paul is unashamed of his love for this gospel that he preaches about Jesus Christ. He also notes that he is speaking to the \"Jew first.\" There is significance to this, but much of it is scholarly conjecture as the relationship between Paul and Judaism is still debated, and scholars are hard-pressed to find an answer to such a question without knowing more about the audience in question. Wayne Brindle argues, based on Paul's former writings against the Judaizers in Galatians and 2\u00a0Corinthians, that rumors had probably spread about Paul totally negating the Jewish existence in a Christian world (see also Antinomianism in the New Testament and Supersessionism). Paul may have used the \"Jew first\" approach to counter such a view.\nCondemnation: The Universal corruption of Gentiles and Jews (1:18\u20133:20).\nThe judgment of God (1:18\u201332).\nPaul begins with a summary of Hellenistic Jewish apologist discourse. His summary begins by suggesting that humans have taken up ungodliness and wickedness for which there already is wrath from God. People have taken God's invisible image and made him into an idol. Paul draws heavily here from the Wisdom of Solomon. This summary condemns \"unnatural sexual behavior\" and warns that such behavior has already resulted in a depraved body and mind (\"reprobate mind\" in the King James Version) and says that people who do such things (including murder and wickedness ) are worthy of death. Paul stands firmly against the idol worship system which was common in Rome. Several scholars believe the passage is a non-Pauline interpolation.\nPaul's warning of hypocrites (2:1\u20134).\nOn the traditional Protestant interpretation, Paul here calls out Jews who are condemning others for not following the law when they themselves are also not following the law. Stanley Stowers, however, has argued on rhetorical grounds that Paul is in these verses not addressing a Jew at all but rather an easily recognizable caricature of the typical boastful person (). Stowers writes, \"There is absolutely no justification for reading as Paul's attack on 'the hypocrisy of the Jew.' No one in the first century would have identified with Judaism. That popular interpretation depends upon anachronistically reading later Christian characterizations of Jews as 'hypocritical Pharisees'\". (See also Anti-Judaism).\nJustification: The Gift of Grace and Forgiveness through Faith (3:21\u20135:11).\nPaul says that a righteousness from God has made itself known apart from the law, to which the law and prophets testify, and this righteousness from God comes through faith in Jesus to all who believe. He describes justification \u2013 legally clearing the believer of the guilt and penalty of sin \u2013 as a gift of God, and not the work of man (lest he might boast), but by faith.\nAssurance of salvation (5\u201311).\nIn chapters five through eight, Paul argues that believers can be assured of their hope in salvation, having been freed from the bondage of sin. Paul teaches that through faith, the faithful have been joined with Jesus and freed from sin. Believers should celebrate in the assurance of salvation and be certain that no external force or party can take their salvation away from them. This promise is open to everyone since everyone has sinned, save the one who paid for all of them.\nIn , Paul says that humans are under the law while they live: \"Know ye not [...] that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?\" However, Jesus' death on the cross makes believers dead to the law (, \"Wherefore, my brethren, ye are also become dead to the law by the body of Christ\"), according to an antinomistic interpretation.\nIn Paul addresses the faithfulness of God to the Israelites, where he says that God has been faithful to his promise. Paul hopes that all Israelites will come to realize the truth, stating that \"Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. For they are not all Israel, which are of Israel: Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children: but, In Isaac shall thy seed be called.\" Paul affirms that he himself is also an Israelite, and had in the past been a persecutor of Early Christians. In Paul talks about how the nation of Israel has not been cast away, and the conditions under which Israel will be God's chosen nation again: when Israel returns to its faith, sets aside its unbelief.\nTransformation of believers (12\u201315:13).\nFrom chapter 12 through the first part of chapter 15, Paul outlines how the gospel transforms believers and the behaviour that results from such a transformation. This transformation is described as a \"renewing of your mind\" (12:2), a transformation that Douglas J. Moo characterizes as \"the heart of the matter.\" It is a transformation so radical that it amounts to \"a transfiguration of your brain,\" a \"metanoia\", a \"mental revolution.\"\nPaul goes on to describe how believers should live. Christians are no longer under the law, that is, no longer bound by the law of Moses, but under the grace of God (see Law and grace). Christians do not need to live under the law because to the extent that their minds have been renewed, they will know \"almost instinctively\" what God wants of them. The law then provides an \"objective standard\" for judging progress in the \"lifelong process\" of their mind's renewal.\nTo the extent they have been set free from sin by renewed minds (Romans 6:18), believers are no longer bound to sin. Believers are free to live in obedience to God and love everybody. As Paul says in Romans 13:10, \"love () worketh no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the fulfilling of law\".\nObedience to earthly powers (13:1\u20137).\nThe fragment in Romans 13:1\u20137 dealing with obedience to earthly powers is considered by some, for example James Kallas, to be an interpolation. (See also the Great Commandment and Christianity and politics). Paul Tillich accepts the historical authenticity of Romans 13:1\u20137, but claims it has been misinterpreted by churches with an anti-revolutionary bias:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the many politico-theological abuses of biblical statements is the understanding of Paul's words [Romans 13:1\u20137] as justifying the anti-revolutionary bias of some churches, particularly the Lutheran. But neither these words nor any other New Testament statement deals with the methods of gaining political power. In Romans, Paul is addressing eschatological enthusiasts, not a revolutionary political movement.\nEpilogue (15:1\u201316:23).\nPaul's ministry and travel plans (16:14\u201327).\nThe concluding verses contain a description of his travel plans, personal greetings and salutations. One-third of the twenty-one Christians identified in the greetings are women. Additionally, none of these Christians answer to the name Peter, although according to the Catholic tradition, he had been Pope in Rome for about 25 years. Possibly related was the Incident at Antioch between Paul and Cephas.\nHermeneutics.\nCatholic interpretation.\nRoman Catholics accept the necessity of faith for salvation but point to for the necessity of living a virtuous life as well:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But by your hard and impenitent heart you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath when God's righteous judgment will be revealed. For he will render to every man according to his works: to those who by patience in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, he will give eternal life; but for those who are factious and do not obey the truth, but obey wickedness, there will be wrath and fury. There will be tribulation and distress for every human being who does evil, the Jew first and also the Greek, but glory and honor and peace for every one who does good, the Jew first and also the Greek. For God shows no partiality.\nCatholics would also look to the passage in Romans 8:13 for evidence that justification by faith is only valid so long as it is combined with obedient cooperation with The Holy Spirit, and the passage in Romans 11:22 to show that the Christian can lose their justification if they turn away from cooperating with The Holy Spirit and reject Christ through mortal sin.\nProtestant interpretation.\nIn the Protestant interpretation, the New Testament epistles (including Romans) describe salvation as coming from faith and not from righteous actions. For example, Romans (underlining added):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;2 For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath \"whereof\" to glory; but not before God. 3 For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. 4 Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. 5 But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted unto him for righteousness.\nIn the Protestant interpretation it is considered significant that in Romans , Paul says that God will reward those who follow the law and then goes on to say that no one follows the law perfectly (see also Sermon on the Mount: Interpretation) Romans :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;21 Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? 22 Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege? 23 Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? 24 For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is written. 25 For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. 26 Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? 27 And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who by the letter and circumcision dost transgress the law? 28 For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: 29 But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God.\nRomans has been at the forefront of several major movements in Protestantism. Martin Luther's lectures on Romans in 1515\u20131516 probably coincided with the development of his criticism of Roman Catholicism which led to the \"95 Theses\" of 1517. In the preface to his German translation of Romans, Luther described Paul's letter to the Romans as \"the most important piece in the New Testament. It is purest Gospel. It is well worth a Christian's while not only to memorize it word for word but also to occupy himself with it daily, as though it were the daily bread of the soul\". In 1738, while hearing Luther's Preface to the Epistle to the Romans read at St. Botolph Church on Aldersgate Street in London, John Wesley famously felt his heart \"strangely warmed\", a conversion experience that is often seen as the beginning of Methodism.\nLuther controversially added the word \"alone\" ( in German) to Romans so that it read: \"thus, we hold, then, that man is justified without doing the works of the law, alone through faith\". The word \"alone\" does not appear in the original Greek text, but Luther defended his translation by maintaining that the adverb \"alone\" was required both by idiomatic German and Paul's intended meaning. This is a \"literalist view\" rather than a literal view of the Bible.\nThe \"Romans Road\" (or \"Roman Road\") refers to a set of scriptures from Romans that Christian evangelists use to present a clear and simple case for personal salvation to each person, as all the verses are contained in one single book, making it easier for evangelism without going back and forth through the entire New Testament. The core verses used by nearly all groups using \"Romans Road\" are: Romans , , , , and .\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9962", "revid": "50972739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9962", "title": "Eleanor of Aquitaine", "text": "Queen of France (1137\u201352) and England (1154\u201389); Duchess of Aquitaine (1137\u20131204)\nEleanor of Aquitaine ( or ; ; , or ; c.\u20091124 \u2013 1 April 1204) was duchess of Aquitaine from 1137 to 1204, queen of France from 1137 to 1152 as the wife of King Louis VII, and queen of England from 1154 to 1189 as the wife of King Henry II. As the reigning duchess of Aquitaine, she ruled jointly with her husbands and two of her sons, Kings Richard I and John of England. As the heiress of the House of Poitiers, which controlled much of southwestern France, she was one of the wealthiest and most powerful people in Western Europe during the High Middle Ages.\nThe eldest child of Duke William X of Aquitaine and A\u00e9nor de Ch\u00e2tellerault, Eleanor became duchess upon her father's death in 1137. Later that year, she married Louis, son of King Louis VI of France. Shortly afterwards, Eleanor's father-in-law died and her husband became king, making her queen consort. Louis VII and Eleanor had two daughters, Marie and Alix. During the Second Crusade, Eleanor accompanied Louis to the Holy Land. Pope Eugene III rejected an initial request in 1149 for an annulment of the marriage on grounds of consanguinity. In 1152, after fifteen years of marriage, Eleanor had not borne a male heir, and the annulment was granted. Their daughters were declared legitimate, custody was awarded to Louis, and Eleanor's lands were restored to her.\nIn the same year, Eleanor married Henry, the duke of Normandy. In 1154, Henry and Eleanor became king and queen of England. The couple had five sons and three daughters, but eventually became estranged. Henry imprisoned Eleanor for supporting the 1173 revolt against him by their sons Young Henry, Richard and Geoffrey. She was not released until 1189, when Henry II died and Richard I ascended the throne. As queen dowager, Eleanor acted as regent during Richard's long absences from England and France. On Richard's death in 1199, she successfully campaigned for his younger brother John to succeed him. After continuing turmoil between the French and English kings and the successive loss of the lands she and Henry II had once ruled over, she died in 1204 and was buried in Fontevraud Abbey in France.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nThere is a scarcity of primary sources on Eleanor's life. There are no contemporary biographies, and modern biographies are largely drawn from annals and chronicles, generally written by clerics associated with the royal courts. There are very few surviving records from Aquitaine and she is barely mentioned in records of the French court, and appears to have been actively erased from memory. Consequently, accounts of Eleanor appear largely as a peripheral figure in chronicles of the men around her. Important secular sources from England and Wales include Roger of Howden, Walter Map, Ralph de Diceto, Gerald of Wales and Ralph Niger. While some were relatively neutral, the writings of Map and Gerald were largely satirical polemics, while Niger's criticisms are mainly directed at Eleanor's second husband, Henry II of England, rather than Eleanor herself. Among the chroniclers are also clerical sources, including Gervase of Canterbury, Ralph of Coggeshall, Richard of Devizes, William of Newburgh and Ranulf Higden. The latter were mainly influenced by their revulsion at the murder of Thomas Becket in 1170. Although Richard of Devizes admired Eleanor's perseverance in supporting her son Richard, all of them expressed negative views about women in power and hinted at some darker attributes that eventually led to a \"Black Legend\" that became associated with her. Twentieth-century writers such as Amy Kelly and Marion Meade would create an opposite myth that pervaded many subsequent accounts, of a feminist heroine, referred to as the \"Golden Myth\", while in the French literature, similar treatment is seen in the work of R\u00e9gine Pernoud. More recent scholarship has sought to correct both of these characterisations.\nIn the absence of reliable contemporary accounts, legend and speculation have frequently been resorted to; \"rarely in the course of historical endeavor has so much been written, over so many centuries, about one woman of whom we know so little\".\nChildhood and adolescence (1124\u20131137).\nFamily origins and education.\nEleanor was descended on her father's side from a long line of dukes of Aquitaine, dating back to the 10th century, who in turn succeeded the Carolingian monarchs of the Kingdom of Aquitaine. Twelfth-century Aquitaine was one of the wealthiest and most powerful vassal states within France at that time. The French kings ruled over a relatively small area around the \u00cele-de-France to the north-west, and the rulers of the surrounding duchies (\"s\") and counties (\"s\") gave only nominal allegiance to the French crown.\nWhile little is known of Eleanor's early life or education, many biographers have speculated from what is known of aristocratic households of the era. Her year of birth is not known precisely, and the first mention of her occurs in July 1129. Tradition places her birth on one of her parents' visit to Bordeaux, likely at her father's nearby castle at . Other authors suggest Poitiers, , Bordeaux, or Nieul-sur-l'Autise. While the date of her birth was once given as 1122 or 1124, the latter is now generally accepted. A late 13th-century genealogy of her family listing her as 13 years old at her father's death in the spring of 1137 provides the best evidence that Eleanor was born in 1124. However, some chronicles mention a fidelity oath of lords of Aquitaine on the occasion of Eleanor's fourteenth birthday in 1136. Her parents are unlikely to have married before 1121. Her age at her death is thus stated as 80 or 82.\nEleanor was the oldest of three children born to Duke William X of Aquitaine and his wife, Aenor de Ch\u00e2tellerault. Her father was the son of Duke William IX of Aquitaine and Countess Philippa of Toulouse. Her mother was the daughter of Viscount Aimery I of Ch\u00e2tellerault and Dangereuse de l'Isle Bouchard. Dangereuse was also William IX's longtime mistress, and she and William IX then arranged for their respective children to be married to each other. Eleanor had two siblings, A\u00e9lith and Aigret.\nEleanor was named for her mother Aenor and baptised as \"Ali\u00e9nor\" from the Latin \"alia \u00c6nor\", which means \"the other Aenor\". It became \"El\u00e9anor\" in the \"langues d'o\u00efl\" of northern France and \"Eleanor\" in English, but the exact spelling was never fixed in her lifetime.\nLittle, if anything, is known of Eleanor's education. Eleanor's mother died in 1130, when she was only six, and her younger brother also died in that year. The only contemporary record of her education comes from Bertran de Born, the troubadour, who states that she read the poetry of her native tongue. Although the language of Bordeaux and Poitiers was Poitevin, a northern French (\"langue d'o\u00efl\") dialect, Eleanor was soon exposed to Occitan (\"langue d'oc\"), the southern dialect and language of the poets and courtiers at the ducal court. With the death of her brother, she became the heir presumptive to her father's domains.\nInheritance (1137).\nIn 1137, William X left Poitiers for Bordeaux and took his daughters with him. Upon reaching Bordeaux, he left them at l'Ombri\u00e8re Castle in the charge of his loyal vassal and the local archbishop, Geoffrey of Louroux. William then set out for the Shrine of Saint James of Compostela in the company of other pilgrims. However, he died on Good Friday of that year (9April).\nEleanor, aged 13, then became the duchess of Aquitaine, and thus one of the richest and most eligible heiresses in Europe. Since kidnapping an heiress was seen as a viable option for obtaining a title and lands, when William X knew that he was dying, he named King Louis VI of France as Eleanor's guardian. William requested that Louis take care of both Eleanor and the lands, and find her a suitable husband. However, until a husband was found, the King had the legal right to her lands. William also insisted to his companions that his death be kept a secret until Louis was informed; the men were to journey as quickly as possible from Saint James of Compostela across the Pyrenees to notify Archbishop Geoffrey, then to Paris to inform the King.\nLouis VI, who was in poor health, recognised an opportunity to realise a long-standing ambition to enlarge his dominions by the acquisition of Aquitaine. His eldest surviving son, Louis, had originally been destined for monastic life, but had become the heir apparent when the King's eldest son, Philip, died after being thrown from his horse in 1131. Louis VI realised the dangers of not swiftly settling the succession of the Aquitainian duchy, while a marriage between his son and Eleanor would add the considerable resources of Aquitaine to the Capetian holdings. Thus, he spent little time in dispatching the young Louis, accompanied by a large retinue, some 500 knights, along with Abbot Suger of Saint-Denis, Bishop , and Counts Theobald II of Champagne and Raoul I of Vermandois to Bordeaux to secure the marriage.\nQueen of France (1137\u20131152).\nMarriage.\nRelatively little is known from the time that Eleanor was queen of France. On 25 July 1137, Archbishop Geoffrey of Bordeaux oversaw her wedding to Louis in the Cathedral of Saint-Andr\u00e9 in Bordeaux. Immediately after the wedding, the couple were enthroned as duke and duchess of Aquitaine. It was agreed that the duchy would remain independent of France until Eleanor's oldest son became both king of France and duke of Aquitaine. As a wedding present she gave Louis a rock crystal vase.\nFrom Bordeaux, the couple proceeded to Poitiers, arriving on 1 August, where after a week of festivities they were invested as count and countess of Poitou on 8 August. Louis's tenure as count of Poitou and duke of Aquitaine and Gascony lasted only a few days. On their way to Paris, a messenger arrived with the news that Louis VI had died on 1 August and therefore they were now king and queen of France. Louis had already been crowned in the Capetian fashion in 1131 and on Christmas Day 1137, Eleanor was crowned queen at Bourges.\nEleanor was not popular with some members of the court, including Abbot Suger and Louis's mother Adelaide of Maurienne, who left the court shortly thereafter and remarried. Some courtiers made unfavourable reference to memories of Constance of Arles, third wife of Robert II of France and ancestor of both Louis and Eleanor. Constance had had a reputation for being indiscreet in both dress and language. Eleanor's conduct was repeatedly criticised by church elders, particularly Bernard of Clairvaux and Suger, as indecorous. Modifications were made to the austere Cit\u00e9 Palace in Paris for Eleanor's sake and she was joined by her sister A\u00e9lith, who became known there as Petronilla.\nClaiming Toulouse (1141).\nEleanor was descended from the counts of Toulouse through her grandmother, Countess Philippa. Philippa was the sole child of Count William IV of Toulouse, but following her father's death in 1093, Philippa's uncle Raymond IV (r.\u20091094\u00a0\u2013\u00a01105) asserted a right to the title. Philippa then persuaded her husband, Duke William IX of Aquitaine, to enforce her right, a struggle that lasted nearly 30 years, finally ending in 1123 with Raymond IV's son, Alfonso Jordan (r.\u20091112\u00a0\u2013\u00a01148). During this time, control of Toulouse continually changed hands between William IX and Raymond IV's children. Philippa's claim was passed on to Eleanor's father then to Eleanor herself. Louis attempted to enforce her claim by marching on Toulouse, arriving at the walls on 21 June 1141. Although he laid siege to the city, he was unable to subjugate it and withdrew, after accepting the homage of Count Alfonso. Despite this setback, Eleanor continued to press her claims, with further expeditions in 1159 and throughout her life.\nConflict with the church.\nLouis soon came into conflict with the church and Pope Innocent II (1130\u20131143). In 1140 he intervened in the election to the see of Poitiers on finding that a new bishop, Grimoald, had been elected and consecrated without his consent. This was despite the fact that his father had granted the ecclesiastical province of Bordeaux the right to do so and that he himself had approved this. Louis then attempted to prohibit Grimoald from entering the city, thus drawing both Innocent II and Bernard of Clairvaux into the dispute. Innocent issued an order to overrule the royal edict but Grimoald died, ending the dispute. The ecclesiastical authorities were aware of the unsuccessful attempt of both William IX and William X of Aquitaine to interfere in church matters. However, the Poitiers affair was soon followed by other attempts by Louis to exert his authority.\nThe most consequential of these occurred when the archbishopric of Bourges became vacant in 1141. Louis put forward as a candidate his chancellor, Cadurc, while vetoing the one suitable candidate, Pierre de la Chatre, a monk who was promptly elected by the canons of Bourges and consecrated by Pope Innocent in Rome. Louis bolted the gates of Bourges against the new archbishop on his return. The Pope, recalling similar attempts by Eleanor's father to exile supporters of Innocent from Poitou and replace them with priests loyal to himself, may have blamed Eleanor for this, but stated that Louis was only \"a foolish schoolboy\" and should be taught not to meddle in such matters. Outraged, Louis swore upon relics that so long as he lived Pierre should never enter Bourges. An interdict was thereupon imposed upon the royal household and lands, and Theobald II of Champagne granted Pierre refuge, further annoying the King.\nLouis had been in a situation of increasing conflict with Theobald of Champagne, and the Bourges affair, together with a crisis in Theobald's family, brought this to a head. In 1125 Theobald's sister Eleanor had married Raoul I of Vermandois, but Raoul had been forming a liaison with Petronilla, the Queen's sister. Raoul eventually deserted his wife, seeking an annulment of their marriage on grounds of consanguinity, to which Louis acquiesced, finding three bishops who agreed that the marriage was invalid and then in 1142 officiated at the wedding of Petronilla and Raoul. Both Theobald, who had taken his sister under protection, and Bernard of Clairvaux protested to Pope Innocent, who convened a council, voided both Raoul's annulment from Eleanor of Champagne and his marriage to Petronilla, excommunicated one bishop and suspended the other two. Furthermore, Raoul was ordered to return to his first wife. Upon his refusal, he and Petronilla were excommunicated and their lands placed under interdiction.\nEleanor's assumed role in these affairs led to the first appearance of the black legend that would be associated with her for centuries. Women, even queens, were not expected to concern themselves with such matters, and that therefore she might represent darker powers. Rumours began to associate her with mythical figures such as Melusine. Things took a more salacious turn when it was suggested she was having an affair with Count Geoffrey Plantagenet of Anjou.\nLouis rejected the papal legate's decision and ordered an invasion of Champagne, in a war that would last two years (1142\u201344) and ended with the occupation of Champagne by the royal army. For a year the royal army laid waste to the Champagne countryside, but since Theobald showed no signs of backing down, Louis took personal charge of the assault in 1143, which focused on the siege of the town of Vitry. More than a thousand people sought refuge in the cathedral, which caught fire, burning alive everyone inside. Horrified at the carnage, Louis returned to Paris, seeking to make peace with Theobald. In return, and with Innocent's support, he demanded Raoul renounce Petronilla and the interdiction on Raoul and Petronilla was duly lifted, while Louis ordered a retreat. When Raoul refused the King's demands, the royal forces once more invaded Champagne.\nPublic opinion was turning against the war and in particular Bernard of Clairvaux was very critical, while Suger advised settling the issues. Innocent II died in September 1143 and was succeeded by Celestine II (1143\u20131144), who lifted the interdiction in an offer of conciliation, at Bernard's suggestion and Louis became more open to negotiation. It was about this time that questions of consanguinity were first raised about Louis and Eleanor's marriage, since he had opposed a number of other marriages on these grounds, including that of Raoul of Vermandois and Eleanor of Champagne. Consequently, a number of negotiations took place over the winter of 1143\u20131144. Finally, Suger hosted a meeting at his newly built monastic church at Saint-Denis during a feast day on 22 April 1144, at which Bernard persuaded Eleanor that her efforts on behalf of her sister were hopeless, and peace was restored, although the couple continued to refuse to separate, and they remained excommunicated till 1148 when Raoul's first marriage was once again invalidated and his second marriage validated. Also the Saint-Denis agreement included Louis withdrawing his opposition to the archbishop of Bourges. The discussion between Eleanor and Bernard also included reference to her apparent infertility (she had had one miscarriage in 1138), and a suggestion that she might be rewarded for her concessions with a child. In April 1145, Eleanor gave birth to a daughter, Marie. On Sunday, 11 June 1144, the King and Queen attended the dedication of Saint-Denis, at which time Louis donated Eleanor's crystal vase.\nSecond Crusade (1145\u20131149).\nTaking the Cross (1145\u20131147).\nLouis remained obsessed over the massacre at Vitry and considered a pilgrimage to the Holy Land, but events overtook this desire. The First Crusade (1096\u20131099) had succeeded in capturing the Holy Land from the Turks and establishing a system of four (largely Frankish) crusader states to administer the region, known as the Outremer. But this was threatened, when on 24 December 1144, Zengi and the Saracen Turks captured Edessa, capital of one of the crusader states, making the adjacent Principality of Antioch, County of Tripoli and Kingdom of Jerusalem vulnerable. Of these, Antioch was the most vulnerable, and of particular concern since the prince of Antioch was Raymond of Poitiers, Eleanor's uncle. On 1 December Pope Eugene III issued a bull requesting that Louis and all faithful French Christians mount a crusade to rescue the remaining States. Louis and Eleanor were at Bourges when the message arrived, and Louis responded enthusiastically on Christmas Day that he would lead a crusade. Noting a lack of enthusiasm among the French nobility, he postponed further action till Easter 1146. Final planning took place at Saint-Denis over Easter that year, at which Pope Eugene attended. Louis delegated administration of his kingdom to Eugene, who appointed Abbot Suger and Raoul of Vermandois as co-regents.\nEleanor also formally took the cross during Bernard's sermon, which meant leaving her daughter behind. Eleanor recruited some women of the Aquitainian nobility for the campaign as well as some 300 other women who volunteered to help. It was not unusual for women to take part in crusades. From Louis's perspective, there were advantages in including her. As regent to an absent monarch, she could have created problems for Suger, Louis's choice as his administrator, and he needed the support of the Aquitainian nobility. Furthermore, the crusade was ostensibly to come to the aid of her uncle. The presence of women was not without its critics, particularly among clerics, though this may have been influenced by hindsight, given that William of Newburgh's account was written well after the actual crusade. Eleanor's taking the cross provided the next opportunity for her detractors to construct her legend, with claims that she and her ladies set off for the crusades as Amazonian warriors.\nRoad to Ephesus (1147).\nOn 11 June 25,000 to 50,000 crusaders and pilgrims gathered at Saint-Denis and began their march, first to Metz and then crossing the Rhine at Worms, and pressing on to Regensburg and the Danube river. There they were met by envoys from Byzantine Emperor Manuel Komnenos (r.\u20091143\u00a0\u2013\u00a01180), and followed the river via Klosterneuburg and through Hungary, reaching the Eastern Empire by mid-August and then, crossing the Danube, to Adrianople and finally Constantinople, five days later, on 4 October 1147.\nIn Constantinople, the French crusaders were obliged to await the arrival of those of their forces that were travelling by sea. While there they received the hospitality of the Emperor, Louis and Eleanor staying in the Philopation palace just outside the city walls. Meanwhile, the German crusaders had gone ahead and crossed the Bosphorus into Asia Minor. Once all their forces were gathered together, the French crossed into Asia on 15 October and proceeded south to their first stop at Nicaea. Continuing south down the Aegean coast, they discovered that the Germans had suffered a major defeat at the hands of the Turks, at the battle of Dorylaeum. The French, together with the remnants of the Germans continued south on the safer coastal route to Ephesus, via Pergamus and Smyrna, which they reached on 20 December. After camping at Ephesus, most of the Germans left for Constantinople.\nEphesus to Jerusalem (1148\u20131149).\nIn January 1148, Louis decided to travel inland towards Laodicea in Phrygia, to reach Antalya on the south coast and thus Antioch more quickly. They reached Laodicea on 6 January and then their route took them across the mountains. On the day of their crossing of Mount Cadmus, Louis took charge of the rear of the column, where the unarmed pilgrims and the baggage trains were, while the vanguard was commanded by the Aquitainian Geoffrey de Rancon and instructed to set camp on the plateau before the next pass. They reached the summit of Cadmus, one of the highest in their path, but Rancon, in concert with Louis's uncle Amadeus III of Savoy, chose to continue on through the pass to the next valley. Accordingly, when the main part of the column arrived, and approached the pass, separated from both the vanguard and rearguard, they were ambushed by the Turkish forces. In the ensuing Battle of Mount Cadmus, the Turks inflicted great losses on the French, while Louis barely escaped.\nThe chronicler William of Tyre, writing between 1170 and 1184 and thus perhaps too long after the event to be considered historically accurate, placed the blame for this disaster firmly on the amount of baggage being carried, much of it reputedly belonging to Eleanor and her ladies, and the presence of non-combatants. Louis was a weak and ineffectual military leader with no skill for maintaining troop discipline or morale, or of making informed and logical tactical decisions. Official blame for the disaster was placed on Geoffrey de Rancon, who had made the decision to continue. Since Geoffrey was Eleanor's vassal, many believed that it was she who had been ultimately responsible for the change in plan, and thus the massacre. This suspicion of responsibility did nothing for her popularity in Christendom. She was also blamed for the size of the baggage train and the fact that her Aquitanian soldiers had marched at the front and thus were not involved in the fight. The survivors reached Antalya on 20 January.\nIn Antalya, the crusaders found there was a limited number of ships available, and those that were required more money than they were willing to pay. Consequently, the royal party sailed from the port with a relatively small group of followers, arriving in Antioch on 19 March, well behind schedule. The remainder attempted to complete the journey with great hardship and much loss, only about half of them completing the journey.\nWhile the crusaders were initially welcomed, tensions grew between them and Raymond. Raymond's agenda was to attack Aleppo and regain control of Edessa, and hence gain some security, while Louis was determined to press on to Jerusalem, despite the original papal decree being to recapture Edessa. Louis was not keen to fight in northern Syria, and his forces were badly depleted. Furthermore, he had a personal agenda to journey in pilgrimage to Jerusalem.\nEleanor's loyalty to her uncle created conflict between her and Louis. Eventually the French, now only a tenth of their original strength, left Antioch abruptly on 28 March, despite Eleanor's protests and attempts to remain with Raymond. These conflicts once again led to the question of consanguinity being raised. According to John of Salisbury, it was Eleanor who prompted this. The crusaders reached Jerusalem in May, entering by the Jaffa Gate, where Queen Melisende and King Baldwin III greeted them. A conference was then held at Acre on 24 June, to discuss strategic plans. This resulted in the disastrous siege of Damascus on 24 July. The crusaders' forced withdrawal after only four days effectively ended the crusade and many of the survivors started making plans to return, but Louis vowed to celebrate Easter 1149 in the Holy Land, despite Suger's pleas.\nThe sojourn in Antioch, the conflict between the rulers and the resulting rift between the royal couple led to chroniclers, such as John of Salisbury and William of Tyre, hinting at an adulterous and incestuous affair between Eleanor and Raymond. Such an affair would become an enduring part of her legend, which in some versions also depicted her as having an affair with a Saracen leader. Contemporary accounts suggest it was her attention to political affairs that was considered the greatest stain on her character.\nReturn to France (1149).\nAfter celebrating Easter, Louis and Eleanor set sail from Acre for Italy in separate ships on 3 April but were delayed by both hostile naval forces off the Peloponnesus in May and storms which drove Eleanor's ship as far south as the Barbary Coast, and for a while their whereabouts were unknown. Louis arrived in Calabria on 29 July and eventually discovered Eleanor had reached Palermo, Sicily, where she was sheltered by agents of King Roger II at his palace. It took some time before Eleanor and Louis could be reunited.\nAt King Roger's court in Potenza, Eleanor had learned of the death of her uncle Raymond, who had been beheaded by Nureddin's Muslim forces at the Battle of Inab, on 29 June. Nureddin then overran most of Raymond's territories in Antioch, setting back the goals of the crusade even further. Instead of returning directly to France, Louis and Eleanor headed north towards Rome, stopping at the Abbey of Monte Cassino on 4 October after Eleanor fell ill. Pope Eugene invited them to stay at his palace at Tusculum, south of Rome, where they arrived on 9 October. Eugene had been informed by Suger of the couple's marital problems, and that they were no longer having sexual relations. The question of consanguinity and hence possible annulment was again raised, but was denied by Eugene, who declared the marriage legitimate by canon law and urged reconciliation. It is likely that Eleanor's second child was conceived at this time. From Tusculum, the couple travelled north through Italy, visiting Rome and then crossing the Alps to reach France and finally arriving in Paris around 11 November 1149, after an absence of two and a half years.\nAnnulment (1152).\nIn the summer of 1150, Eleanor gave birth to a second daughter, Alix. The lack of a male heir was unprecedented in the Capetian line, Eleanor was now twenty-six and had been married for thirteen years. Not only was the likelihood of a son being born to secure the succession seen as remote, but the lack of an heir was perceived as an omen. Suger had been a strong advocate for the political advantages of the marriage between Louis and Eleanor. When he died on 13 January 1151, the balance changed since Bernard of Clairvaux was a critic of the marriage's consanguinity. A number of nobles and courtiers also advised the King to dissolve the marriage. Later that year, Count Henry of Anjou appeared at the court in Paris to pay homage to Louis as the new duke of Normandy. Chroniclers such as Gerald of Wales, William of Newburgh and Walter Map later implied that something happened between Henry and Eleanor, eleven years his senior, that contributed to the dissolution of her marriage with Louis.\nBy this stage, her reputation badly damaged, Eleanor's influence at court was waning. Any such dissolution would require a complex political realignment, separating the Aquitanian and Capetian possessions and jurisdictions, and in the autumn of 1151 the couple made a tour of the duchy during which much of the French presence, such as garrisons, was replaced with Eleanor's people. On 11 March 1152, at the royal castle of Beaugency on the Loire, near Orl\u00e9ans, , archbishop of Sens and primate of France, presided over a synod to consider the matter. Louis and Eleanor were both present, as were Archbishops Samson of Reims, Geoffrey of Bordeaux and Hugh of Rouen and many other bishops and nobility. Samson of Reims acted for Eleanor, who did not contest the action.\nOn 21 March, the four archbishops, with the approval of Pope Eugene, granted an annulment on grounds of consanguinity within the fourth degree; Eleanor was Louis's third cousin once removed, and they shared common ancestry through Robert II of France and his wife Constance of Arles. Their two daughters were, however, declared legitimate. Custody of their daughters was awarded to Louis, as both custom and law decreed. Louis assured Archbishop Samson that Eleanor's lands would be restored to her.\nWhile Eleanor stated that the reason for the annulment was \"for reasons of kinship with my Lord, Louis\", the event fueled speculation as to her behaviour and added to the growing legend. Equally without evidence are accounts of a distraught discarded wife.\nRemarriage and family (1152\u20131154).\nOnce again a single woman with possessions, Eleanor was at risk of abduction and forced marriage. This \"rapuit et abduxit\" was a common practice regarding heiresses, even in her own family. From Beaugency, she travelled south towards her court in Poitiers. On her route she narrowly evaded two kidnapping attempts. First, Count Theobald V of Blois attempted to capture Eleanor on the night of 21 March as she passed through Blois, but she escaped by taking a boat down the Loire to Tours. Theobald later married her daughter Alix, while his brother Count Henry I of Champagne married Alix's older sister, Marie. Geoffrey of Anjou lay in wait for Eleanor at Port-de-Piles, but she was warned at Tours of the plot and changed her route, arriving safely by boat at Poitiers.\nAs soon as she arrived in Poitiers, just before Easter, Eleanor sent envoys to Geoffrey of Anjou's older brother, Duke Henry of Normandy, asking him to come at once to marry her. Many authors conclude that this fulfilled a prior arrangement made at his earlier visit to the French court. While providing security for her Aquitaine lands, the choice of Henry also made political sense as Anjou lay on the northern border of Aquitaine, thus protecting it and enlarging her joint jurisdiction. She then set about revoking all acts and charters of Louis relating to Aquitaine, and replacing them with her own. The message reached Henry at Lisieux on 6 April. Henry arrived in Poitiers in mid May and on 18 May 1152 (Whit Sunday), eight weeks after her annulment, Eleanor married the much younger Henry in a quiet private ceremony at Poitiers Cathedral, thereby transferring her Aquitaine lands from Louis to Henry. The wedding was described as being \"without the pomp and ceremony that befitted their rank\". They had kept the arrangements secret, for fear that Louis, who regarded the growing power of Henry and the Angevins with anxiety, would prevent it.\nEleanor was related to Henry even more closely than she had been to Louis: they were cousins to the third degree through their common ancestor Ermengarde of Anjou (wife of Duke Robert I of Burgundy and Count Geoffrey II of G\u00e2tinais), and they were also descended from King Robert II of France. Her remarriage to Henry provided the next chapter of the legend of her scandalous behaviour, it being implied that she had a previous illicit relationship with him.\nWhen Louis discovered Eleanor had married his archrival, and knowing Henry was also in line for succession to the throne of England, he was furious and immediately made preparations for war. He also refused to give up the title of duke of Aquitaine, which he had acquired through marriage to Eleanor and was now Henry's by the same right, for if Eleanor bore a male heir, his daughters would be disinherited. His subsequent invasion of Normandy marked the beginning of an Angevin-Capetian conflict that would last more than fifty years.\nEleanor now exercised independent power in her court and within her hereditary domains, striking new seals for her charters, both as duchess of Aquitaine and countess of Poitou, but also with the added titles of duchess of the Normans and countess of the Angevins. Within a month, Henry departed with the intention of pursuing his claim to the throne of England but now had to deal with Louis's invasion of Normandy, which he easily repelled within six weeks, signing a truce, so that by the autumn of that year he was able to return to Aquitaine. To commemorate their marriage, Henry and Eleanor had a stained glass window installed at Poitiers Cathedral, in which they are represented, kneeling as donors. By late 1152, the couple moved to Rouen in Normandy and in January 1153 Henry finally set sail for England to challenge the claim of his cousin Stephen of Blois, who then held the throne. He did not return till March 1154, leaving the now pregnant Eleanor with his mother, Matilda, and his youngest brother, William. On 17 August 1153, Henry and Eleanor's first child, William, was born, most likely at Angers.\nIn England, Henry had finally fought King Stephen to a truce, and at the Treaty of Winchester in November 1153, it was agreed that Henry would be Stephen's heir and successor, and this was ratified at Westminster at Christmas. Upon Henry's return to his French domains, Eleanor again became pregnant. Meanwhile, Louis VII remarried, became reconciled with Henry and relinquished the title of duke of Aquitaine.\nQueen of England (1154\u20131189).\nQueen and regent (1154\u20131173).\nEarly years in England (1154\u20131158).\nOn 25 October 1154, King Stephen died. Although Henry was immediately summoned to England, it was not until 7 December that he and Eleanor were able to cross the channel from Barfleur, landing near Southampton on the 8th. They travelled first to Winchester to greet Archbishop Theobald of Canterbury, who had been acting as regent. From Winchester, the royal party moved to London and were lodged at the royal palace at Bermondsey. On 19 December 1154, Theobald crowned Henry as King Henry II in Westminster Abbey, with Eleanor beside him. It is unclear whether Eleanor was actually crowned or anointed as well, since she had already been crowned queen of France in 1137. This was the beginning of the House of Plantagenet that would rule England till the end of the fifteenth century.\nAs queen of England, Eleanor was provided for generously by Henry, including multiple dowerlands and regular settlements of money that made her one of the richest people in the kingdom, earning her the title of \"riche dame de riche rei\". The chroniclers barely mention Eleanor during the reign of Henry II, other than to note when she was with the King, and biographies have been built on these itineraries and surviving official documents. She signed her official documents . This was not uncommon, in that the activities of women were not thought to be of sufficient importance to report, they were merely . Furthermore, the independence and authority of queens had been progressively eroded prior to her ascension to the role. She participated with the King in ceremonial occasions, though she never learned English.\nHenry's dominions stretched from the Scottish border to the Pyrenees, and he was frequently travelling through them, both in England and France and was absent from England far more than any of his predecessors. For much of his absences from court Eleanor acted as either regent or co-regent with the justiciar. Although she sometimes accompanied Henry, she also travelled extensively throughout her domains on her own or with her children. While claims that she was an influential patron of the arts appear to be greatly exaggerated, many writers dedicated works to her. These include Robert Wace's \"Roman de Brut\" (c.\u20091155) and William of Blois, while other writers such as Marie de France and the author of \"Roman de Thebes\" are believed to have been inspired by her. Some writers, such as Marie de France, appear to associate her with the Arthurian Legends, while the more speculative Eleanor legends even associate her with the person of Guinevere.\nOn 28 February 1155, Eleanor gave birth to the couple's second child, Henry, during the King's absence. On 10 January 1156, King Henry left England for one of his many prolonged absences, leaving Eleanor pregnant again. It was during this absence, in the spring of 1156, that Prince William died and was buried at Reading Abbey, next to his great-grandfather Henry I. In June of that year, the couple's third child Matilda was born and Eleanor and her children travelled to France to be with Henry in July, returning in February 1157. Henry joined her in England in April, and on 8 September their fourth child, Richard, was born at Beaumont Palace. After 1156, Eleanor's autonomous rule of her duchy was much diminished, her name disappearing other than to confirm acts of Henry, for whom Aquitainians had little respect.\nToulouse campaign (1159).\nLouis VII had remarried in 1154 to Constance of Castile, and by 1157 had a third daughter, Marguerite. Noting a seeming inability of Louis to produce a male heir, Henry II conceived of a plan to eventually acquire the French throne by marrying his son Henry to Marguerite and began making plans in 1158. He travelled to France in August to negotiate the terms with Louis and take the infant Marguerite into his care. He would remain away for over four years. Eleanor soon gave birth to a fourth son, Geoffrey, on 23 September 1158, and shortly afterwards she rejoined Henry in France. In 1159, she and Henry made a further unsuccessful attempt at enforcing her claims to Toulouse through her grandmother, thereby alienating Louis again, since Count Raymond V of Toulouse was both his vassal and now his relative. Although Henry had formed a coalition to conquer Toulouse, Louis came to Raymond's aid. Amongst Henry's allies was Count Raymond Berengar IV of Barcelona. Henry symbolically tied the two dynasties by betrothing his son Richard to Raymond Berengar's daughter. But by September Henry had been forced to a temporary truce, although this was the beginning of forty years of war between England and France. Eleanor sailed to England on 29 December, obtained funds for Henry's campaigns and escorted it to him in France before returning to England.\nLater years in England (1159\u20131168).\nIt was not until September 1160 that Henry again summoned Eleanor and the children to be with him in France. Queen Constance had died that year, providing Louis with two daughters but no male heir, and he promptly arranged a third marriage to Adela of Champagne. Therefore, Henry II decided to immediately arrange for Prince Henry's marriage to Marguerite, despite their being only children. For this he obtained a special dispensation from the church, and the marriage proceeded on 2 November, unbeknown to Louis. Eleanor remained in France and in September 1161 gave birth to a daughter, Eleanor, at Domfront, Normandy. Henry and Eleanor finally returned to England on 25 January 1163 after a prolonged absence, which also marked the end of her duties as regent in England.\nFebruary 1165 saw Henry back on the continent to arrange the marriages of their daughters Matilda and Eleanor to cement an alliance with Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. Eleanor joined him on 1 May, acting as his regent in Anjou and Maine. It was there that another daughter, Joanna, was born at Angers in October, although Henry was not there, having returned to England only two weeks after her arrival. During much of these times the royal couple saw very little of each other, Henry not joining Eleanor till she asked for his help in dealing with a potential revolt in March 1166. His conflict with Breton nobles was settled by betrothing Prince Geoffrey to Constance, daughter of Duke Conan IV of Brittany.\nThese long periods of separation would give rise to speculation and then rumours of Henry's infidelities, and a resultant rift between him and Eleanor. The most notorious of these stories was that of an alleged affair with Rosamund Clifford. Henry's affair had become known by late 1166 and was acknowledged by 1174. Henry had a reputation for philandering; he fathered other, illegitimate, children throughout the marriage. Eleanor appears to have taken an ambivalent attitude towards these affairs. Geoffrey of York, for example, was an illegitimate son of Henry, but acknowledged by Henry as his child and raised at Westminster in the care of the Queen.\nFollowing the birth of Princess Joanna, Eleanor remained at Angers. Henry did not join her for Christmas that year, only crossing to France in March 1166, where he would remain for another four years. The unprecedented separation at Christmas also led to speculation of discord, but Henry was with her by Easter that year, when she conceived their last child, John. After Easter, Eleanor returned to England, and Christmas 1166 was again spent apart, with John having been born on Christmas Eve. Eleanor did not join Henry in France till Christmas 1167, which they spent at Angers. This year also saw her bringing Matilda, then only eleven, to the continent in September in preparation for her marriage to the much older duke of Saxony, Henry the Lion, which took place on 1 February 1168.\nHenry II's reign was marred by a bitter feud with Thomas Becket, which began in 1163. Becket was initially a close friend and adviser, then his chancellor and eventually archbishop of Canterbury. There has been some speculation as to what role Eleanor may have played in this, but very little evidence. During his exile in France from 1164, Becket unsuccessfully sought her help. What little evidence exists though, suggests that she urged reconciliation.\nIn December 1167, Eleanor gathered her movable possessions in England and transported them on several ships to Argentan. Christmas was celebrated at the royal court there, and immediately afterward she left for her own city of Poitiers. Henry and his army went with her before attacking a castle belonging to the rebellious Lusignan family. Henry then went about his own business outside Aquitaine, leaving Patrick, Earl of Salisbury, his regional military commander, as her protective custodian. When Patrick was killed in a skirmish with the Lusignans, Eleanor, who proceeded to ransom his captured nephew, the young William Marshal, was left in control of her lands. There she would remain until 1173, a move that facilitated Henry's control over a corner of his realm where the vassals were continually rebelling. This move also led to speculation of a marital breakdown.\nBy this time, King Louis and Queen Adela had finally had a son, Philip Augustus. Philip's birth in 1165 ended Henry II's attempts to add the throne of France to the Angevin empire through dynastic alliances.\nPoitier years (1168\u20131173).\nThe separation of Eleanor and Henry during the next five years has been the subject of much speculation as to whether it was predominantly a matter of political expediency, an indication of a growing rift between the couple or both. Certainly Eleanor had fulfilled her queenly duties of providing both male heirs and daughters as commodities for alliances, but was now too old to provide further children. She successfully set about restoring order in proverbially restless Aquitaine, and continued in her royal duties as Angevin queen, including acting as regent in various French territories. Richard of Devizes suggested it was Eleanor that initiated the separation and that Henry did not oppose it.\nAlthough not much is known about Eleanor's whereabouts during this period, Christmas 1168 was spent apart, Henry at Argentan and Eleanor at Poitiers. On 6 January 1169, the King, joined by Princes Henry and Richard, met with Louis VII at Montmirail, Maine. In the resulting treaty, Henry II divided his domains between his sons and betrothed Richard to Louis' daughter Alys. In addition to keeping his vassals in order and maintaining relations with the French king, Henry was busy creating domestic alliances. Geoffrey was betrothed to Constance of Brittany and negotiations were begun to marry Joanna to William II of Sicily and John to Alicia, eldest daughter of Humbert III of Savoy. To further secure a peaceful succession he sought to continue the Capetian tradition of crowning his heir, Prince Henry. Despite opposition from the Church, the prince was crowned on 14 June 1170, after which he was called Henry the Young King. While Eleanor and Henry appeared to be in communication during this period, it is not evident that they actually saw much of each other, other than at some of the major feasts, such as Christmas at Bur-le-Roi, near Bayeux, in 1170 and at Chinon in 1172. While there were rumours of alienation between the couple, Eleanor began to exert increasing autonomy in ruling her duchy. For instance she changed her formal address to omit \"the king's\", merely stating \"to her faithful followers\".\nDuring this period, relations between Henry II and his young sons became increasingly fractious. Having been allocated portions of the Angevin empire at Montmirail, they were eager to assume their powers, rather than wait for their father's death. Louis VII saw an opportunity to exploit these divisions. In November 1172, Louis invited his daughter Marguerite and son-in-law Henry to Paris, where he encouraged Young Henry's ambitions.\nCourtly love, troubadours and the Golden Myth.\nOf all her influence on culture, Eleanor's time in Poitiers between 1168 and 1173 has been claimed to be the most critical, yet very little is actually known about it. Henry II was occupied with his own affairs after escorting Eleanor there. For a long time, writers dealing with this period stated that her court was a center of chivalry and the troubadour culture. This evolved further into the tradition that Eleanor presided alongside her eldest child, Countess Marie of Champagne, over what became known as \"The Court of Love\", where courtly love thrived. While troubadours both attended her court and praised her, the Court of Love was a later literary invention. This emerged from a late 12th-century treatise known as \"The Art of Courtly Love\", or \"Tractatus de amore et de amoris remedio\" by Andreas Capellanus, which appeared long after the period of Eleanor's court in Poitiers, and is largely satirical.\nThe \"Tractatus\" stated that Eleanor, together with her daughter Marie, Ermengarde of Narbonne, Isabelle of Vermandois and other ladies, would listen to the quarrels of lovers and act as a jury on questions of romantic love. He records some twenty-one cases, the most famous of them being a problem posed to the women about whether true love can exist in marriage. According to Capellanus, the women decided that it was not at all likely. There is no evidence for any of Capellanus' claims. Despite this, many popular accounts, such as the biography by Polly Schoyer Brooks, continue to give credence to it, at least as some sort of \"parlor game\".\nThere is no evidence to the claim that Eleanor invented \"courtly love\", an expression that only appeared in the late nineteenth century. The concept of \"courtoisie\" (\"amour courtois\", \"fin'amor\") was a set of attitudes regarding love associated with the courts and praised by troubadours that had begun to grow before Eleanor's Poitier period. What can be said, is that this \"fin'amor\" first appeared in the south in the early twelfth century, became popular and spread north, and that there were troubadours at Eleanor's court, such as Bernart de Ventadorn and Arnaut Guilhem de Marsan, as at other Occitan courts. The rest is merely conjecture. The legend of a court of love has formed an important element in what has been referred to as the \"Golden Myth\" of Eleanor's life.\nRevolt and imprisonment (1173\u20131189).\nRevolt and arrest (1173\u20131174).\nFrom 21 to 28 February 1173, Henry and Eleanor were together at Montferrat for the betrothal of Prince John to Alice of Maurienne, who died shortly thereafter. The occasion was marred by open conflict between the two Henrys over the delegation of powers. From Montferrat, the royal entourage moved to Limoges, where matters worsened. The Henrys then headed north in March to Chinon, where they arrived on the 5th. In the morning, Henry II discovered his son had escaped his custody and travelled to Paris. Louis VII then informed Henry II that he was now supporting his son as the new reigning monarch. This was the beginning of the Revolt of 1173\u20131174.\nLater chroniclers assigned much of the blame to Eleanor, adding to her deepening reputation and leading to much speculation regarding motive, despite lack of evidence, although they carefully added \"so it was said\" to their accounts. Other evidence implicates Louis VII, Young Henry's father-in-law. From Paris, William of Newburgh recounts, \"the younger Henry, devising evil against his father from every side by the advice of the French king, went secretly into Aquitaine where his two youthful brothers, Richard and Geoffrey, were living with their mother, and with her connivance, so it is said, he incited them to join him.\" Roger of Hoveden gives a somewhat different account, stating that Eleanor sent the younger sons to France and their older brother \"to join with him against their father the King.\" Young Henry and his brothers then returned to Paris in the spring and Eleanor encouraged her vassals to support her sons.\nLater, in April, Eleanor too would set out to travel to Paris to join her sons. But she was seized on the road to Chartres and taken to Henry II in Rouen. The King did not announce the arrest publicly but had her confined, and for the next year the Queen's whereabouts were unknown. Meanwhile, Louis held court in Paris, where the French nobles swore allegiance to Young Henry. Of Henry II's sons, only seven-year-old John remained with his father. Hostilities commenced in May, with the joined forces of Young Henry and Louis VII invading Normandy, although neither side prevailed during 1173. After a brief winter truce, Henry II entered Poitiers in May 1174, and took his daughter Joanna together with other noble ladies back to his stronghold in Normandy. On either 7 or 8 July 1174, Henry II, facing imminent invasion of England, took ship and sailed with Eleanor, John, Joanna and the other ladies from Barfleur to Southampton, from where Eleanor was taken to an unknown place of confinement.\nImprisonment (1173\u20131189).\nWhile Henry II was ultimately victorious and made some concessions to his sons at the Treaty of Montlouis on 30 September 1174, Eleanor was confined to various degrees for the rest of Henry's life in various locations in England, about which there is very little information, although pipe rolls refer to Ludgershall Castle in Wiltshire, to Buckinghamshire and houses in Berkshire and Nottinghamshire. Gerald of Wales states that Henry considered having his marriage annulled on the grounds of consanguinity during 1175, requesting a visit from a papal legate to discuss the matter and meeting with Cardinal Pietro Pierleoni at Winchester on 1 November. Pierleoni dissuaded him from this course. In early 1176, he tried again, by persuading Eleanor to become a nun at Fontevrault. She then requested the archbishop of Rouen to intervene and he supported her refusal, prompting Henry to once again attempt to seek papal approval, which was denied.\nMeanwhile, Henry continued using his children to forge alliances. In the summer of 1176, Eleanor was at Winchester with Joanna, then eleven. Joanna was sent to Sicily on 27 August, as soon as plans for her marriage to William II were concluded, the marriage taking place on 13 February 1177. On 28 September 1176, John was betrothed to his cousin Isabella of Gloucester. In September 1177, Princess Eleanor left for Castile and was married to King Alfonso VIII in Burgos, while Geoffrey was married to Constance of Brittany in July 1181.\nWhile Eleanor remained confined, she was not strictly a prisoner, but rather in a form of \"house arrest\", although stripped of her revenues. She enjoyed some greater freedoms from 1177 onwards and particularly after 1184, and would witness the deaths of three of her children (Henry, Matilda and Geoffrey), but very little information exists about these years. During her imprisonment, Eleanor became more and more distant from her sons, since Henry II could not afford having her in communication with them, and possibly plotting against him. This was especially so for Richard, her heir in Aquitaine, who had always been her favourite. She did not have the opportunity to see her sons very often during her imprisonment, though she was released for special occasions such as Easter 1176.\nRosamund Clifford died in 1176 or 1177 at Godstow, Oxfordshire. Henry erected a tomb in the abbey and gave gifts to the abbey in her memory. Her death would much later lead to myths concerning Eleanor's putative involvement that grew more elaborate over the centuries, and for a long time were accepted as established facts, further building her Black Legend, despite virtually no contemporary evidence to support this.\nSome chroniclers, including Gerald of Wales, Ralph Niger, Roger of Hoveden and Ranulf Higden state that Henry then began an affair with the sixteen-year-old Alys of France, a matter complicated by the fact that she was betrothed to his son Richard and was also the daughter of Louis VII, who became alarmed on hearing this news. In the meantime, Henry delayed the marriage, which Richard was now resisting.\nThe years of Eleanor's confinement were marked by almost constant warfare, as her sons fought against rebellious vassals (especially in Aquitaine), among each other and with their father. The situation became further complicated after 1180, with the death of Louis VII and the succession of his son Philip II. Philip was even more determined than his father to regain the French lands of Henry II and his sons. He sought to exploit their familial conflicts.\nDuring one of these campaigns, Eleanor's son Henry died of dysentery on 11 June 1183, at Martel, at age twenty-eight. His dying wishes included a plea for his mother to be set free and that his wife Marguerite be provided for. Henry II sent the archdeacon of Wells, Thomas Agnell, to Eleanor at Sarum to inform her of her son's death. Agnell later described how she told him she had a premonition in a dream. In 1193, she related to Pope Celestine III how much she was tortured by her memories of her son. Young Henry's death changed the family dynamics, leaving Richard as the new heir.\nAs a result of Young Henry's death and his wish for Marguerite's lands to be protected, Henry II found himself in conflict with Philip II of France, Marguerite's half-brother. Philip claimed that certain properties in Normandy and England belonged to Marguerite, but Henry insisted that they had once belonged to Eleanor and would revert to her upon her son's death. It was therefore politically expedient that Eleanor be seen in the disputed territories and Henry summoned her to Normandy in late summer 1183. This marked the beginning of a loosening of the restrictions on her. Roger of Hovenden states that the King commanded she \"be freed and that she make a progress about her dowerlands\". Her income also improved. Geoffroy du Brueil states that she remained in Normandy for about six months.\nYoung Henry's death necessitated a renegotiation of the treaty of Montmirail and the contentious question of Richard's betrothal to Alys, resulting in a further meeting of the English and French kings at Gisors, Normandy on 6 December 1183, at which time Henry revoked much of the land concessions he had made earlier. Eleanor returned to England in early 1184, where her daughter Matilda and son-in-law Henry (now in exile) were able to stay with her at Winchester and then Berkhamsted. On 30 November at Westminster, Eleanor and Henry presided over another unsuccessful attempt to bring peace with their warring sons and settle their inheritance, and the family spent Christmas at Windsor. In early 1185, they journeyed to Normandy, where a further family council took place in May. She would remain in Normandy for nearly a year, the royal couple returning to Southampton from Barfleur England on 27 April 1186, spending the summer together at Winchester, though her whereabouts are largely unknown from then till 1189. However, even in Aquitainian affairs, it was clear she had little freedom to act, stating that her acts were \"with the assent and at the will of her lord Henry, King of England, and of Richard, Geoffrey and John, her sons\". The family situation changed further when Geoffrey died in Paris on 18 or 19 August 1186, leaving only Richard and John as heirs but conflict between them and with their father continued over their inheritance, and Richard made yet another attempt at adding Toulouse to the Aquitaine domain, bringing Henry and Philip into direct conflict, leading to twenty-seven years of intermittent war. This time Richard and Philip combined their forces against an ailing Henry, forcing him to relinquish much of his French possessions. After John joined this alliance against his father, Henry's health deteriorated further and he died at Chinon on 6 July 1189, aged fifty-six. At around this time, Eleanor also received news of Matilda's death.\nOver the last few years Eleanor had often travelled with her husband and was sometimes associated with him in the government of the realm, but still had a custodian. Henry's death ended a marriage which has been described as tumultuous and Eleanor's long years of imprisonment.\nWidow and queen mother (1189\u20131204).\nRichard I (1189\u20131199).\nRelease from prison and regency (1189).\nUpon the death of Henry II on 6 July 1189, Richard I was the undisputed heir. One of his first acts as king was to send William Marshal to England with orders to release the sixty-five-year-old Eleanor from prison; he found upon his arrival that her custodians had already released her, whereupon she assumed the powers of regent, bestowed upon her by Richard, who was still in France. Eleanor then rode to Westminster and received the oaths of fealty from the lords and prelates on behalf of the new king. She ruled England in Richard's name, now signing herself \"Eleanor, by the grace of God, Queen of England\", and reversed many of Henry II's acts.\nThird Crusade and journey to Italy (1189\u20131191).\nOn 13 August 1189, Richard sailed from Barfleur to Portsmouth and was received with enthusiasm, proceeding from there to Winchester to meet Eleanor. At this time, Eleanor's two surviving sons were unmarried, raising questions about succession. However, on 29 August, Prince John married his cousin Isabella, to whom he had been betrothed in 1176. On 3 September Richard was crowned at Westminster Abbey, with Eleanor and John in attendance. Richard was preoccupied with a long planned participation in the Third Crusade, and on his first absence from the kingdom in November on a pilgrimage, appointed Eleanor regent. On his return he made more formal arrangements, prior to his more prolonged departure for the crusade on 12 December, appointing as custodians his justiciar Hugh de Puiset together with William de Longchamp as \"summi justifiarii\". Although Eleanor had no formal appointment in England during this time, they deferred to her authority. On 2 February 1190, Eleanor joined Richard at the Chateau of Bures, Normandy, and a family conclave was held at Nonancourt with John in attendance at which arrangements for the administration of England in the King's absence were finalised.\nMeanwhile, although John had married, the question of succession still remained, and in particular the problem of Richard's betrothed, Alys, who was Philip II's half-sister and with whom Henry II had had an affair. It was during the spring of 1190 that negotiations began with the Navarrese House of Jim\u00e9nez regarding Berengaria, daughter of King Sancho VI of Navarre, though such an alliance would require the approval of Philip in breaking Richard's betrothal to Alys. Such an alliance would serve the purpose of stabilising matters in Gascony. However, Richard and Philip finally departed on their crusade on 4 July 1190. Once Richard had set off, Eleanor sent John to England while she travelled to Navarre, meeting Berengaria and Sancho at Pamplona. From there, she escorted Berengaria to Sicily, where Richard had arrived at Messina. In Messina, Richard found that his sister Joanna, widowed since November 1189, was being held prisoner. He was also in conflict with Philip, partly over the matter of Alys, as a result of which Eleanor's ship was refused landing at Messina and had to proceed to Brindisi. By March 1191, Richard had secured Joanna's release, and joined Eleanor and Berengaria at Reggio. The King then placed Berengaria in Joanna's care. Richard confronted Philip with the matter of Alys' relationship with Henry II as the reason for breaking the betrothal, and Philip promptly departed for the Holy Land prior to the arrival of Eleanor in Messina.\nBy the time Eleanor had reached Sicily, stories of misrule and conflict in England between Longchamp and John had emerged. Walter de Coutances, archbishop of Rouen, was appointed to reestablish royal authority in England, and he and Eleanor began their return journey after only four days, departing on 2 April 1191 for Salerno. From there they travelled to Rome, arriving on the 14th to meet with the new pope, Celestine III, to obtain his approval of appointing Walter de Coutances over William de Longchamp, who also served as a papal legate.\nOn 10 April 1191, Richard, Berengaria and Joanna left Sicily, with the women on a separate ship, bound for Outremer, but storms diverted them to Cyprus, where Richard and Berengaria were married on 12 May at Limasol, and Berengaria was crowned. They then sailed to the Holy Land on 5 June, arriving at Acre on the 8th, which Richard captured. Philip abandoned the Crusade on 2 July and returned to France, but in the meantime Richard had found himself in conflict with Duke Leopold V of Austria, an event which would have serious consequences for him later.\nNormandy and the struggle for power (1191\u20131192).\nOnce Eleanor reached Rouen, where she arrived on 24 June 1191, she was able to direct affairs in England better, although she spent the winter of 1191\u20131192 in France. Eleanor's new role softened the criticisms she had accumulated. As regent, she demonstrated the qualities of a benevolent and statesmanlike ruler, with Richard of Devizes describing her as \"incomparable\" and she began using the phrase \"teste me ipsa\" (as my own witness) on official documents. In England, while Coutance tried to restore order, Longchamp was eventually deposed and Prince John began to consolidate power, claiming he was the heir presumptive. Coutance was appointed head of a regency council and Longchamp fled to France, attempting unsuccessfully to recruit Eleanor to his cause. Her position became more complicated with Philip II's return from the Holy Land in late 1191, who not only attempted to undermine Richard's reputation but demanded the return of Alys, still in Eleanor's care. In early 1192 Philip recruited John to his cause, offering him lands and Alys, prompting Eleanor's return to England on 11 February to prevent John's invasion of Normandy, but she spent much of that year dealing with ecclesiastical disputes and successfully curbing the ambitions of Longchamp and John.\nRaising a ransom and restoration of Richard I (1192\u20131194).\nIn the Holy Land, Richard made little progress in his quest to capture Jerusalem, and by late 1192 was forced to arrange a truce with Saladin, and sent Joanna and Berengaria back to Sicily in September, departing from Acre himself on 9 October. His whereabouts were unknown till January 1193 when Eleanor learned that he had been taken prisoner by Duke Leopold, whom he had slighted on his arrival in Acre. Richard had travelled north from Trieste through Hungary, but when he crossed into Austria he was recognised, apprehended and taken to D\u00fcrnstein Castle. Leopold informed Emperor Henry VI, who wrote to Philip II of France. Philip supported this turn of events. Eleanor only became aware of what had happened through Coutances' spies in France, but immediately assumed control of the government. Prince John, with Philip's support, became emboldened once more in claiming the throne. Leopold handed over his prisoner to the Emperor in February, and he was moved to the castle of Trifels, while Eleanor unsuccessfully sought the intervention of the Pope.}} Eventually a truce was concluded with John in April, but Eleanor also received a demand from the Emperor for 100,000 silver marks and the provision of hostages for Richard's release. At the same time she received the first letter from him since his capture, urging her to accept the terms, and informing her that his conditions had much improved and that he had been transferred to Hagenau.\nEleanor and her council immediately set about trying to raise the ransom and arrange the hostages, a task to which Beregnaria, now in Poitou. contributed, largely through taxation of all of Richard's territories and subjects. The first installment of 100,000 marks was delivered in October and the balance was raised by December. Having agreed to a date for Richard's release on 17 January 1194, Eleanor and Coutances set off for Germany in December 1193, arriving at Speyer by the agreed day. There she discovered that Philip and John had outbid her in return for keeping Richard in custody. Further negotiations and offers, including an annual tribute, led to him being released on 4 February. They immediately began their return, via Cologne, eventually arriving in Antwerp where they boarded the \"Trenchemer\" in the Scheldt, to avoid the French, landing in Sandwich on 12 March. Richard and Eleanor then made a triumphal entry into London on 23 March 1194.\nReturn to France and retirement (1194\u20131199).\nEleanor and Richard's stay in England was relatively brief. Richard departed from Portsmouth on 12 May 1194, feeling the need to defend his French possessions from Philip. Arriving in Barflueur, neither Richard nor Eleanor would return to England. There, they effected a reconciliation with John that would last through the rest of Richard's reign, leaving the latter free to defend his territory against Philip, while Eleanor, now seventy-two, retired to Fontevrault and there is very little information available about her for the next few years, though she made the abbey her principal residence for the rest of her life. The marriage of her daughter Joanna to Raymond VI of Toulouse in October 1196 finally ended Eleanor's dynastic claims on Toulouse, which now passed to Joanna. Richard was in a state of almost perpetual war with Philip following his return to Normandy in 1194, and finally succumbed to a wound on 6 April 1199 at the age of forty-one, with Eleanor at his side.\nInitially, prior to arriving in England, Richard delegated authority to Eleanor \"statuendi quae vellet in regno\", though this was not repeated. During Richard's subsequent prolonged absences, royal authority in England was represented by a succession of chief justiciars. On Longchamp's dismissal in 1191, government moved to a more conciliar mode (\"magnum concilium\" and \"communitas regni\") under Coutance.\nKing John (1199\u20131204).\nRichard and Berengaria had no children, and when he died, one of the first things Eleanor did was to warn John to flee from Brittany, where he was with his nephew Duke Arthur I of Brittany, and secure Richard's possessions. Arthur was the only son of Eleanor's fourth son Geoffrey and his wife Constance. He had been considered Richard's heir, being the son of John's older brother, and hence had a claim on the throne, there being no other male heirs. Richard himself had declared John to be his successor. Philip II was quick to exploit the possibility of an Angevin succession war, proclaiming the twelve-year-old Arthur as the new king of England. Arthur swore allegiance to Philip for his French possessions, whereupon the Breton army advanced on Angers and captured it, followed by Anjou, Maine and Touraine declaring their allegiance to Arthur. Eleanor immediately acted to repel the Bretons, ordering the devastation of the lands of any vassal disloyal to John. Support for Arthur soon collapsed, he withdrew with Philip to Paris and John was officially invested as duke of Normandy on 25 April 1199, while Eleanor toured all her domains raising support for John, whom she had declared the rightful heir. John arrived in England on 25 May and was crowned king on 27 May, although he was back in Normandy by 20 June where he concluded a truce.\nEleanor also made peace with Philip and pledged her allegiance as a vassal. She had come to an arrangement with John, whereby she would officially declare him her heir and cede her French possessions to him, while retaining her right to them during her lifetime, as his \"domina\". This helped to safeguard them from Philip in the event of her death. John and Isabella had no children, and he needed an heir to secure the succession, so he had his marriage annulled in 1199. In September that year Joanna died in childbirth, at Fontevrault, where she was buried, leaving Eleanor with only two surviving children. Despite their truce, conflict between John, Arthur and Philip continued intermittently, until a further arrangement was put in place at Le Mans sometime after Christmas 1199. Among other provisions, the new truce cemented dynastic alliances through the marriage of the twelve-year-old Louis, Philip's heir, to one of John's Castilian nieces and the payment of 30,000 marks by John to Philip. This was formalised in the Treaty of Le Goulet of May 1200. Subsequently, John returned to England to raise the money, while Eleanor travelled to Castile to select a suitable bride. On the way one of her vassals, Hugh IX of Lusignan, kidnapped her just south of Poitiers. Hugh demanded she cede him the County of La Marche, which one of his ancestors had previously sold to Henry II. She acceded so that she could complete her mission. She arrived in Castile by the end of January 1200.\nEleanor of Castile had two unmarried daughters, of whom her mother chose the younger, Blanche. The English queen remained in Castile until late March to avoid Lent, during which marriages could not be solemnised, arriving in Bordeaux at Easter on 9 April. Travelling on to the Loire, she entrusted Blanche to the archbishop of Bordeaux, who escorted her to meet John, while Eleanor once more returned to Fontevrault. While there she undertook a major reconstruction of her ducal palace in Poitiers, originally Merovingian but now being rebuilt in the Angevin style.\nBlanche and Louis were married on 23 May 1200. They had 12 children, one of whom was the future Louis IX of France, ensuring that Eleanor's descendants would be future rulers of France. John visited Eleanor at Fontevault in the early summer, hearing she was unwell. Amongst the advice she gave him was to secure the loyalty of her vassals, should she die, and in particular Hugh of Lusignan. John arrived at Lusignan Castle on 5 July, where he encountered the thirteen-year-old Isabella of Angoul\u00eame and sought her hand in marriage from her parents, while breaking off negotiations with the Portuguese court. However, Isabella was already betrothed to Hugh, whom he had dispatched to England. While there were potential political advantages to such an alliance, under the circumstances this was a mistake that would soon have serious consequences.\nThe marriage between John and Isabella took place in secret in Bordeaux on 24 August. They then proceeded to England, where she was crowned queen at Westminster Abbey on 8 October 1200. John ignored the Lusignans' protests over the betrayal, whereupon they rose in rebellion in early 1201. Eleanor, though in ill health, once more intervened to restore peace in February and March, summoning her grandson Arthur as an intermediary with Philip. But John continued to seek vengeance on the Lusignans, and conflict simmered throughout 1201.\nOn 28 April 1202, freed from some of his other commitments, Philip summoned John to his court, and upon his refusal declared him a traitor and in lieu of his lands. John's position became more perilous when Philip betrothed his daughter Marie to the fifteen-year-old Arthur in July, and declared him to be the rightful lord of the Angevin possessions. Under Philip's orders, Arthur proceeded to Poitou to seize his new inheritance. This prompted Eleanor to set out for Poitiers from Fontevrault, but on the way found herself besieged by Arthur and Hugh in Mirebeau Castle, near the Angevin border. She refused demands to yield up control of the fortress and urgently summoned John to aid her. John received the news on 30 July and reached Mirebeau on 1 August where he found that the defences were already breached, but was able to lift the siege, release Eleanor and take both Arthur and the Lusignans into his custody. Arthur was last seen entering Falaise Castle in Normandy as a prisoner on 10 August. Eleanor had demanded a promise of clemency for Arthur, but little was heard of him for some time, despite an attempt to free him in the autumn of 1202. On her return to Fontevrault, Eleanor took the veil as a nun.\nBy the end of 1202, rumours were circulating about Arthur's death, but John had the youth brought before him in January 1203 at Falaise, asking him to switch his allegiance from Philip. Instead, Arthur demanded that John grant to him all his possessions, according to Philip's declaration. Arthur's threats were sufficient for some of the King's advisers to suggest he be eliminated, as a danger to the security of the realm. Rumours of his assassination persisted and subsequent events have been the matter of speculation, other than that he was transferred to Rouen on 8 March, and in April his gaoler announced he was relinquishing his role, which is the last record of his existence. John was commonly blamed for Arthur's disappearance, and found himself increasingly isolated over the spring of 1203, providing an opportunity for Philip, who progressively annexed Normandy throughout the rest of the year, John leaving for England to muster support on 6 December. The French and Breton conquest of Normandy continued in early 1204, with most of the significant strongholds captured by the end of March. It is unclear if Eleanor was aware of the progressive destruction of the empire she and Henry II had ruled, and which she had fought to preserve for her sons. One source from Fontevrault suggests that she had become unaware of her surroundings at some point during the last few months of her life.\nDeath and interment (1204).\nEleanor died at Fontevraud on either 31 March or 1 April 1204 and was entombed in the crypt of the abbey between Richard I and Henry II. Eleanor's tomb lies under a painted stone \"gisant\" (effigy) of the Queen, wearing a crown and with an open book in her hands. The tomb is considered one of the finest of those few that survive from this period. During the French Revolution, the abbey was sacked and the tombs vandalised, while the human remains were exhumed and scattered and have never been located.\nAppearance.\nContemporary sources praise Eleanor's beauty. Even in an era when ladies of the nobility were excessively eulogised and praised, their praise of her was undoubtedly sincere, though probably based on hearsay, while in some cases, the reference is only implied. The medieval German songs known as \"Carmina Burana\" praise \"England's Queen\". Benoit de Sainte-Maure wrote of the \"Queen of Beauty and largesse\" in the \"Roman de Troie\", while Philippe de Thaun wrote \"God save Lady Eleanor, Queen, who is the arbiter of honour, wit and beauty\". When she was young, she was described as \"perpulchra\"\u2014more than beautiful. When she was around 30, Bernard de Ventadour, a noted troubadour, called her \"gracious, lovely, the embodiment of charm\", extolling her \"lovely eyes and noble countenance\" and declaring that she was \"one meet to crown the state of any king\". William of Newburgh emphasised the charms of her person, and even in her old age Richard of Devizes described her as beautiful, while Matthew Paris, writing in the 13thcentury, recalled her \"admirable beauty\", a common practice at the time, and \"a woman of wonderful appearance, more beautiful than moral\". Richard of Devizes was similarly exuberant, but not all were in agreement. William of Tyre dismissed her as \"uxorem quae una erat de fatuis mulieribus\". The History of William the Marshal describes her as \"avenante, vaillante, courtoise\".\nNo one left a detailed description of Eleanor. For instance, the colour of her hair and eyes are unknown. Such details were of little interest to contemporary chroniclers, with portraiture of the time making no attempt at realism, while descriptions were largely rhetorical. However, many biographers have attempted to describe her, and Elizabeth Chadwick dismisses all these as fantasy or based on misinformation. The effigy on her tomb (almost certainly not a true portrait) shows a tall and large-boned woman with brown skin. Her seal of c.\u20091152 shows a woman with a slender figure, but these were impersonal images intended to convey authority.\nLegacy.\nEleanor's descendants ruled various realms, and her grandchildren included Kings Henry III of England, Henry I of Castile, Richard of Germany, and Henry of Jerusalem, Queens Berengaria of Castile and Blanche of France, and Holy Roman Emperor Otto IV. In England, the rule of her husband Henry's House of Plantagenet ended in 1485, with the death of Richard III.\nEleanor's life has inspired a large canon of literature, reflected in popular culture. This has varied considerably from scholarly research to romantic fictionalised history. Nicholas Vincent writes that this includes \"the very worst historical writing devoted to the European Middle Ages\" and concludes that \"the Eleanor of history has been overshadowed by an Eleanor of wishful-thinking and make-believe\". Legends about her started during her lifetime and rapidly grew, and much of it appears in the chronicles of the late twelfth century which constitute almost all that is known of her. Most of these paint her in an unfavourable light, yet none are actually first hand accounts. Many of the accounts of her life are composed \"so distant in time and place\" from the events as to have little credence, and chroniclers were more concerned with their messages than an accurate setting out of facts. These messages were often laden with ideology that in Eleanor's case was largely negative. The aspects of her life most valued by modern romanticisation were those her contemporary commentators found most unacceptable in her position. Most of these were clerics, like William of Tyre, John of Salisbury, Mathew Paris, Helinand de Froidment and Aubri des Trois Fontaines and based their assessments on \"the common talk of the day\". In this way, gossip and rumour, often prefaced by \"ut dicibatur\" (as it was said) became included in the records of the times and then into later histories and biographies. Among modern biographies, one of the first by Amy Kelly (1950), while relying on literary sources but not historical records is \"legend focussed\" and highly romanticised in a way that cannot be substantiated. In the absence of much reliable information about Eleanor herself, biographers have largely focused on the people around her and the political and cultural events of her time.\nArt.\nImages of Eleanor are common throughout history but since there are none from her lifetime, these are purely speculative. Some romanesque carvings, such as those at the Cloisters in New York and Chartres and Bordeaux cathedrals, have been attributed to her but these cannot be substantiated, while completely erroneous claims from medieval art have frequently been used to illustrate articles and books about her, such as a queen from the 14th-century Codex Manesse. The stained glass window in Poitiers Cathedral with a donor portrait of Eleanor is not original but a nineteenth-century restoration by . Two of the commonest claims have been the fresco in the chapel of at St. Radegonde at Chinon and a donor portrait of a kneeling woman in a twelfth-century psalter, which has led to it becoming known as the Eleanor Psalter.\nIn France, the Salles des Croisades at Versailles, opened in 1843, showed two 1839 paintings including Eleanor - \"St Bernard preaching the second crusade in the presence of King Louis VII and Queen Eleanor of Aquitaine\" by Emile Signol, and \"King Louis VII takes the Oriflamme\" by Jean-Baptiste Mauzaisse. In both, Eleanor is depicted in prayer. In contrast, British paintings including Frederick Sandys's \"Queen Eleanor\" (1858) and Burne-Jones's \"Fair Rosamund and Queen Eleanor\" (1861 and 1862), depict her as a melodramatic murderess, coincident with the popularity of the Fair Rosamond story, which in itself led to a series of art works. In the twentieth century, similar works appeared by Herbert Sidney (1905), Evelyn de Morgan (1905), John William Waterhouse (1916) and Frank Cadogan Cowper (1920).\nJudy Chicago's installation \"The Dinner Party\" (1979) features a place setting for Eleanor. She was also commemorated on a French \u20ac0.50 postage stamp in 2004, the 800th anniversary of her death.\nFiction and poetry.\nFictionalised accounts of Eleanor include Jean Plaidy's 1987 autobiographical \"The Courts of Love\". Norah Lofts also wrote a fictionalized biography of her in 1955, including some romanticized episodes\u2014starting off with the young Eleanor planning to elope with a young knight, who is killed out of hand by her guardian, in order to facilitate her marriage to the King's son. Kristiana Gregory wrote a fictionalised diary, \"Eleanor: Crown Jewel of Aquitaine\" (\"The Royal Diaries\" series, 2002).\nEleanor also features in the works of many historical novelists. These include \"The Merry Adventures of Robin Hood\" (1883) by Howard Pyle as Queen Catherine and F. Marion Crawford's novel of the second crusade \"Via Crucis\" (1899). She is the subject of \"A Proud Taste for Scarlet and Miniver\", a 1973 children's novel by E. L. Konigsburg, and Margaret Ball's \"Duchess of Aquitaine\" (2006).\nIn Sharon Kay Penman's Plantagenet novels, she figures prominently in \"When Christ and His Saints Slept\" (1995), \"Time and Chance\" (2002), and \"Devil's Brood\" (2008). In Penman's historical Justin de Quincy mysteries, Eleanor, as Richard's regent, sends squire Justin de Quincy on various missions, often an investigation of a situation involving Prince John. The four published mysteries are the \"Queen's Man\" (1996), \"Cruel as the Grave\" (1998), \"Dragon's Lair\" (2003), and \"Prince of Darkness\" (2005). Other novels include Elizabeth Chadwick's Eleanor trilogy \"The Summer Queen\" (2013), \"The Winter Crown\" (2014), and \"The Autumn Throne\" (2016). Ariana Franklin features Eleanor in her Adelia Aguilar twelfth-century mysteries. She is also a character in \"Matrix\" by Lauren Groff (2021).\nEleanor is an allegorical figure in Ezra Pound's \"Cantos\".\nDrama, film, radio and television.\nEleanor is a character in Shakespeare's \"The Life and Death of King John\". Una Venning played the role in the \"Sunday Night Theatre\" television version of this in 1952 and Mary Morris in the BBC Shakespeare version (1984).\nEleanor has featured in a number of screen versions of the \"Ivanhoe\" and \"Robin Hood\" stories. She has been played by Martita Hunt in \"The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men\" (1952), Jill Esmond in \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\" (1955\u20131960), Phyllis Neilson-Terry in \"Ivanhoe\" (1958), Yvonne Mitchell in \"The Legend of Robin Hood\" (1975), Si\u00e2n Phillips in \"Ivanhoe\" (1997), Tusse Silberg in \"The New Adventures of Robin Hood\" (1997), Lynda Bellingham in \"Robin Hood\" (2006), Eileen Atkins in \"Robin Hood\" (2010) and most recently by Connie Nielsen in \"Robin Hood\" (2025).\nEleanor was played by Mary Clare in \"Becket\" (1923), and by Pamela Brown in the 1964 \"Becket\". She and Henry II are the main characters in James Goldman's 1966 play \"The Lion in Winter\" and Katharine Hepburn played Eleanor in the 1968 film \"The Lion in Winter\". Glenn Close and Patrick Stewart played Eleanor and Henry in the 2003 version.\nEleanor was played by Prudence Hyman in \"Richard the Lionheart\" (1962), twice by Jane Lapotaire in \"The Devil's Crown\" (1978) and again in Mike Walker's BBC Radio 4 series \"Plantagenet\" (2010). In the 2014 film \"Richard the Lionheart: Rebellion\", Eleanor is played by Debbie Rochon. In the BBC Radio 4 \"Eleanor Rising\" Rose Basista plays Eleanor and Joel MacCormack plays Louis (2020\u20132022). These and other dramatic accounts have helped to perpetuate the Golden Myth image of Eleanor.\nMusic.\nEleanor of Aquitaine is thought to be the \"chunegin von Engellant\" (Queen of England) mentioned in the 12th century poem \"\"Were diu werlt alle min\",\" in Carl Orff's \"Carmina Burana\". Queen Eleanor's Confession, a traditional 17th century Child Ballad, is a fictional account. Eleanor (as Eleonora di Guienna) appeared in Gaetano Donizetti's opera \"Rosmonda d'Inghilterra\" (1834). \"Flower and Hawk\" is a monodrama for soprano and orchestra, written by American composer Carlisle Floyd in 1972, in which Eleanor relives memories of her time as queen.\nGenealogy.\nSources:\nIssue.\nEleanor had ten children, and outlived eight of them.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\nBiography (chronological).\nFiction\nArticles and theses.\nTheses"}
{"id": "9963", "revid": "48059376", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9963", "title": "Epistle to Philemon", "text": "Book of the New Testament\nThe Epistle to Philemon is a Pauline epistle of the New Testament of the Christian Bible. It is a prison letter, authored by Paul the Apostle (the opening verse also mentions Timothy), to Philemon, a leader in the Colossian church. Paul does not identify himself as an apostle with authority, but as \"a prisoner of Jesus Christ\", calling Timothy \"our brother\", and addressing Philemon as \"fellow labourer\" and \"brother\" (). Onesimus, a slave who had escaped from his master Philemon, was returning with this epistle wherein Paul asked Philemon to receive him as a \"brother beloved\" (). The letter appeals on behalf of Onesimus, who had subsequently became a Christian through Paul. Paul requests that Philemon receive Onesimus not as a slave but as a beloved brother in Christ, offering to repay any debt Onesimus owes.\nPhilemon was a wealthy Christian, possibly a bishop of the church that met in his home () in Colossae. This letter is now generally regarded as one of the undisputed works of Paul. It is the shortest of Paul's extant letters, consisting of only 335 words in the Greek text.\nThe epistle emphasizes reconciliation, forgiveness, and Christian fellowship, addressing themes of slavery, freedom, and ethical conduct within the Roman social context. While it does not explicitly condemn slavery, it reframes master-servant relationships in spiritual terms, highlighting the moral and social transformation encouraged within early Christian communities.\nComposition.\nThe Epistle to Philemon was composed around AD 57\u201362 by Paul while in prison at Caesarea Maritima (early date) or more likely from Rome (later date) in conjunction with the composition of Colossians.\nAuthorship.\nThe Epistle to Philemon is attributed to the apostle Paul, and this attribution has rarely been questioned by scholars. Along with six others, it is numbered among the \"undisputed letters\", which are widely considered to be authentically Pauline. The main challenge to the letter's authenticity came from a group of German scholars in the nineteenth century known as the T\u00fcbingen School. Their leader, Ferdinand Christian Baur, only accepted four New Testament epistles as genuinely written by Paul: Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians and Galatians. Commenting on Philemon, Baur described the subject matter as \"so very singular as to arouse our suspicions\", and concluded that it is perhaps a \"Christian romance serving to convey a genuine Christian idea\". This view is now largely considered to be outdated and finds no support in modern scholarship.\nThe opening verse of the salutation also names Timothy alongside Paul. This, however, does not mean that Timothy was the epistle's co-author. Rather, Paul regularly mentions others in the address if they have a particular connection with the recipient. In this case, Timothy may have encountered Philemon while accompanying Paul in his work in Ephesus.\nOccasion.\nAccording to the most common interpretation, Paul wrote this letter on behalf of Onesimus, a runaway slave who had wronged his owner Philemon. A slave running away was in and of itself illegal. It is often assumed that Onesimus had fled after stealing money, as Paul states in verse 18 that if Onesimus owes anything, Philemon should charge this to Paul's account. Sometime after leaving, Onesimus came into contact with Paul, although again the details are unclear. He may have been arrested and imprisoned alongside Paul. Alternatively, he may have previously heard Paul's name (as his owner was a Christian) and so travelled to him for help. After meeting Paul, Onesimus became a Christian believer. An affection grew between them, and Paul would have been glad to keep Onesimus with him. However, he considered it better to send him back to Philemon with an accompanying letter, which aimed to effect reconciliation between them as Christian brothers. The preservation of the letter suggests that Paul's request was granted.\nOnesimus' status as a fugitive slave was challenged by Allen Dwight Callahan in an article published in the \"Harvard Theological Review\" and in a later commentary. Callahan argues that, beyond verse 16, \"nothing in the text conclusively indicates that Onesimus was ever the chattel of the letter's chief addressee. Moreover, the expectations fostered by the traditional fugitive slave hypothesis go unrealized in the letter. Modern commentators, even those committed to the prevailing interpretation, have tacitly admitted as much.\" Callahan argues that the earliest commentators on this work \u2013 the homily of Origen and the Anti-Marcion Preface \u2013 are silent about Onesimus' possible servile status, and traces the origins of this interpretation to John Chrysostom, who proposed it in his \"Homiliae in epistolam ad Philemonem\", during his ministry in Antioch, circa 386\u2013398. In place of the traditional interpretation, Callahan suggests that Onesimus and Philemon are brothers both by blood and religion, but who have become estranged, and the intent of this letter was to reconcile the two men. Ben Witherington III has challenged Callahan's interpretation as a misreading of Paul's rhetoric. Further, Margaret M. Mitchell has demonstrated that a number of writers before Chrysostom either argue or assume that Onesimus was a runaway slave, including Athanasius, Basil of Caesarea and Ambrosiaster.\nHowever, from the standpoint of context, vs.12\u201316 do make it rather clear that he was a runaway slave. In v.14 Paul states he did not want to do anything without Philemon's consent. Since Paul could have ordered or commanded Philemon to do it, but the fact that he desired his consent stands out. Also, Paul could have just kept Onesimus there, and Onesimus himself could have stayed there. Philemon would have had the right to hold his runaway slave accountable not just from a financial or social standpoint, but a legal standpoint. Onesimus, upon his return, could have legally been made a prisoner of Rome. Vs15\u201316 make it clear that Paul was asking Philemon to receive him back \"forever\" and \"no longer as a slave\" but as a \"beloved brother.\" Paul actually writes that it was perhaps God's purpose that Onesimus initially ran away for the purpose of becoming a Christian and then return as a fellow Christian. Paul calls him \"his son\" (v.10) whom he \"begot while still in chains.\" The message to Philemon is to accept Onesimus back as the \"son\" of a \"prisoner of Jesus Christ.\" It appears that both Paul and Onesimus desired to do the right thing out of respect for Philemon, but also expecting Philemon to do the right thing as someone who had been graciously forgiven and received by the Lord...as a fellow \"prisoner of Christ Jesus.\"\nThe only extant information about Onesimus apart from this letter is found in Paul's epistle to the Colossians 4:7\u20139, where Onesimus is called \"a faithful and beloved brother\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All my state shall Tychicus declare unto you, \"who is\" a beloved brother, and a faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord: 8\u00a0Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts; 9 With Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is \"one\" of you. They shall make known unto you all things which \"are done\" here.\nRecipient.\nThe letter is addressed to Philemon, Apphia and Archippus, and the church in Philemon's house. Philemon is described as a \"fellow worker\" of Paul. It is generally assumed that he lived in Colossae; in the letter to the Colossians, Onesimus (the slave who fled from Philemon) and Archippus (whom Paul greets in the letter to Philemon) are described as members of the church there. Philemon may have converted to Christianity through Paul's ministry, possibly in Ephesus. Apphia in the salutation is probably Philemon's wife. Her name () is possibly of Phrygian or Greek origin. Some have speculated that Archippus (), described by Paul as a \"fellow soldier\", is the son of Philemon and Apphia.\nThe Scottish Pastor John Knox proposed that Onesimus' owner was in fact Archippus, and the letter was addressed to him rather than Philemon. In this reconstruction, Philemon would receive the letter first and then encourage Archippus to release Onesimus so that he could work alongside Paul. This view, however, has not found widespread support. In particular, Knox's view has been challenged on the basis of the opening verses. According to O'Brien, the fact that Philemon's name is mentioned first, together with the use of the phrase \"in your house\" in verse 2, makes it unlikely that Archippus was the primary addressee. Knox further argued that the letter was intended to be read aloud in the Colossian church in order to put pressure on Archippus. A number of commentators, however, see this view as contradicting the tone of the letter. J. B. Lightfoot, for example, wrote: \"The tact and delicacy of the Apostle's pleading for Onesimus would be nullified at one stroke by the demand for publication.\"\nContent.\nGreeting and introduction (1\u20133).\nThe opening salutation follows a typical pattern found in other Pauline letters. Paul first introduces himself, with a self-designation as a \"prisoner of Jesus Christ,\" which in this case refers to a physical imprisonment. He also mentions his associate Timothy, as a valued colleague who was presumably known to the recipient. As well as addressing the letter to Philemon, Paul sends greetings to Apphia, Archippus and the church that meets in Philemon's house. Apphia is often presumed to be Philemon's wife and Archippus, a \"fellow labourer\", is sometimes suggested to be their son. Paul concludes his salutation with a prayerful wish for grace and peace.\nThanksgiving and intercession (4\u20137).\nBefore addressing the main topic of the letter, Paul continues with a paragraph of thanksgiving and intercession. This serves to prepare the ground for Paul's central request. He gives thanks to God for Philemon's love and faith and prays for his faith to be effective. He concludes this paragraph by describing the joy and comfort he has received from knowing how Philemon has shown love towards the Christians in Colossae.\nPaul's plea for Onesimus (8\u201320).\nAs a background to his specific plea for Onesimus, Paul clarifies his intentions and circumstances. Although he has the boldness to command Philemon to do what would be right in the circumstances, he prefers to base his appeal on his knowledge of Philemon's love and generosity. He also describes the affection he has for Onesimus and the transformation that has taken place with Onesimus's conversion to the Christian faith. Where Onesimus was \"useless\", now he is \"useful\" \u2013 a wordplay, as Onesimus means \"useful\". Paul indicates that he would have been glad to keep Onesimus with him, but recognised that it was right to send him back. Paul's specific request is for Philemon to welcome Onesimus as he would welcome Paul, namely as a Christian brother. He offers to pay for any debt created by Onesimus' departure and expresses his desire that Philemon might refresh his heart in Christ.\nConclusion and greetings (21\u201325).\nIn the final section of the letter, Paul describes his confidence that Philemon would do even more than he had requested, perhaps indicating his desire for Onesimus to return to work alongside him. He also mentions his wish to visit and asks Philemon to prepare a guest room. Paul sends greetings from five of his co-workers and concludes the letter with a benediction.\nThemes.\nPaul uses slavery vs. freedom language more often in his writings as a metaphor. \nThis letter may have provided some comfort to some slaves of the time.\nThough its practice appears centrally, Paul does not share value judgments about the institution of slavery. Its influence could create pressures, as an \u201cabolitionist would have been at the same time an insurrectionist, and the political effects of such a movement would have been unthinkable.\" Paul saw human institutions like slavery among many that in his apocalyptic view would soon go. \nWhen it comes to Onesimus and his circumstance as a slave, Paul felt that Onesimus should return to Philemon but not as a slave; rather, under a bond of familial love. Paul also was not suggesting that Onesimus be punished, in spite of the fact that Roman law allowed the owner of a runaway slave nearly unlimited privileges of punishment, even execution. This is a concern of Paul and a reason he is writing to Philemon, asking that Philemon accept Onesimus back in a bond of friendship, forgiveness, and reconciliation. Paul is undermining this example of a human institution which dehumanizes people. Onesimus, like Philemon, belongs to Christ, and so \"Christ, and not Philemon, has a claim on Onesimus' honor and obedience.\"\nVerses 13\u201314 suggest that Paul wants Philemon to send Onesimus back to Paul (possibly freeing him for the purpose). Marshall, Travis and Paul write, \"Paul hoped that it might be possible for [Onesimus] to spend some time with him as a missionary colleague... If that is not a request for Onesimus to join Paul\u2019s circle, I do not know what more would need to be said\".\nSignificance.\nIn order to better appreciate the Book of Philemon, it is necessary to be aware of the situation of the early Christian community in the Roman Empire; and the economic system of Classical Antiquity based on slavery. According to the Epistle to Diognetus:For the Christians are distinguished from other men neither by country, nor language, nor the customs which they observe... They are in the flesh, but they do not live after the flesh. They pass their days on earth, but they are citizens of heaven. They obey the prescribed laws, and at the same time surpass the laws by their lives.Pope Benedict XVI refers to this letter in his encyclical letter, \"Spe salvi\", highlighting the power of Christianity as power of the transformation of society:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those who, as far as their civil status is concerned, stand in relation to one an other as masters and slaves, inasmuch as they are members of the one Church have become brothers and sisters\u2014this is how Christians addressed one another... Even if external structures remained unaltered, this changed society from within. When the Letter to the Hebrews says that Christians here on earth do not have a permanent homeland, but seek one which lies in the future (cf. Heb 11:13\u201316; Phil 3:20), this does not mean for one moment that they live only for the future: present society is recognized by Christians as an exile; they belong to a new society which is the goal of their common pilgrimage and which is anticipated in the course of that pilgrimage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9966", "revid": "50779718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9966", "title": "Elliptic-curve cryptography", "text": "Approach to public-key cryptography \nElliptic-curve cryptography (ECC) is an approach to public-key cryptography based on the algebraic structure of elliptic curves over finite fields. ECC allows smaller keys to provide equivalent security, compared to cryptosystems based on modular exponentiation in finite fields, such as the RSA cryptosystem and ElGamal cryptosystem.\nElliptic curves are applicable for key agreement, digital signatures, pseudo-random generators and other tasks. Indirectly, they can be used for encryption by combining the key agreement with a symmetric encryption scheme. They are also used in several integer factorization algorithms that have applications in cryptography, such as Lenstra elliptic-curve factorization.\nHistory.\nThe use of elliptic curves in cryptography was suggested independently by Neal Koblitz and Victor S. Miller in 1985. Elliptic curve cryptography algorithms entered wide use starting in 2004.\nIn 1999, NIST recommended fifteen elliptic curves. Specifically, FIPS 186-4 has ten recommended finite fields:\nThe NIST recommendation thus contains a total of five prime curves and ten binary curves. The curves were chosen for optimal security and implementation efficiency.\nAt the RSA Conference 2005, the National Security Agency (NSA) announced Suite B, which exclusively uses ECC for digital signature generation and key exchange. The suite is intended to protect both classified and unclassified national security systems and information. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has endorsed elliptic curve cryptography in its Suite B set of recommended algorithms, specifically elliptic-curve Diffie\u2013Hellman (ECDH) for key exchange and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) for digital signature. The NSA allows their use for protecting information classified up to top secret with 384-bit keys.\nRecently, a large number of cryptographic primitives based on bilinear mappings on various elliptic curve groups, such as the Weil and Tate pairings, have been introduced. Schemes based on these primitives provide efficient identity-based encryption as well as pairing-based signatures, signcryption, key agreement, and proxy re-encryption.\nElliptic curve cryptography is used successfully in numerous popular protocols, such as Transport Layer Security and Bitcoin.\nSecurity concerns.\nIn 2013, \"The New York Times\" stated that Dual Elliptic Curve Deterministic Random Bit Generation (or Dual_EC_DRBG) had been included as a NIST national standard due to the influence of NSA, which had included a deliberate weakness in the algorithm and the recommended elliptic curve. RSA Security in September 2013 issued an advisory recommending that its customers discontinue using any software based on Dual_EC_DRBG. In the wake of the exposure of Dual_EC_DRBG as \"an NSA undercover operation\", cryptography experts have also expressed concern over the security of the NIST recommended elliptic curves, suggesting a return to encryption based on non-elliptic-curve groups.\nAdditionally, in August 2015, the NSA announced that it plans to replace Suite B with a new cipher suite due to concerns about quantum computing attacks on ECC.\nPatents.\nWhile the RSA patent expired in 2000, there may be patents in force covering certain aspects of ECC technology, including at least one ECC scheme (ECMQV). However, RSA Laboratories and Daniel J. Bernstein have argued that the US government elliptic curve digital signature standard (ECDSA; NIST FIPS 186-3) and certain practical ECC-based key exchange schemes (including ECDH) can be implemented without infringing those patents.\nElliptic curve theory.\nFor the purposes of this article, an \"elliptic curve\" is a plane curve over a finite field (rather than the real numbers) which consists of the points satisfying the equation\n formula_3\nalong with a distinguished point at infinity, denoted \u221e. The coordinates here are to be chosen from a fixed finite field of characteristic not equal to 2 or 3, or the curve equation would be somewhat more complicated.\nThis set of points, together with the group operation of elliptic curves, is an abelian group, with the point at infinity as an identity element. The structure of the group is inherited from the divisor group of the underlying algebraic variety:\n formula_4\nApplication to cryptography.\nPublic-key cryptography is based on the intractability of certain mathematical problems. Early public-key systems, such as RSA's 1983 patent, based their security on the assumption that it is difficult to factor a large integer composed of two or more large prime factors which are far apart. For later elliptic-curve-based protocols, the base assumption is that finding the discrete logarithm of a random elliptic curve element with respect to a publicly known base point is infeasible (the computational Diffie\u2013Hellman assumption): this is the \"elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem\" (ECDLP). The security of elliptic curve cryptography depends on the ability to compute a point multiplication and the inability to compute the multiplicand given the original point and product point. The size of the elliptic curve, measured by the total number of discrete integer pairs satisfying the curve equation, determines the difficulty of the problem.\nThe primary benefit promised by elliptic curve cryptography over alternatives such as RSA is a smaller key size, reducing storage and transmission requirements. For example, a 256-bit elliptic curve public key should provide comparable security to a 3072-bit RSA public key.\nCryptographic schemes.\nSeveral discrete logarithm-based protocols have been adapted to elliptic curves, replacing the group formula_5 with an elliptic curve:\nImplementation.\nSome common implementation considerations include:\nDomain parameters.\nTo use ECC, all parties must agree on all the elements defining the elliptic curve, that is, the \"domain parameters\" of the scheme. The size of the field used is typically either prime (and denoted as p) or is a power of two (formula_6); the latter case is called \"the binary case\", and this case necessitates the choice of an auxiliary curve denoted by \"f\". Thus the field is defined by \"p\" in the prime case and the pair of \"m\" and \"f\" in the binary case. The elliptic curve is defined by the constants \"a\" and \"b\" used in its defining equation. Finally, the cyclic subgroup is defined by its generator (a.k.a. \"base point\") \"G\". For cryptographic application, the order of \"G\", that is the smallest positive number \"n\" such that formula_7 (the point at infinity of the curve, and the identity element), is normally prime. Since \"n\" is the size of a subgroup of formula_8 it follows from Lagrange's theorem that the number formula_9 is an integer. In cryptographic applications, this number \"h\", called the \"cofactor\", must be small (formula_10) and, preferably, formula_11. To summarize: in the prime case, the domain parameters are formula_12; in the binary case, they are formula_13.\nUnless there is an assurance that domain parameters were generated by a party trusted with respect to their use, the domain parameters \"must\" be validated before use.\nThe generation of domain parameters is not usually done by each participant because this involves computing the number of points on a curve which is time-consuming and troublesome to implement. As a result, several standard bodies published domain parameters of elliptic curves for several common field sizes. Such domain parameters are commonly known as \"standard curves\" or \"named curves\"; a named curve can be referenced either by name or by the unique object identifier defined in the standard documents:\nSECG test vectors are also available. NIST has approved many SECG curves, so there is a significant overlap between the specifications published by NIST and SECG. EC domain parameters may be specified either by value or by name.\nIf, despite the preceding admonition, one decides to construct one's own domain parameters, one should select the underlying field and then use one of the following strategies to find a curve with appropriate (i.e., near prime) number of points using one of the following methods:\nSeveral classes of curves are weak and should be avoided:\nKey sizes.\nBecause all the fastest known algorithms that allow one to solve the ECDLP (baby-step giant-step, Pollard's rho, etc.), need formula_22 steps, it follows that the size of the underlying field should be roughly twice the security parameter. For example, for 128-bit security one needs a curve over formula_21, where formula_24. This can be contrasted with finite-field cryptography (e.g., DSA) which requires 3072-bit public keys and 256-bit private keys, and integer factorization cryptography (e.g., RSA) which requires a 3072-bit value of \"n\", where the private key should be just as large. However, the public key may be smaller to accommodate efficient encryption, especially when processing power is limited.\nThe hardest ECC scheme (publicly) broken to date had a 112-bit key for the prime field case and a 109-bit key for the binary field case. For the prime field case, this was broken in July 2009 using a cluster of over 200 PlayStation 3 game consoles and could have been finished in 3.5 months using this cluster when running continuously. The binary field case was broken in April 2004 using 2600 computers over 17 months.\nA current project is aiming at breaking the ECC2K-130 challenge by Certicom, by using a wide range of different hardware: CPUs, GPUs, FPGA.\nProjective coordinates.\nA close examination of the addition rules shows that in order to add two points, one needs not only several additions and multiplications in formula_21 but also an inversion operation. The inversion (for given formula_26 find formula_27 such that formula_28) is one to two orders of magnitude slower than multiplication. However, points on a curve can be represented in different coordinate systems which do not require an inversion operation to add two points. Several such systems were proposed: in the \"projective\" system each point is represented by three coordinates formula_29 using the following relation: formula_30, formula_31; in the \"Jacobian system\" a point is also represented with three coordinates formula_29, but a different relation is used: formula_33, formula_34; in the \"L\u00f3pez\u2013Dahab system\" the relation is formula_30, formula_36; in the \"modified Jacobian\" system the same relations are used but four coordinates are stored and used for calculations formula_37; and in the \"Chudnovsky Jacobian\" system five coordinates are used formula_38. Note that there may be different naming conventions, for example, IEEE P1363-2000 standard uses \"projective coordinates\" to refer to what is commonly called Jacobian coordinates. An additional speed-up is possible if mixed coordinates are used.\nFast reduction.\nReduction modulo \"p\" (which is needed for addition and multiplication) can be executed much faster if the prime \"p\" is a pseudo-Mersenne prime (Solinas prime), that is formula_39; for example, formula_40 (P-521) or formula_41 (P-256) Compared to Barrett reduction, there can be an order of magnitude speed-up. The speed-up here is a practical rather than theoretical one, and derives from the fact that the moduli of numbers against numbers near powers of two can be performed efficiently by computers operating on binary numbers with bitwise operations.\nThe curves over formula_1 with pseudo-Mersenne P-256 and P-384 are recommended by NIST. The NIST curves also use \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u22123, which improves addition in Jacobian coordinates. However, this latter choice is suboptimal according to Bernstein and Lange, with other curves being likely more secure and run just as fast.\nThe use of pseudo-Mersennes is not one suboptimal decision: Bernstein's more preferred curves use similar forms such as formula_43 and formula_44.\nSecurity.\nSide-channel attacks.\nUnlike most other DLP systems (where it is possible to use the same procedure for squaring and multiplication), the EC addition is significantly different for doubling (\"P\" = \"Q\") and general addition (\"P\" \u2260 \"Q\") depending on the coordinate system used. Consequently, it is important to counteract side-channel attacks (e.g., timing or simple/differential power analysis attacks) using, for example, fixed pattern window (a.k.a. comb) methods (note that this does not increase computation time). Alternatively one can use an Edwards curve; this is a special family of elliptic curves for which doubling and addition can be done with the same operation. Another concern for ECC-systems is the danger of fault attacks, especially when running on smart cards.\nBackdoors.\nCryptographic experts have expressed concerns that the National Security Agency has inserted a kleptographic backdoor into at least one elliptic curve-based pseudo random generator. Internal memos leaked by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden suggest that the NSA put a backdoor in the Dual EC DRBG standard. One analysis of the possible backdoor concluded that an adversary in possession of the algorithm's secret key could obtain encryption keys given only 32 bytes of PRNG output.\nThe SafeCurves project has been launched in order to catalog curves that are easy to implement securely and are designed in a fully publicly verifiable way to minimize the chance of a backdoor.\nQuantum computing attack.\nShor's algorithm can be used to break elliptic curve cryptography by computing discrete logarithms on a hypothetical quantum computer. The latest quantum resource estimates for breaking a curve with a 256-bit modulus (128-bit security level) are 2330 qubits and 126 billion Toffoli gates. For the binary elliptic curve case, 906 qubits are necessary (to break 128 bits of security). In comparison, using Shor's algorithm to break the RSA algorithm requires 4098 qubits and 5.2 trillion Toffoli gates for a 2048-bit RSA key, suggesting that ECC is an easier target for quantum computers than RSA. All of these figures vastly exceed any quantum computer that has ever been built, and estimates place the creation of such computers at a decade or more away.\nSupersingular Isogeny Diffie\u2013Hellman Key Exchange claimed to provide a post-quantum secure form of elliptic curve cryptography by using isogenies to implement Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchanges. This key exchange uses much of the same field arithmetic as existing elliptic curve cryptography and requires computational and transmission overhead similar to many currently used public key systems. However, new classical attacks undermined the security of this protocol.\nIn August 2015, the NSA announced that it planned to transition \"in the not distant future\" to a new cipher suite that is resistant to quantum attacks. \"Unfortunately, the growth of elliptic curve use has bumped up against the fact of continued progress in the research on quantum computing, necessitating a re-evaluation of our cryptographic strategy.\"\nInvalid curve attack.\nWhen ECC is used in virtual machines, an attacker may use an invalid curve to get a complete PDH private key.\nAlternative representations.\nAlternative representations of elliptic curves include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9967", "revid": "47320720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9967", "title": "EDM", "text": "EDM or E-DM may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9970", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9970", "title": "Eightfold path (policy analysis)", "text": "Method of policy analysis\nThe eightfold path is a method of policy analysis assembled by Eugene Bardach, a professor at the Goldman School of Public Policy at the University of California, Berkeley. It is outlined in his book \"\", which is now in its seventh edition. The book is commonly referenced in public policy and public administration scholarship.\nBardach's procedure is as follows:\nA possible ninth step, based on Bardach's own writing, might be \"repeat steps 1\u20138 as necessary.\"\nThe method is named after the Buddhist Noble Eightfold Path, but otherwise has no relation to it.\nNew York taxi driver test.\nThe New York taxi driver test is a technique for evaluating the effectiveness of communication between policy makers and analysts. Bardach contends that policy explanations must be clear and down-to-earth enough for a taxi driver to be able to understand the premise during a trip through city streets. The New York taxi driver is presumed to be both a non-specialist and a tough customer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9971", "revid": "50915464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9971", "title": "Eden Project", "text": "Visitor attraction in Cornwall, United Kingdom\nThe Eden Project () is a visitor attraction in Cornwall, England. The project is located in a reclaimed china clay pit.\nThe complex is dominated by two huge enclosures consisting of adjoining domes that house thousands of plant species, and each enclosure emulates a natural biome. The biomes consist of hundreds of hexagonal and pentagonal ethylene tetrafluoroethylene (ETFE) inflated cells supported by geodesic tubular steel domes. The larger of the two biomes simulates a rainforest environment (and is one of the largest indoor rainforests in the world) and the second, a Mediterranean environment.\nThe attraction also has an outside botanical garden which is home to many plants and wildlife native to Cornwall and the UK in general; it also has many plants that provide an important and interesting backstory, for example, those with a prehistoric heritage.\nThere are plans to build an Eden Project in the seaside town of Morecambe, Lancashire, with a focus on the marine environment.\nHistory.\nThe clay pit in which the project is sited was in use for over 160 years. In 1981, the pit was used by the BBC as the planet surface of Magrathea in the TV series \"the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". By the mid-1990s the pit was all but exhausted.\nThe initial idea for the project dates back to 1996, with construction beginning in 1998. The work was hampered by torrential rain in the first few months of the project, and parts of the pit flooded as it sits below the water table.\nThe first part of the Eden Project, the visitor centre, opened to the public in May 2000. The first plants began arriving in September of that year, and the full site opened on 17 March 2001.\nTo counter criticism from environmental groups, the Eden Project committed to investigate a rail link to the site. The rail link was never built, and car parking on the site is still funded from revenue generated from general admission ticket sales. A bus service links the site to St Austell railway station, on the Cornish Main Line.\nThe Eden Project was used as a filming location for the 2002 James Bond film \"Die Another Day\". On 2 July 2005 The Eden Project hosted the \"Africa Calling\" concert of the Live 8 concert series. It has also provided some plants for the British Museum's Africa garden.\nIn 2005, the Project launched \"A Time of Gifts\" for the winter months, November to February. This features an ice rink covering the lake, with a small caf\u00e9-bar attached, as well as a Christmas market. Cornish choirs regularly perform in the biomes.\nIn 2007, the Eden Project campaigned unsuccessfully for \u00a350\u00a0million in Big Lottery Fund money for a proposed desert biome. It received just 12.07% of the votes, the lowest for the four projects being considered. As part of the campaign, the Eden Project invited people all over Cornwall to try to break the world record for the biggest ever pub quiz as part of its campaign to bring \u00a350\u00a0million of lottery funds to Cornwall.\nIn December 2009, much of the project, including both greenhouses, became available to navigate through Google Street View.\nThe Eden Trust revealed a trading loss of \u00a31.3\u00a0million for 2012\u201313, on a turnover of \u00a325.4\u00a0million. The Eden Project had posted a surplus of \u00a3136,000 for the previous year. In 2014 Eden accounts showed a surplus of \u00a32\u00a0million.\nThe World Pasty Championships, an international competition to find the best Cornish pasties and other pasty-type savoury snacks, have been held at the Eden Project since 2012.\nThe Eden Project is said to have contributed over \u00a31\u00a0billion to the Cornish economy. In 2016, Eden became home to Europe's second-largest redwood forest (after the Giants Grove at Birr Castle, Birr Castle, Ireland) when forty saplings of coast redwoods, \"Sequoia sempervirens\", which could live for 4,000 years and reach 115 metres in height, were planted there.\nThe Eden Project received 1,010,095 visitors in 2019.\nIn December 2020 the project was closed after heavy rain caused several landslips at the site. Managers at the site are assessing the damage and will announce when the project will reopen on the company's website. Reopening became irrelevant as Covid lockdown measures in the UK indefinitely closed the venue from early 2021, though it had reopened by May 2021 after remedial works had taken place. The site was used for an event during the 2021 G7 Summit, hosted by the United Kingdom.\nDesign and construction.\nThe project was conceived by Tim Smit and Jonathan Ball, and designed by Grimshaw Architects and structural engineering firm Anthony Hunt Associates (now part of Sinclair Knight Merz). Davis Langdon carried out the project management, Sir Robert McAlpine and Alfred McAlpine did the construction, MERO jointly designed and built the biome steel structures, the ETFE pillows that build the fa\u00e7ade were realized by Vector Foiltec, and Arup was the services engineer, economic consultant, environmental engineer and transportation engineer. Land Use Consultants led the masterplan and landscape design. The project took 2\u00bd years to construct and opened to the public on 17 March 2001.\nSite.\nLayout.\nOnce into the attraction, there is a meandering path with views of the two biomes, planted landscapes, including vegetable gardens, and sculptures that include a giant bee and previously The WEEE Man (removed in 2016), a towering figure made from old electrical appliances and was meant to represent the average electrical waste used by one person in a lifetime.\nBiomes.\nAt the bottom of the pit are two covered biomes:\nThe Rainforest Biome, covers and measures high, wide, and long. It is used for tropical plants, such as fruiting banana plants, coffee, rubber, and giant bamboo, and is kept at a tropical temperature and moisture level.\nThe Mediterranean Biome covers and measures high, wide, and long. It houses familiar warm temperate and arid plants such as olives and grape vines and various sculptures.\nThe Outdoor Gardens represent the temperate regions of the world with plants such as tea, lavender, hops, hemp, and sunflowers, as well as local plant species.\nThe covered biomes are constructed from a tubular steel (hex-tri-hex) with mostly hexagonal external cladding panels made from the thermoplastic ETFE. Glass was avoided due to its weight and potential dangers. The cladding panels themselves are created from several layers of thin UV-transparent ETFE film, which are sealed around their perimeter and inflated to create a large cushion. The resulting cushion acts as a thermal blanket to the structure. The ETFE material is resistant to most stains, which simply wash off in the rain. If required, cleaning can be performed by abseilers. Although the ETFE is susceptible to punctures, these can be easily fixed with ETFE tape. The structure is completely self-supporting, with no internal supports, and takes the form of a geodesic structure. The panels vary in size up to across, with the largest at the top of the structure.\nThe ETFE technology was supplied and installed by the firm Vector Foiltec, which is also responsible for ongoing maintenance of the cladding. The steel spaceframe and cladding package (with Vector Foiltec as ETFE subcontractor) was designed, supplied and installed by MERO (UK) PLC, who also jointly developed the overall scheme geometry with the architect, Nicholas Grimshaw &amp; Partners.\nThe entire build project was managed by McAlpine Joint Venture.\nThe Core.\nThe Core is the latest addition to the site and opened in September 2005. It provides the Eden Project with an education facility, incorporating classrooms and exhibition spaces designed to help communicate Eden's central message about the relationship between people and plants. Accordingly, the building has taken its inspiration from plants, most noticeable in the form of the soaring timber roof, which gives the building its distinctive shape.\nGrimshaw developed the geometry of the copper-clad roof in collaboration with a sculptor, Peter Randall-Page, and Mike Purvis of structural engineers SKM Anthony Hunts. It is derived from phyllotaxis, which is the mathematical basis for nearly all plant growth; the \"opposing spirals\" found in many plants such as the seeds in a sunflower's head, pine cones, and pineapples. The copper was obtained from traceable sources, and the Eden Project is working with Rio Tinto to explore the possibility of encouraging further traceable supply routes for metals, which would enable users to avoid metals mined unethically. The services and acoustic, mechanical, and electrical engineering design was carried out by Buro Happold.\nArt at The Core.\nThe Core is also home to art exhibitions throughout the year. A permanent installation entitled \"Seed\", by Peter Randall-Page, occupies the anteroom. \"Seed\" is a large, 70 tonne egg-shaped installation, carved from a single block of granite from De Lank Quarry on Bodmin Moor, standing some tall and displaying a complex pattern of protrusions that are based upon the geometric and mathematical principles that underlie plant growth.\nEnvironmental aspects.\nThe biomes provide diverse growing conditions, and many plants are on display.\nThe Eden Project includes environmental education focusing on the interdependence of plants and people; plants are labelled with their medicinal uses. The massive amounts of water required to create the humid conditions of the Tropical Biome, and to serve the toilet facilities, are all sanitised rain water that would otherwise collect at the bottom of the quarry. The only mains water used is for hand washing and for cooking. The complex also uses Green Tariff Electricity \u2013 some of the energy comes from one of the many wind turbines in Cornwall, which were among the first in Europe.\nIn December 2010 the Eden Project received permission to build a geothermal electricity plant which will generate approx 4MWe, enough to supply Eden and about 5000 households. The project will involve geothermal heating as well as geothermal electricity. Cornwall Council and the European Union came up with the greater part of \u00a316.8m required to start the project. First a well will be sunk nearly 3 miles (4.5\u00a0km) into the granite crust underneath Eden.\nEden co-founder, Sir Tim Smit said, \"Since we began, Eden has had a dream that the world should be powered by renewable energy. The sun can provide massive solar power and the wind has been harnessed by humankind for thousands of years, but because both are intermittent and battery technology cannot yet store all we need there is a gap. We believe the answer lies beneath our feet in the heat underground that can be accessed by drilling technology that pumps water towards the centre of the Earth and brings it back up superheated to provide us with heat and electricity\".\nDrilling began in May 2021, and heating of the biomes began in 2023, using 85\u00b0C.\nOther projects.\nEden Project Morecambe.\nIn 2018, the Eden Project revealed its design for a new version of the project, located on the seafront in Morecambe, Lancashire. There will be biomes shaped like mussels and a focus on the marine environment. There will also be reimagined lidos, gardens, performance spaces, immersive experiences, and observatories.\nGrimshaw are the architects for the project, which is expected to cost \u00a380 million. The project is a partnership with the Lancashire Enterprise Partnership, Lancaster University, Lancashire County Council, and Lancaster City Council. In December 2018, the four local partners agreed to provide \u00a31 million to develop the idea, which allowed the development of an outline planning application for the project. It is expected that there will be 500 jobs created and 8,000 visitors a day to the site.\nHaving been granted planning permission in January 2022 and with \u00a350 million of levelling-up funding granted in January 2023, it is due to open in late 2028 and predicted to benefit the North West economy by \u00a3200 million per year. In July 2024, Lancaster City Council received the first \u00a32.5m of a promised \u00a350m in UK government funding for the scheme. The grant would be used to appoint a main contractor to develop the designs for Eden Project Morecambe.\nEden Project Dundee.\nIn May 2020, the Eden Project revealed plans to establish their first attraction in Scotland, and named Dundee as the proposed site of the location. The city's Camperdown Park was widely touted to be the proposed location of the new attraction however in May 2021, it was announced that the Eden Project had chosen the site of the former gasworks in Dundee as the location. It was planned that the new development would result in 200 new jobs and \"contribute \u00a327m a year to the regional economy\". The project is in partnership with Dundee City Council, the University of Dundee and the Northwood Charitable Trust.\nIn 2021, Eden Project announced that they would establish fourteen hectares of new wildflower habitat in areas across Dundee, including Morgan Academy and Caird Park.\nIn July 2023, new images were released depicting what the Dundee attraction would look which accompanied the planning permission documents for the new attraction which would be submitted by autumn 2023.\nPlanning permission for the project was approved by Dundee City Council in June 2024.\nSouth Downs.\nIn 2020, Eastbourne Borough Council and the Eden Project announced a joint project to explore the viability of a new Eden site in the South Downs National Park.\nQingdao, China.\nIn 2015, the Eden Project announced that it had reached an agreement to construct an Eden site in Qingdao, China. While the site had originally been slated to open by 2020, construction fell behind schedule due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the opening date was delayed to 2023. The new site is expected to focus on \"water\" and its central role in civilization and nature.\nEden Project New Zealand.\nA planned Eden Project for the New Zealand city of Christchurch, to be called Eden Project New Zealand/Eden Project Aotearoa, was expected to be inaugurated in 2025. It was to be centred close to the Avon River, on a site largely razed as a result of the 2011 Christchurch Earthquake. The project has since been cancelled.\nEden Sessions.\nSince 2002, the Project has hosted a series of musical performances, called the Eden Sessions, usually held during the summer. The 2020 sessions were postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and were rescheduled as the 2022 sessions lineup.\nThe currently announced acts for the 2026 sessions will be headlined by Pixies, The Maccabees, Bowling for Soup and Frank Turner &amp; The Sleeping Souls.\nIn the media.\nThe Eden Project has appeared in various television shows and films such as the James Bond film \"Die Another Day\", \"The Bad Education Movie\", in the Netflix series \"The Last Bus\", in the CBeebies show \"Andy's Aquatic Adventure\" and in Armenia\u2019s postcard in the \"Eurovision Song Contest 2023\".\nA weekly radio show called \"The Eden Radio Project\" is held every Thursday afternoon on CHAOS Radio, formerly known as Radio St Austell Bay.\nOn 18 November 2019, on the \"Trees A Crowd\" podcast, David Oakes interviewed Eden Project's Head of Interpretation, Dr Jo Elworthy, about the site.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9974", "revid": "32182696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9974", "title": "European Commission", "text": "Executive branch of the European Union\nThe European Commission (EC) is the primary executive branch of the European Union (EU).\nIt operates as a cabinet government, with a number of members of the Commission (directorial system, informally known as \"commissioners\") corresponding to two thirds of the number of member states, unless the European Council, acting unanimously, decides to alter this number. \nThe current number of commissioners is 27, including the president. It includes an administrative body of about 32,000 European civil servants. The commission is divided into departments known as Directorates-General (DGs) that can be likened to departments or ministries each headed by a director-general who is responsible to a commissioner.\nCurrently, there is one member per member state, but members are bound by their oath of office to represent the general interest of the EU as a whole rather than their home state. The Commission president (currently Ursula von der Leyen) is proposed by the European Council (the 27 heads of state/governments) and elected by the European Parliament. The Council of the European Union then nominates the other members of the Commission in agreement with the nominated president, and the 27 members as a team are then subject to a vote of approval by the European Parliament. \nThe current Commission is the von der Leyen Commission II, which took office in December 2024, following the European Parliament elections in June of the same year.\nHistory.\nThe European Commission derives from one of the five key institutions created in the supranational European Community system, following the proposal of Robert Schuman, French Foreign Minister, on 9 May 1950. Originating in 1951 as the High Authority in the European Coal and Steel Community, the commission has undergone numerous changes in power and composition under various presidents, involving three Communities.\nEstablishment.\nThe first Commission originated in 1951 as the nine-member \"High Authority\" under President Jean Monnet (see Monnet Authority). The High Authority was the supranational administrative executive of the new European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). It took office first on 10 August 1952 in Luxembourg City. In 1958, the Treaties of Rome had established two new communities alongside the ECSC: the European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). However, their executives were called \"Commissions\" rather than \"High Authorities\". The reason for the change in name was the new relationship between the executives and the Council. Some states, such as France, expressed reservations over the power of the High Authority and wished to limit it by giving more power to the Council rather than the new executives.\nLouis Armand led the first Commission of Euratom. Walter Hallstein led the first Commission of the EEC, holding the first formal meeting on 16 January 1958 at the Ch\u00e2teau of Val-Duchesse. It achieved agreement on a contentious cereal price accord, as well as making a positive impression upon third countries when it made its international debut at the Kennedy Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations. Hallstein notably began the consolidation of European law and started to have a notable impact on national legislation. Little heed was taken of his administration at first but, with help from the European Court of Justice, his Commission stamped its authority solidly enough to allow future Commissions to be taken more seriously. In 1965, however, accumulating differences between the French government of Charles de Gaulle and the other member states on various subjects (British entry, direct elections to Parliament, the Fouchet Plan and the budget) triggered the \"empty chair\" crisis, ostensibly over proposals for the Common Agricultural Policy. Although the institutional crisis was solved the following year, it cost \u00c9tienne Hirsch his presidency of Euratom and later Walter Hallstein the EEC presidency, despite his otherwise being viewed as the most 'dynamic' leader until Jacques Delors.\nEarly development.\nThe three bodies, collectively named the European Executives, co-existed until 1 July 1967 when, under the Merger Treaty, they were combined into a single administration under President Jean Rey. Owing to the merger, the Rey Commission saw a temporary increase to 14 members\u2014although subsequent Commissions were reduced back to nine, following the formula of one member for small states and two for larger states. The Rey Commission completed the Community's customs union in 1968 and campaigned for a more powerful, elected, European Parliament. Despite Rey being the first President of the combined communities, Hallstein is seen as the first President of the modern Commission.\nThe Malfatti and Mansholt Commissions followed with work on monetary co-operation and the first enlargement to the north in 1973. With that enlargement, the College of Commissioners membership increased to thirteen under the Ortoli Commission (the United Kingdom as a large member was granted two Commissioners), which dealt with the enlarged community during economic and international instability at that time. The external representation of the Community took a step forward when President Roy Jenkins, recruited to the presidency in January 1977 from his role as Home Secretary of the United Kingdom's Labour government, became the first President to attend a G8 summit on behalf of the Community. Following the Jenkins Commission, Gaston Thorn's Commission oversaw the Community's enlargement to the south, in addition to beginning work on the Single European Act.\nJacques Delors.\nThe Commission headed by Jacques Delors was seen as giving the Community a sense of direction and dynamism. Delors and his College are also considered as the \"founding fathers of the euro\". The \"International Herald Tribune\" noted the work of Delors at the end of his second term in 1992: \"Mr. Delors rescued the European Community from the doldrums. He arrived when Europessimism was at its worst. Although he was a little-known former French finance minister, he breathed life and hope into the EC and into the dispirited Brussels Commission. In his first term, from 1985 to 1988, he rallied Europe to the call of the single market, and when appointed to a second term he began urging Europeans toward the far more ambitious goals of economic, monetary, and political union\".\nJacques Santer.\nThe successor to Delors was Jacques Santer. As a result of a fraud and corruption scandal, the entire Santer Commission was forced by the Parliament to resign in 1999. These frauds were revealed by internal auditor Paul van Buitenen, with French commissioner \u00c9dith Cresson being the main target of the allegations.\nThat was the first time a College of Commissioners had been forced to resign \"en masse\", and represented a shift of power towards the Parliament. However, the Santer Commission did carry out work on the Treaty of Amsterdam and the euro. In response to the scandal, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) was created.\nRomano Prodi.\nFollowing Santer, Romano Prodi took office. The Amsterdam Treaty had increased the commission's powers and Prodi was dubbed by the press as something akin to a Prime Minister. Powers were strengthened again; the Treaty of Nice, signed in 2001, gave the Presidents more power over the composition of the College of Commissioners.\nJos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso.\nJos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso became president in 2004: the Parliament once again asserted itself in objecting to the proposed membership of the Barroso Commission. Owing to this opposition, Barroso was forced to reshuffle his College before taking office. The Barroso Commission was also the first full Commission since the enlargement in 2004 to 25 members; hence, the number of Commissioners at the end of the Prodi Commission had reached 30. As a result of the increase in the number of states, the Amsterdam Treaty triggered a reduction in the number of Commissioners to one per state, rather than two for the larger states.\nAllegations of fraud and corruption were again raised in 2004 by former chief auditor Jules Muis. A Commission officer, Guido Strack, reported alleged fraud and abuses in his department in the years 2002\u20132004 to OLAF, and was fired as a result. In 2008, Paul van Buitenen (the former auditor known from the Santer Commission scandal) accused the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) of a lack of independence and effectiveness.\nBarroso's first Commission term expired on 31 October 2009. Under the Treaty of Nice, the first Commission to be appointed after the number of member states reached 27 would have to be reduced to \"less than the number of Member States\". The exact number of Commissioners was to be decided by a unanimous vote of the European Council, and membership would rotate equally between member states. Following the accession of Romania and Bulgaria in January 2007, this clause took effect for the next Commission. The Treaty of Lisbon, which came into force on 1 December 2009, mandated a reduction of the number of commissioners to two-thirds of member-states from 2014 unless the Council decided otherwise. Membership would rotate equally and no member state would have more than one Commissioner. However, the treaty was rejected by voters in Ireland in 2008 with one main concern being the loss of their Commissioner. Hence a guarantee given for a rerun of the vote was that the council would use its power to amend the number of Commissioners upwards. However, according to the treaties it still has to be fewer than the total number of members, thus it was proposed that the member state that does not get a Commissioner would get the post of High Representative\u00a0\u2013 the so-called 26+1 formula. This guarantee (which may find its way into the next treaty amendment, probably in an accession treaty) contributed to the Irish approving the treaty in a second referendum in 2009.\nLisbon also combined the posts of European Commissioner for External Relations with the council's High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy. This post, also a Vice-president of the Commission, would chair the Council of the European Union's foreign affairs meetings as well as the commission's external relations duties. The treaty further provides that the most recent European elections should be \"\"taken into account\" when appointing the President of the European Commission, and although they are still proposed by the European Council; the European Parliament \"elects\" candidates to the office, rather than \"approves\"\" them as under the Treaty of Nice.\nThe Barroso Commission is, in reaction to Euroscepticism, said to have toned down enforcement to increase integration.\nJean-Claude Juncker.\nIn 2014, Jean-Claude Juncker became President of the European Commission.\nJuncker appointed his previous campaign director and head of the transition team, Martin Selmayr, as his chief of cabinet. During the Juncker presidency Selmayr has been described as \"the most powerful EU chief of staff ever.\"\nUrsula von der Leyen.\nIn 2019, Ursula von der Leyen was appointed as President of the European Commission. She submitted the guidelines of her policy to the European Parliament on 16 July 2019, following her confirmation. She had not been considered a likely candidate (in general, the elected candidate is determined, according to the results of the European election, as winner of the internal election into the dominant European party known as \"\"). While the European People's Party had won the European Parliament election, they had performed worse than expected and therefore nominated von der Leyen instead of Manfred Weber, their original candidate. On 9 September, the Council of the European Union declared a list of candidate-commissioners, which are sent to Brussels by the governments of each member state and which had to be officially approved by the parliament.\nIn September 2024, Von der Leyen revealed her new team of European Commissioners, marking a shift to a \"leaner\" and more interconnected structure. The lineup featured six executive vice-presidents (EVPs) from France, Finland, Estonia, Italy, Romania, and Spain. These EVPs, including Teresa Ribera and St\u00e9phane S\u00e9journ\u00e9, were tasked with overseeing various clusters of Commissioners and steering key policy areas such as prosperity, security, and democracy. Raffaele Fitto was appointed despite criticism from European socialists over his hard-right affiliations. Other notable appointments included Kaja Kallas as EVP for Foreign and Security Policy, and Henna Virkkunen as EVP for Tech Sovereignty and Digital Technologies. The Commission also introduced new roles like the Commissioner for Defence and Security and the Commissioner for the Mediterranean.\nPowers and functions.\nThe commission was set up from the start to act as an independent supranational authority separate from governments; it has been described as \"the only body paid to think European\". The members are proposed by their member state governments, one from each. However, they are bound to act independently\u00a0\u2013 free from other influences such as those governments which appointed them. This is in contrast to the Council of the European Union, which represents governments, the European Parliament, which represents citizens, the Economic and Social Committee, which represents organised civil society, and the Committee of the Regions, which represents local and regional authorities.\nThrough the commission has several responsibilities: to develop medium-term strategies; to draft legislation and arbitrate in the legislative process; to represent the EU in trade negotiations; to make rules and regulations, for example in competition policy; to draw up the budget of the European Union; and to scrutinise the implementation of the treaties and legislation. The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the commission's operation and organisation.\nExecutive power.\nBefore the Treaty of Lisbon came into force, the executive power of the EU was held by the council: it conferred on the Commission such powers for it to exercise. However, the council was allowed to withdraw these powers, exercise them directly, or impose conditions on their use. This aspect has been changed by the Treaty of Lisbon, after which the Commission exercises its powers just by virtue of the treaties. Powers are more restricted than most national executives, in part due to the commission's lack of power over areas like foreign policy\u00a0\u2013 that power is held by the Council of the European Union and the European Council, which some analysts have described as another executive.\nConsidering that under the Treaty of Lisbon, the European Council has become a formal institution with the power of appointing the commission, it could be said that the two bodies hold the executive power of the EU (the European Council also holds individual national executive powers). However, it is the Commission that currently holds most of the executive power over the European Union.\nLegislative initiative.\nThe Commission differs from the other institutions in that it alone has legislative initiative in the EU. Only the commission can make formal proposals for legislation: they cannot originate in the legislative branches. Under the Treaty of Lisbon, no legislative act is allowed in the field of the Common Foreign and Security Policy. In the other fields, the Council and Parliament can request legislation; in most cases the Commission initiates on the basis of these proposals. This monopoly is designed to ensure coordinated and coherent drafting of EU law. This monopoly has been challenged by some who claim the Parliament should also have the right, with most national parliaments holding the right in some respects. However, the Council and Parliament may request the commission to draft legislation, though the Commission does have the power to refuse to do so as it did in 2008 over transnational collective conventions. Under the Lisbon Treaty, EU citizens are also able to request the commission to legislate in an area via a petition carrying one million signatures, but this is not binding.\nThe commission's powers in proposing law have usually centred on economic regulation. It has put forward a large number of regulations based on a \"precautionary principle\". This means that pre-emptive regulation takes place if there is a credible hazard to the environment or human health: for example on tackling climate change and restricting genetically modified organisms. The European Commission has committed EU member states to carbon neutrality by 2050. This is opposed to weighting regulations for their effect on the economy. Thus, the Commission often proposes stricter legislation than other countries. Owing to the size of the European market, this has made EU legislation an important influence in the global market. On February 23, 2022, the European Commission published the Corporate Sustainability Due Diligence Directive which establishes a framework of due diligence for companies to identify actual or potential risks and harm to human rights and the environment as well as establishing processes and standards to diminish these risks. The Directive is expected to be officially adopted in 2024 and then be incorporated into domestic laws within two years by all of the European Union member states.\nRecently the commission has moved into creating European criminal law. In 2006, a toxic waste spill off the coast of C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, from a European ship, prompted the commission to look into legislation against toxic waste. at that time did not even have a crime against shipping toxic waste; this led the Commissioners Franco Frattini and Stavros Dimas to put forward the idea of \"ecological crimes\". Their right to propose criminal law was challenged in the European Court of Justice but upheld. the only other criminal law proposals which have been brought forward are on the intellectual property rights directive, and on an amendment to the 2002 counter-terrorism framework decision, outlawing terrorism\u2011related incitement, recruitment (especially via the internet) and training.\nEnforcement.\nOnce legislation is passed by the Council and Parliament, it is the commission's responsibility to ensure it is implemented. It does this through the member states or through its agencies. In adopting the necessary technical measures, the commission is assisted by committees made up of representatives of member states and of the public and private lobbies (a process known in jargon as \"comitology\"). Furthermore, the commission is responsible for the implementation of the EU budget, ensuring, along with the Court of Auditors, that EU funds are correctly spent.\nIn particular the commission has a duty to ensure the treaties and law are upheld, potentially by taking member states or other institutions to the Court of Justice in a dispute. In this role it is known informally as the \"Guardian of the Treaties\". Finally, the Commission provides some external representation for the Union, alongside the member states and the Common Foreign and Security Policy, representing the Union in bodies such as the World Trade Organization. It is also usual for the President to attend meetings of the G7.\nCollege of Commissioners.\nThe commission is composed of a \"College of Commissioners\" of 27 members, including the President and vice-presidents. Even though each member is nominated on the basis of the suggestions made by the national governments, one per state, they do not represent their state in the commission. In practice, however, they do occasionally press for their national interest. Once proposed, the President delegates portfolios among each of the members. The power of a Commissioner largely depends upon their portfolio, and can vary over time. For example, the Education Commissioner has been growing in importance, in line with the rise in the importance of education and culture in European policy-making. Another example is the Competition Commissioner, who holds a highly visible position with global reach. Before the commission can assume office, the college as a whole must be approved by the Parliament. Commissioners are supported by their personal cabinet who give them political guidance, while the Civil Service (the DGs, see below) deal with technical preparation.\nAppointment.\nThe President of the Commission is appointed in an indirect election. The candidate is first selected by the European Council, according to the Qualified Majority Vote (QMV), taking into account the latest parliamentary elections (any person from the largest party can be picked). That candidate then faces approval by the European Parliament. If the European Parliament fails to elect the candidate, the European Council shall propose another within one month.\nFollowing the selection of the President, and the appointment of the High Representative by the European Council, each Commissioner is proposed by their member state (except for those states who provided the President and High Representative) in consultation with the Commission President and the Council of the European Union, who formally adopts the list of candidates. The President's proposed College of Commissioners is then subject to hearings at the European Parliament which will question them and then vote on their suitability as a whole. If the European Parliament submits a negative opinion of a candidate, the President must either reshuffle them or request a new candidate from the member state to avoid the college's outright rejection by the European Parliament. Once the college is approved by parliament, it is formally appointed following a QMV vote by the European Council.\nFollowing the college's appointment, the President appoints a number of Vice-presidents from among the commissioners. Vice-presidents manage policy areas involving multiple Commissioners. One of these includes the High Representative, who is automatically one of the Vice-presidents \"ex officio\" rather than by appointment and confirmation. Commonly referred to as the 'HR/VP' position, the High Representative also coordinates commissioners' activities involving the external relations and defence cooperation of the European Union. The von der Leyen Commission also created the position of more senior Executive Vice-presidents, appointed from the three largest political groups in the European Parliament. Unlike the other vice-presidents, their mission is to manage the incumbent Commission's top priority policy areas, for which they receive additional support from a dedicated Directorate-General.\nDismissal.\nThe European Parliament can dissolve the College of Commissioners as a whole following a vote of no-confidence, which requires a two-thirds vote.\nOnly the President can request the resignation of an individual Commissioner. However, individual Commissioners, by request of the council or Commission, can be compelled to retire on account of a breach of obligation(s) and if so ruled by the European Court of Justice (Art. 245 and 247, Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union).\nPolitical styles.\nThe Barroso Commission took office in late 2004 after being delayed by objections from the Parliament, which forced a reshuffle. In 2007 the Commission increased from 25 to 27 members with the accession of Romania and Bulgaria who each appointed their own Commissioners. With the increasing size of the commission, Barroso adopted a more presidential style of control over the college, which earned him some criticism.\nHowever, under Barroso, the commission began to lose ground to the larger member states as countries such as France, the UK and Germany sought to sideline its role. This has increased with the creation of the President of the European Council under the Treaty of Lisbon. There has also been a greater degree of politicisation within the Commission.\nAdministration.\nThe commission is divided into departments known as Directorates-General (DGs) that can be likened to departments or ministries. Each covers a specific policy area such as agriculture or justice and citizens' rights or internal services such as human resources and translation and is headed by a director-general who is responsible to a commissioner. A commissioner's portfolio can be supported by numerous DGs; they prepare proposals for them and if approved by a majority of commissioners proposals go forward to the Parliament and Council for consideration. The Commission's civil service is headed by a Secretary General. The position is currently held by Ilze Juhansone. The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the commission's operation and organisation.\nThere has been criticism from a number of people that the highly fragmented DG structure wastes a considerable amount of time in turf wars as the different departments and Commissioners compete with each other. Furthermore, the DGs can exercise considerable control over a Commissioner with the Commissioner having little time to learn to assert control over their staff.\nAccording to figures published by the commission, 23,803 persons were employed by the commission as officials and temporary agents in September 2012. In addition to these, 9230 \"external staff\" (e.g. Contractual agents, detached national experts, young experts, trainees etc.) were employed. The single largest DG is the Directorate-General for Translation, with a 2309-strong staff, while the largest group by nationality is Belgian (18.7%), probably due to a majority (17,664) of staff being based in the country.\nPress.\nCommunication with the press is handled by the Directorate-General Communication. The Commission's chief spokesperson is Paula Pinho who holds the midday press briefings, commonly known as the \"Midday Presser\". It takes place every weekday in the Commission's press room at the Berlaymont where journalists may ask questions to the Commission officials on any topic and legitimately expect to get an \"on the record\" answer for live TV. Such a situation is unique in the world.\nAs an integral part of the Directorate-General for Communication, the Spokesperson's Service, in coordination with the Executive Communication Adviser in the President's Cabinet, supports the President and Commissioners so that they can communicate effectively. On political communication matters, the chief spokesperson reports directly to the President of the European Commission.\nIt has been noted by one researcher that the press releases issued by the commission are uniquely political. A release often goes through several stages of drafting which emphasises the role of the commission and is used \"for justifying the EU and the Commission\" increasing their length and complexity. Where there are multiple departments involved a press release can also be a source of competition between areas of the Commission and Commissioners themselves. This also leads to an unusually high number of press releases, and is seen as a unique product of the EU's political set-up.\nThere is a larger press corps in Brussels than Washington, D.C.; in 2020, media outlets in every Union member-state had a Brussels correspondent. Although there has been a worldwide cut in journalists, the considerable press releases and operations such as Europe by Satellite and EuroparlTV leads many news organisations to believe they can cover the EU from these source and news agencies. The Commission shut down Presseurop on 20 December 2013, though the decision was criticised.\nLegitimacy and criticism.\nAs the commission is the executive branch, candidates are chosen individually by the 27 national governments. Within the EU, the legitimacy of the commission is mainly drawn from the vote of approval that is required from the European Parliament, along with its power to dismiss the body. Eurosceptics have therefore raised the concern of the relatively low turnout (often less than 50%) in elections for the European Parliament since 1999. While that figure may be higher than that of some national elections, including the off-year elections of the United States Congress, the fact that there are no direct elections for the position of Commission President calls the position's legitimacy into question in the eyes of some Eurosceptics. The fact that the commission can directly decide (albeit with oversight from specially formed 'comitology committees') on the shape and character of implementing legislation further raises concerns about democratic legitimacy.\nEven though democratic structures and methods are changing there is not such a mirror in creating a European civil society. The Treaty of Lisbon may go some way to resolving the perceived deficit in creating greater democratic controls on the commission, including enshrining the procedure of linking elections to the selection of the Commission president. Historically, the commission had indeed been seen as a technocratic expert body which, akin with institutions such as independent central banks, deals with technical areas of policy and therefore ought to be removed from party politics. From this viewpoint, electoral pressures would undermine the commission's role as an independent regulator. Defenders of the Commission point out that legislation must be approved by the Council in all areas (the ministers of member states) and the European Parliament in most areas before it can be adopted, thus the amount of legislation which is adopted in any one country without the approval of its government is limited.\nIn 2009 the European ombudsman published statistics of citizens' complaints against EU institutions, with most of them filed against the commission (66%) and concerning lack of transparency (36%). In 2010 the commission was sued for blocking access to documents on EU biofuel policy. This happened after media accused the Commission of blocking scientific evidence against biofuel subsidies. Lack of transparency, unclear lobbyist relations, conflicts of interests and excessive spending of the commission was highlighted in a number of reports by internal and independent auditing organisations. It has also been criticised on IT-related issues, particularly with regard to Microsoft.\nIn September 2020, the European Commission put forward an Anti-Racism Action Plan to tackle the structural racism in the European Union, including measures to address the lack of racial diversity among the European decision makers in Brussels, as denounced by the #BrusselsSoWhite movement.\nInitiatives.\nAnti-terrorism.\nThe European Commission has an Action Plan to enhance preparedness against chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) security risks as part of its anti-terrorism package released in October 2017. In recent times Europe has seen an increased threat level of CBRN attacks. As such, the European Commission's preparedness plan is important, said Steven Neville Chatfield, a director for the Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response in the United Kingdom's Health Protection Agency. For the first time, the European Commission proposed that medical preparedness for CBRN attack threats is a high priority. \"The European Commission's (EC) Action Plan to enhance preparedness against CBRN security risks is part of its anti-terrorism package released in October 2017, a strategy aimed at better protecting the more than 511 million citizens across the 27 member states of the European Union (EU).\"\nCOVID-19 response.\nThe European Commission organized a video conference of world leaders on 4 May 2020 to raise funds for COVID-19 vaccine development. US$8 billion was raised.\nThe European Commission issued a new multi-year data plan in February 2020 pushing the digitalization of all aspects of EU society for the benefit of civic and economic growth.\nThe goal of this data strategy is to create a single market for data in which data flows across the EU and across sectors while maintaining full respect for privacy and data protection, where access rules are fair, and where the European economy benefits enormously as a global player as a result of the new data economy.\nLocation.\nThe commission's political seat is in Brussels with the President's office and the commission's meeting room on the 13th floor of the Berlaymont building. The commission also operates out of numerous other buildings in Brussels and Luxembourg City. When the Parliament is meeting in Strasbourg, the Commissioners also meet there in the Winston Churchill building to attend the Parliament's debates. The Members of the Commission and their \"cabinets\" (immediate teams) are also based in the Berlaymont building in Brussels. Additionally, the European Commission has in-house scientific facilities that support it in: Ispra, Italy; Petten, Netherlands; Karlsruhe, Germany; Geel, Belgium and Seville, Spain. In Grange, County Meath, Ireland, a Commission site is hosting part of DG Sant\u00e8.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9975", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9975", "title": "Linear filter", "text": "Filter that has a linear response\nLinear filters process time-varying input signals to produce output signals, subject to the constraint of linearity. In most cases these linear filters are also time invariant (or shift invariant) in which case they can be analyzed exactly using LTI (\"linear time-invariant\") system theory revealing their transfer functions in the frequency domain and their impulse responses in the time domain. Real-time implementations of such linear signal processing filters in the time domain are inevitably causal, an additional constraint on their transfer functions. An analog electronic circuit consisting only of linear components (resistors, capacitors, inductors, and linear amplifiers) will necessarily fall in this category, as will comparable mechanical systems or digital signal processing systems containing only linear elements. Since linear time-invariant filters can be completely characterized by their response to sinusoids of different frequencies (their frequency response), they are sometimes known as frequency filters.\nNon real-time implementations of linear time-invariant filters need not be causal. Filters of more than one dimension are also used such as in image processing. The general concept of linear filtering also extends into other fields and technologies such as statistics, data analysis, and mechanical engineering.\nImpulse response and transfer function.\nA linear time-invariant (LTI) filter can be uniquely specified by its impulse response \"h\", and the output of any filter is mathematically expressed as the convolution of the input with that impulse response. The frequency response, given by the filter's transfer function formula_1, is an alternative characterization of the filter. Typical filter design goals are to realize a particular frequency response, that is, the magnitude of the transfer function formula_2; the importance of the phase of the transfer function varies according to the application, inasmuch as the shape of a waveform can be distorted to a greater or lesser extent in the process of achieving a desired (amplitude) response in the frequency domain. The frequency response may be tailored to, for instance, eliminate unwanted frequency components from an input signal, or to limit an amplifier to signals within a particular band of frequencies.\nThe impulse response \"h\" of a linear time-invariant causal filter specifies the output that the filter would produce if it were to receive an input consisting of a single impulse at time 0. An \"impulse\" in a continuous time filter means a Dirac delta function; in a discrete time filter the Kronecker delta function would apply. The impulse response completely characterizes the response of any such filter, inasmuch as any possible input signal can be expressed as a (possibly infinite) combination of weighted delta functions. Multiplying the impulse response shifted in time according to the arrival of each of these delta functions by the amplitude of each delta function, and summing these responses together (according to the superposition principle, applicable to all linear systems) yields the output waveform.\nMathematically this is described as the convolution of a time-varying input signal \"x(t)\" with the filter's impulse response \"h\", defined as:\nformula_3 or\nformula_4.\nThe first form is the continuous-time form, which describes mechanical and analog electronic systems, for instance. The second equation is a discrete-time version used, for example, by digital filters implemented in software, so-called \"digital signal processing\". The impulse response \"h\" completely characterizes any linear time-invariant (or shift-invariant in the discrete-time case) filter. The input \"x\" is said to be \"convolved\" with the impulse response \"h\" having a (possibly infinite) duration of time \"T\" (or of \"N\" sampling periods).\nFilter design consists of finding a possible transfer function that can be implemented within certain practical constraints dictated by the technology or desired complexity of the system, followed by a practical design that realizes that transfer function using the chosen technology. The complexity of a filter may be specified according to the order of the filter.\nAmong the time-domain filters we here consider, there are two general classes of filter transfer functions that can approximate a desired frequency response. Very different mathematical treatments apply to the design of filters termed infinite impulse response (IIR) filters, characteristic of mechanical and analog electronics systems, and finite impulse response (FIR) filters, which can be implemented by discrete time systems such as computers (then termed \"digital signal processing\").\nImplementation issues.\nClassical analog filters are IIR filters, and classical filter theory centers on the determination of transfer functions given by low order rational functions, which can be synthesized using the same small number of reactive components. Using digital computers, on the other hand, both FIR and IIR filters are straightforward to implement in software.\nA digital IIR filter can generally approximate a desired filter response using less computing power than a FIR filter, however this advantage is more often unneeded given the increasing power of digital processors. The ease of designing and characterizing FIR filters makes them preferable to the filter designer (programmer) when ample computing power is available. Another advantage of FIR filters is that their impulse response can be made symmetric, which implies a response in the frequency domain that has zero phase at all frequencies (not considering a finite delay), which is absolutely impossible with any IIR filter.\nFrequency response.\nThe frequency response or transfer function formula_2 of a filter can be obtained if the impulse response is known, or directly through analysis using Laplace transforms, or in discrete-time systems the Z-transform. The frequency response also includes the phase as a function of frequency, however in many cases the phase response is of little or no interest. FIR filters can be made to have zero phase, but with IIR filters that is generally impossible. With most IIR transfer functions there are related transfer functions having a frequency response with the same magnitude but a different phase; in most cases the so-called minimum phase transfer function is preferred.\nFilters in the time domain are most often requested to follow a specified frequency response. Then, a mathematical procedure finds a filter transfer function that can be realized (within some constraints), and approximates the desired response to within some criterion. Common filter response specifications are described as follows:\nFIR transfer functions.\nMeeting a frequency response requirement with an FIR filter uses relatively straightforward procedures. In the most basic form, the desired frequency response itself can be sampled with a resolution of formula_6 and Fourier transformed to the time domain. This obtains the filter coefficients \"hi\", which implements a zero phase FIR filter that matches the frequency response at the sampled frequencies used. To better match a desired response, formula_6 must be reduced. However the duration of the filter's impulse response, and the number of terms that must be summed for each output value (according to the above discrete time convolution) is given by formula_8 where \"T\" is the sampling period of the discrete time system (N-1 is also termed the \"order\" of an FIR filter). Thus the complexity of a digital filter and the computing time involved, grows inversely with formula_6, placing a higher cost on filter functions that better approximate the desired behavior. For the same reason, filter functions whose critical response is at lower frequencies (compared to the sampling frequency \"1/T\") require a higher order, more computationally intensive FIR filter. An IIR filter can thus be much more efficient in such cases.\nElsewhere the reader may find further discussion of design methods for practical FIR filter design.\nIIR transfer functions.\nSince classical analog filters are IIR filters, there has been a long history of studying the range of possible transfer functions implementing various of the above desired filter responses in continuous time systems. Using transforms it is possible to convert these continuous time frequency responses to ones that are implemented in discrete time, for use in digital IIR filters. The complexity of any such filter is given by the \"order\" N, which describes the order of the rational function describing the frequency response. The order N is of particular importance in analog filters, because an Nth order electronic filter requires N reactive elements (capacitors and/or inductors) to implement. If a filter is implemented using, for instance, biquad stages using op-amps, N/2 stages are needed. In a digital implementation, the number of computations performed per sample is proportional to N. Thus the mathematical problem is to obtain the best approximation (in some sense) to the desired response using a smaller N, as we shall now illustrate.\nBelow are the frequency responses of several standard filter functions that approximate a desired response, optimized according to some criterion. These are all fifth-order low-pass filters, designed for a cutoff frequency of .5 in normalized units. Frequency responses are shown for the Butterworth, Chebyshev, inverse Chebyshev, and elliptic filters.\nAs is clear from the image, the elliptic filter is sharper than the others, but at the expense of ripples in both its passband and stopband. The Butterworth filter has the poorest transition but has a more even response, avoiding ripples in either the passband or stopband. A Bessel filter (not shown) has an even poorer transition in the frequency domain, but maintains the best phase fidelity of a waveform. Different applications emphasize different design requirements, leading to different choices among these (and other) optimizations, or requiring a filter of a higher order.\nExample implementations.\nA popular circuit implementing a second order active R-C filter is the Sallen-Key design, whose schematic diagram is shown here. This topology can be adapted to produce low-pass, band-pass, and high pass filters.\nAn Nth order FIR filter can be implemented in a discrete time system using a computer program or specialized hardware in which the input signal is subject to N delay stages. The output of the filter is formed as the weighted sum of those delayed signals, as is depicted in the accompanying signal flow diagram. The response of the filter depends on the weighting coefficients denoted \"b0\", \"b1\", ... \"bN\". For instance, if all of the coefficients were equal to unity, a so-called boxcar function, then it would implement a low-pass filter with a low frequency gain of N+1 and a frequency response given by the sinc function. Superior shapes for the frequency response can be obtained using coefficients derived from a more sophisticated design procedure.\nMathematics of filter design.\nLTI system theory describes linear \"time-invariant\" (LTI) filters of all types. LTI filters can be completely described by their frequency response and phase response, the specification of which uniquely defines their impulse response, and \"vice versa\". From a mathematical viewpoint, continuous-time IIR LTI filters may be described in terms of linear differential equations, and their impulse responses considered as Green's functions of the equation. Continuous-time LTI filters may also be described in terms of the Laplace transform of their impulse response, which allows all of the characteristics of the filter to be analyzed by considering the pattern of zeros and poles of their Laplace transform in the complex plane. Similarly, discrete-time LTI filters may be analyzed via the Z-transform of their impulse response.\nBefore the advent of computer filter synthesis tools, graphical tools such as Bode plots and Nyquist plots were extensively used as design tools. Even today, they are invaluable tools to understanding filter behavior. Reference books had extensive plots of frequency response, phase response, group delay, and impulse response for various types of filters, of various orders. They also contained tables of values showing how to implement such filters as RLC ladders - very useful when amplifying elements were expensive compared to passive components. Such a ladder can also be designed to have minimal sensitivity to component variation a property hard to evaluate without computer tools.\nMany different analog filter designs have been developed, each trying to optimise some feature of the system response. For practical filters, a custom design is sometimes desirable, that can offer the best tradeoff between different design criteria, which may include component count and cost, as well as filter response characteristics.\nThese descriptions refer to the \"mathematical\" properties of the filter (that is, the frequency and phase response). These can be \"implemented\" as analog circuits (for instance, using a Sallen Key filter topology, a type of active filter), or as algorithms in digital signal processing systems.\nDigital filters are much more flexible to synthesize and use than analog filters, where the constraints of the design permits their use. Notably, there is no need to consider component tolerances, and very high Q levels may be obtained.\nFIR digital filters may be implemented by the direct convolution of the desired impulse response with the input signal.\nThey can easily be designed to give a matched filter for any arbitrary pulse shape.\nIIR digital filters are often more difficult to design, due to problems including dynamic range issues, quantization noise and instability.\nTypically digital IIR filters are designed as a series of digital biquad filters.\nAll low-pass second-order continuous-time filters have a transfer function given by\n formula_10\nAll band-pass second-order continuous-time filters have a transfer function given by\n formula_11\nwhere\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9976", "revid": "27417341", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9976", "title": "Ergative case", "text": "Grammatical case\nIn grammar, the ergative case (abbreviated erg) is the grammatical case that identifies a nominal phrase as the agent of a transitive verb in ergative\u2013absolutive languages.\nCharacteristics.\nIn such languages, the ergative case is typically marked (most salient), while the absolutive case is unmarked. Recent work in case theory has vigorously supported the idea that the ergative case identifies the agent (the intentful performer of an action) of a verb.\nIn Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) for example, the ergative case is used to mark subjects of transitive verbs and possessors of nouns. This syncretism with the genitive is commonly referred to as the \"relative\" case.\nNez Perce has a three-way nominal case system with both ergative (\"-nim\") and accusative (\"-ne\") plus an absolute (unmarked) case for intransitive subjects: \"hip\u00e1ayna q\u00ediwn\" \u2018the old man arrived\u2019; \"hip\u00e1ayna wew\u00fakiye\" \u2018the elk arrived\u2019; \"wew\u00fakiyene p\u00e9exne q\u00ediwnim\" \u2018the old man saw an elk\u2019.\nSahaptin has an ergative noun case (with suffix \"-n\u0268m\") that is limited to transitive constructions only when the direct object is 1st or 2nd person: \"iwap\u00e1atayaa\u0161 \u0142m\u00e1man\u0268m\" \u2018the old woman helped me\u2019; \"paan\u00e1y iwap\u00e1ataya \u0142m\u00e1ma\" \u2018the old woman helped him/her\u2019 (direct); \"p\u00e1wapaataya \u0142m\u00e1mayin\" \u2018the old woman helped him/her\u2019 (inverse).\nIn languages with an optional ergative, the choice between marking the ergative case or not depends on semantic or pragmatics aspects such as marking focus on the argument.\nOther languages that use the ergative case are Georgian, Chechen, and other Caucasian languages, Mayan languages, Mixe\u2013Zoque languages, Wagiman and other Australian Aboriginal languages as well as Basque, Burushaski and Tibetan. Among all Indo-European languages, only Yaghnobi, Kurdish language varieties (including Kurmanji, Zazaki and Sorani) and Pashto from the Iranian languages and Hindi/Urdu, along with some other Indo-Aryan languages, are ergative.\nThe ergative case is also a feature of some constructed languages such as Na'vi, Ithkuil and Black Speech.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9977", "revid": "37823666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9977", "title": "Ewe", "text": "A ewe is a female sheep. \nEwe or EWE may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9978", "revid": "461300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9978", "title": "Essenes", "text": "Jewish sect during the Second Temple period\nThe Essenes (; Hebrew: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d0\u05b4\u05e1\u05b4\u05bc\u05d9\u05b4\u05d9\u05dd\u200e, ; Greek: , , or , ) or Essenians were a mystic Jewish community during the Second Temple period that flourished from the 2nd century BCE to the 1st century CE.\nThe Essene movement likely originated as a distinct group among Jews during Jonathan Apphus's time, driven by disputes over Jewish law and the belief that Jonathan's high priesthood was illegitimate. Most scholars think the Essenes seceded from the Zadokite priests. They attributed their interpretation of the Torah to their early leader, the Teacher of Righteousness, possibly a legitimate high priest. Embracing a conservative approach to Jewish law, they observed a strict hierarchy favoring priests (the Sons of Zadok) over laypeople, emphasized ritual purity, and held a dualistic worldview.\nAccording to Jewish writers Josephus and Philo, the Essenes numbered around four thousand, and resided in various settlements throughout Judaea. Conversely, Roman writer Pliny the Elder positioned them somewhere above Ein Gedi, on the west side of the Dead Sea. Pliny relates in a few lines that the Essenes possess no money, had existed for thousands of generations, and that their priestly class (\"contemplatives\") did not marry. Josephus gave a detailed account of the Essenes in \"The Jewish War\" (c.\u200975 CE), with a shorter description in \"Antiquities of the Jews\" (c.\u200994 CE) and \"The Life of Flavius Josephus\" (c.\u200997 CE). Claiming firsthand knowledge, he lists the \"Essenoi\" as one of the three sects of Jewish philosophy alongside the Pharisees and Sadducees. He relates the same information concerning piety, celibacy; the absence of personal property and of money; the belief in communality; and commitment to a strict observance of Sabbath. He further adds that the Essenes ritually immersed in water every morning (a practice similar to the use of the mikveh for daily immersion found among some contemporary Hasidim), ate together after prayer, devoted themselves to charity and benevolence, forbade the expression of anger, studied the books of the elders, preserved secrets, and were very mindful of the names of the angels kept in their sacred writings.\nThe Essenes have gained fame in modern times as a result of the discovery of an extensive group of religious documents known as the Dead Sea Scrolls, which are commonly believed to be the Essenes' library. The scrolls were found at Qumran, an archaeological site situated along the northwestern shore of the Dead Sea, believed to have been the dwelling place of an Essene community. These documents preserve multiple copies of parts of the Hebrew Bible along with deuterocanonical and sectarian manuscripts, including writings such as the Community Rule, the Damascus Document, and the War Scroll.\nAccording to the conventional view, the Essenes disappeared after the First Jewish\u2013Roman War, which also witnessed the destruction of the settlement at Qumran. Scholars have noted the absence of direct sources supporting this claim, raising the possibility of their endurance or the survival of related groups in the following centuries. Some researchers suggest that Essene teachings could have influenced other religious traditions, such as Mandaeism and Christianity.\nEtymology.\nJosephus uses the name \"Essenes\" in his two main accounts, \"The Jewish War\" 2.119, 158, 160 and \"Antiquities of the Jews\", 13.171\u20132, but some manuscripts read here \"Essaion\" (\"holding the Essenes in honour\"; \"a certain Essene named Manaemus\"; \"to hold all Essenes in honor\"; \"the Essenes\").\nIn several places, however, Josephus has \"Essaios\", which is usually assumed to mean \"Essene\" (\"Judas of the \"Essaios\" race\"; \"Simon of the \"Essaios\" race\"; \"John the \"Essaios\"\"; \"those who are called by us \"Essaioi\"\"; \"Simon a man of the \"Essaios\" race\"). Josephus identified the Essenes as one of the three major Jewish sects of that period.\nPhilo's usage is \"Essaioi\", although he admits this Greek form of the original name, that according to his etymology signifies \"holiness\", to be inexact. Pliny's Latin text has \"Esseni\".\nGabriele Boccaccini implies that a convincing etymology for the name Essene has not been found, but that the term applies to a larger group within Judea that also included the Qumran community.\nIt was proposed before the Dead Sea Scrolls were discovered that the name came into several Greek spellings from a Hebrew self-designation later found in some Dead Sea Scrolls, \"\u02bbosey haTorah\", \"'doers' or 'makers' of Torah\". Although dozens of etymology suggestions have been published, this is the only etymology published before 1947 that was confirmed by Qumran text self-designation references, and it is gaining acceptance among scholars. It is recognized as the etymology of the form \"Ossaioi\" (and note that Philo also offered an O spelling) and \"Essaioi\" and \"Esseni\" spelling variations have been discussed by VanderKam, Goranson, and others. In medieval Hebrew (e.g., \"Sefer Yosippon\") \"Hassidim\" \"the Pious\" replaces \"Essenes\". While this Hebrew name is not the etymology of \"Essaioi\"/\"Esseni\", the Aramaic equivalent \"Hesi'im\" known from Eastern Aramaic texts has been suggested. Others suggest that Essene is a transliteration of the Hebrew word \"\u1e25i\u1e63onim\" (\"\u1e25i\u1e63on\" \"outside\"), which the Mishnah (e.g., Megillah 4:8) uses to describe various sectarian groups. Another theory is that the name was borrowed from a cult of devotees to Artemis in Anatolia, whose demeanor and dress somewhat resembled those of the group in Judea.\nFlavius Josephus in Chapter 8 of \"The Jewish War\" states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;2.(119)For there are three philosophical sects among the Jews. The followers of the first of which are the Pharisees; of the second, the Sadducees; and the third sect, which pretends to a severer discipline, are called Essenes. These last are Jews by birth, and seem to have a greater affection for each other than other sects have.\nLocation.\nAccording to Josephus, the Essenes had settled \"not in one city\" but \"in large numbers in every town\". Philo speaks of \"more than four thousand\" \"Essaioi\" living in \"Palestine and Syria\", more precisely, \"in many cities of Judaea and in many villages and grouped in great societies of many members\".\nPliny locates them \"on the west side of the Dead Sea, away from the coast\u00a0... [above] the town of Engeda\".\nSome modern scholars and archeologists have argued that Essenes inhabited the settlement at Qumran, a plateau in the Judean Desert along the Dead Sea, citing Pliny the Elder in support and giving credence that the Dead Sea Scrolls are the product of the Essenes. This theory, though not yet conclusively proven, has come to dominate the scholarly discussion and public perception of the Essenes.\nIn the same area along the Dead Sea shore there are also the sites of Ein Feshkha and Ain el-Ghuweir that have been linked with the Qumran settlement. In particular, the cemetery at Ain el-Ghuweir is somewhat similar, although it also includes the burials of women and children.\nIndividual burials found at the Qumran cemeteries are different from the practice found elsewhere in Israel.\n\"The old Jewish tradition of burying the dead with their ancestors was not followed by the Qumran community, where individual burial was stressed.\"\nThis seems to testify \"that the residents of Qumran were \nnot families and that it was a community cemetery.\"\nRules, customs, theology, and beliefs.\nThe accounts by Josephus and Philo show that the Essenes led a strictly communal life\u2014often compared to later Christian monasticism. Many of the Essene groups appear to have been celibate, but Josephus speaks also of another \"\"order\" of Essenes\" that observed the practice of being engaged for three years and then becoming married. According to Josephus, they had customs and observances such as collective ownership, electing a leader to attend to the interests of the group, and obedience to the orders from their leader. Also, they were forbidden from swearing oaths and from sacrificing animals. They controlled their tempers and served as channels of peace, carrying weapons only for protection against robbers. The Essenes chose not to possess slaves but served each other and, as a result of communal ownership, did not engage in trading. Josephus and Philo provide lengthy accounts of their communal meetings, meals, and religious celebrations. This communal living has led some scholars to view the Essenes as a group practicing social and material egalitarianism.\nDespite their prohibition on swearing oaths, after a three-year probationary period, new members would take an oath that included a commitment to practice piety to God and righteousness toward humanity; maintain a pure lifestyle; abstain from criminal and immoral activities; transmit their rules uncorrupted; and preserve the books of the Essenes and the names of the angels. Their theology included belief in the immortality of the soul and that they would receive their souls back after death. Part of their activities included purification by water rituals which was supported by rainwater catchment and storage. According to the Community Rule, repentance was a prerequisite to water purification.\nRitual purification was a common practice among the peoples of Judea during this period and was thus not specific to the Essenes. A ritual bath or mikveh was found near many synagogues of the period continuing into modern times. Purity and cleanliness was considered so important to the Essenes that they would refrain from defecation on the Sabbath.\nAccording to Joseph Lightfoot, the Church Father Epiphanius (writing in the 4th century CE) seems to make a distinction between two main groups within the Essenes: \"Of those that came before his [Elxai, an Ossaean prophet] time and during it, the Ossaeans and the Nasaraeans.\" https:// Epiphanius describes each group as following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We do not know much about the canon of the Essenes, and what their attitude was towards the apocryphal writings. However, the Essenes perhaps did not esteem the book of Esther highly as manuscripts of Esther are completely absent in Qumran, likely because of their opposition to mixed marriages and the use of different calendars.\nThe Essenes were unique for their time for being against the practice of slave-ownership, which they regarded as unjust and ungodly, believing that all men are born equal.\nInvolvement in the First Jewish\u2013Roman War.\nAt the outset of the First Jewish\u2013Roman War in 66\u00a0CE, as Roman advances were anticipated, command over parts of western Judea was assigned to John the Essene (or Essaean), who was placed in charge of the toparchy of Thamna. This region encompassed Lydda, Joppa, and Emmaus.\nScholarly discussion.\nJosephus and Philo discuss the Essenes in detail. Most scholars believe that the community at Qumran that most likely produced the Dead Sea Scrolls was an offshoot of the Essenes. However, this theory has been disputed by some; for example, Norman Golb argues that the primary research on the Qumran documents and ruins (by Father Roland de Vaux, from the \"\u00c9cole Biblique et Arch\u00e9ologique de J\u00e9rusalem\") lacked scientific method, and drew wrong conclusions that comfortably entered the academic canon. For Golb, the number of documents is too extensive and includes many different writing styles and calligraphies; the ruins seem to have been a fortress, used as a military base for a very long period of time\u2014including the 1st century\u2014so they therefore could not have been inhabited by the Essenes; and the large graveyard excavated in 1870, just east of the Qumran ruins, was made of over 1200 tombs that included many women and children; Pliny clearly wrote that the Essenes who lived near the Dead Sea \"had not one woman, had renounced all pleasure... and no one was born in their race\". Golb's book presents observations about de Vaux's premature conclusions and their uncontroverted acceptance by the general academic community. He states that the documents probably stemmed from various libraries in Jerusalem, kept safe in the desert from the Roman invasions. Other scholars refute these arguments\u2014particularly since Josephus describes some Essenes as allowing marriage.\nAnother issue is the relationship between the \"Essaioi\" and Philo's \"Therapeutae\" and \"Therapeutrides\". He regarded the \"Therapeutae\" as a contemplative branch of the \"Essaioi\" who, he said, pursued an active life.\nOne theory on the formation of the Essenes suggests that the movement was founded by a Jewish high priest, dubbed by the Essenes the Teacher of Righteousness, whose office had been usurped by Jonathan (of priestly but not of Zadokite lineage), labeled the \"man of lies\" or \"false priest\". Others follow this line and a few argue that the Teacher of Righteousness was not only the leader of the Essenes at Qumran, but was also identical to the original Messianic figure about 150 years before the time of the Gospels. Fred Gladstone Bratton notes that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Teacher of Righteousness of the Scrolls would seem to be a prototype of Jesus, for both spoke of the New Covenant; they preached a similar gospel; each was regarded as a Savior or Redeemer; and each was condemned and put to death by reactionary factions... We do not know whether Jesus was an Essene, but some scholars feel that he was at least influenced by them. Lawrence Schiffman has argued that the Qumran community may be called Sadducean, and not Essene, since their legal positions retain a link with Sadducean tradition.\nConnection to other religious traditions.\nMandaeism.\nThe Haran Gawaita uses the name Nasoraeans for the Mandaeans who fled from Jerusalem, meaning guardians or possessors of secret rites and knowledge. Scholars such as Kurt Rudolph, Rudolf Mac\u00fach, Mark Lidzbarski and Ethel S. Drower connect the Mandaeans with the Nasaraeans described by Epiphanius, a group within the Essenes according to Joseph Lightfoot. Epiphanius (29:6) says that they existed before Jesus. That is questioned by some, but others accept the pre-Christian origin of the Nasaraeans.\nEarly religious concepts and terminologies recur in the Dead Sea Scrolls, and \"Yardena\" (Jordan) has been the name of every baptismal water in Mandaeism. \"Mara \u1e0f-Rabuta\" (Mandaic for 'Lord of Greatness', which is One of the names for the Mandaean God Hayyi Rabbi) is found in the Genesis Apocryphon II, 4. Another early self-appellation is \"bhiria zidqa\", meaning 'elect of righteousness' or 'the chosen righteous', a term found in the Book of Enoch and Genesis Apocryphon II, 4. As Nasoraeans, Mandaeans believe that they constitute the true congregation of \"bnia nhura\", meaning 'Sons of Light', a term used by the Essenes. Mandaean scripture affirms that the Mandaeans descend directly from John the Baptist's original Nasoraean Mandaean disciples in Jerusalem. Similar to the Essenes, it is forbidden for a Mandaean to reveal the names of the angels to a gentile. Essene graves are oriented north\u2013south and a Mandaean's grave must also be in the north\u2013south direction so that if the dead Mandaean were stood upright, they would face north. Mandaeans have an oral tradition that some were originally vegetarian and also similar to the Essenes, they are pacifists.\nThe \"bit manda\" (beth manda) is described as \"biniana rba \u1e0f-\u0161rara\" (\"the Great building of Truth\") and \"bit tu\u0161lima\" (\"house of Perfection\") in Mandaean texts such as the \"Qulasta\", \"Ginza Rabba\", and the \"Mandaean Book of John\". The only known literary parallels are in Essene texts from Qumran such as the \"Community Rule\", which has similar phrases such as the \"house of Perfection and Truth in Israel\" (\"Community Rule\" 1QS VIII 9) and \"house of Truth in Israel.\"\nChristianity.\nRituals of the Essenes and Christianity have much in common; the Dead Sea Scrolls describe a meal of bread and wine that will be instituted by the messiah, both the Essenes and Christians were eschatological communities, where judgement on the world would come at any time. The New Testament also possibly quotes writings used by the Qumran community. Luke 1:31-35 states \" And now you will conceive in your womb and bear a son and you will name him Jesus. He will be great and will be called the son of the Most High\u00a0... the son of God\" which seems to echo 4Q246, stating: \"He will be called great and he will be called Son of God, and they will call him Son of the Most High\u00a0... He will judge the earth in righteousness\u00a0... and every nation will bow down to him\".\nOther similarities include high devotion to the faith even to the point of martyrdom, communal prayer, self denial and a belief in a captivity in a sinful world.\nJohn the Baptist has also been argued to have been an Essene, as there are numerous parallels between John's mission and the Essenes, which suggests he perhaps was trained by the Essene community.\nIn the early church a book called the Odes of Solomon was written. The writer was very likely a convert from the Essene community into Christianity. The book reflects a mixture of mystical ideas of the Essene community with Christian concepts.\nBoth the Essenes and Christians practiced voluntary celibacy and prohibited divorce. Both also used concepts of \"light\" and \"darkness\" for good and evil.\nA few have claimed that the Essenes had an idea of a pierced Messiah based on 4Q285; however, the interpretation of the text is ambiguous. Some scholars interpreted it as the Messiah being killed himself, while modern scholars mostly interpret it as the Messiah executing the enemies of Israel in an eschatological war.\nBoth the Essenes and Christians practiced a ritual of immersion by water, however the Essenes had it as a regular practice instead of a one-time event.\nDevotional writers associated with the Carmelites, such as Daniel de la Vierge-Marie, made the claim in the 17th century that the Essenes had been proto-Christian and that they were synonymous with the Carmelites since the times of the Prophet Elias. This was a hotly disputed issue about the antiquity of the Carmelites with their rivals the Bollandists.\nMagarites.\nThe Magharians or Magarites (, 'people of the caves') were, according to Jacob Qirqisani, a Jewish sect founded in the 1st century\u00a0BCE.\nAbraham Harkavy and others identify the Magharians with the Essenes, and their author referred to as the \"Alexandrinian\" with Philo (whose affinity for the Essenes is well-known), based on the following evidence:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "9979", "revid": "8561672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9979", "title": "Eyes Wide Shut", "text": "1999 film by Stanley Kubrick\nEyes Wide Shut is a 1999 erotic psychological drama film directed, produced, and co-written by Stanley Kubrick, and starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman. The plot centers on a Manhattan doctor who is shocked when his wife reveals that she contemplated cheating on him. He embarks on a night-long adventure and infiltrates a masked orgy of a secret society. It is based on the 1926 novella \"Dream Story\" () by Arthur Schnitzler, and transfers the story's setting from early twentieth-century Vienna to 1990s New York City. \nKubrick obtained the filming rights for \"Dream Story\" in the 1960s, considering it a perfect text for a film adaptation about sexual relations. He revived the project in the 1990s when he hired writer Frederic Raphael to help him with the adaptation. An international co-production between the United Kingdom and United States, principal photography of \"Eyes Wide Shut\" began in late 1996 in England, with a detailed recreation of exterior Greenwich Village street scenes built at Pinewood Studios. The film's production, at 400 days, holds the Guinness World Record for the longest continuous film shoot. \nFollowing an extensive post-production process that began in early 1998, Kubrick submitted his final cut of the film to Warner Bros. on March 1, 1999, which was viewed by Cruise, Kidman, and studio executives. Kubrick died of a heart attack six days later. Some post-production was resumed the week after Kubrick's death, which led to some public debate over the film's state of completion. Warner Bros. began an extensive marketing campaign to promote the film in early 1999, though its publicity materials were vague in nature and marketed the film as an erotic thriller.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" had its world premiere in Los Angeles on July 13, 1999, before being released in the United States on July 16 and in the United Kingdom on September 10. It received generally positive reviews from critics, and was nominated for numerous awards, including the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score. The film was met with significant critical notice in France, receiving a C\u00e9sar Award nomination for Best Foreign Film, as well as winning the award in the same category from the French Syndicate of Cinema Critics. It was also named the best film of the year by \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" in their annual top ten list. The film was also a box-office success, earning $162 million worldwide, making it Kubrick's highest-grossing film in unadjusted dollars. \nPlot.\nDr. William \"Bill\" Harford and his wife Alice live in New York City with their daughter, Helena. At a Christmas party hosted by Bill's patient, Victor Ziegler, Bill reconnects with his former medical school classmate, Nick Nightingale, now a professional pianist. Meanwhile, an older Hungarian guest attempts to seduce Alice, while two young models try to seduce Bill. Victor interrupts Bill's flirtation to handle an emergency involving Mandy, a young woman who overdosed during sex with him. Bill helps stabilize Mandy.\nThe following night, Bill and Alice smoke marijuana and discuss their unfulfilled desires. Bill dismisses the idea of Alice being unfaithful, believing women to be naturally loyal. However, Alice shocks him by confessing to fantasizing about a naval officer she observed while on vacation, even considering leaving Bill and Helena for him. Disturbed, Bill is called to a patient's home, where the patient's daughter, Marion, confesses her love and tries to seduce him. Bill resists and leaves.\nWandering the city, Bill meets a prostitute named Domino. Before anything happens, Alice calls, prompting Bill to leave after paying Domino without proceeding further. Later, Bill encounters Nick at a jazz club. Nick tells Bill about a secretive gig at 2AM, where he will play piano blindfolded, and reveals the password to gain entry. Intrigued, Bill visits a costume store, formerly owned by one of his patients but now run by Mr. Milich, to rent an outfit. During the visit, Milich discovers his teenage daughter with two older men and locks the men in a room, threatening to call the police.\nBill arrives at the mansion, provides the password, and witnesses a bizarre sexual ritual. A masked woman warns him that he is in danger. He is taken to a gathering where the master of ceremonies demands a second password. Bill claims to have forgotten the second password, to which the master of ceremonies exposes him as an outsider. Before the master of ceremonies forces Bill to remove his clothes, the masked woman intervenes, offering herself to save him. Bill is let go with a stern warning to remain silent.\nShaken, Bill returns home to find Alice laughing in her sleep. She tearfully recounts a dream of having sex with the naval officer and many other men while mocking Bill. The next day, Bill visits Nick's hotel, but the clerk claims Nick was taken away by two threatening men. Returning the costume, Bill notices the mask is missing and learns that Milich now profits from prostituting his daughter, offering her services to Bill.\nConsumed by jealousy and doubt, Bill revisits the mansion but receives an envelope warning him to stay away. That evening, he tries calling Marion but hangs up when her fianc\u00e9 answers. He then visits Domino's apartment, only to find her roommate, Sally, who informs him that Domino has tested HIV-positive.\nAs Bill leaves, a mysterious figure follows him. Later, at the morgue, he identifies Mandy as the masked woman from the orgy after reading about her death from an overdose. Victor summons Bill and admits to being at the orgy. He explains that there was no second password and that Bill's exposure was deliberate. Victor insists the secret society only seeks to intimidate him into silence but warns they are dangerous. He claims Nick has returned safely to Seattle and attributes Mandy's death to her drug addiction, dismissing foul play.\nReturning home, Bill finds the missing mask placed on his pillow. Breaking down in tears, he confesses everything to Alice. The next day, the couple takes Helena shopping for Christmas. Bill apologizes to Alice, who suggests they take action to repair their relationship. When he asks what she means, Alice responds with a single word: \"Fuck.\"\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Tom Cruise as Dr. William \"Bill\" Harford\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" was developed after Stanley Kubrick read Arthur Schnitzler's \"Dream Story\" in 1968, when Kubrick was looking for a project to follow \"\". Kubrick was interested in adapting the story, and with the help of journalist Jay Cocks, bought the filming rights to the novel. For the following decade, Kubrick considered making the \"Dream Story\" adaptation a sex comedy \"with a wild and somber streak running through it\", starring Steve Martin or Woody Allen in the main role. Kubrick also considered Tom Hanks, Bill Murray, Dustin Hoffman, Warren Beatty, Albert Brooks, Alan Alda, and Sam Shepard for the lead in the 1980s. The project was revived in 1994 when Kubrick hired Frederic Raphael to work on the script, updating the setting from early 20th-century Vienna to late 20th-century New York City. Kubrick invited his friend Michael Herr, who helped write \"Full Metal Jacket\", to make revisions, but Herr declined for fear he would be underpaid and have to commit to a long production.\nAdaptation.\nKubrick adapted \"Eyes Wide Shut\" with co-writer Frederic Raphael from Arthur Schnitzler's 1926 novella \"Dream Story\", which centers on a doctor, Fridolin, and his wife, Albertina, in suburban Vienna. The novella is set during the Carnival, when people often wear masks to parties. The party that both husband and wife attend at the opening of the story is a Carnival masquerade ball, whereas the film's story begins at Christmas time.\nFor the film, Kubrick transposed the events to 1990s Greenwich Village in New York City, instead featuring an American doctor, Bill, and his wife, Alice. In an introduction to a Penguin Classics edition of \"Dream Story\", Raphael wrote that, \"Fridolin is not declared to be a Jew, but his feelings of cowardice, for failing to challenge his aggressor, echo the uneasiness of Austrian Jews in the face of Gentile provocation.\" Kubrick, who frequently removed references to Jewishness of characters in the novels he adapted, felt that the character of Bill should be a \"Harrison Ford-ish goy\" and created the surname of Harford as an allusion to the actor. \nIn the novella, the party (which is sparsely attended) requires \"Denmark\" as the password for entrance, paralleling Albertina's admitted infatuation with a Danish soldier, which she confides in Fridolin. In the film, the password used for the party entrance is \"Fidelio.\" Film critic Jonathan Rosenbaum notes that both passwords echo elements of one member of the couple's behavior, though in opposite ways. In the novella, the woman who \"redeems\" Fridolin at the party, saving him from punishment for his infiltration of the event, is costumed as a nun, and most of the characters at the party are dressed as nuns or monks; Fridolin himself used a monk costume. This aspect was retained in the film's original screenplay, but was omitted in the filmed version.\nThe novella makes it clear that Fridolin at this point hates Albertina more than ever, thinking they are now lying together \"like mortal enemies\". It has been argued that the dramatic climax of the novella is actually Albertina's dream, and the film has shifted the focus to Bill's visit to the secret society's orgy, whose content is more shocking in the film.\nThe adaptation created a character with no counterpart in the novella: Ziegler, who represents both the elevated wealth and prestige to which Bill Harford aspires, and a connection between Bill's two worlds (his regular life, and the secret society organizing the ball). Critic Randy Rasmussen interprets Ziegler as representing Bill's worst self, much as in other Kubrick films; the title character in \"Dr. Strangelove\" represents the worst of the American national security establishment, Charles Grady represents the worst of Jack Torrance in \"The Shining\", and Clare Quilty represents the worst of Humbert Humbert in \"Lolita\".\nMore significantly, in the film, Ziegler gives a commentary on the whole story to Bill, including an explanation that the party incident, where Bill is apprehended, threatened, and ultimately redeemed by the woman's sacrifice, was staged. Whether this is to be believed or not, it is an exposition of Ziegler's view of the ways of the world as a member of the powerful elite.\nCasting.\nWhen Warner Bros. president Terry Semel approved production in 1995, he asked Kubrick to cast a movie star as \"you haven't done that since Jack Nicholson [in \"The Shining\"]\". Kubrick intended to cast a real married couple in the film as Bill and Alice Harford. Alec Baldwin and Kim Basinger were considered, as were Bruce Willis and Demi Moore. Kubrick eventually cast Tom Cruise in the role of Bill, having been impressed by his performance in \"Born on the Fourth of July\" (1989), and Nicole Kidman as Alice. Kidman had been in England filming \"The Portrait of a Lady\" (1996), and she and Cruise eventually decided to visit Kubrick at his estate in Childwickbury to discuss the project. After that meeting, Kubrick awarded them the roles. The couple's casting was officially announced by \"Variety\" on December 17, 1995. Kubrick also managed to make both not commit to other projects until \"Eyes Wide Shut\" was completed. \nKubrick had written the role of Nick Nightingale for John Turturro, but Turturro accidentally declined due to a misunderstanding with Kubrick about being him being available for the film, a decision he later regretted; the role eventually went to Todd Field. Jennifer Jason Leigh and Harvey Keitel each were cast in supporting roles and filmed by Kubrick, as Marion Nathanson and Victor Ziegler, respectively. Both ultimately dropped out of the production, reportedly due to scheduling conflicts. Keitel was first to depart the project to appear in \"Finding Graceland\", followed by Leigh, who was shooting \"eXistenZ\" with David Cronenberg. Leigh was replaced by Marie Richardson, and Keitel by Sydney Pollack. Decades later, Keitel said that he had quit after feeling like Kubrick had \"disrespected\" him; Gary Oldman added that the breaking point was after Kubrick asked Keitel to do dozens of takes for a scene of his character walking through a doorway. \nAmong the other supporting cast, Alan Cumming later said that he auditioned six times for his small role in the film as a hotel clerk. Vinessa Shaw submitted an audition tape for the role of Domino, a prostitute encountered by Bill, and was cast by Kubrick. Shaw recalled, \"twice I was called in and I was hired off of tape because Stanley Kubrick didn\u2019t fly anywhere...\u00a0I was hired off of this tape and that was it.\"\nJulienne Davis was cast in the role of Mandy, a prostitute saved from a drug overdose by Bill at the Zieglers' Christmas party, whom he later finds has died and visits in the morgue. Kubrick originally offered Eva Herzigov\u00e1 this role, but she declined. It is implied that the character of Mandy and the mysterious masked woman Bill encounters at the orgy are the same person. However, while Davis does appear in the background as a masked participant during the orgy sequence, she was replaced by Abigail Good for the dialogue scenes with Cruise.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began in November 1996. Kubrick's perfectionism led to script pages being rewritten on the set, and he intentionally filmed many scenes multiple times to try to break down the actors involved and have them give a more authentic performance. One scene of Cruise walking through a door was filmed 95 times. As a result, the shoot went on for much longer than expected. The actress Vinessa Shaw was initially contracted for two weeks and one scene but ended up working for two months. Due to the relentless nature of the production, the crew became exhausted and were reported to have been impacted by low morale. Cruise developed an ulcer but did not tell Kubrick. Filming was finally completed in June 1998, with the film's production budget having reached $65 million. The \"Guinness World Records\" recognized \"Eyes Wide Shut\" as the longest constant movie shoot that ran \"...for over 15 months, a period that included an unbroken shoot of 46 weeks\". \nBecause of Kubrick's fear of flying, the entire film was shot in England. Sound-stage works were completed at London's Pinewood Studios which included a detailed recreation of Greenwich Village. Kubrick's perfectionism went as far as sending production designers to Manhattan to measure street widths and note newspaper vending machine locations. Real New York footage was also shot to be rear projected behind Cruise. Production was followed by a strong campaign of secrecy helped by Kubrick always working with a small team on set. \nOutdoor locations included Hatton Garden for a Greenwich Village street, Hamleys for the toy store from the film's ending, and Mentmore Towers and Elveden Hall in Elveden, Suffolk, England for the mansion. Larry Smith, who had first served as a gaffer on both \"Barry Lyndon\" and \"The Shining\", was chosen by Kubrick to be the film's cinematographer. Wherever possible, Smith made use of available light sources visible in the shots such as lamps and Christmas tree lights, but when this was insufficient he used Chinese paper ball lamps to softly brighten the scene, with other types of film lighting if needed. The color was enhanced by push processing the film reels (emulsion) which helped bring out the intensity of the color and emphasize highlights. This effect is evident in the Christmas party scene at Ziegler's house, with Smith noting that the push processing \"made the lights appear to be much brighter than they were\" and created a \"wonderful warm glow.\"\nKubrick's perfectionism led him to oversee every visual element that would appear in a given frame, from props and furniture to the color of walls and other objects. One such element were the masks used in the orgy which were inspired by the masked carnival balls visited by the protagonists in the novel. Costume designer Marit Allen explained that Kubrick felt they fit in that scene for being part of the imaginary world and ended up \"creat[ing] the impression of menace, but without exaggeration\". As many masks as were used in the Venetian carnival were sent to London and Kubrick chose who would wear each piece. The paintings of Kubrick's wife Christiane and his stepdaughter Katharina are featured as decorations.\nNicole Kidman revealed that her explicit scenes with the naval officer, played by Gary Goba, were filmed over three days and that Kubrick wanted them to be \"almost pornographic\".\nPost-production.\nAfter shooting was completed, Kubrick entered a prolonged post-production process. Editor Nigel Galt worked with Kubrick on the editing process using Avid Technology, and indicated he had begun editing the existing footage while the film was still in principal photography, beginning on December 30, 1996. The workload was so demanding that Galt requested assistant editors, after which Melanie Viner-Cuneo and Claus Wehlisch were hired, often working 12-hour days. By mid-February 1999, Galt noted that he was working up to 15 hours each day with Warner Bros.' impending March deadline.\nWhile Kubrick typically screened the final cut of his films in England, he sent the first cut of the finished film to New York to accommodate Cruise and Kidman. On March 2, 1999, the first cut was screened for Cruise, Kidman, and Warner Bros. executives at the studio's Fifth Avenue headquarters. According to studio executive Semel: \"[Stanley] felt really great about the film and I have to say we were really thrilled. It is an incredible picture.\" The film was well-received by Cruise, Kidman, and Semel. By Semel's account, only a few minor adjustments remained, consisting of titles and \"a couple of color corrections, and some technical things.\" \nOn March 5, 1999, Kubrick held a second screening of the film for a British Warner Bros. representative at his home in Childwickbury. Kubrick died suddenly two days later of a heart attack. On March 13, 1999, the day after Kubrick's funeral, Galt resumed the post-production process with the assistance of Viner-Cuneo, Leon Vitali, Jan Harlan, and Kubrick's wife Christiane.\nIn 2019, it was revealed that Cate Blanchett had provided the voice of the mysterious masked woman at the orgy party because actress Abigail Good was unable to speak with a convincing American accent. Cruise and Kidman ended up suggesting Blanchett for the dubbing, which occurred after Kubrick's death.\nMusic.\nJocelyn Pook wrote the original music for \"Eyes Wide Shut\", but, like other Kubrick movies, the film was noted for its use of classical music. The opening title music is Shostakovich's Waltz No. 2 from \"Suite for Variety Stage Orchestra\", misidentified as \"Jazz Suite No. 2\". One recurring piece is the second movement of Gy\u00f6rgy Ligeti's piano cycle \"Musica ricercata\". Kubrick originally intended to feature \"Im Treibhaus\" from Wagner's \"Wesendonck Lieder\", but the director eventually replaced it with Ligeti's piece feeling Wagner's song was \"too beautiful\". In the morgue scene, Franz Liszt's late solo piano piece, \"Nuages Gris\" (\"Grey Clouds\") (1881), is heard. \"Rex tremendae\" from Mozart's \"Requiem\" plays as Bill walks into the caf\u00e9 and reads of Mandy's death.\nPook was hired after choreographer Yolande Snaith rehearsed the masked ball orgy scene using Pook's composition \"Backwards Priests\" \u2013 which features a Romanian Orthodox Divine Liturgy recorded in a church in Baia Mare, played backwards \u2013 as a reference track. Kubrick then called the composer and asked if she had anything else \"weird\" like that song, which was reworked for the final cut of the scene, with the title \"Masked Ball\". Pook ended up composing and recording four pieces of music, many times based on her previous work, totaling 24 minutes. The composer's work ended up having mostly string instruments \u2013 including a viola played by Pook herself \u2013 with no brass or woodwinds as Pook \"just couldn't justify these other textures\", particularly as she wanted the tracks played on dialogue-heavy scenes to be \"subliminal\" and felt such instruments would be intrusive.\nAnother track in the orgy, \"Migrations\", features a Tamil song sung by Manickam Yogeswaran, a Carnatic singer. The original cut featured a scriptural recitation from the \"Bhagavad Gita\", which Pook took from a previous Yogeswaran recording. South African Hindu Mahasabha, a Hindu group, protested against the scripture being used, Warner Bros. issued a public apology, and hired the singer to record a similar track to replace the chant.\nThe party at Ziegler's house features rearrangements of love songs such as \"When I Fall in Love\" and \"It Had to Be You\", used in increasingly ironic ways considering how Alice and Bill flirt with other people in the scene. As Kidman was nervous about doing nude scenes, Kubrick stated she could bring her own music for the filming. When Kidman brought a Chris Isaak CD, Kubrick approved it, and incorporated Isaak's song \"Baby Did a Bad, Bad Thing\" to both an early romantic embrace of Bill and Alice and the film's trailer.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\nWarner Bros. heavily promoted \"Eyes Wide Shut\", while following Kubrick's secrecy campaign\u2014to the point that the film's press kits contained no production notes, not even the director's suggestions to Semel regarding the marketing campaign, given one week prior to Kubrick's death. The first footage was shown to theater owners attending the 1999 ShoWest convention in Las Vegas, consisting of a teaser trailer in which Cruise and Kidman's characters caress one another in front of a mirror. Television spots featured both Isaak and Ligeti's music from the soundtrack, while revealing little about the film's plot. The film also appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine, and on show-business programs, including \"Entertainment Tonight\" and \"Access Hollywood\".\nKubrick's stepdaughter Katharina and wife Christiane designed several posters for the film using the motif of Venetian masks modeled after Cruise and Kidman. Commenting on the designs, Katharina said: \"My mother and I are both artists, and because masks are very heavily featured in the film\u2014we started with the premise of turning Tom and Nicole\u2019s faces into masks. We got a photographer who shot them for us full-face. Then using Photoshop we made Nicole and Tom look as mask-like as possible.\" These designs were ultimately rejected by Warner Bros. because they felt the images obscured the faces of the film's two stars. After the rejection, Katharina and Christiane created a new design which was ultimately approved by the studio; the final official one-sheet features a still image of Cruise and Kidman kissing, framed within a mirror that was used as a prop in the Harfords' apartment. \"We had [the mirror] photographed, and then we took that photograph of them in front of the mirror and made, again, what we thought was an elegant poster,\" Katharina said. \"It\u2019s a shame the originals weren\u2019t used because if you look at them now, 20 years later, I think they really hold up and they are definitely Tom and Nicole.\" One of the original designs was later used as the cover artwork for the 4K UHD Blu-ray disc release of the film by The Criterion Collection in 2025. \nStudio censorship and classification.\nCiting contractual obligations to deliver an R rating, Warner Bros. digitally altered the orgy for the film's American release by blocking out graphic sexuality using additional figures to obscure the view in order to avoid an adults-only NC-17 rating that would have limited its financial viability. Cinematographer Larry Smith commented on the censorship: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis alteration angered both film critics and fans, who argued that Kubrick had never been shy about ratings (\"A Clockwork Orange\" was originally given an X rating). Roger Ebert heavily criticized the technique of using digital images to mask the action, writing that it \"should not have been done at all\" and it is \"symbolic of the moral hypocrisy of the rating system that it would force a great director to compromise his vision, while by the same process making his adult film more accessible to young viewers.\" Although Ebert has been frequently cited as calling the standard North American R-rated version the \"Austin Powers\" version of \"Eyes Wide Shut\" \u2013 referring to two scenes in \"\" in which, through camera angles and coincidences, full frontal nudity is blocked from view in a comical way \u2013 his review stated that this joke referred to an early rough draft of the altered scene, never publicly released.\nTheatrical run.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" had its world premiere at the Westwood Village Theatre in Los Angeles on July 13, 1999. The film subsequently opened nationwide on July 16, 1999.\nThe film was exhibited at the Venice Film Festival on September 1, 1999, followed by a screening in Paris on September 2, 1999; stars Cruise and Kidman in attendance at both events. The film's British premiere occurred on September 3, 1999, at the Warner Village cinema in Leicester Square.\nHome media.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" was first released on VHS and DVD on March 7, 2000 by Warner Bros. Home Entertainment. A reissue under the studio's \"Stanley Kubrick Collection\" was released in 2001. Both editions are presented in 4:3 full frame aspect ratio, and feature the censored R-rated version of the film that was theatrically released in the United States.\nOn October 23, 2007, Warner Bros. Home Entertainment re-released the film in its original uncensored cut on DVD, as well as in HD DVD and Blu-ray disc formats. This marked the first home video release that presents the film in anamorphic 1.78:1 (16:9) format (the film was shown theatrically as soft matted 1.66:1 in Europe and 1.85:1 in the US and Japan); it is also the first American home video release to feature the uncensored version. While the packaging for these releases indicate that both the R-rated and uncensored cuts are included on the discs, this is a misprint, as only the uncensored version is present.\nThe Criterion Collection released the film on 4K UHD and Blu-ray on November 25, 2025, featuring the uncensored cut in a new master scanned from the original 35 mm camera negatives.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film topped the week-end box office for its U.S. opening, earning $21.7\u00a0million from 2,411 screens. These numbers surpassed the studio's expectations of $20\u00a0million, and became both Cruise's sixth consecutive chart topper and Kubrick's highest opening week-end as well as the highest featuring Kidman and Cruise together. \"Eyes Wide Shut\" ended up grossing a total of $55,691,208 in the US. The numbers put it as Kubrick's second-highest-grossing film in the country, behind \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", but both were considered box office disappointments.\nIn the United Kingdom, it also topped the box-office charts during its opening, earning \u00a31,189,672. \nOverseas earnings of over $105\u00a0million led to a $162,091,208 box office run world-wide, turning it into the highest-grossing film directed by Kubrick.\nCritical response.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" received generally positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 76% based on 164 reviews, with an average rating of 7.9/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"Kubrick's intense study of the human psyche yields an impressive cinematic work.\" Metacritic gives the film a weighted average score of 69 out of 100 based on 34 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. Over fifty critics listed the film among the best of 1999. French magazine \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" named it the best film of the year in its annual \"top-ten\" list. However, audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"D\u2212\" on an A+ to F scale.\nIn the \"Chicago Tribune\", Michael Wilmington declared the film a masterpiece, lauding it as \"provocatively conceived, gorgeously shot and masterfully executed ... Kubrick's brilliantly choreographed one-take scenes create a near-hypnotic atmosphere of commingled desire and dread.\" Nathan Rabin of \"The A.V. Club\" was also highly positive, arguing that \"the film's primal, almost religious intensity and power is primarily derived from its multifaceted realization that disobeying the dictates of society and your conscience can be both terrifying and exhilarating. ... The film's depiction of sexual depravity and amorality could easily venture into the realm of camp in the hands of a lesser filmmaker, but Kubrick depicts primal evil in a way that somehow makes it seem both new and deeply terrifying.\"\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film a score of three and a half stars out of four, writing, \"Kubrick's great achievement in the film is to find and hold an odd, unsettling, sometimes erotic tone for the doctor's strange encounters.\" He praised the individual dream-like atmosphere of the separate scenes, and called the choice of Christmas-themed lighting \"garish, like an urban sideshow\".\nReviewer James Berardinelli stated that it was arguably one of Kubrick's best films. Along with considering Kidman \"consistently excellent\", he wrote that Kubrick \"has something to say about the causes and effects of depersonalized sex\", and praised the work as \"thought-provoking and unsettling\". Writing for \"The New York Times\", reviewer Janet Maslin commented, \"This is a dead-serious film about sexual yearnings, one that flirts with ridicule yet sustains its fundamental eeriness and gravity throughout. The dreamlike intensity of previous Kubrick visions is in full force here.\"\nSome reviewers gave the film unfavorable assessments. One complaint was that the film's pacing was too slow; while this may have been intended to convey a dream state, critics objected that it made actions and decisions seem laboured. Another complaint was that it did not live up to the expectation of it being a \"sexy film\" which is what it had been marketed as, thus defying audiences' expectations. Many critics, such as Manohla Dargis of \"LA Weekly\", found the prolific orgy scene to be \"banal\" and \"surprisingly tame\". While Kubrick's \"pictorial talents\" were described as \"striking\" by Rod Dreher of \"The New York Post\", the pivotal scene was deemed by Stephen Hunter, writing for \"The Washington Post\", as the \"dullest orgy [he'd] ever seen\". Hunter elaborates on his criticism, and states that \"Kubrick is annoyingly offhand while at the same time grindingly pedantic; plot points are made over and over again, things are explained till the dawn threatens to break in the east, and the movie stumbles along at a glacial pace\". Owen Gleiberman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" complained about the inauthenticity of the New York setting, claiming that the soundstage used for the film's production did not have \"enough bustle\" to capture the reality of the city. Paul Tatara of CNN described the film as a \"slow-motion morality tale full of hot female bodies and thoroughly uneventful 'mystery'\", while Andrew Sarris writing for \"The New York Observer\" criticized the film's \"feeble attempts at melodramatic tension and suspense\". David Edelstein of \"Slate\" dismissed it as \"estranged from any period I recognize. Who are these people played by Cruise and Kidman, who act as if no one has ever made a pass at them and are so deeply traumatized by their newfound knowledge of sexual fantasies\u2014the kind that mainstream culture absorbed at least half a century ago? Who are these aristocrats whose limos take them to secret masked orgies in Long Island mansions? Even dream plays need some grounding in the real world.\" J. Hoberman wrote that the film \"feels like a rough draft at best.\"\nLee Siegel from \"Harper's\" felt that most critics responded mainly to the marketing campaign and did not address the film on its own terms. Others felt that American censorship took an esoteric film and made it even more difficult to understand. In his article \"Grotesque Caricature\", published in \"Postmodern Culture\", Stefan Mattesich praises the film's nuanced caricatured elements, and states that the film's negation of conventional narrative elements is what resulted in its subsequent negative reception.\nFor the introduction to Michel Ciment's \"Kubrick: The Definitive Edition\", Martin Scorsese wrote: \"When \"Eyes Wide Shut\" came out a few months after Stanley Kubrick's death in 1999, it was severely misunderstood, which came as no surprise. If you go back and look at the contemporary reactions to any Kubrick picture (except the earliest ones), you'll see that all his films were initially misunderstood. Then, after five or ten years came the realization that \"\" or \"Barry Lyndon\" or \"The Shining\" was like nothing else before or since.\" In 2012, \"Slant Magazine\" ranked the film as the second greatest of the 1990s. The British Film Institute ranked the film at No. 19 on its list of \"90 great films of the 1990s\". In 2022, IndieWire named the film the best movie of the 1990s. The film was listed at number 61 in the BBC's list of the 100 greatest American films of all time.\nThemes and interpretations.\nGenre.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" was described by some reviewers, and partially marketed, as an erotic thriller, a categorization disputed by others. It is classified as an erotic thriller in the book \"The Erotic Thriller in Contemporary Cinema\", by Linda Ruth Williams, and was described as such in news articles about Cruise and Kidman's lawsuit over assertions that they saw a sex therapist during filming. Jeffrey M. Anderson, writing for \"Combustible Celluloid\", describes it as an erotic thriller upon first viewing, but actually a \"complex story about marriage and sexuality\". Kubrick's wife, Christiane, disputed the film's association with the erotic thriller genre, stating that it \"has nothing to do with sex and everything to do with fear.\" In an essay published in \"Stanley Kubrick: Essays on His Films and Legacy\" (2015), academic Lindiwe Dovey commented that the film's marketing as an erotic thriller was misleading: \"Audiences who were expecting an erotic thriller from the film were sorely disappointed; they received, instead, a kind of horror thriller.\"\nWriting in \"TV Guide\", Maitland McDonagh writes: \"No one familiar with the cold precision of Kubrick's work will be surprised that this isn't the steamy erotic thriller a synopsis (or the ads) might suggest.\" Writing in general about the erotic thriller genre for \"CineAction\" in 2001, Douglas Keesey states that \"whatever [\"Eyes Wide Shut\"'s] actual type, [it] was at least marketed as an erotic thriller\". \nMichael Koresky, writing in the 2006 issue of film journal \"Reverse Shot\", notes \"this director, who defies expectations at every turn and brings genre to his feet, was\u00a0...setting out to make neither the 'erotic thriller' that the press maintained nor an easily identifiable 'Kubrick film'\". In a 2019 retrospective for \"Consequence of Sound\", Joe Lipsett echoed this sentiment, stating that the film \"is not erotic, sexy, or even titillating. This is because the film is not actually about sex at all; it\u2019s the journey of self-realization of a close-minded narcissist who discovers, after a revelation from his wife, that the world is actually a highly sexualized place.\"\nChristmas setting.\nIn addition to relocating the story from Vienna in the 1900s to New York City in the 1990s, Kubrick changed the time-frame of Schnitzler's story from Mardi Gras to Christmas. Michael Koresky believed Kubrick did this because of the rejuvenating symbolism of Christmas. Mario Falsetto, on the other hand, notes that Christmas lights allow Kubrick to employ some of his distinct methods of shooting including using source location lighting, as he also did in \"Barry Lyndon\". Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" notes that the film \"gives an otherworldly radiance and personality to Christmas lights\", and critic Randy Rasmussen notes that \"colorful Christmas lights\u00a0 ... illuminate almost every location in the film.\" \"Harper\"'s film critic, Lee Siegel, believes that the film's recurring motif is the Christmas tree, because it symbolizes the way that \"Compared with the everyday reality of sex and emotion, our fantasies of gratification are\u00a0 ... pompous and solemn in the extreme\u00a0 ... For desire is like Christmas: it always promises more than it delivers.\" Author Tim Kreider notes that the \"Satanic\" mansion-party at Somerton is the only set in the film without a Christmas tree, stating that \"Almost every set is suffused with the dreamlike, hazy glow of colored lights and tinsel.\" Furthermore, he argues that \"Eyes Wide Shut, though it was released in summer, was \"the\" Christmas movie of 1999.\" Noting that Kubrick has shown viewers the dark side of Christmas consumerism, Louise Kaplan states that the film illustrates ways in which the \"material reality of money\" is shown replacing the spiritual values of Christmas, charity, and compassion. While virtually every scene has a Christmas tree, there is \"no Christmas music or cheery Christmas spirit.\"\nCritic Alonso Duralde, in his book \"Have Yourself a Movie Little Christmas\", categorized the film as a \"Christmas movie for grownups\", arguing that \"Christmas weaves its way through the film from start to finish\".\nUse of Venetian masks.\nHistorians, travel guide authors, novelists, and merchants of Venetian masks have noted that these have a long history of being worn during promiscuous activities. Authors Tim Kreider and Thomas Nelson have linked the film's usage of these to Venice's reputation as a center of both eroticism and mercantilism. Nelson notes that the sex ritual combines elements of Venetian Carnival and Catholic rites, in particular, the character of \"Red Cloak\" who simultaneously serves as Grand Inquisitor and King of Carnival. As such, Nelson argues that the sex ritual is a symbolic mirror of the darker truth behind the fa\u00e7ade of Victor Ziegler's earlier Christmas party. Carolin Ruwe, in her book \"Symbols in Stanley Kubrick's Movie 'Eyes Wide Shut\"', argues that the mask is the prime symbol of the film. Its symbolic meaning is represented through its connection to the characters in the film; as Tim Kreider points out, this can be seen through the masks in the prostitute's apartment and her being renamed as \"Domino\" in the film, which is a type of Venetian Mask. \nArtwork in the film.\nPaintings and sculptures appear throughout the film, some historical and others painted by Kubrick's wife Christiane Kubrick and stepdaughter Katharina Kubrick Hobbs. The home of the Harfords contains the majority of the works painted by Kubrick's family members, with the exception being a painting of a nude reclining pregnant woman by Christiane Kubrick titled \"Paula On Red\" that appears in Ziegler's bathroom during the overdose scene. In the beginning of the film, as Bill and Alice are saying goodbye to their daughter Helena and the babysitter, a painting by Christiane Kubrick titled \"View from the Mentmore\" can be seen hanging next to the Christmas tree. Mentmore Towers is an English country house in the southeast of England that was used for filming the interior scenes of the Somerton house and the masked orgy.\nDuring Ziegler's party, Bill is summoned to the bathroom to deal with an apparent overdose, as he climbs the spiral staircase he passes Giulio Bergonzoli's sculpture \"Gli amori degli angeli\" (The Loves of Angels) which is at the foot of the staircase. This sculpture is said to be inspired by a poem titled \"The Loves of the Angels\" by 19th-century poet Thomas Moore; the poem itself describes the story of three angels who fall in love with mortal women and share the password to heaven with them resulting in their banishment. At the time of the poem's release, it was received with controversy due to the open eroticism throughout. During the same party sequence, Bill is talking with the two models as they walk past a small reproduction of Gian Lorenzo Bernini's sculpture \"Apollo and Daphne\" sitting on a table.\nWhen Bill enters a cafe towards the end of the film, two Pre-Raphaelite paintings can be seen hanging on parallel walls, \"Ophelia\" by John William Waterhouse and \"Astarte Syriaca\" by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Waterhouse's \"Ophelia\" depicts the character by the same name in Shakespeare's tragedy Hamlet moments before her death. \"Astarte Syriaca\" depicts Astarte, the ancient Syrian goddess of love, as well as two symmetrical angels holding torches directly behind her. Both paintings mirror events within the film and, as Robert Wilkes writes, reflect its \"mood of sensuality, ritualism, and exoticism\". In the same cafe scene, a crystoleum print of Maude Goodman's \"Hush!\" (or, \"A Moment of Idleness\") is seen behind Bill as he sits down with a newspaper; in the following shot the print is replaced with what Wilkes describes as a \"more chaotic, nightmarish image\" as Bill reads about the ex-beauty queen's apparent overdose.\nWhen Bill is walking through a hospital hallway towards the end of the film, he walks past Jann Haworth's painting \"Aunt Gurdi Burning\" (1995). The painting is in the permanent collection of the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital where the scenes were filmed.\nControversies.\nDebate over the film's state of completion.\nThough Warner Bros. insisted that Kubrick had turned in his final cut before his death, the film was still in the final stages of post-production, which was therefore completed by the studio in collaboration with Kubrick's estate. This spurred debate from journalists and audiences about whether the work that remained was minor and exclusively technical in nature, allowing the estate to faithfully complete the film based on the director's notes. However, decisions regarding sound mixing, scoring and color-correction would have necessarily been made without Kubrick's input. Furthermore, Kubrick had a history of continuing to edit his films up until the last minute, and in some cases even after initial public screenings, as had been the case with \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" and \"The Shining\".\nWriting for \"Vanity Fair\", Kubrick collaborator Michael Herr recalled a phone call from the director regarding the cut that would be screened for the Warner Bros. executives four days before his death: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...there was looping to be done and the music wasn't finished, lots of small technical fixes on color and sound; would I show work that wasn't finished? He had to show it to Tom and Nicole because they had to sign nudity releases, and to Terry Semel and Bob Daly of Warner Bros., but he hated it that he had to, and I could hear it in his voice that he did.\nGarrett Brown, inventor of the Steadicam, has expressed that he considers \"Eyes Wide Shut\" to be an unfinished film:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think \"Eyes Wide Shut\" was snatched up by the studio when Stanley died and they just grabbed the highest number Avid edit and ran off as if that was the movie. But it was three months before the movie was due to be released. I don't think there's a chance that was the movie he had in mind, or the music track and a lot of other things. It's a great shame because you know it's out there, but it doesn't feel to me as it's really his film.\nNicole Kidman, one of the stars of the film, briefly wrote about the completion of the film and the release of the film being at the same time as John F. Kennedy Jr.'s death from her perspective: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was a lot of interest in \"Eyes Wide Shut\" before it was released. But the weekend it came out, July 16, 1999, was the death of JFK Jr., his wife and her sister\u2014a black, black weekend. And for Stanley to have died [on March 7, 1999, at age 70] before the film opened... Well, it all felt so dark and strange. Stanley had sent over the cut he considered done to us, Tom and I watched it in New York\u2014and then he died.\nIn 2025, editor Nigel Galt spoke on the film as a complete work fitting Kubrick's intent:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I can tell you that nothing in the film that happened\u2014and this includes after his death\u2014involved anything that Stanley wasn\u2019t aware of, or wasn\u2019t aware that was going to happen. The difficulty that happened with Stanley\u2019s sudden demise\u2014and this was, remember, three days after I showed the film in New York: shown it to Terry Semel and Bob Daly at Warners and then, same night, showed it to Tom and Nicole\u2014when I got back to London, Stanley was jubilant with the reaction. And we had a long, long-ish conversation, and the only thing that had to be done was mundane editing stuff. We had establishing shots to put in the film\u2014you know, exterior buildings\u2014and that was it. There was nothing missing. That cut is \"Stanley\u2019s cut\" the day he died. And nothing was over-edited. There was no Illuminati.\nKubrick's opinion.\nJan Harlan, Kubrick's brother-in-law and executive producer, reported that Kubrick was \"very happy\" with the film and considered it to be his \"greatest contribution to the art of cinema\".\nR. Lee Ermey, an actor in Kubrick's film \"Full Metal Jacket\", stated that Kubrick phoned him two weeks before his death to express his despondency over \"Eyes Wide Shut\". \"He told me it was a piece of shit\", Ermey said in \"Radar\" magazine, \"and that he was disgusted with it and that the critics were going to 'have him for lunch'. He said Cruise and Kidman had their way with him \u2013 exactly the words he used.\"\nAccording to Todd Field, Kubrick's friend and an actor in \"Eyes Wide Shut\", Ermey's claims do not accurately reflect Kubrick's essential attitude. Field's response appeared in an October 18, 2006, interview with Grouch Reviews: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The polite thing would be to say 'No comment'. But the truth is that\u00a0...let's put it this way, you've never seen two actors more completely subservient and prostrate themselves at the feet of a director. Stanley was absolutely thrilled with the film. He was still working on the film when he died. And he probably died because he finally relaxed. It was one of the happiest weekends of his life, right before he died, after he had shown the first cut to Terry, Tom and Nicole. He would have kept working on it, like he did on all of his films. But I know that from people around him personally, my partner who was his assistant for thirty years. And I thought about R. Lee Ermey for \"In the Bedroom\". And I talked to Stanley a lot about that film, and all I can say is Stanley was adamant that I shouldn't work with him for all kinds of reasons that I won't get into because there is no reason to do that to anyone, even if they are saying slanderous things that I know are completely untrue.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9980", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9980", "title": "Extreme unction", "text": ""}
{"id": "9981", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9981", "title": "Extreme Unction", "text": ""}
{"id": "9984", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9984", "title": "Earth Sciences basic topics", "text": ""}
{"id": "9986", "revid": "1319200868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9986", "title": "Outline of education", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to education\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to education:\nEducation is the process of facilitating learning, or the acquisition of knowledge, skills, values, morals, beliefs, habits, and personal development.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEducational theory and practice.\nPedogagical and instructional approaches.\nTeaching methods.\nTeaching method \u2013 set of principles and methods used by teachers to enable student learning.\nTypes of educational goals and outcomes.\nThere are many types of potential educational aims and objectives, irrespective of the specific subject being learned. Some can cross multiple school disciplines.\nBranches of education.\nEducation by level or stage.\nEducational stage \u2013 subdivisions of formal learning\nEducational research.\nIn addition, research methods are drawn from many social research and psychological fields.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9987", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9987", "title": "Outline of engineering", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to engineering\nThe following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to engineering:\nEngineering is the scientific discipline and profession that applies scientific theories, mathematical methods, and empirical evidence to design, create, and analyze technological solutions cognizant of safety, human factors, physical laws, regulations, practicality, and cost.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory of engineering.\nHistory of engineering\nEngineering education and certification.\nEngineering education\nRegulation and licensure in engineering"}
{"id": "9988", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9988", "title": "Outline of entertainment", "text": "Overview of and topical guide to entertainment\nThe following outline provides an overview of and topical guide to entertainment and the entertainment industry:\nEntertainment is any activity which provides a diversion or permits people to amuse themselves in their leisure time, and may also provide fun, enjoyment, and laughter. People may create their own entertainment, such as when they spontaneously invent a game; participate actively in an activity they find entertaining, such as when they play sport as a hobby; or consume an entertainment product passively, such as when they attend a performance.\nThe entertainment industry (informally known as show business or show biz) is part of the tertiary sector of the economy and includes many sub-industries devoted to entertainment. However, the term is often used in the mass media to describe the mass media companies that control the distribution and manufacture of mass media entertainment. In the popular parlance, the term \"show biz\" in particular connotes the commercially popular performing arts, especially musical theatre, vaudeville, comedy, film, fun, and music. It applies to every aspect of entertainment including cinema, television, radio, theatre, and music.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9992", "revid": "50952422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9992", "title": "List of lists of contemporary ethnic groups", "text": "List of lists of ethnic groups\nThis is a list of lists of contemporary ethnic groups."}
{"id": "9993", "revid": "4440889", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9993", "title": "Edda", "text": "Collective name of two Medieval Icelandic literary works\n\"Edda\" (; Old Norse \"Edda\", plural \"Eddur\") is an Old Norse term that has been applied by modern scholars to the collective of two Medieval Icelandic literary works: what is now known as the \"Prose Edda\" and an older collection of poems (without an original title) now known as the \"Poetic Edda\". The term historically referred only to the \"Prose Edda\", but this usage has fallen out of favour because of confusion with the other work. Both works were recorded in Iceland during the 13th century in Icelandic, although they contain material from earlier traditional sources, reaching back into the Viking Age. The books provide the main sources for medieval skaldic tradition in Iceland and for Norse mythology.\nEtymology.\nAt least five hypotheses have been suggested for the origins of the word \"edda\":\nThe \"Poetic Edda\".\nThe \"Poetic Edda\", also known as \"S\u00e6mundar Edda\" or the \"Elder Edda\", is a collection of Old Norse poems from the Icelandic medieval manuscript Codex Regius (\"Royal Book\"). Along with the \"Prose Edda\", the \"Poetic Edda\" is the most expansive source on Norse mythology. The first part of the Codex Regius preserves poems that narrate the creation and foretold destruction and rebirth of the Old Norse mythological world as well as individual myths about gods concerning Norse deities. The poems in the second part narrate legends about Norse heroes and heroines, such as Sigurd, Brynhildr and Gunnar.\nIt consists of two parts. The first part has 10 songs about gods, and the second one has 19 songs about heroes.\nThe Codex Regius was written in the 13th century, but nothing is known of its whereabouts until 1643, when it came into the possession of Brynj\u00f3lfur Sveinsson, then the Church of Iceland's Bishop of Sk\u00e1lholt. At that time, versions of the \"Prose Edda\" were well known in Iceland, but scholars speculated that there once was another \"Edda\"\u2014an \"Elder Edda\"\u2014which contained the pagan poems Snorri quotes in his book. When the Codex Regius was discovered, it seemed that this speculation had proven correct. Brynj\u00f3lfur attributed the manuscript to S\u00e6mundr the Learned, a larger-than-life 12th century Icelandic priest. While this attribution is rejected by modern scholars, the name \"S\u00e6mundar Edda\" is still sometimes encountered.\nBishop Brynj\u00f3lfur sent the \"Codex Regius\" as a present to King Christian IV of Denmark, hence the name \"Codex Regius\". For centuries it was stored in the Royal Library in Copenhagen but in 1971 it was returned to Iceland.\nThe \"Prose Edda\".\nThe \"Prose Edda\", sometimes referred to as the \"Younger Edda\" or \"Snorri's Edda\", is an Icelandic manual of poetics which also contains many mythological stories. Its purpose was to enable Icelandic poets and readers to understand the subtleties of alliterative verse, and to grasp the mythological allusions behind the many kennings that were used in skaldic poetry.\nIt was written by the Icelandic scholar and historian Snorri Sturluson around 1220. It survives in four known manuscripts and three fragments, written down from about 1300 to about 1600.\nThe \"Prose Edda\" consists of a Prologue and three separate books: \"Gylfaginning\", concerning the creation and foretold destruction and rebirth of the Norse mythical world; \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", a dialogue between \u00c6gir, a Norse god connected with the sea, and Bragi, the skaldic god of poetry; and \"H\u00e1ttatal\", a demonstration of verse forms used in Norse mythology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9994", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9994", "title": "Ephemeris time", "text": "Time standard used in astronomical ephemerides\nIn metrology, ephemeris time (ET) is time in association with any ephemeris (itinerary of the trajectory of an astronomical object). In practice it has been used more specifically to refer to:\nMost of the following sections relate to the ephemeris time of the 1952 standard.\nAn impression has sometimes arisen that ephemeris time was in use from 1900: this probably arose because ET, though proposed and adopted in the period 1948\u20131952, was defined in detail using formulae that made retrospective use of the epoch date of 1900 January 0 and of Newcomb's \"Tables of the Sun\".\nThe ephemeris time of the 1952 standard leaves a continuing legacy, through its historical unit ephemeris second which became closely duplicated in the length of the current standard SI second (see below: Redefinition of the second).\nHistory (1952 standard).\nEphemeris time (ET), adopted as standard in 1952, was originally designed as an approach to a uniform time scale, to be freed from the effects of irregularity in the rotation of the Earth, \"for the convenience of astronomers and other scientists\", for example for use in ephemerides of the Sun (as observed from the Earth), the Moon, and the planets. It was proposed in 1948 by the American astronomer G M Clemence.\nFrom the time of John Flamsteed (1646\u20131719) it had been believed that the Earth's daily rotation was uniform. But in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with increasing precision of astronomical measurements, it began to be suspected, and was eventually established, that the rotation of the Earth (\"i.e.\" the length of the day) showed irregularities on short time scales, and was slowing down on longer time scales. The evidence was compiled by the Dutch astronomer Willem de Sitter, who wrote \"If we accept this hypothesis, then the 'astronomical time', given by the Earth's rotation, and used in all practical astronomical computations, differs from the 'uniform' or 'Newtonian' time, which is defined as the independent variable of the equations of celestial mechanics\". De Sitter offered a correction to be applied to the mean solar time given by the Earth's rotation to get uniform time.\nOther astronomers of the period also made suggestions for obtaining uniform time, including Andr\u00e9-Louis Danjon (1929), who suggested in effect that observed positions of the Moon, Sun and planets, when compared with their well-established gravitational ephemerides, could better and more uniformly define and determine time.\nThus the aim developed, to provide a new time scale for astronomical and scientific purposes, to avoid the unpredictable irregularities of the mean solar time scale, and to replace for these purposes Universal Time (UT) and any other time scale based on the rotation of the Earth around its axis, such as sidereal time.\nThe American astronomer G M Clemence (1948) made a detailed proposal of this type based on the results of the English Astronomer Royal H Spencer Jones (1939). Clemence (1948) made it clear that his proposal was intended \"for the convenience of astronomers and other scientists only\" and that it was \"logical to continue the use of mean solar time for civil purposes\".\nDe Sitter and Clemence both referred to the proposal as 'Newtonian' or 'uniform' time. D Brouwer suggested the name 'ephemeris time'.\nFollowing this, an astronomical conference held in Paris in 1950 recommended \"that in all cases where the mean solar second is unsatisfactory as a unit of time by reason of its variability, the unit adopted should be the sidereal year at 1900.0, that the time reckoned in this unit be designated \"ephemeris time\"\", and gave Clemence's formula (see Definition of ephemeris time (1952)) for translating mean solar time to ephemeris time.\nThe International Astronomical Union approved this recommendation at its 1952 general assembly. Practical introduction took some time (see Use of ephemeris time in official almanacs and ephemerides); ephemeris time (ET) remained a standard until superseded in the 1970s by further time scales (see Revision).\nDuring the currency of ephemeris time as a standard, the details were revised a little. The unit was redefined in terms of the tropical year at 1900.0 instead of the sidereal year; and the standard second was defined first as 1/31556925.975 of the tropical year at 1900.0, and then as the slightly modified fraction 1/31556925.9747 instead, finally being redefined in 1967/8 in terms of the cesium atomic clock standard (see below).\nAlthough ET is no longer directly in use, it leaves a continuing legacy. Its successor time scales, such as TDT, as well as the atomic time scale IAT (TAI), were designed with a relationship that \"provides continuity with ephemeris time\". ET was used for the calibration of atomic clocks in the 1950s. Close equality between the ET second with the later SI second (as defined with reference to the cesium atomic clock) has been verified to within 1 part in 1010.\nIn this way, decisions made by the original designers of ephemeris time influenced the length of today's standard SI second, and in turn, this has a continuing influence on the number of leap seconds which have been needed for insertion into current broadcast time scales, to keep them approximately in step with mean solar time.\nDefinition (1952).\nEphemeris time was defined in principle by the orbital motion of the Earth around the Sun (but its practical implementation was usually achieved in another way, see below). Its detailed definition was based on Simon Newcomb's \"Tables of the Sun\" (1895), implemented in a new way to accommodate certain observed discrepancies:\nIn the introduction to \"Tables of the Sun,\" the basis of the tables (p.\u00a09) includes a formula for the Sun's mean longitude at a time, indicated by interval T (in units of Julian centuries of 36525 mean solar days), reckoned from Greenwich Mean Noon on 0 January 1900:\n Ls = 279\u00b0 41' 48\".04 + 129,602,768\".13T +1\".089T2 . . . . . (1)\nSpencer Jones' work of 1939 showed that differences between the observed positions of the Sun and the predicted positions given by Newcomb's formula demonstrated the need for the following correction to the formula:\n \u0394Ls = + 1\".00 + 2\".97T + 1\".23T2 + 0.0748B\nwhere \"the times of observation are in Universal time, not corrected to Newtonian time,\" and 0.0748B represents an irregular fluctuation calculated from lunar observations.\nThus, a conventionally corrected form of Newcomb's formula, incorporating the corrections on the basis of mean solar time, would be the sum of the two preceding expressions:\n Ls = 279\u00b0 41' 49\".04 + 129,602,771\".10T +2\".32T2 +0.0748B . . . . . (2)\nClemence's 1948 proposal, however, did not adopt such a correction of mean solar time. Instead, the same numbers were used as in Newcomb's original uncorrected formula (1), but now applied somewhat prescriptively, to define a new time and time scale implicitly, based on the real position of the Sun:\n Ls = 279\u00b0 41' 48\".04 + 129,602,768\".13E +1\".089E2 . . . . . (3)\nWith this reapplication, the time variable, now given as E, represents time in ephemeris centuries of 36525 ephemeris days of 86400 ephemeris seconds each. The 1961 official reference summarized the concept as such: \"The origin and rate of ephemeris time are defined to make the Sun's mean longitude agree with Newcomb's expression\"\nFrom the comparison of formulae (2) and (3), both of which express the same real solar motion in the same real time but defined on separate time scales, Clemence arrived at an explicit expression, estimating the difference in seconds of time between ephemeris time and mean solar time, in the sense (ET-UT):\nformula_1 . . . . . (4)\nwith the 24.349 seconds of time corresponding to the 1.00\" in \u0394Ls.\nClemence's formula (today superseded by more modern estimations) was included in the original conference decision on ephemeris time. In view of the fluctuation term, practical determination of the difference between ephemeris time and UT depended on observation. Inspection of the formulae above shows that the (ideally constant) units of ephemeris time have been, for the whole of the twentieth century, very slightly shorter than the corresponding (but not precisely constant) units of mean solar time (which, besides their irregular fluctuations, tend to lengthen gradually). This finding is consistent with the modern results of Morrison and Stephenson (see article \u0394T).\nImplementations.\nSecondary realizations by lunar observations.\nAlthough ephemeris time was defined in principle by the orbital motion of the Earth around the Sun, it was usually measured in practice by the orbital motion of the Moon around the Earth. These measurements can be considered as secondary realizations (in a metrological sense) of the primary definition of ET in terms of the solar motion, after a calibration of the mean motion of the Moon with respect to the mean motion of the Sun.\nReasons for the use of lunar measurements were practically based: the Moon moves against the background of stars about 13 times as fast as the Sun's corresponding rate of motion, and the accuracy of time determinations from lunar measurements is correspondingly greater.\nWhen ephemeris time was first adopted, time scales were still based on astronomical observation, as they always had been. The accuracy was limited by the accuracy of optical observation, and corrections of clocks and time signals were published in arrear.\nSecondary realizations by atomic clocks.\nA few years later, with the invention of the cesium atomic clock, an alternative offered itself. Increasingly, after the calibration in 1958 of the cesium atomic clock by reference to ephemeris time, cesium atomic clocks running on the basis of ephemeris seconds began to be used and kept in step with ephemeris time. The atomic clocks offered a further secondary realization of ET, on a quasi-real time basis that soon proved to be more useful than the primary ET standard: not only more convenient, but also more precisely uniform than the primary standard itself. Such secondary realizations were used and described as 'ET', with an awareness that the time scales based on the atomic clocks were not identical to that defined by the primary ephemeris time standard, but rather, an improvement over it on account of their closer approximation to uniformity. The atomic clocks gave rise to the atomic time scale, and to what was first called Terrestrial Dynamical Time and is now Terrestrial Time, defined to provide continuity with ET.\nThe availability of atomic clocks, together with the increasing accuracy of astronomical observations (which meant that relativistic corrections were at least in the foreseeable future no longer going to be small enough to be neglected), led to the eventual replacement of the ephemeris time standard by more refined time scales including terrestrial time and barycentric dynamical time, to which ET can be seen as an approximation.\nRevision of time scales.\nIn 1976, the IAU resolved that the theoretical basis for its then-current (since 1952) standard of Ephemeris Time was non-relativistic, and that therefore, beginning in 1984, Ephemeris Time would be replaced by two relativistic timescales intended to constitute dynamical timescales: Terrestrial Dynamical Time (TDT) and Barycentric Dynamical Time (TDB). Difficulties were recognized, which led to these, in turn, being superseded in the 1990s by time scales Terrestrial Time (TT), Geocentric Coordinate Time GCT (TCG) and Barycentric Coordinate Time BCT (TCB).\nJPL ephemeris time argument Teph.\nHigh-precision ephemerides of sun, moon and planets were developed and calculated at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) over a long period, and the latest available were adopted for the ephemerides in the Astronomical Almanac starting in 1984. Although not an IAU standard, the ephemeris time argument Teph has been in use at that institution since the 1960s. The time scale represented by Teph has been characterized as a relativistic coordinate time that differs from Terrestrial Time only by small periodic terms with an amplitude not exceeding 2 milliseconds of time: it is linearly related to, but distinct (by an offset and constant rate which is of the order of 0.5\u00a0s/a) from the TCB time scale adopted in 1991 as a standard by the IAU. Thus for clocks on or near the geoid, Teph (within 2 milliseconds), but not so closely TCB, can be used as approximations to Terrestrial Time, and via the standard ephemerides Teph is in widespread use.\nPartly in acknowledgement of the widespread use of Teph via the JPL ephemerides, IAU resolution 3 of 2006 (re-)defined Barycentric Dynamical Time (TDB) as a current standard. As re-defined in 2006, TDB is a linear transformation of TCB. The same IAU resolution also stated (in note 4) that the \"independent time argument of the JPL ephemeris DE405, which is called Teph\" (here the IAU source cites), \"is for practical purposes the same as TDB defined in this Resolution\". Thus the new TDB, like Teph, is essentially a more refined continuation of the older ephemeris time ET and (apart from the &lt; 2 ms periodic fluctuations) has the same mean rate as that established for ET in the 1950s.\nUse in official almanacs and ephemerides.\nEphemeris time based on the standard adopted in 1952 was introduced into the Astronomical Ephemeris (UK) and the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac, replacing UT in the main ephemerides in the issues for 1960 and after. (But the ephemerides in the Nautical Almanac, by then a separate publication for the use of navigators, continued to be expressed in terms of UT.) The ephemerides continued on this basis through 1983 (with some changes due to adoption of improved values of astronomical constants), after which, for 1984 onwards, they adopted the JPL ephemerides.\nPrevious to the 1960 change, the 'Improved Lunar Ephemeris' had already been made available in terms of ephemeris time for the years 1952\u20141959 (computed by W J Eckert from Brown's theory with modifications recommended by Clemence (1948)).\nRedefinition of the second.\nSuccessive definitions of the unit of ephemeris time are mentioned above (History). The value adopted for the 1956/1960 standard second:\nthe fraction 1/31 556 925.9747 of the tropical year for 1900 January 0 at 12 hours ephemeris time.\nwas obtained from the linear time-coefficient in Newcomb's expression for the solar mean longitude (above), taken and applied with the same meaning for the time as in formula (3) above. The relation with Newcomb's coefficient can be seen from:\n1/31 556 925.9747 = 129 602 768.13 / (360\u00d760\u00d760\u00d736 525\u00d786 400).\nCaesium atomic clocks became operational in 1955, and quickly confirmed the evidence that the rotation of the Earth fluctuated irregularly. This confirmed the unsuitability of the mean solar second of Universal Time as a measure of time interval for the most precise purposes. After three years of comparisons with lunar observations, Markowitz et al. (1958) determined that the ephemeris second corresponded to 9 192 631 770 \u00b1 20 cycles of the chosen cesium resonance.\nFollowing this, in 1967/68, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) replaced the definition of the SI second by the following:\nThe second is the duration of 9\u2009192\u2009631\u2009770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium 133 atom.\nAlthough this is an independent definition that does not refer to the older basis of ephemeris time, it uses the same quantity as the value of the ephemeris second measured by the cesium clock in 1958. This SI second referred to atomic time was later verified by Markowitz (1988) to be in agreement, within 1 part in 1010, with the second of ephemeris time as determined from lunar observations.\nFor practical purposes the length of the ephemeris second can be taken as equal to the length of the second of Barycentric Dynamical Time (TDB) or Terrestrial Time (TT) or its predecessor TDT.\nThe difference between ET and UT is called \u0394T; it changes irregularly, but the long-term trend is parabolic, decreasing from ancient times until the nineteenth century, and increasing since then at a rate corresponding to an increase in the solar day length of 1.7\u00a0ms per century (see leap seconds).\nInternational Atomic Time (TAI) was set equal to UT2 at 1 January 1958 0:00:00. At that time, \u0394T was already about 32.18 seconds. The difference between Terrestrial Time (TT) (the successor to ephemeris time) and atomic time was later defined as follows:\n1977 January 1.000 3725 TT = 1977 January 1.000 0000 TAI, \"i.e.\"\nTT \u2212 TAI = 32.184 seconds\nThis difference may be assumed constant\u2014the rates of TT and TAI are designed to be identical."}
{"id": "9995", "revid": "1524034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9995", "title": "EastEnders", "text": "British television soap opera (since 1985)\nEastEnders is a British television soap opera created by Julia Smith and Tony Holland which has been broadcast on BBC One since February 1985. Set in the fictional borough of Walford in the East End of London, the programme follows the stories of local residents and their families as they go about their daily lives. Within eight months of the show's original launch, it had reached the number one spot in BARB's television ratings, and has consistently remained among the top-rated series in Britain. Four \"EastEnders\" episodes are listed in the all-time top 10 most-watched programmes in the UK, including the number one spot, when more than 30 million watched the 1986 Christmas Day episode. \"EastEnders\" has been important in the history of British television drama, tackling many subjects that are considered to be controversial or taboo in British culture, and portraying a social life previously unseen on UK mainstream television.\nSince co-creator Holland was from a large family in the East End, a theme heavily featured in \"EastEnders\" is strong families, and each character is supposed to have their own place in the fictional community. The Watts, Beales and Fowlers, Mitchells, Brannings and the Slaters are some of the families that have been central to the soap's notable and dramatic storylines. \"EastEnders\" has been filmed at the BBC Elstree Centre since its inception, with a set that is outdoors and open to weather. In 2014, the BBC announced plans to rebuild the set entirely. Filming commenced on the new set in January 2022, and it was first used on-screen in March 2022. Demolition on the old set commenced in November 2022.\n\"EastEnders\" has received both praise and criticism for many of its storylines, which have dealt with difficult themes including violence, rape, murder and abuse. It has been criticised for various storylines, including the 2010 baby swap storyline, which attracted more than 6,000 complaints, as well as complaints of showing too much violence and allegations of national and racial stereotypes. However, \"EastEnders\" has also been commended for representing real-life issues and spreading awareness on social topics. The cast and crew of the show have received and been nominated for various awards.\nHistory.\nConception and preparations for broadcast.\nIn March 1983, under two years before \"EastEnders\"' first episode was broadcast, the show was a vague idea in the mind of a handful of BBC executives, who decided that what BBC One needed was a popular twice-weekly drama series that would attract the kind of mass audiences that ITV were getting with \"Coronation Street\". The first people to whom David Reid, then head of series and serials, turned were Julia Smith and Tony Holland, a well established producer/script editor team who had first worked together on \"Z-Cars\". The outline that Reid presented was vague: two episodes a week, 52 weeks a year. After the concept was put to them on 14 March 1983, Smith and Holland then went about putting their ideas down on paper; they decided it would be set in the East End of London. It was decided after a report indicated that a show focusing on a working-class London neighbourhood would have the most widespread appeal. Granada Television gave Smith unrestricted access to the \"Coronation Street\" production for a month so that she could get a sense of how a continuing drama was produced. The show initially had the working title \"East 8\" and was, at first, to be set in a real street in Hackney, London.\nSeveral cities were considered for the show's setting, including Manchester and Birmingham, before ultimately choosing London. There was anxiety at first that the viewing public would not accept a new soap set in the south of England, though research commissioned by lead figures in the BBC revealed that southerners would accept a northern soap, northerners would accept a southern soap and those from the Midlands, as Julia Smith herself pointed out, did not mind where it was set as long as it was somewhere else. This was the beginning of a close and continuing association between \"EastEnders\" and audience research, which, though commonplace today, was something of a revolution in practice.\nThe show's creators were both Londoners, but when they researched Victorian squares, they found massive changes in areas they thought they knew well; however, delving further into the East End of London, they found exactly what they had been searching for: a real East End spirit, an inward-looking quality, a distrust of strangers and authority figures, a sense of territory and community that the creators summed up as \"Hurt one of us and you hurt us all\".\nWhen developing \"EastEnders\", both Smith and Holland looked at influential models like \"Coronation Street\", but they found that it offered a rather outdated and nostalgic view of working-class life. Only after \"EastEnders\" began, and featured the characters of Tony Carpenter and Kelvin Carpenter, did \"Coronation Street\" start to feature black characters, for example. They came to the conclusion that \"Coronation Street\" had grown old with its audience, and that \"EastEnders\" would have to attract a younger, more socially extensive audience, ensuring that it had the longevity to retain it for many years thereafter. They also looked at \"Brookside\", but found there was a lack of central meeting points for the characters, making it difficult for the writers to intertwine different storylines, so \"EastEnders\" was set in Albert Square.\nA previous UK soap set in an East End market was ATV's \"Market in Honey Lane\"; however, between 1967 and 1969, this show, which graduated from one showing a week to two in three separate series (the latter series being shown in different time slots across the ITV network) was very different in style and approach from \"EastEnders\". The British Film Institute described \"Market in Honey Lane\" thus: \"It was not an earth-shaking programme, and certainly not pioneering in any revolutionary ideas in technique and production, but simply proposed itself to the casual viewer as a mildly pleasant affair.\"\nThe target launch date was originally January 1985. Smith and Holland had 11 months in which to write, cast and shoot the whole thing; however, in February 1984, they did not even have a title or a place to film. Both Smith and Holland were unhappy about the January 1985 launch date, favouring November or even September 1984 when seasonal audiences would be higher, but the BBC stayed firm, and Smith and Holland had to concede that, with the massive task of getting the Elstree studios operational, January was the most realistic date; however, this was later to be changed to February.\nThe project had a number of working titles: \"Square Dance\", \"Round the Square\", \"Round the Houses\", \"London Pride\" and \"East 8\". It was the latter that stuck (E8 is the postcode for Hackney) in the early months of creative process; however, the show was renamed after many casting agents mistakenly thought the show was to be called \"Estate\", and the fictional postcode E20 was created, instead of using E8. Julia Smith came up with the name \"Eastenders\" after she and Holland had spent months telephoning theatrical agents and asking \"Do you have any real East Enders on your books?\" Smith thought \"Eastenders\" \"looked ugly written down\" and was \"hard to say\", so decided to capitalise the second \"e\".\nInitial character creation and casting.\nAfter they decided on the filming location of BBC Elstree Centre in south Hertfordshire, Smith and Holland set about creating the 23 characters needed, in just 14 days. They took a holiday in Playa de los Pocillos, Lanzarote, and started to devise the characters. Holland created the Beale and Fowler family, drawing on his own background. His mother, Ethel Holland, was one of four sisters raised in Walthamstow. Her eldest sister, Lou, had married a man named Albert Beale and had two children, named Peter and Pauline. These family members were the basis for Lou Beale, Pete Beale and Pauline Fowler. Holland also created Pauline's unemployed husband Arthur Fowler, their children Mark and Michelle, Pete's wife Kathy and their son Ian. Smith used her personal memories of East End residents she met when researching Victorian squares. Ethel Skinner was based on an old woman she met in a pub, with ill-fitting false teeth, and a \"face to rival a neon sign\", holding a Yorkshire Terrier in one hand and a pint of Guinness in the other.\nOther characters created included Jewish doctor Harold Legg, the Anglo-Cypriot Osman family (Ali, Sue and baby Hassan), black father and son Tony and Kelvin Carpenter, single mother Mary Smith and Bangladeshi couple Saeed and Naima Jeffery. Jack, Pearl and Tracey Watts were created to bring \"flash, trash, and melodrama\" to the Square (they were later renamed Den, Angie and Sharon). The characters of Andy O'Brien and Debbie Wilkins were created to show a modern couple with outwardly mobile pretensions, and Lofty Holloway to show an outsider, someone who did not fit in with other residents. It was decided that he would be a former soldier, as Holland's personal experiences of ex-soldiers were that they had trouble fitting into society after being in the army. When they compared the characters they had created, Smith and Holland realised they had created a cross-section of East End residents. The Beale and Fowler family represented the old families of the East End, who had always been there. The Osmans, Jefferys and Carpenters represented the more modern diverse ethnic community of the East End. Debbie, Andy and Mary represented more modern-day individuals.\nOnce they had decided on their 23 characters, they returned to London for a meeting with the BBC. Everyone agreed that \"EastEnders\" would be tough, violent on occasion, funny and sharp\u2014set in Margaret Thatcher's Britain\u2014and it would start with a bang (namely the death of Reg Cox). They decided that none of their existing characters were wicked enough to have killed Reg, so a 24th character, Nick Cotton, was added to the line-up. He was a racist thug, who often tried to lead other young characters astray. When all the characters had been created, Smith and Holland set about casting the actors, which also involved the input of lead director Matthew Robinson, who supervised auditions with the other directors at the outset, Vivienne Cozens and Peter Edwards.\nFinal preparations.\nThrough the next few months, the set was growing rapidly at Elstree, and a composer and designer had been commissioned to create the title sequence. Simon May wrote the theme music and Alan Jeapes created the visuals. The visual images were taken from an aircraft flying over the East End of London at 1000 feet. Approximately 800 photographs were taken and pieced together to create one big image. The credits were later updated when the Millennium Dome was built.\nThe launch was delayed until February 1985 due to a delay in the chat show \"Wogan\", that was to be a part of the major revamp in BBC1's schedules. Smith was uneasy about the late start as \"EastEnders\" no longer had the winter months to build up a loyal following before the summer ratings lull. The press were invited to Elstree to meet the cast and see the lot, and stories immediately started circulating about the show, about a rivalry with ITV (which was launching its own market-based soap, \"Albion Market\") and about the private lives of the cast. Anticipation and rumour grew in equal measure until the first transmission at 7p.m. on 19 February 1985. Neither Holland nor Smith could watch; they both instead returned to the place where it all began, Albertine's Wine Bar on Wood Lane. The next day, viewing figures were confirmed at 17million. The reviews were largely favourable, although, after three weeks on air, BBC1's early evening share had returned to the pre-\"EastEnders\" figure of seven million, though \"EastEnders\" then climbed to highs of up to 23million later on in the year. Following the launch, both group discussions and telephone surveys were conducted to test audience reaction to early episodes.\n1980s broadcast history.\nThe show's first episode attracted some 17million viewers, and it continued to attract high viewing figures from then on. By Christmas 1985, the tabloids could not get enough of the soap. \"Exclusives\" about \"EastEnders\" storylines and the actors on the show became a staple of tabloid buyers' daily reading.\nIn 1987, the show featured the first same-sex kiss on a British soap, when Colin Russell (Michael Cashman) kissed boyfriend Barry Clark (Gary Hailes) on the forehead. This was followed, in January 1989, by the first on-the-mouth gay kiss in a British soap when Colin kissed a new character, Guido Smith (Nicholas Donovan), in an episode that was watched by 17 million people.\nWriter Colin Brake suggested that 1989 was a year of big change for \"EastEnders\", both behind the cameras and in front of them. Original production designer Keith Harris left the show, and Holland and Smith both decided that the time had come to move on too, their final contribution coinciding with the exit of one of \"EastEnders\"' most successful characters, Den Watts (Leslie Grantham). Producer Mike Gibbon was given the task of running the show, and he enlisted the most experienced writers to take over the storylining of the programme, including Charlie Humphreys, Jane Hollowood and Tony McHale.\nAccording to Brake, the departure of two of the soap's most popular characters, Den and Angie Watts (Anita Dobson), left a void in the programme, which needed to be filled. In addition, several other long-running characters left the show that year, including Sue and Ali Osman (Sandy Ratcliff and Nejdet Salih) and their family; Donna Ludlow (Matilda Ziegler); Carmel Jackson (Judith Jacob) and Colin Russell (Michael Cashman). Brake indicated that the production team decided that 1989 was to be a year of change in Walford, commenting, \"it was almost as if Walford itself was making a fresh start\".\nBy the end of 1989, \"EastEnders\" had acquired a new executive producer, Michael Ferguson, who had previously been a successful producer on ITV's \"The Bill\". Brake suggested that Ferguson was responsible for bringing in a new sense of vitality and creating a programme that was more in touch with the real world than it had been over the previous year.\nChanges in the 1990s.\nA new era began in 1990, with the introduction of Phil Mitchell (Steve McFadden) and Grant Mitchell (Ross Kemp)\u2014the Mitchell brothers\u2014successful characters who would go on to dominate the soap thereafter. As the new production team cleared the way for new characters and a new direction, all of the characters introduced under Gibbon were axed from the show at the start of the year. Ferguson introduced other characters and was responsible for storylines including HIV, Alzheimer's disease and murder. After a successful revamp of the soap, Ferguson decided to leave \"EastEnders\" in July 1991. Ferguson was succeeded by both Leonard Lewis and Helen Greaves, who initially shared the role as executive producer. Lewis and Greaves formulated a new regime for \"EastEnders\", giving the writers of the serial more authority in storyline progression, with the script department providing \"guidance rather than prescriptive episode storylines\". By the end of 1992, Greaves had left, and Lewis became executive and series producer. He left \"EastEnders\" in 1994 after the BBC controllers demanded an extra episode a week, taking its weekly airtime from 60 to 90 minutes. Lewis felt that producing an hour of \"reasonable quality drama\" a week was the maximum that any broadcasting system could generate without loss of integrity. Having set up the transition to the new schedule, the first trio of episodes\u2014dubbed The Vic siege\u2014marked Lewis's departure from the programme. Barbara Emile then became the executive producer of \"EastEnders\", remaining with \"EastEnders\" until early 1995. She was succeeded by Corinne Hollingworth.\nHollingworth's contributions to the soap were awarded in 1997 when \"EastEnders\" won the BAFTA for Best Drama Series. Hollingworth shared the award with the next executive producer, Jane Harris. Harris was responsible for the critically panned Ireland episodes and Cindy Beale's (Michelle Collins) attempted assassination of Ian Beale (Adam Woodyatt), which brought in an audience of 23 million in 1996, roughly four million more than \"Coronation Street\". In 1998 Matthew Robinson was appointed as the executive producer of \"EastEnders\". During his reign, \"EastEnders\" won the BAFTA for \"Best Soap\" in consecutive years 1999 and 2000 and many other awards. Robinson also earned tabloid soubriquet \"Axeman of Albert Square\" after sacking a large number of characters in one hit, and several more thereafter. In their place, Robinson introduced new long-running characters including Melanie Healy (Tamzin Outhwaite), Jamie Mitchell (Jack Ryder), Lisa Shaw (Lucy Benjamin), Steve Owen (Martin Kemp) and Billy Mitchell (Perry Fenwick).\n2000s.\nJohn Yorke became the executive producer of \"EastEnders\" in 2000. Yorke was given the task of introducing the soap's fourth weekly episode. He axed the majority of the Di Marco family, except Beppe di Marco (Michael Greco), and helped introduce popular characters such as the Slater family. As what Mal Young described as \"two of \"EastEnders\"' most successful years\", Yorke was responsible for highly rated storylines such as \"Who Shot Phil?\", Ethel Skinner's (Gretchen Franklin) death, Jim Branning (John Bardon) and Dot Cotton's (June Brown) marriage, Trevor Morgan's (Alex Ferns) domestic abuse of his wife Little Mo Morgan (Kacey Ainsworth), and Kat Slater's (Jessie Wallace) revelation to her daughter Zoe Slater (Michelle Ryan) that she was her mother.\nIn 2002, Louise Berridge succeeded Yorke as the executive producer. During her time at \"EastEnders\", Berridge introduced popular characters such as Alfie Moon (Shane Richie), Dennis Rickman (Nigel Harman), Chrissie Watts (Tracy-Ann Oberman), Jane Beale (Laurie Brett), Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner) and the critically panned Indian Ferreira family.\nBerridge was responsible for some ratings success stories, such as Alfie and Kat Slater's (Jessie Wallace) relationship, Janine Butcher (Charlie Brooks) getting her comeuppance, Trevor Morgan (Alex Ferns) and Jamie Mitchell's (Jack Ryder) death storylines and the return of one of the greatest soap icons, Den Watts (Leslie Grantham), who had been presumed dead for 14 years. His return in late 2003 was watched by more than 16 million viewers, putting \"EastEnders\" back at number one in the rating war with \"Coronation Street\"; however, other storylines, such as one about a kidney transplant involving the Ferreiras, were not well received, and although Den's return proved to be a ratings success, the British press branded the plot unrealistic and felt that it questioned the show's credibility. A severe press backlash followed after Den's actor, Leslie Grantham, was outed in an internet sex scandal, which coincided with a swift decline in viewer ratings. The scandal led to Grantham's departure from the soap, but the occasion was used to mark the 20th anniversary of \"EastEnders\", with an episode showing Den's murder at the Queen Vic pub.\nOn 21 September 2004, Berridge quit as executive producer of \"EastEnders\" following continued criticism of the show. Kathleen Hutchison was swiftly appointed in her place, and was tasked with quickly turning the fortunes of the soap. During her time at the soap Hutchison axed multiple characters and reportedly ordered the rewriting of numerous scripts. Newspapers reported on employee dissatisfaction with Hutchison's tenure at \"EastEnders\". In January 2005, Hutchison left the soap and John Yorke (who by this time, was the BBC controller of continuing drama series) took total control of the show himself and became acting executive producer for a short period, before appointing Kate Harwood to the role. Harwood stayed at \"EastEnders\" for 20 months before being promoted by the BBC. The highly anticipated return of Ross Kemp as Grant Mitchell in October 2005 proved to be a sudden major ratings success, with the first two episodes consolidating to ratings of 13.21 to 13.34 million viewers. On Friday 11 November 2005, \"EastEnders\" was the first British drama to feature a two-minute silence. This episode later went on to win British Soap Award for \"Best Single Episode\". In October 2006, Diederick Santer took over as executive producer. He introduced several characters to the show, including ethnic minority and homosexual characters to make the show \"feel more 21st century\". Santer also reintroduced past and popular characters to the programme.\nOn 2 March 2007, BBC signed a deal with Google to put videos on YouTube. A behind the scenes video of \"EastEnders\", hosted by Matt Di Angelo, who played Deano Wicks on the show, was put on the site the same day, and was followed by another on 6 March 2007. In April 2007, \"EastEnders\" became available to view on mobile phones, via 3G technology, for 3, Vodafone and Orange customers. On 21 April 2007, the BBC launched a new advertising campaign using the slogan \"There's more to \"EastEnders\"\". The first television advert showed Dot Branning with a refugee baby, Tomas, whom she took in under the pretence of being her grandson. The second and third featured Stacey Slater and Dawn Swann, respectively. There have also been adverts in magazines and on radio.\nIn 2009, producers introduced a limit on the number of speaking parts in each episode due to budget cuts, with an average of 16 characters per episode. The decision was criticised by Martin McGrath of Equity, who said: \"Trying to produce quality TV on the cheap is doomed to fail.\" The BBC responded by saying they had been working that way for some time and it had not affected the quality of the show.\n2010s.\nFrom 4 February 2010, CGI was used in the show for the first time, with the addition of computer-generated trains.\n\"EastEnders\" celebrated its 25th anniversary on 19 February 2010. Santer came up with several plans to mark the occasion, including the show's first episode to be broadcast live, the second wedding between Ricky Butcher (Sid Owen) and Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer) and the return of Bianca's relatives, mother Carol Jackson (Lindsey Coulson), and siblings Robbie Jackson (Dean Gaffney), Sonia Fowler (Natalie Cassidy) and Billie Jackson (Devon Anderson). He told entertainment website Digital Spy, \"It's really important that the feel of the week is active and exciting and not too reflective. There'll be those moments for some of our longer-serving characters that briefly reflect on themselves and how they've changed. The characters don't know that it's the 25th anniversary of anything, so it'd be absurd to contrive too many situations in which they're reflective on the past. The main engine of that week is great stories that'll get people talking.\" The live episode featured the death of Bradley Branning (Charlie Clements) at the conclusion of the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline, which saw Bradley's wife Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner) reveal that she was the murderer. Viewing figures peaked at 16.6\u00a0million, which was the highest viewed episode in seven years. Other events to mark the anniversary were a spin-off DVD, \"EastEnders: Last Tango in Walford\", and an Internet spin-off, \"\".\nSanter officially left \"EastEnders\" in March 2010, and was replaced by Bryan Kirkwood. Kirkwood's first signing was the reintroduction of characters Alfie Moon (Shane Richie) and Kat Moon (Jessie Wallace), and his first new character was Vanessa Gold, played by Z\u00f6e Lucker. In April and May 2010, Kirkwood axed eight characters from the show, Barbara Windsor left her role of Peggy Mitchell, which left a hole in the show, which Kirkwood decided to fill by bringing back Kat and Alfie, which he said would \"herald the new era of \"EastEnders\".\" \"EastEnders\" started broadcasting in high definition on 25 December 2010. Old sets had to be rebuilt, so The Queen Victoria set was burnt down in a storyline (and in reality) to facilitate this.\nIn November 2011, a storyline showed character Billy Mitchell, played by Perry Fenwick, selected to be a torch bearer for the 2012 Summer Olympics. In reality, Fenwick carried the torch through the setting of Albert Square, with live footage shown in the episode on 23 July 2012. This was the second live broadcast of \"EastEnders\". In 2012, Kirkwood chose to leave his role as executive producer and was replaced by Lorraine Newman. The show lost many of its significant characters during this period. Newman stepped down after 16 months in the job in 2013 after the soap was criticised for its boring storylines and its lowest-ever figures pointing at around 4.8\u00a0million. Dominic Treadwell-Collins was appointed as the new executive producer on 19 August 2013 and was credited on 9 December. He axed multiple characters from the show and introduced the extended Carter family. He also introduced a long-running storyline, \"Who Killed Lucy Beale?\", which peaked during the show's 30th anniversary in 2015 with a week of live episodes. Treadwell-Collins announced his departure from \"EastEnders\" on 18 February 2016.\nSean O'Connor, former \"EastEnders\" series story producer and then-editor of radio soap opera \"The Archers\", was announced to be taking over the role. Treadwell-Collins left on 6 May and O'Connor's first credited episode was broadcast on 11 July although his own creative work was not seen onscreen until late September. Additionally, Oliver Kent was brought in as the head of continuing drama series for BBC Scripted Studios, meaning that Kent would oversee \"EastEnders\" along with O'Connor. O'Connor's approach to the show was to have a firmer focus on realism, which he said was being \"true to \"EastEnders\"' DNA and [finding] a way of capturing what it would be like if Julia Smith and Tony Holland were making the show now.\" He said that \"\"EastEnders\" has always had a distinctly different tone from the other soaps but over time we've diluted our unique selling point. I think we need to be ourselves and go back to the origins of the show and what made it successful in the first place. It should be entertaining but it should also be informative\u2014that's part of our unique BBC compact with the audience. It shouldn't just be a distraction from your own life, it should be an exploration of the life shared by the audience and the characters.\" O'Connor planned to stay with \"EastEnders\" until the end of 2017, but announced his departure on 23 June 2017 with immediate effect, saying he wanted to concentrate on a career in film. John Yorke returned as a temporary executive consultant. Kent said, \"John Yorke is a Walford legend and I am thrilled that he will be joining us for a short period to oversee the show and to help us build on Sean's legacy while we recruit a long-term successor.\" Yorke initially returned for three months but his contract was later extended.\nIn July 2018, a special episode was aired as part of a knife crime storyline. This episode, which showed the funeral of Shakil Kazemi (Shaheen Jafargholi) interspersed with real people talking about their true-life experiences of knife crime.\n On 8 August 2018, it was announced that Kate Oates, who has previously been a producer on the ITV soap operas \"Emmerdale\" and \"Coronation Street\", would become senior executive producer of \"EastEnders\", as well as \"Holby City\" and \"Casualty\". Oates began her role in October, and continued to work with Yorke until the end of the year to \"ensure a smooth handover\". It was also announced that Oates was looking for an executive producer to work under her. Jon Sen was announced on 10 December 2018 to be taking on the role.\nIn late 2016, popularity and viewership of \"EastEnders\" began to decline, with viewers criticising the storylines during the O'Connor reign, such as the killing of the Mitchell sisters and a storyline centred on the local bin collection. Since Yorke's and Oates's reigns, however, opinions towards the storylines have become more favourable, with storylines such as Ruby Allen's (Louisa Lytton) sexual consent, which featured a special episode which \"broke new ground\" and knife crime, both of which have created \"vital\" discussions. The soap won the award for Best Continuing Drama at the 2019 British Academy Television Awards; its first high-profile award since 2016; however, in June 2019, \"EastEnders\" suffered its lowest ever ratings of 2.4\u00a0million due to its airing at 7\u00a0pm because of the BBC's coverage of the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup. As of 2019, the soap is one of the most watched series on BBC iPlayer and averages around 5 million viewers per episode. The soap enjoyed a record-breaking year on the streaming platform in 2019, with viewers requesting to stream or download the show 234 million times, up 10% on 2018. The Christmas Day episode in 2019 became \"EastEnders\" biggest ever episode on BBC iPlayer, with 2.14\u00a0million viewer requests.\n2020s.\nIn February 2020, \"EastEnders\" celebrated its 35th anniversary with a stunt on the River Thames leading to the death of Dennis Rickman Jr (Bleu Landau).\nIt was announced on 18 March 2020 that production had been suspended on \"EastEnders\" and other BBC Studios continuing dramas in light of new government guidelines following the COVID-19 pandemic, and that broadcast of the show would be reduced to two 30-minute episodes per week, broadcast on Mondays and Tuesdays. A spokesperson confirmed that the decision was made to use up pre-shot episodes more slowly so that \"EastEnders\" could remain on-screen for longer. Two months later, Charlotte Moore, the director of content at the BBC, announced plans for a return to production. She confirmed that \"EastEnders\" would return to filming during June 2020 and that there would be a transmission break between episodes filmed before and after production paused. When production recommenced, social distancing measures were utilised and the show's cast were required to do their own hair and make-up, which is normally done by a make-up artist.\nIt was announced on 3 June 2020 that \"EastEnders\" would go on a transmission break following the broadcast of episode 6124 on 16 June. A behind-the-scenes show, \"EastEnders: Secrets From The Square\", would air in the show's place during the transmission break, hosted by television personality Stacey Dooley. The first episode of the week featured exclusive interviews with the show's cast, while the second episode was a repeat of \"iconic\" episodes of the show. Beginning on 22 June 2020, Dooley interviewed two cast members together in the show's restaurant set while observing social distancing measures. Kate Phillips, the controller of BBC Entertainment, explained that \"EastEnders: Secrets From The Square\" would be the \"perfect opportunity to celebrate the show\" in the absence of the show. Jon Sen, the show's executive producer, expressed his excitement at the new series, dubbing it \"a unique opportunity to see from the cast themselves just what it is like to be part of \"EastEnders\"\".\nPlans for the show's return to transmission were announced on 12 June 2020. It was confirmed that after the transmission break, the show would temporarily broadcast four 20-minute episodes per week, until it could return to its normal output. Sen explained that the challenges in production and filming of the show has led to the show's reduced output, but also stated that the crew had been \"trialling techniques, filming methods and new ways of working\" to prepare the show for its return. Filming recommenced on 29 June, with episodes airing from 7 September 2020.\nOn 9 April 2021, following the death of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, the episode of \"EastEnders\" that was due to be aired that night was postponed along with the final of \"Masterchef\". In May 2021, it was announced that from 14 June 2021, boxsets of episodes would be uploaded to BBC iPlayer each Monday for three weeks. Executive producer Sen explained that the bi-annual scheduling conflicts that the UEFA European Championship and the FIFA World Cup cause to the soap, premiering four episodes on the streaming service would be beneficial for fans of the show who want to watch at their own chosen pace. Sen also confirmed that the episodes will still air on BBC One throughout the week. The release of these boxsets was extended for a further five weeks, due to similar impacts caused by the 2020 Summer Olympics.\nOn 12 October 2021, it was announced that \"EastEnders\" would partake in a special week-long crossover event involving multiple British soaps to promote the topic of climate change ahead of the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference. During the week, beginning from 1 November, a social media clip featuring Maria Connor (Samia Longchambon) from \"Coronation Street\" was featured on the programme while Cindy Cunningham (Stephanie Waring) from \"Hollyoaks\" was also referenced. Similar clips featuring the show's own characters, Bailey Baker (Kara-Leah Fernandes) and Peter Beale (Dayle Hudson), were featured on \"Doctors\" and \"Emmerdale\" during the week.\nIn November 2021, it was announced that Sen would step down from his role as executive producer, and would be succeeded by former story producer Chris Clenshaw. Sen's final credited episode as executive producer was broadcast on 10 March 2022 and coincided in a week of episodes that saw the arrest of serial killer Gray Atkins (Toby-Alexander Smith). From the week commencing on 7 March 2022, the show has been broadcast every weekday from Monday to Thursday in a 7:30 pm slot, making it the first time in the show's history that the programme began airing permanently on Wednesdays. On 2 June 2022, \"EastEnders\" aired an episode celebrating the Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II. Charles, Prince of Wales and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall guest starred in the episode; it also marked the first executive producer credit for Clenshaw. Clenshaw's first major decision as executive producer was the axing of five series regulars: Peter Beale (Dayle Hudson), Stuart Highway (Ricky Champ), Jada Lennox (Kelsey Calladine-Smith), Dana Monroe (Barbara Smith) and Lola Pearce (Danielle Harold). Viewers criticised the decision, feeling that some of the characters had potential to add to the soap. Clenshaw has since overseen the returns of Alfie Moon (Shane Richie) and Yolande Trueman (Angela Wynter), the recast of Amy Mitchell (Ellie Dadd), as well as the reintroduction of Cindy Beale (Michelle Collins), who returned from the dead after 25 years. Public opinion on Clenshaw then changed and he has been credited for improving ratings and garnering critical acclaim for the soap, with \"EastEnders\" winning the award for Best British Soap at the 2023 British Soap Awards and the award for Serial Drama at the 28th National Television Awards under his leadership.\nOn 26 September 2024, it was announced Clenshaw would step down as series executive producer in February 2025, following the soap's 40th anniversary; Ben Wadey was announced as his successor. Clenshaw's final credited episode aired 13 June, followed by Wadey's debut on 16 June 2025. Wadey's initial decisions at the head of the show have included the reintroduction of Zoe Slater (Michelle Ryan) and Oscar Branning (Pierre Moullier), as well as axing Felix Baker (Matthew James Morrison), Bernadette Taylor (Clair Norris), Freddie Slater (Bobby Brazier) and Anna Knight (Molly Rainford).\nSetting.\nThe central focus of \"EastEnders\" is the fictional Victorian square Albert Square in the fictional London Borough of Walford. In the show's narrative, Albert Square is a 19th-century street, named after Prince Albert (1819\u20131861), the husband of Queen Victoria (1819\u20131901, reigned 1837\u20131901). Thus, central to Albert Square is The Queen Victoria pub (also known as The Queen Vic or The Vic). The show's producers based the square's design on Fassett Square in Dalston. There is also a market close to Fassett Square at Ridley Road. The postcode for the area, E8, was one of the working titles for the series. The name \"Walford\" is both a street in Dalston where Tony Holland lived and a blend of Walthamstow and Stratford\u2014the areas of Greater London where the creators were born. Other parts of the square and set interiors are based on other locations. The railway bridge is based upon one near BBC Television Centre which carries the Hammersmith &amp; City line over Wood Lane W12, and the Queen Vic on the former College Park Hotel pub in Willesden at the end of Scrubs Lane at the junction with Harrow Road NW10 just a couple of miles from BBC Television Centre.\nThe current residents of the Queen Victoria Public House are landlady Kat Moon (Jessie Wallace) and husband Alfie Moon (Shane Richie) as landlord.\nWalford East is a fictional London Underground station for Walford, and a tube map that was first seen on air in 1996 showed Walford East between Bow Road and West Ham, in the actual location of Bromley-by-Bow on the District and Hammersmith &amp; City lines.\nWalford has the postal district of E20. It was named as if Walford were part of the actual E postcode area which covers much of east London, the \"E\" standing for \"Eastern\". E20 was entirely fictional when it was created, as London East postal districts stopped at E18 at the time. The show's creators opted for E20 instead of E19 as it was thought to sound better.\nIn March 2011, Royal Mail allocated the E20 postal district to the 2012 Olympic Park. In September 2011, the postcode for Albert Square was revealed in an episode as E20 6PQ.\nCharacters.\n\"EastEnders\" is built around the idea of relationships and strong families, with each character having a place in the community. This theme encompasses the whole square, making the entire community a family of sorts, prey to upsets and conflict, but pulling together in times of trouble. Co-creator Tony Holland was from a large East End family, and such families have typified \"EastEnders\". The first central family was the combination of the Fowler family, consisting of Pauline Fowler (Wendy Richard), her husband Arthur (Bill Treacher), and teenage children Mark (David Scarboro/Todd Carty) and Michelle (Susan Tully). Pauline's family, the Beales, consisted of Pauline's twin brother Pete Beale (Peter Dean), his wife Kathy (Gillian Taylforth) and their teenage son Ian (Adam Woodyatt). Pauline and Pete's domineering mother Lou Beale (Anna Wing) lived with Pauline and her family. Holland drew on the names of his own family for the characters.\nThe Watts and Mitchell families have been central to many notable \"EastEnders\" storylines, the show having been dominated by the Watts in the 1980s, with the 1990s focusing on the Mitchells and Butchers. The early 2000s saw a shift in attention towards the newly introduced female Slater clan, before a renewal of emphasis upon the restored Watts family beginning in 2003. In 2006, \"EastEnders\" became largely dominated by the Mitchell, Masood and Branning families. However, the early 2010s also saw a renewed focus on the Moon and Slater family; further, from 2013 onwards, the Carters were a prominent family. In 2016, the Fowlers were revived and merged with the Slaters, with Martin Fowler (James Bye) marrying Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner). The late 2010s saw the newly introduced Taylor family become central to the show's main storylines, and in 2019, the first Sikh family, the Panesars, were introduced. The early 2020s was dominated by the Mitchells, Brannings, Panesars, Slaters, as well as the newly introduced Knight family. Key people involved in the production of \"EastEnders\" have stressed how important the idea of strong families is to the programme.\n\"EastEnders\" has an emphasis on strong family matriarchs, with examples including Pauline Fowler (Wendy Richard) and Peggy Mitchell (Barbara Windsor), helping to attract a female audience. John Yorke, the former BBC's head of drama production, put this down to Tony Holland's \"gay sensibility, which showed a love for strong women\". The matriarchal role is one that has been seen in various reincarnations since the programme's inception, often depicted as the centre of the family unit. The original matriarch was Lou Beale (Anna Wing), though later examples include Mo Harris (Laila Morse), Pat Butcher (Pam St Clement), Zainab Masood (Nina Wadia), Cora Cross (Ann Mitchell), Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth), Jean Slater (Gillian Wright), and Suki Panesar (Balvinder Sopal). These characters are often seen as being loud and interfering but most importantly, responsible for the well-being of the family.\nThe show often includes strong, brassy, long-suffering women who exhibit diva-like behaviour and stoically battle through an array of tragedy and misfortune. Such characters include Angie Watts (Anita Dobson), Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth), Sharon Watts (Letitia Dean), Pat Butcher (Pam St Clement), Peggy Mitchell (Barbara Windsor), Kat Slater (Jessie Wallace), Denise Fox (Diane Parish), Tanya Branning (Jo Joyner) and Linda Carter (Kellie Bright). Conversely there are female characters who handle tragedy less well, depicted as eternal victims and endless sufferers; examples include Ronnie Mitchell (Samantha Womack), Little Mo Mitchell (Kacey Ainsworth), Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty), Laura Beale (Hannah Waterman), Sue Osman (Sandy Ratcliff), Lisa Fowler (Lucy Benjamin), Mel Owen (Tamzin Outhwaite) and Rainie Cross (Tanya Franks). The \"tart with a heart\" is another recurring character. Often, their promiscuity masks a hidden vulnerability and a desire to be loved. Such characters have included Pat Butcher (Pam St Clement), Tiffany Mitchell (Martine McCutcheon), Kat Slater (Jessie Wallace), Dawn Swann (Kara Tointon) and Priya Nandra-Hart (Sophie Khan Levy).\nA gender balance in the show is maintained via the inclusion of various \"macho\" male personalities such as Phil Mitchell (Steve McFadden), Grant Mitchell (Ross Kemp), Dan Sullivan (Craig Fairbrass), and George Knight (Colin Salmon), \"bad boys\" such as Den Watts (Leslie Grantham), Sean Slater (Robert Kazinsky), Michael Moon (Steve John Shepherd), Derek Branning (Jamie Foreman), Vincent Hubbard (Richard Blackwood), and Ravi Gulati (Aaron Thiara) and \"heartthrobs\" such as Simon Wicks (Nick Berry), Joe Wicks (Paul Nicholls), Jamie Mitchell (Jack Ryder), Dennis Rickman (Nigel Harman), Joey Branning (David Witts), Kush Kazemi (Davood Ghadami) and Zack Hudson (James Farrar). Another recurring male character type is the smartly dressed businessman, often involved in gang culture and crime and seen as a local authority figure. Examples include Steve Owen (Martin Kemp), Jack Dalton (Hywel Bennett), Andy Hunter (Michael Higgs), Johnny Allen (Billy Murray), Derek Branning (Jamie Foreman), and Nish Panesar (Navin Chowdhry). Following criticism aimed at the show's over-emphasis on \"gangsters\" in 2005, such characters have been significantly reduced. Another recurring male character seen in \"EastEnders\" is the \"loser\" or \"soft touch\", males often comically under the thumb of their female counterparts, which have included Arthur Fowler (Bill Treacher), Ricky Butcher (Sid Owen), Garry Hobbs (Ricky Groves), Lofty Holloway (Tom Watt), Billy Mitchell (Perry Fenwick) and Howie Danes (Delroy Atkinson).\nOther recurring character types that have appeared throughout the serial are \"cheeky-chappies\" Pete Beale (Peter Dean), Alfie Moon (Shane Richie), Garry Hobbs (Ricky Groves) and Kush Kazemi (Davood Ghadami), \"lost girls\" such as Mary Smith (Linda Davidson), Donna Ludlow (Matilda Ziegler), Mandy Salter (Nicola Stapleton), Janine Butcher (Charlie Brooks), Zoe Slater (Michelle Ryan), Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty), and Hayley Slater (Katie Jarvis), delinquents such as Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner), Jay Brown (Jamie Borthwick), Lola Pearce (Danielle Harold), Bobby Beale (Eliot Carrington/Clay Milner Russell) and Keegan Baker (Zack Morris), \"villains\" such as Nick Cotton (John Altman), Trevor Morgan (Alex Ferns), May Wright (Amanda Drew), Yusef Khan (Ace Bhatti), Archie Mitchell (Larry Lamb), Dean Wicks (Matt Di Angelo), Stuart Highway (Ricky Champ) and Gray Atkins (Toby-Alexander Smith), \"bitches\" such as Cindy Beale (Michelle Collins), Janine Butcher (Charlie Brooks), Chrissie Watts (Tracy-Ann Oberman), Lucy Beale (Melissa Suffield/Hetti Bywater), Abi Branning (Lorna Fitzgerald), Babe Smith (Annette Badland), Suki Panesar (Balvinder Sopal) and Nicola Mitchell (Laura Doddington), \"brawlers\" or \"fighters\" such as Mary Smith (Linda Davidson), Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer), Kat Slater (Jessie Wallace), Shirley Carter (Linda Henry), Chelsea Fox (Zaarah Abrahams) and Priya Nandra-Hart (Sophie Khan Levy), and cockney \"wide boys\" or \"wheeler dealers\" such as Frank Butcher (Mike Reid), Alfie Moon (Shane Richie), Kevin Wicks (Phil Daniels), Darren Miller (Charlie G. Hawkins), Fatboy (Ricky Norwood), Jay Brown (Jamie Borthwick), Kheerat Panesar (Jaz Deol) and Tom \"Rocky\" Cotton (Brian Conley).\nOver the years, \"EastEnders\" has typically featured a number of elderly residents, who are used to show vulnerability, nostalgia, stalwart-like attributes and are sometimes used for comedic purposes. The original elderly residents included Lou Beale (Anna Wing), Ethel Skinner (Gretchen Franklin) and Dot Cotton (June Brown). Over the years, they have been joined by the likes of Mo Butcher (Edna Dor\u00e9), Jules Tavernier (Tommy Eytle), Marge Green (Pat Coombs), Nellie Ellis (Elizabeth Kelly), Jim Branning (John Bardon), Charlie Slater (Derek Martin), Mo Harris (Laila Morse), Patrick Trueman (Rudolph Walker), Cora Cross (Ann Mitchell), Les Coker (Roger Sloman), Rose Cotton (Polly Perkins), Pam Coker (Lin Blakley), Stan Carter (Timothy West), Babe Smith (Annette Badland), Claudette Hubbard (Ellen Thomas), Sylvie Carter (Linda Marlowe), Ted Murray (Christopher Timothy), Joyce Murray (Maggie Steed), Arshad Ahmed (Madhav Sharma), Mariam Ahmed (Indira Joshi) and Vi Highway (Gwen Taylor). The programme has more recently included a higher number of teenagers and successful young adults in a bid to capture the younger television audience. This has spurred criticism, most notably from the actress Anna Wing, who portrayed Lou Beale in the show. She commented, \"I don't want to be disloyal, but I think you need a few mature people in a soap because they give it backbone and body... if all the main people are young it gets a bit thin and inexperienced. It gets too lightweight.\"\n\"EastEnders\" has been known to feature a \"comedy double-act\", originally demonstrated with the characters of Dot and Ethel, whose friendship was one of the serial's most enduring. Other examples include Paul Priestly (Mark Thrippleton) and Trevor Short (Phil McDermott). In 1989 especially, characters were brought in who were deliberately conceived as comic or light-hearted. Such characters included Julie Cooper (Louise Plowright)\u2014a brassy maneater; Marge Green\u2014a batty older lady played by veteran comedy actress Pat Coombs; Trevor Short (Phil McDermott)\u2014the \"village idiot\"; his friend, northern heartbreaker Paul Priestly (Mark Thrippleton); wheeler-dealer Vince Johnson (Hepburn Graham); and Laurie Bates (Gary Powell), who became Pete Beale's (Peter Dean) sparring partner. The majority of \"EastEnders\"' characters are working-class. Middle-class characters do occasionally become regulars, but have been less successful and rarely become long-term characters. In the main, middle-class characters exist as villains, such as James Willmott-Brown (William Boyde), May Wright (Amanda Drew), Stella Crawford (Sophie Thompson), Yusef Khan (Ace Bhatti) and Gray Atkins (Toby-Alexander Smith), or are used to promote positive liberal influences, such as Colin Russell (Michael Cashman), Rachel Kominski (Jacquetta May) and Derek Harkinson (Ian Lavender).\n\"EastEnders\" has always featured a culturally diverse cast which has included black, Asian, Turkish, Polish and Latvian characters. \"The expansion of minority representation signals a move away from the traditional soap opera format, providing more opportunities for audience identification with the characters and hence a wider appeal\". Despite this, the programme has been criticised by the Commission for Racial Equality, which argued in 2002 that \"EastEnders\" was not giving a realistic representation of the East End's \"ethnic make-up\". It suggested that the average proportion of visible minority faces on \"EastEnders\" was substantially lower than the actual ethnic minority population in East London boroughs, and it, therefore, reflected the East End in the 1960s, not the East End of the 2000s. The programme has since attempted to address these issues. A sari shop was opened and various characters of different ethnicities were introduced throughout 2006 and 2007, including the Fox family, the Ahmeds, and various background artists. This was part of producer Diederick Santer's plan to \"diversify\", to make \"EastEnders\" \"feel more 21st century\". \"EastEnders\" has had varying success with ethnic minority characters. Possibly the least successful were the Indian Ferreira family, who were not well received by critics or viewers and were dismissed as unrealistic by the Asian community in the UK.\n\"EastEnders\" has been praised for its portrayal of characters with disabilities, including Adam Best (David Proud) (spina bifida), Noah Chambers (Micah Thomas) and Frankie Lewis (Rose Ayling-Ellis) (deaf), Jean Slater (Gillian Wright) and her daughter Stacey (Lacey Turner) (bipolar disorder), Janet Mitchell (Grace) (Down syndrome), Jim Branning (John Bardon) (stroke) and Dinah Wilson (Anjela Lauren Smith) (multiple sclerosis). The show also features a large number of gay, lesbian and bisexual characters (see list of soap operas with LGBT characters), including Colin Russell (Michael Cashman), Barry Clark (Gary Hailes), Simon Raymond (Andrew Lynford), Tony Hills (Mark Homer), Sonia Fowler (Natalie Cassidy), Naomi Julien (Petra Letang), Tina Carter (Luisa Bradshaw-White), Tosh Mackintosh (Rebecca Scroggs), Christian Clarke (John Partridge), Syed Masood (Marc Elliott), Ben Mitchell (Harry Reid/Max Bowden), Paul Coker (Jonny Labey), Iqra Ahmed (Priya Davdra), Ash Panesar (Gurlaine Kaur Garcha), Bernadette Taylor (Clair Norris), Callum Highway (Tony Clay) and Eve Unwin (Heather Peace). Kyle Slater (Riley Carter Millington), a transgender character, was introduced in 2015.\n\"EastEnders\" has a high cast turnover and characters are regularly changed to facilitate storylines or refresh the format. The show has also become known for the return of characters after they have left the show. Sharon Watts (Letitia Dean) returned in August 2012 for her third stint on the show. Den Watts (Leslie Grantham) returned, 14 years after he was believed to have died, in September 2003, a feat repeated by Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth) in 2015, and Cindy Beale (Michelle Collins) in 2023. Speaking extras, including Tracey the barmaid (Jane Slaughter) (who has been in the show since the first episode in 1985), have made appearances throughout the show's duration without being the focus of any major storylines. The character of Nick Cotton (John Altman) gained a reputation for making constant exits and returns since the programme's first year until the character died in 2015.\nAs of January 2024[ [update]], Gillian Taylforth, Letitia Dean and Adam Woodyatt are the only members of the original cast remaining in the show, in their roles of Kathy Beale, Sharon Watts and Ian Beale respectively. Tracey is the longest-serving female character in the show, having appeared since 1985, albeit as a minor character.\nStorylines.\n\"EastEnders\" programme makers took the decision that the show was to be about \"everyday life\" in the inner city \"today\" and regarded it as a \"slice of life\". Creator/producer Julia Smith declared that \"We don't make life, we reflect it\". She also said, \"We decided to go for a realistic, fairly outspoken type of drama which could encompass stories about homosexuality, rape, unemployment, racial prejudice, etc., in a believable context. Above all, we wanted realism\". In 2011, the head of BBC drama, John Yorke, said that the real East End had changed significantly since \"EastEnders\" started, and the show no longer truly reflected real life, but that it had an \"emotional truthfulness\" and was partly \"true to the original vision\" and partly \"adapt[ing] to a changing world\", adding that \"If it was a show where every house cost a fortune and everyone drove a Lexus, it wouldn't be \"EastEnders\". You have to show shades of that change, but certain things are immutable, I would argue, like The Vic and the market.\"\nIn the 1980s, \"EastEnders\" featured \"gritty\" storylines involving drugs and crime, representing the issues faced by working-class Britain under Thatcherism. Storylines included the cot death of 14-month-old Hassan Osman, Nick Cotton's (John Altman) homophobia, racism and murder of Reg Cox (Johnnie Clayton), Arthur Fowler's (Bill Treacher) unemployment reflecting the recession of the 1980s, the rape of Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth) in 1988 by James Willmott-Brown (William Boyde) and Michelle Fowler's (Susan Tully) teenage pregnancy. The show also dealt with prostitution, mixed-race relationships, shoplifting, sexism, divorce, domestic violence and mugging. In 1989, the programme came under criticism in the British media for being too depressing, and according to writer Colin Brake, the programme makers were determined to change this. In 1989, there was a deliberate attempt to increase the lighter, more comic aspects of life in Albert Square. This led to the introduction of some characters who were deliberately conceived as comic or light-hearted. Brake suggested that humour was an important element in \"EastEnders\"' storylines during 1989, with a greater amount of slapstick and light comedy than before. He classed 1989's changes as a brave experiment, and suggested that while some found this period of \"EastEnders\" entertaining, many other viewers felt that the comedy stretched the programme's credibility. Although the programme still covered many issues in 1989, such as domestic violence, drugs, rape and racism, Brake reflected that the new emphasis on a more balanced mix between \"light and heavy storylines\" gave the illusion that the show had lost a \"certain edge\".\nAs the show progressed into the 1990s, \"EastEnders\" still featured hard-hitting issues such as Mark Fowler (Todd Carty) revealing he was HIV positive in 1991, the death of his wife Gill (Susanna Dawson) from an AIDS-related illness in 1992, murder, adoption, abortion, Peggy Mitchell's (Barbara Windsor) battle with breast cancer, and Phil Mitchell's (Steve McFadden) alcoholism and violence towards wife Kathy. Mental health issues were confronted in 1996 when 16-year-old Joe Wicks developed schizophrenia following the off-screen death of his sister in a car crash. The long-running storyline of Mark Fowler's HIV was so successful in raising awareness that in 1999, a survey by the National Aids Trust found teenagers got most of their information about HIV from the soap, though one campaigner noted that in some ways the storyline was not reflective of what was happening at the time as the condition was more common among the gay community. Still, heterosexual Mark struggled with various issues connected to his HIV status, including public fears of contamination, a marriage breakdown connected to his inability to have children and the side effects of combination therapies.\nIn the early 2000s, \"EastEnders\" covered the issue of euthanasia with Ethel Skinner's (Gretchen Franklin) death in a pact with her friend Dot Cotton (June Brown), the unveiling of Kat Slater's (Jessie Wallace) sexual abuse by her uncle Harry (Michael Elphick) as a child (which led to the birth of her daughter Zoe (Michelle Ryan), who had been brought up to believe that Kat was her sister), the domestic abuse of Little Mo Morgan (Kacey Ainsworth) by husband Trevor (Alex Ferns) (which involved marital rape and culminated in Trevor's death after he tried to kill Little Mo in a fire), Sonia Jackson (Natalie Cassidy) giving birth at the age of 15 and then putting her baby up for adoption, and Janine Butcher's (Charlie Brooks) prostitution, agoraphobia and drug addiction. The soap also tackled the issue of mental illness and carers of people who have mental conditions, illustrated with mother and daughter Jean (Gillian Wright) and Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner); Jean has bipolar disorder, and teenage daughter Stacey was her carer (this storyline won a Mental Health Media Award in September 2006). Stacey went on to struggle with the disorder herself. The issue of illiteracy was highlighted by the characters of middle-aged Keith (David Spinx) and his young son Darren (Charlie G. Hawkins). \"EastEnders\" has also covered the issue of Down syndrome, as Billy (Perry Fenwick) and Honey Mitchell's (Emma Barton) baby, Janet Mitchell (Grace), was born with the condition in 2006. \"EastEnders\" covered child abuse with its storyline involving Phil Mitchell's (Steve McFadden) 11-year-old son Ben (Charlie Jones) and lawyer girlfriend Stella Crawford (Sophie Thompson), and child grooming involving the characters Tony King (Chris Coghill) as the perpetrator and Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty) as the victim.\nAside from this, soap opera staples of youthful romance, jealousy, domestic rivalry, gossip and extramarital affairs are regularly featured, with high-profile storylines occurring several times a year. Whodunits also feature regularly, including the \"Who Shot Phil?\" story arc in 2001 that attracted more than 19 million viewers and was one of the biggest successes in British soap television; the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline, which was revealed in a special live episode of the show that drew a peak of 17 million viewers; and the \"Who Killed Lucy Beale?\" saga. The most recent whodunit happened at Christmas 2023, where The Six storyline saw Keanu Taylor (Danny Walters) be murdered by Linda Carter (Kellie Bright), and covered up by five other residents present that night.\nProduction.\nSet.\nThe exterior set for the fictional Albert Square is located in the permanent backlot of the BBC Elstree Centre, Borehamwood, Hertfordshire, at , and is outdoors and open to the weather. It was initially built in 1984 with a specification that it should last for at least 15 years at a cost of \u00a3750,000. The \"EastEnders\" lot was designed by Keith Harris, who was a senior designer within the production team together with supervising art directors Peter Findley and Gina Parr. The main buildings on the square consisted originally of hollow shells, constructed from marine plywood facades mounted onto steel frames. The lower walls, pavements, etc., were constructed of real brick and tarmac. The set had to be made to look as if it had been standing for years. This was done by a number of means, including chipping the pavements, using chemicals to crack the top layer of the paint work, using varnish to create damp patches underneath the railway bridge, and making garden walls in such a way they appeared to sag. The final touches were added in summer 1984; these included a telephone box, telegraph pole that was provided by British Telecom, lampposts that were provided by Hertsmere Borough Council and a number of vehicles parked on the square. All the appliances on each set are fully functional, such as gas cookers, the laundry washing machines and The Queen Victoria beer pumps.\nThe walls were intentionally built crooked to give them an aged appearance. The drains around the set are real so rainwater can naturally flow from the streets. The square was built in two phases with only three sides being built, plus Bridge Street, to begin with in 1984, in time to be used for the show's first episode. Then in 1986, Harris added an extension to the set, building the fourth side of Albert Square, and in 1987, Turpin Road began to be featured more, which included buildings such as The Dagmar.\nIn 1993, George Street was added, and soon after Walford East Underground station was built, to create further locations when \"EastEnders\" went from two to three episodes per week. The set was constructed by the BBC in-house construction department under construction manager Mike Hagan. Most of the buildings on Albert Square have no interior filming space, with a few exceptions, and most do not have rears or gardens. Some interior shots are filmed in the actual buildings.\nIn February 2008, it was reported that the set would transfer to Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, where a new set would be built as the set was looking \"shabby\", with its flaws showing up on high-definition television broadcasts; however, by April 2010 a follow-up report confirmed that Albert Square would remain at Elstree Studios for at least another four years, taking the set through its 25th anniversary. The set was consequently rebuilt for high definition on the same site, using mostly real brick with some areas using a new improved plastic brick. Throughout rebuilding filming would still take place, and so scaffolding was often seen on screen during the process, with some storylines written to accommodate the rebuilding, such as the Queen Vic fire.\nIn 2014, then executive producer Dominic Treadwell-Collins said that he wanted Albert Square to look like a real-life east London neighbourhood so that the soap would \"better reflect the more fashionable areas of east London beloved of young professionals\" giving a flavour of the \"creeping gentrification\" of east London. He added: \"It should feel more like London. It's been frozen in aspic for too long.\" The BBC announced that it would rebuild the \"EastEnders\" set to secure the long-term future of the show, with completion expected to be in 2018. The set would provide a modern, upgraded exterior filming resource for \"EastEnders\", and copy the appearance of the existing buildings; however, it would be 20 per cent bigger, in order to enable greater editorial ambition and improve working conditions for staff. A temporary set would be created on-site to enable filming to continue while the permanent structure was rebuilt.\nIn May 2016, the rebuild was delayed until 2020, and forecast to cost in excess of \u00a315\u00a0million, although the main part of the set was scheduled to be able to start filming in May 2019. In December 2018, it was revealed that the new set was now planned to cost \u00a359\u00a0million but a National Audit Office (NAO) report stated that it would actually cost \u00a386.7\u00a0million and be completed two-and-a-half years later than planned, in 2023; the NAO concluded that the BBC \"could not provide value for money on the project\". The NAO's forecast cost was more than the annual combined budget for BBC Radio 1 and Radio 2. The BBC said the new set would be more suitable for HD filming, and better reflect the modern East End of London. In March 2019 there was criticism from a group of MPs about how the BBC handled the redevelopment of the set. In March 2020, during the suspension of filming, the interior sets were used for a new adaptation of \"Talking Heads\". This marked the first time that it had been used for anything other than \"EastEnders\". In January 2022, the new \u00a386.7m exterior set was officially unveiled by the BBC, replacing the original set built in 1984. The new scenes from the new set first appeared in episodes airing in spring that year.\nFilming.\nThe majority of \"EastEnders\" episodes are filmed at the BBC Elstree Centre in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire. In January 1987, \"EastEnders\" had three production teams each comprising a director, production manager, production assistant and assistant floor manager. Other permanent staff included the producer's office, script department and designer, meaning between 30 and 35 people would be working full-time on \"EastEnders\", rising to 60 to 70 on filming days. When the number of episodes was increased to four per week, more studio space was needed, so \"Top of the Pops\" was moved from its studio at Elstree to BBC Television Centre in April 2001. Episodes are produced in \"quartets\" of four episodes, each of which starts filming on a Tuesday and takes nine days to record. Each day, between 25 and 30 scenes are recorded. During the filming week, actors can film for as many as eight to 12 episodes. Exterior scenes are filmed on a specially constructed film lot, and interior scenes take place in six studios. The episodes are usually filmed about six to eight weeks in advance of broadcast. During the winter period, filming can take place up to 12 weeks in advance, due to less daylight for outdoor filming sessions. This time difference has been known to cause problems when filming outdoor scenes. On 8 February 2007, heavy snow fell on the set and filming had to be cancelled as the scenes due to be filmed on the day were to be transmitted in April. \"EastEnders\" is normally recorded using four cameras. When a quartet is completed, it is edited by the director, videotape editor and script supervisor. The producer then reviews the edits and decides if anything needs to be re-edited, which the director will do. A week later, sound is added to the episodes and they are technically reviewed, and are ready for transmission if they are deemed of acceptable quality.\nAlthough episodes are predominantly recorded weeks before they are broadcast, occasionally, \"EastEnders\" includes current events. In 1987, \"EastEnders\" covered the general election. Using a plan devised by co-creators Smith and Holland, five minutes of material was cut from four of the pre-recorded episodes preceding the election. These were replaced by specially recorded election material, including representatives from each major party, and a scene recorded on the day after the election reflecting the result, which was broadcast the following Tuesday. The result of the 2010 general election was referenced on 7 May 2010 episode. During the 2006 FIFA World Cup, actors filmed short scenes following the tournament's events that were edited into the programme in the following episode. Last-minute scenes have also been recorded to reference the 50th anniversary of the end of the Second World War in 1995, the two-minute silence on Remembrance Day 2005 (2005 also being the year for the 60th anniversary of the end of the Second World War and the 200th anniversary of the Battle of Trafalgar), Barack Obama's election victory in 2008, the death of Michael Jackson in 2009, the 2010 Comprehensive Spending Review, Andy Murray winning the men's singles at the 2013 Wimbledon Championships, the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton, the birth of Prince George of Wales, Scotland voting no against independence in 2014, and the 100th anniversary of the beginning of the First World War.\n\"EastEnders\" is often filmed on location, away from the studios in Borehamwood. Sometimes an entire quartet is filmed on location, which has a practical function and are the result of \"EastEnders\" making a \"double bank\", when an extra week's worth of episodes are recorded at the same time as the regular schedule, enabling the production of the programme to stop for a two-week break at Christmas. These episodes often air in late June or early July and again in late October or early November. The first time this happened was in December 1985 when Pauline (Wendy Richard) and Arthur Fowler (Bill Treacher) travelled to the Southend-on-Sea to find their son Mark, who had run away from home. In 1986, \"EastEnders\" filmed overseas for the first time, in Venice, and this was also the first time it was not shot on videotape, as a union rule at the time prevented producers taking a video crew abroad and a film crew had to be used instead. In 2011, it was reported that eight per cent of the series is filmed on location.\nIf scenes during a normal week are to be filmed on location, this is done during the normal recording week. Off-set locations that have been used for filming include Clacton (1989), Devon (September 1990), Hertfordshire (used for scenes set in Gretna Green in July 1991), Portsmouth (November 1991), Milan (1997), Ireland (1997), Amsterdam (December 1999), Brighton (2001) and Portugal (2003). In 2003, filming took place at Loch Fyne Hotel and Leisure Club in Inveraray, The Arkinglass Estate in Cairndow and Grims Dyke Hotel, Harrow Weald, north London, for a week of episodes set in Scotland. The episode shown on 9 April 2007 featured scenes filmed at St Giles Church and The Blacksmiths Arms public house in Wormshill, the Ringlestone Inn, two miles away and Court Lodge Farm in Stansted, Kent. and the Port of Dover, Kent. .\nOther locations have included the court house, a disused office block, Evershed House, and St Peter's Church, all in St Albans, an abandoned mental facility in Worthing, and a wedding dress shop in Muswell Hill, north London. A week of episodes in 2011 saw filming take place on a beach in Thorpe Bay and a pier in Southend-on-Sea\u2014during which a stuntman was injured when a gust of wind threw him off balance and he fell onto rocks\u2014 with other scenes filmed on the Essex coast. In 2012, filming took place in Keynsham, Somerset. In January 2013, on-location filming at Grahame Park in Colindale, north London, was interrupted by at least seven youths who threw a firework at the set and threatened members of the crew. In October 2013, scenes were filmed on a road near London Southend Airport in Essex.\n\"EastEnders\" has featured seven live broadcasts. For its 25th anniversary in February 2010, a live episode was broadcast in which Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner) was revealed as Archie Mitchell's (Larry Lamb) killer. Turner was told only 30\u00a0minutes before the live episode and to maintain suspense, she whispers this revelation to former lover and current father-in-law, Max Branning, in the very final moments of the live show. Many other cast members only found out at the same time as the public, when the episode was broadcast. On 23 July 2012, a segment of that evening's episode was screened live as Billy Mitchell (Perry Fenwick) carried the Olympic flame around Walford in preparation for the 2012 Summer Olympics. In February 2015, for the soap's 30th anniversary, five episodes in a week featured live inserts throughout them. Episodes airing on Tuesday 17, Wednesday 18 and Thursday 19 (which featured an hour long episode and a second episode) all featured at least one live insert. The show revealed that the killer of Lucy Beale (Hetti Bywater) was her younger brother, Bobby (Eliot Carrington), during the second episode on Thursday, after a 10-month mystery regarding who killed her. In a flashback episode which revisited the night of the murder, Bobby was revealed to have killed his sister. The aftermath episode, which aired on Friday 20, was completely live and explained in detail Lucy's death. Carrington was told he was Lucy's killer on Monday 16, while Laurie Brett (who plays Bobby's adoptive mother, Jane) was informed in November, due to the character playing a major role in the cover-up of Lucy's murder. Bywater only discovered Bobby was responsible for Lucy's death on the morning of Thursday, 19 February, several hours before they filmed the scenes revealing Bobby as Lucy's killer.\nPost-production.\nEach episode should run for 27 minutes and 15 seconds; however, if any episode runs over or under then it is the job of post-production to cut or add scenes where appropriate. As noted in the 1994 behind-the-scenes book, \"EastEnders: The First 10 Years\", after filming, tapes were sent to the videotape editor, who then edited the scenes together into an episode. The videotape editor used the director's notes so they knew which scenes the director wanted to appear in a particular episode. The producer might have asked for further changes to be made. The episode was then copied onto D3 video. The final process was to add the audio which included background noise such as a train or a jukebox music and to check it met the BBC's technical standard for broadcasting.\nSince 2010, \"EastEnders\" no longer uses tapes in the recording or editing process. After footage is recorded, the material is sent digitally to the post-production team. The editors then assemble all the scenes recorded for the director to view and note any changes that are needed. The sound team also have the capability to access the edited episode, enabling them to dub the sound and create the final version.\nBudgets and costs.\nAccording to the book \"How to Study Television\", in 1995 \"EastEnders\" cost the BBC \u00a340,000 per episode on average. A 2012 agreement between the BBC, the Writers' Guild of Great Britain and the Personal Managers' Association set out the pay rate for \"EastEnders\" scripts as \u00a3137.70 per minute of transmission time (\u00a34,131 for 30 minutes), which is 85 per cent of the rate for scripts for other BBC television series. The writers would be paid 75 per cent of that fee for any repeats of the episode. In 2011, it was reported that actors receive a per-episode fee of between \u00a3400 and \u00a31,200, and are guaranteed a certain number of episodes per year, perhaps as few as 30 or as many as 100, therefore annual salaries could range from \u00a312,000 to \u00a3200,000 depending on the popularity of a character. Some actors' salaries were leaked in 2006, revealing that Natalie Cassidy (Sonia Fowler) was paid \u00a3150,000, Cliff Parisi (Minty Peterson) received \u00a3220,000, Barbara Windsor (Peggy Mitchell) and Steve McFadden (Phil Mitchell) each received \u00a3360,000 and Wendy Richard (Pauline Fowler) had a salary of \u00a3370,000. In 2017, it was revealed that Danny Dyer (Mick Carter) and Adam Woodyatt (Ian Beale) were the highest-paid actors in \"EastEnders\", earning between \u00a3200,000 and \u00a3249,999, followed by Laurie Brett (Jane Beale), Letitia Dean (Sharon Watts), Tameka Empson (Kim Fox), Linda Henry (Shirley Carter), Scott Maslen (Jack Branning), Diane Parish (Denise Fox), Gillian Taylforth (Kathy Beale) and Lacey Turner (Stacey Slater), earning between \u00a3150,000 and \u00a3199,999.\nA 2011 report from the National Audit Office (NAO) showed that \"EastEnders\" had an annual budget of \u00a329.9\u00a0million. Of that, \u00a32.9\u00a0million was spent on scripts and \u00a36.9\u00a0million went towards paying actors, extras and chaperones for child actors. According to the NAO, BBC executives approved \u00a3500,000 of additional funding for the 25th anniversary live episode (19 February 2010). With a total cost of \u00a3696,000, the difference was covered from the 2009\u20132010 series budget for \"EastEnders\". When repeats and omnibus editions are shown, the BBC pays additional fees to cast and scriptwriters and incurs additional editing costs, which in the period 2009\u20132010, amounted to \u00a35.5million. According to a Radio Times article for 212 episodes it works out at \u00a3141,000 per episode or 3.5p per viewer hour.\nSustainability.\nIn 2014, two new studios were built and they were equipped with low-energy lighting which has saved approximately 90,000 kwh per year. A carbon literacy course was run with heads of departments of \"EastEnders\" attending. As a result, representatives from each department agreed to meet quarterly to share new sustainability ideas. The paper usage was reduced by 50 per cent across script distribution and other weekly documents and 20 per cent across all other paper usage. The production team also began using recycled paper and stationery.\nAdditionally, changes made to working online also saved transportation cost of distribution 2,500 DVDs per year. Sets, costumes, paste pots and paint are all recycled by the design department. Cars used by the studio are low emission vehicles and the production team take more efficient energy efficient generators out on location. Caterers no longer use polystyrene cups and recycling on location must be provided.\nAs a result of \"EastEnders\"' sustainability, it was awarded albert+, an award that recognises the production's commitment to becoming a more eco-friendly television production. The albert+ logo was first shown at the end of the \"EastEnders\" titles for episode 5281 on 9 May 2016. Four years later, in 2020, the organisation did a follow-up piece about \"EastEnders\"' sustainability. They revealed that all food served on set as a prop is vegetarian, unless the script requires it to be meat. All food waste and any other compostable waste, including the flowers from the market's flower stall or from a wedding or funeral, are also collected for anerobic digestion. The soap also began using electric vehicles whilst filming and has its own electric car sharing scheme and charging point. Off set, \"EastEnders\" has two hybrid technical vans and extended their hybrid fleet to the props department with a hybrid props van.\nScheduling.\nBroadcast.\nSince 1985, \"EastEnders\" has remained at the centre of BBC One's primetime schedule. From 2001 to 2022, it was broadcast at 7:30pm on Tuesday and Thursday, and 8pm on Monday and Friday. \"EastEnders\" was originally broadcast twice weekly at 7:00pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 19 February 1985; however, in September 1985 the two episodes were moved to 7:30pm as Michael Grade did not want the soap running in direct competition with \"Emmerdale Farm\", and this remained the same until 7 April 1994. The BBC had originally planned to take advantage of the \"summer break\" that \"Emmerdale Farm\" usually took to capitalise on ratings, but ITV added extra episodes and repeats so that \"Emmerdale Farm\" was not taken off the air over the summer. Realising the futility of the situation, Grade decided to move the show to the later 7:30pm slot.\nThe show's output then increased to three times a week on Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays from 11 April 1994 until 2 August 2001.\nFrom 10 August 2001, \"EastEnders\" then added its fourth episode (shown on Fridays). This caused some controversy, as the first Friday episode clashed with \"Coronation Street\", which was moved to 8pm to make way for an hour-long episode of rural soap \"Emmerdale\". In this first head-to-head battle, \"EastEnders\" claimed victory over its rival.\nIn early 2003, viewers could watch episodes of \"EastEnders\" on digital channel BBC Three before they were broadcast on BBC One. This was to coincide with the relaunch of the channel and helped BBC Three break the one million viewers mark for the first time with 1.03\u00a0million who watched to see Mark Fowler's departure. According to the \"EastEnders\" website, there are, on average, 208 episodes outputted each year.\nOn 21 February 2022, it was announced that from 7 March 2022, \"EastEnders\" would begin airing from Monday to Thursday at 7:30pm, therefore no longer airing on a Friday. This meant that \"EastEnders\" would clash with \"Emmerdale\", but the producers stated that due to the importance of online streaming figures, they were not concerned about the soaps clashing on the live television guides.\nRepeats.\nThe omnibus edition, a compilation of the week's episodes in a continuous sequence, originally aired on BBC One on Sunday afternoons, until 1 April 2012, when it was changed to a late Friday night or early Saturday morning slot, commencing on 6 April 2012, though the exact time differed. It reverted to a weekend daytime slot from January 2013 on BBC Two. In 2014, the omnibus moved back to around midnight on Friday nights, and in April 2015, the omnibus was axed, following detailed audience research and the introduction of 30-day catch up on BBC iPlayer and the planning of BBC One +1. The last omnibus on the BBC was shown on 24 April 2015. While W was showing same-day repeats of \"EastEnders\", they also returned the weekend omnibus, starting on 20 February 2016.\nFrom 20 February to 26 May 1995, as part of the programme's 10th anniversary celebrations, episodes from 1985 were repeated each weekday morning at 10am, starting from episode one. Four specially selected episodes from 1985, 1986 and 1987 were also repeated on BBC1 on Friday evenings at 8pm under the banner \"The Unforgettable EastEnders\". These included the wedding of Michelle Fowler and Lofty Holloway, the revelation of the father of Michelle's baby, a two-hander between Dot Cotton and Ethel Skinner and the 1986 Christmas episode featuring Den Watts presenting Angie Watts with divorce papers.\n\"EastEnders\" was regularly repeated at 10pm on BBC Choice from the channel's launch in 1998, a practice continued by BBC Three for many years until mid-2012 with the repeat moving to 10:30pm. From 25 December 2010 \u2013 29 April 2011 and 31 July 2012 \u2013 13 August 2012 to the show was repeated on BBC HD in a Simulcast with BBC Three. In 2015, the BBC Three repeat moved back to 10pm. In February 2016, the repeat moved to W, the rebranded Watch, after BBC Three became an online-only channel. W stopped showing \"EastEnders\" in April 2018. Following the reinstatement of BBC Three as a linear channel in 2022, the nightly 'narrative repeat' was not reinstated; instead, the channel retransmits that week's four BBC One episodes at the weekend, airing two episodes on each of Saturday and Sunday evenings, unless live sports or music/events coverage takes precedence. Episodes of \"EastEnders\" were available on-demand through BBC iPlayer for 30 days after their original screening; however, starting with the episode broadcast on 4 April 2022, episodes were made available indefinitely.\nOn 1 December 2012, the BBC uploaded the first 54 episodes of \"EastEnders\" to YouTube, and on 23 July 2013 it uploaded a further 14 episodes bringing the total to 68. These have since been taken down. In April 2018, it was announced that the Drama channel would be showing repeats of the show, starting on 6 August 2018 during weekdays; they are also available on-demand on the U catch-up service for 30 days after the broadcast. In December 2019, Christmas episodes were added to Britbox UK.\nInternational broadcast.\n\"EastEnders\" is broadcast around the world in many English-speaking countries. New Zealand became the first to broadcast \"EastEnders\" overseas, the first episode being shown on 30 August 1985. This was followed by the Netherlands on 8 December 1986, Australia on 5 January 1987, Norway on 27 April, and Barcelona on 30 June (dubbed into Catalan). On 9 July 1987, it was announced that the show would be aired in the United States on PBS. BBC Worldwide licensed 200 hours of \"EastEnders\" for broadcast in Serbia on RTS (dubbed into Serbian); it began airing the first episode in December 1997. The series was broadcast in the United States until BBC America ceased broadcasts of the serial in 2003, amidst fan protests. In June 2004, the satellite television provider Dish Network picked up \"EastEnders\", broadcasting episodes starting at the point when BBC America had ceased broadcasting them, offering the series as a pay-per-view item. Episodes air two months behind the UK schedule. Episodes from prior years are still shown on various PBS stations in the US. Since 7 March 2017, \"EastEnders\" has been available in the United States on demand, 24 hours after it has aired in the United Kingdom via BritBox, a joint venture between the BBC and ITV.\nThe series was screened in Australia by ABC TV from 1987 until 1991. It is aired in Australia on Satellite &amp; Streaming services on BBC UKTV, from Mondays to Thursdays 7:50pm\u20138:30pm with two advertisement breaks of five minutes each. Episodes are shown roughly one week after their UK broadcast. In New Zealand, it was shown by TVNZ on TVNZ 1 for several years, and then on Prime each weekday afternoon. It is shown on BBC UKTV from Mondays to Thursdays at 8pm. Episodes are roughly two weeks behind the UK.\n\"EastEnders\" is shown on BBC Entertainment (formerly BBC Prime) in Europe and in Africa, where it is approximately six episodes behind the UK. It was also shown on BBC Prime in Asia, but when the channel was replaced by BBC Entertainment, it ceased broadcasting the series. In Canada, \"EastEnders\" was shown on BBC Canada until 2010, at which point it was picked up by VisionTV.\nIn Ireland, \"EastEnders\" was shown on TV3 from September 1998 until March 2001, when it moved over to RT\u00c9 One, after RT\u00c9 lost to TV3 the rights to air rival soap \"Coronation Street\". Additionally, episodes of \"EastEnders\" are available on-demand through RT\u00c9 Online for seven days after their original screening.\nOverseas versions.\nIn 1991, the BBC sold the programme's format rights to a Dutch production company IDTV. The programme was renamed \"Het Oude Noorden\" (Translation: Old North). The Dutch version was written from pre-existing \"EastEnders\" scripts. The schedule remained the same as \"EastEnders\" with twice weekly episodes; however, some notable changes included the programme now being set in Rotterdam rather than London, characters being given Dutch names (Den and Angie became Ger and Ankie) and the Queen Victoria pub being renamed Cade Faas.\nAccording to Barbara Jurgen, who re-wrote the scripts for a Dutch audience, he said: \"the power of the show is undeniable. The scripts are full of hard, sharp drama, plus great one-liners which will translate well to Holland.\" The Dutch version began broadcasting on VARA 13 March 1993 but was cancelled after 20 episodes.\nSpin-offs and merchandise.\nOn 26 December 1988, the first \"EastEnders\" \"bubble\" was shown, titled \"CivvyStreet\". Since then, \"Return of Nick Cotton\" (2000), \"Ricky &amp; Bianca\" (2002), \"Dot's Story\" (2003), \"Perfectly Frank\" (2003) and \"Pat and Mo\" (2004) have all been broadcast, each episode looking into lives of various characters and revealing part of their backstories or lives since leaving \"EastEnders\". In 1993, the two-part story \"Dimensions in Time\", a charity cross-over with \"Doctor Who\", was shown.\nIn 1998, \"EastEnders Revealed\" was launched on BBC Choice (now BBC Three). The show takes a look behind the scenes of the \"EastEnders\" and investigates particular places, characters or families within \"EastEnders\". An episode of \"EastEnders Revealed\" that was commissioned for BBC Three attracted 611,000 viewers. As part of the BBC's digital push, \"EastEnders Xtra\" was introduced in 2005. The show was presented by Angellica Bell and was available to digital viewers at 8:30\u00a0pm on Monday nights. It was also shown after the Sunday omnibus. The series went behind the scenes of the show and spoke to some of the cast members. A new breed of behind-the-scenes programmes have been broadcast on BBC Three since 1 December 2006. These are all documentaries related to current storylines in \"EastEnders\", in a similar format to \"EastEnders Revealed\", though not using the \"EastEnders Revealed\" name.\nIn October 2009, a 12-part online spin-off series entitled \"\" was announced. The series was conceived by executive producer Diederick Santer \"as a way of nurturing new, young talent, both on- and off-screen, and exploring the stories of the soaps' anonymous bystanders.\" \"E20\" features a group of sixth-form characters and targets the \"\"Hollyoaks\" demographic\". It was written by a team of young writers and was shown three times a week on the \"EastEnders\" website from 8 January 2010. A second 10-part series started in September 2010, with twice-weekly episodes available online and an omnibus on BBC Three. A third series of 15 episodes started in September 2011.\n\"EastEnders\" and rival soap opera \"Coronation Street\" took part in a crossover episode for Children in Need on 19 November 2010 called \"East Street\". On 4 April 2015, \"EastEnders\" confirmed plans for a BBC One series featuring Kat and Alfie Moon. The six-part drama, \"\", was created by executive producer Dominic Treadwell-Collins and his team. In the spin-off, the Moons visit Ireland where they \"search for answers to some very big questions\".\nUntil its closure, BBC Store released 553 \"EastEnders\" episodes from various years, including the special episode \"CivvyStreet\", available to buy as digital downloads.\nPopularity and viewership.\nAn example of \"EastEnders\"' popularity is that after episodes, electricity use in the United Kingdom rises significantly as viewers who have waited for the show to end begin boiling water for tea, a phenomenon known as TV pickup. Over five minutes, power demand rises by three GW, the equivalent of 1.5 to 1.75\u00a0million kettles. National Grid personnel watch the show to know when closing credits begin so they can prepare for the surge, asking for additional power from France if necessary.\nRatings.\n\"EastEnders\" is the BBC's most consistent programme in terms of ratings, and as of 2024, episodes typically receive between 3 and 4 million viewers. \"EastEnders\" two biggest ratings rivals are the ITV soaps \"Coronation Street\" (produced by Granada Television in Manchester) and \"Emmerdale\" (produced by Yorkshire Television in Leeds).\nThe launch show in 1985 attracted 17.35\u00a0million viewers. 25 July 1985 was the first time the show's viewership rose to first position in the weekly top 10 shows for BBC One. The highest-rated episode of \"EastEnders\" is the Christmas Day 1986 episode, which attracted a combined 30.15\u00a0million viewers who tuned into either the original transmission or the omnibus to see Den Watts hand over divorce papers to his wife Angie. This remains the highest rated episode of a soap in British television history.\nIn 2001, \"EastEnders\" clashed with \"Coronation Street\" for the first time. \"EastEnders\" won the battle with 8.4\u00a0million viewers (41% share) whilst \"Coronation Street\" lagged behind with 7.3\u00a0million viewers (34% share). On 21 September 2004, Louise Berridge, the then executive producer, quit following criticism of the show. The following day the show received its lowest ever ratings at that time (6.2\u00a0million) when ITV scheduled an hour-long episode of \"Emmerdale\" against it. \"Emmerdale\" was watched by 8.1\u00a0million viewers. The poor ratings motivated the press into reporting viewers were bored with implausible and ill-thought-out storylines. Under new producers, \"EastEnders\" and \"Emmerdale\" continued to clash at times, and \"Emmerdale\" tended to come out on top, giving \"EastEnders\" lower than average ratings. In 2006, \"EastEnders\" regularly attracted between 8 and 12 million viewers in official ratings. \"EastEnders\" received its second lowest ratings on 17 May 2007, when 4.0\u00a0million viewers tuned in. This was also the lowest ever audience share, with just 19.6 per cent. This was attributed to a conflicting one-hour special episode of \"Emmerdale\" on ITV1; however, ratings for the 10pm \"EastEnders\" repeat on BBC Three reached an all-time high of 1.4\u00a0million. Despite this, there have been times when \"EastEnders\" had higher ratings than \"Emmerdale\", despite the two going head-to-head.\nThe ratings increased in 2010, thanks to the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline and second wedding of Ricky Butcher (Sid Owen) and Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer), and the show's first live episode on 19 February 2010. The live-episode averaged 15.6\u00a0million viewers, peaking at 16.6\u00a0million in the final five minutes of broadcast. In January 2010, the average audience was higher than that of \"Coronation Street\" for the first time in three years. During the 30th anniversary week, in which there were live elements and the climax of the Who Killed Lucy Beale? storyline, 10.84\u00a0million viewers tuned in for the 30th anniversary episode itself in an hour long special on 19 February 2015 (peaking with 11.9\u00a0million). Later on in the same evening, a special flashback episode averaged 10.3\u00a0million viewers, and peaked with 11.2\u00a0million. The following day, the anniversary week was rounded off with another fully live episode (the second after 2010) with 9.97\u00a0million viewers watching the aftermath of the reveal, the Beale family finding out the truth of Lucy's killer and deciding to keep it a secret. In 2013, the average audience share for an episode was around 30 per cent.\nDue to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the soap, \"EastEnders\" suffered a ratings drop after 2020. Despite once being the highest-rated soap, it dropped to third in the rankings in 2021, behind \"Coronation Street\" and \"Emmerdale\", with 4.09 million viewers. The BBC's head of drama, Piers Wenger, explained that since the episode duration had been shortened and the airtime frequently suffered changes, it had led to the audience not knowing when to watch it. Digital Spy opined that the ratings drop was accredited to \"lacklustre storylines\" and thought that storylines on rival soaps were better. Later that year, \"EastEnders\" suffered its lowest rating ever, with 1.7 million viewers watching live. The \"Daily Mirror\"'s Jamie Roberts felt that viewers had \"turned their back\" on the soap due to its lack of interesting stories and iconic characters. Ratings expert Stephen Price also noted that the drop is partly due to the rise of streaming services.\nReception and impact.\n\"EastEnders\" has received both praise and criticism for most of its storylines, which have dealt with difficult themes including violence, rape, murder and child abuse. Since its premiere in 1985, \"EastEnders\" has had a large impact on British popular culture and has frequently been referred to in many different media, including songs and television programmes.\nInitial response.\nThe show's first broadcast saw a mixed reaction from viewers. A \"Sunday People\" poll of 600 viewers showed 56% of respondents did not enjoy the episode, as the audience were unsure about the show's \"coarse\" and \"bawdy\" dialogue. \"The Guardian\" critic Hugh Herbert wrote that it would \"probably take a year before anyone knows whether the BBC has got it right\". The show, regardless, became one of the BBC's most successful shows of the 1980s, which was credited with the reveal that Den Watts was the father of Michelle Fowler's baby. Following the first broadcast, the show was also criticised by Cockney viewers for lacking humour and realism.\nMorality and violence.\nMary Whitehouse, social critic, argued at the time that \"EastEnders\" represented a violation of \"family viewing time\" and that it undermined the watershed policy. She regarded \"EastEnders\" as a fundamental assault on the family and morality itself. She made reference to representation of family life and emphasis on psychological and emotional violence within the show. She was also critical of language such as \"bleeding\", \"bloody hell\", \"bastard\" and \"for Christ's sake\"; however, Whitehouse also praised the programme, describing Michelle Fowler's decision not to have an abortion as a \"very positive storyline\". She also felt that \"EastEnders\" had been cleaned up as a result of her protests, though she later commented that \"EastEnders\" had returned to its old ways. Her criticisms were widely reported in the tabloid press as ammunition in its existing hostility towards the BBC. The stars of \"Coronation Street\" in particular aligned themselves with Mary Whitehouse, gaining headlines such as \"STREETS AHEAD! RIVALS LASH SEEDY EASTENDERS\" and \"CLEAN UP SOAP! Street Star Bill Lashes \"Steamy\" EastEnders\".\n\"EastEnders\" has been criticised for being too violent, most notably during a domestic violence storyline between Little Mo Morgan (Kacey Ainsworth) and her husband Trevor Morgan (Alex Ferns). As \"EastEnders\" is shown pre-watershed, there were worries that some scenes in this storyline were too graphic for its audience. Complaints against a scene in which Little Mo's face was pushed in gravy on Christmas Day were upheld by the Broadcasting Standards Council; however, a helpline after this episode attracted more than 2000 calls. Erin Pizzey, who became internationally famous for having started one of the first women's refuges, said that \"EastEnders\" had done more to raise the issue of violence against women in one story than she had done in 25 years. The character of Phil Mitchell (played by Steve McFadden since early 1990) has been criticised on several occasions for glorifying violence and proving a bad role model to children. On one occasion following a scene in an episode broadcast in October 2002, where Phil brutally beat his godson, Jamie Mitchell (Jack Ryder), 31 complaints came from viewers.\nIn 2003, cast member Shaun Williamson, who was in the final months of his role of Barry Evans, said that the programme had become much grittier over the past 10 to 15 years, and found it \"frightening\" that parents let their young children watch.\nIn 2005, the BBC was accused of anti-religious bias by a House of Lords committee, who cited \"EastEnders\" as an example. Indarjit Singh, editor of the Sikh Messenger and patron of the World Congress of Faiths, said: \"\"EastEnders\"' Dot Cotton is an example. She quotes endlessly from the Bible and it ridicules religion to some extent.\" In July 2010, complaints were received following the storyline of Christian minister Lucas Johnson (Don Gilet) committing a number of murders that he believed was his duty to God, claiming that the storyline was offensive to Christians.\nIn 2008, \"EastEnders\", along with \"Coronation Street\", was criticised by Martin McGuinness, then Northern Ireland's deputy first minister, for \"the level of concentration around the pub\" and the \"antics portrayed in The [...] Queen Vic\".\nIn 2017, viewers complained on Twitter about scenes implying that Keanu Taylor (Danny Walters) is the father of his 15-year-old sister Bernadette Taylor's (Clair Norris) unborn baby, with the pair agreeing to keep the pregnancy secret from their mother, Karen Taylor (Lorraine Stanley); however, the baby's father is revealed as one of Bernadette's school friends.\nAllegations of national and racial stereotypes.\nIn 1997, several episodes were shot and set in Ireland, resulting in criticisms for portraying the Irish in a negatively stereotypical way. Ted Barrington, the Irish ambassador to the UK at the time, described the portrayal of Ireland as an \"unrepresentative caricature\", stating he was worried by the negative stereotypes and the images of drunkenness, backwardness and isolation. Jana Bennett, the BBC's then director of production, later apologised for the episodes, stating on BBC1's news bulletin: \"It is clear that a significant number of viewers have been upset by the recent episodes of \"EastEnders\", and we are very sorry, because the production team and programme makers did not mean to cause any offence.\" A year later BBC chairman Christopher Bland admitted that as result of the Irish-set EastEnders episodes, the station failed in its pledge to represent all groups accurately and avoid reinforcing prejudice.\nIn 2008, the show was criticised for stereotyping their Asian and Black characters, by having a black single mother, Denise Fox (Diane Parish), and an Asian shopkeeper, Zainab Masood (Nina Wadia). There has been criticism that the programme does not authentically portray the ethnic diversity of the population of East London, with the programme being \"twice as white\" as the real East End.\nControversial storylines.\nIn 1992, writer David Yallop successfully sued the BBC for \u00a368,000 after it was revealed he had been hired by producer Mike Gibbon in 1989 to pen several controversial storylines in an effort to \"slim down\" the cast; however, after Gibbon left the programme, executive producers chose not to use Yallop's storylines, which put the BBC in breach of the contract Yallop had signed with them. Unused storylines penned by Yallop, which were revealed in the press during the trial, included the death of Cindy Beale's (Michelle Collins) infant son Steven; Sufia Karim (Rani Singh) being killed during a shotgun raid at the corner shop; Pauline Fowler (Wendy Richard) dying of undiscovered cancer; and an IRA explosion at the Walford community centre, killing Pete Beale (Peter Dean) and Diane Butcher (Sophie Lawrence), and leaving Simon Wicks (Nick Berry) paralysed below the waist. A suicide was also planned, but the character this storyline was assigned to was not revealed.\nSome storylines have provoked high levels of viewer complaints. In August 2006, a scene involving Carly Wicks (Kellie Shirley) and Jake Moon (Joel Beckett) having sex on the floor of Scarlet nightclub, and another scene involving Owen Turner (Lee Ross) violently attacking Denise Fox (Diane Parish), prompted 129 and 128 complaints, respectively.\nIn March 2008, scenes showing Tanya Branning (Jo Joyner) and boyfriend Sean Slater (Robert Kazinsky) burying Tanya's husband Max (Jake Wood) alive attracted many complaints. The UK communications regulator Ofcom later found that the episodes depicting the storyline were in breach of the 2005 Broadcasting Code. They contravened the rules regarding protection of children by appropriate scheduling, appropriate depiction of violence before the 9\u00a0p.m. watershed and appropriate depiction of potentially offensive content. In September 2008, \"EastEnders\" began a grooming and paedophilia storyline involving characters Tony King (Chris Coghill), Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty), Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer), Lauren Branning (Madeline Duggan) and Peter Beale (Thomas Law). The storyline attracted more than 200 complaints.\nIn December 2010, Ronnie Branning (Samantha Womack) swapped her newborn baby, who died in cot, with Kat Moon's (Jessie Wallace) living baby. Around 3,400 complaints were received, with viewers branding the storyline \"insensitive\", \"irresponsible\" and \"desperate\". Roz Laws from the \"Sunday Mercury\" called the plot \"shocking and ridiculous\" and asked \"are we really supposed to believe that Kat won't recognise that the baby looks different?\" The Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths (FSID) praised the storyline, and its director Joyce Epstein explained, \"We are very grateful to \"EastEnders\" for their accurate depiction of the devastating effect that the sudden death of an infant can have on a family. We hope that this story will help raise the public's awareness of cot death, which claims 300 babies' lives each year.\" By 7 January, that storyline had generated the most complaints in show history: the BBC received about 8,500 complaints, and media regulator Ofcom received 374; however, despite the controversy, \"EastEnders\" pulled in rating highs of 9\u201310\u00a0million throughout the duration of the storyline.\nIn October 2014, the BBC defended a storyline, after receiving 278 complaints about 6 October 2014 episode where pub landlady Linda Carter (Kellie Bright) was raped by Dean Wicks (Matt Di Angelo). On 17 November 2014 it was announced that Ofcom will investigate over the storyline. On 5 January 2015, the investigation was cleared by Ofcom. A spokesman of Ofcom said: \"After carefully investigating complaints about this scene, Ofcom found the BBC took appropriate steps to limit offence to viewers. This included a warning before the episode and implying the assault, rather than depicting it. Ofcom also took into account the programme's role in presenting sometimes challenging or distressing social issues.\"\nIn 2022, \"EastEnders\" aired their first male rape scene which saw Lewis Butler (Aidan O'Callaghan) rape Ben Mitchell (Max Bowden). The BBC received complaints from viewers who were unhappy with the content in the episode. Viewers felt that the scenes were too violent and graphic for a pre-watershed time slot. The BBC responded by stating: \"\"EastEnders\" has been a pre-watershed BBC One staple for over 37 years and has a rich history of dealing with challenging and difficult issues and Ben's story is one of these. We have worked closely with organisations and experts in the field to tell this story which we hope will raise awareness of sexual assaults and the issues surrounding them. We are always mindful of the timeslot in which \"EastEnders\" is shown and we took great care to signpost this storyline prior to transmission, through on-air continuity and publicity as well as providing a BBC Action Line at the end of the episode which offers advice and support to those affected by the issue\".\nPortrayal of certain professions.\nIn 2010, \"EastEnders\" came under criticism from the police for the way that they were portrayed during the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline. During the storyline, DCI Jill Marsden (Sophie Stanton) and DC Wayne Hughes (Jamie Treacher) talk to locals about the case and Hughes accepts a bribe. The police claimed that such scenes were \"damaging\" to their reputation and added that the character DC Deanne Cunningham (Zo\u00eb Henry) was \"irritatingly inaccurate\". In response to the criticism, \"EastEnders\" apologised for offending real life detectives and confirmed that it uses a police consultant for such storylines.\nIn October 2012, a storyline involving Lola Pearce (Danielle Harold), forced to hand over her baby Lexi Pearce, was criticised by the charity The Who Cares? Trust, who called the storyline an \"unhelpful portrayal\" and said it had already received calls from members of the public who were \"distressed about the \"EastEnders\" scene where a social worker snatches a baby from its mother's arms\". The scenes were also condemned by the British Association of Social Workers (BASW), calling the BBC \"too lazy and arrogant\" to correctly portray the child protection process, and saying that the baby was taken \"without sufficient grounds to do so\". Bridget Robb, acting chief of the BASW, said the storyline provoked \"real anger among a profession well used to a less than accurate public and media perception of their jobs .. \"EastEnders\"' shabby portrayal of an entire profession has made a tough job even tougher.\"\nBooks.\nMany books have been written about \"EastEnders\". Notably, from 1985 to 1988, author and television writer Hugh Miller wrote 17 novels, detailing the lives of many of the show's original characters before 1985, when events on screen took place.\nKate Lock also wrote four novels centred on more recent characters; Steve Owen (Martin Kemp), Grant Mitchell (Ross Kemp), Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer) and Tiffany Mitchell (Martine McCutcheon). Lock also wrote a character guide entitled \"Who's Who in EastEnders\" () in 2000, examining main characters from the first 15 years of the show.\nShow creators Julia Smith and Tony Holland also wrote a book about the show in 1987, entitled \"EastEnders: The Inside Story\" (), telling the story of how the show made it to screen. Two special anniversary books have been written about the show; \"EastEnders: The First 10 Years: A Celebration\" () by Colin Brake in 1995 and \"EastEnders: 20 Years in Albert Square\" () by Rupert Smith in 2005.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9996", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9996", "title": "Embroidery", "text": "Art or handicraft of decorating fabric or other materials with needle and thread or yarn\nEmbroidery is the art of decorating fabric or other materials using a needle to stitch thread or yarn. It is one of the oldest forms of textile art, with origins dating back thousands of years across various cultures. Common stitches found in early embroidery include the chain stitch, buttonhole or blanket stitch, running stitch, satin stitch, and cross stitch. Modern embroidery continues to utilize traditional techniques, though many contemporary stitches are exclusive to machine embroidery.\nEmbroidery is commonly used to embellish accessories and garments is usually seen on quilts, clothing, and accessories. In addition to thread, embroidery may incorporate materials such as pearls, beads, quills, and sequins to highlight texture and design. Today, embroidery serves both decorative and functional purposes and is utilized in fashion expression, cultural identity, and custom-made gifts.\nA person who is doing embroidery is called an embroiderer. An archaic term is broderer, derived from French \"broderie\" for 'embroidery'.\nClassification.\nEmbroidery can be classified according to what degree the design takes into account the nature of the base material and by the relationship of stitch placement to the fabric. The main categories are free or surface embroidery, counted-thread embroidery, and needlepoint or canvas work.\nIn free or surface embroidery, designs are applied without regard to the weave of the underlying fabric. Examples include crewel and traditional Chinese and Japanese embroidery.\nCounted-thread embroidery patterns are created by making stitches over a predetermined number of threads in the foundation fabric. Counted-thread embroidery is more easily worked on an even-weave foundation fabric such as embroidery canvas, aida cloth, or specially woven cotton and linen fabrics. Examples include cross-stitch and some forms of blackwork embroidery.\nWhile similar to counted thread in regards to technique, in canvas work or needlepoint, threads are stitched through a fabric mesh to create a dense pattern that completely covers the foundation fabric. Examples of canvas work include bargello and Berlin wool work.\nEmbroidery can also be classified by the similarity of its appearance. In drawn thread work and cutwork, the foundation fabric is deformed or cut away to create holes that are then embellished with embroidery, often with thread in the same color as the foundation fabric. When created with white thread on white linen or cotton, this work is collectively referred to as whitework. However, whitework can either be counted or free. Hardanger embroidery is a counted embroidery and the designs are often geometric. Conversely, styles such as Broderie anglaise are similar to free embroidery, with floral or abstract designs that are not dependent on the weave of the fabric.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe process used to tailor, patch, mend and reinforce cloth fostered the development of sewing techniques, and the decorative possibilities of sewing led to the art of embroidery. Indeed, the remarkable stability of basic embroidery stitches has been noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is a striking fact that in the development of embroidery ... there are no changes of materials or techniques which can be felt or interpreted as advances from a primitive to a later, more refined stage. On the other hand, we often find in early works a technical accomplishment and high standard of craftsmanship rarely attained in later times.\nThe art of embroidery has been found worldwide and several early examples have been found. The earliest surviving embroidered cloth comes from Egypt. The Egyptians were skilled at embroidery, using appliqu\u00e9 decorations with leather and beads. Works in China have been dated to the Warring States period (5th\u20133rd century BC). In a garment from Migration period Sweden, roughly 300\u2013700 AD, the edges of bands of trimming are reinforced with running stitch, back stitch, stem stitch, tailor's buttonhole stitch, and Whip stitch, but it is uncertain whether this work simply reinforced the seams or should be interpreted as decorative embroidery.\nHistorical applications and techniques.\nDepending on time, location and materials available, embroidery could be the domain of a few experts or a widespread, popular technique. This flexibility led to a variety of works, from the royal to the mundane. Examples of high status items include elaborately embroidered clothing, religious objects, and household items often were seen as a mark of wealth and status. \nIn medieval England, Opus Anglicanum, a technique used by professional workshops and guilds in medieval England, was used to embellish textiles used in church rituals. In 16th century England, some books, usually bibles or other religious texts, had embroidered bindings. The Bodleian Library in Oxford contains one presented to Queen Elizabeth I in 1583. It also owns a copy of The Epistles of Saint Paul, whose cover was reputedly embroidered by the Queen.\nOne of the oldest complete embroidered works still in existence is the Bayeux Tapestry, an embroidered cloth nearly long and tall that depicts the events leading up to the Norman Conquest of England in 1066, led by William, Duke of Normandy, challenging Harold II, King of England, and culminating in the Battle of Hastings. It is thought to date to the 11th century, within a few years of the battle.\nIn 18th-century England and its colonies, with the rise of the merchant class and the wider availability of luxury materials, rich embroideries began to appear in a secular context. These embroideries took the form of items displayed in private homes of well-to-do citizens, as opposed to a church or royal setting. Even so, the embroideries themselves may still have had religious themes. Samplers employing fine silks were produced by the daughters of wealthy families. Embroidery was a skill marking a girl's path into womanhood as well as conveying rank and social standing.\nEmbroidery was an important art and signified social status in the Medieval Islamic world as well. The 17th-century Turkish traveler Evliya \u00c7elebi called it the \"craft of the two hands\". In cities such as Damascus, Cairo and Istanbul, embroidery was visible on handkerchiefs, uniforms, flags, calligraphy, shoes, robes, tunics, horse trappings, slippers, sheaths, pouches, covers, and even on leather belts. Craftsmen embroidered items with gold and silver thread. Embroidery cottage industries, some employing over 800 people, grew to supply these items.\nIn the 16th century, in the reign of the Mughal Emperor Akbar, his chronicler Abu al-Fazl ibn Mubarak wrote in the famous Ain-i-Akbari:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His majesty [Akbar] pays much attention to various stuffs; hence Irani, Ottoman, and Mongolian articles of wear are in much abundance especially textiles embroidered in the patterns of \"Nakshi\", \"Saadi\", \"Chikhan\", \"Ari\", \"Zardozi\", \"Wastli\", \"Gota\" and \"Kohra\". The imperial workshops in the towns of Lahore, Agra, Fatehpur and Ahmedabad turn out many masterpieces of workmanship in fabrics, and the figures and patterns, knots and variety of fashions which now prevail astonish even the most experienced travelers. Taste for fine material has since become general, and the drapery of embroidered fabrics used at feasts surpasses every description.\nEmbroidery was often perceived primarily as a domestic task performed by women, frequently viewed as a leisurely activity rather than recognized as a skilled craft. Women who lacked access to formal education or writing implements often used embroidery to document their lives through stitched narratives, effectively creating personal diaries through textile art, especially when literacy was limited.\nEmbroidery is also a folk art, using materials that were accessible to nonprofessionals. Examples include Hardanger embroidery from Norway; Merezhka from Ukraine; Mountmellick embroidery from Ireland; Nakshi kantha from Bangladesh and West Bengal; Achachi from Peru; and Brazilian embroidery. Many techniques had a practical use such as Sashiko from Japan, which was used as a way to reinforce clothing.\nIn marginalized communities, embroidery has also served as a tool of empowerment and expression. For example, in Inner Mongolia, embroidery initiatives arose in response to economic pressures intensified by climate change, including desertification, allowing women to express themselves and preserve cultural identities through traditional embroidery skills. Embroidery has also preserved the stories of marginalized groups, particularly women of color, whose experiences were historically underrepresented in written records. In South African communities, embroidered \"story cloths\" have captured and preserved critical perspectives and events otherwise missing from historical narratives.\n21st century.\nSince the late 2010s, there has been a growth in the popularity of embroidering by hand. As a result of visual social media such as Pinterest and Instagram, artists can share their work more extensively, which has inspired younger generations to pick up needlework.\nContemporary embroidery artists believe hand embroidery has grown in popularity as a result of an increasing need for relaxation and digitally disconnecting practices. Many people are also using embroidery to creatively upcycle and repair clothing, to help counteract over-consumption and fashion industry waste.\nModern canvas work tends to follow symmetrical counted stitching patterns with designs emerging from the repetition of one or just a few similar stitches in a variety of hues. In contrast, many forms of surface embroidery make use of a wide range of stitching patterns in a single piece of work.\nIn literature.\nEmbroidery portrays a large function of representation in many literary works. Hobbies in regards to stitching, dressmaking, or quilting have learned to be acquainted with women through the 18th to 19th century. Embroidery alters itself in literary contexts to perform as a symbol instead of a depiction of culture and rooted history. Novels by Jane Austen capture a depiction where women are riddled with silent productivity and installs certain societal norms within a specific gender.\nIn Greek mythology the goddess Athena is said to have passed down the art of embroidery (along with weaving) to humans, leading to the famed competition between herself and the mortal Arachne.\nMaterials and tools.\nMaterials.\nThe fabrics and yarns used in traditional embroidery vary from place to place. Wool, linen, and silk have been in use for thousands of years for both fabric and yarn. Today, embroidery thread is manufactured in cotton, rayon, and novelty yarns as well as in traditional wool, linen, and silk. Ribbon embroidery uses narrow ribbon in silk or silk/organza blend ribbon, most commonly to create floral motifs.\nCanvas work techniques, in which large amounts of yarn are buried on the back of the work, use more materials but provide a sturdier and more substantial finished textile.\nTools.\nA sewing needle is the main stitching tool in embroidery, and comes in various sizes and types. The tips may be sharp or blunt, depending on the type of material the needle needs to be drawn through. Tapestry needles are blunt and larger than a chenille needle which is sharp and shorter than a standard embroidery needle.\nIn both canvas work and surface embroidery, an embroidery hoop or frame can be used to stretch the material and ensure even stitching tension that prevents pattern distortion. Frames can come in a square or rectangular shape and prevent the canvas from distorting. The two types of frames used are scroll and artist's stretcher bars.\nBeeswax is often used to treat thread. It smooths and strengthens threads, especially silk and metallic threads.\nMachine embroidery.\nMass-produced machine embroidery emerged in the early 20th century. As embroidery shifted from personalized craft to mechanical output during the Industrial Revolution, the craft developed into a structured industry centered on large-scale production. The first embroidery machine was the hand embroidery machine, invented in France in 1832 by Josu\u00e9 Heilmann. The next evolutionary step was the schiffli embroidery machine. The latter borrowed from the sewing machine and the Jacquard loom to fully automate its operation. The manufacture of machine-made embroideries in St. Gallen in eastern Switzerland flourished in the latter half of the 19th century. Both St. Gallen, Switzerland and Plauen, Germany were important centers for machine embroidery and embroidery machine development. Many Swiss and Germans immigrated to Hudson county, New Jersey in the early twentieth century and developed a machine embroidery industry there. Shiffli machines have continued to evolve and are still used for industrial scale embroidery.\nContemporary embroidery is stitched with a computerized embroidery machine using patterns digitized with embroidery software. In machine embroidery, different types of \"fills\" add texture and design to the finished work. Machine embroidery is used to add logos and monograms to business shirts or jackets, gifts, and team apparel as well as to decorate household items for the bed and bath and other linens, draperies, and decorator fabrics that mimic the elaborate hand embroidery of the past.\nMachine embroidery is most typically done with rayon thread, although polyester thread can also be used. Cotton thread, on the other hand, is prone to breaking and is avoided.\nThere has also been a development in free hand machine embroidery, new machines have been designed that allow for the user to create free-motion embroidery which has its place in textile arts, quilting, dressmaking, home furnishings and more. Users can use the embroidery software to digitize the digital embroidery designs. These digitized design are then transferred to the embroidery machine with the help of a flash drive and then the embroidery machine embroiders the selected design onto the fabric.\nArt therapy.\nThe practice of slow threading and repetitive motion ensues a calming process within a persons mind. Therapists portray the process as getting to regulate certain emotions, allowing patients to reminisce on memory. As embroidery holds a rich history, this invokes a calming and grounding state where people learn to regulate emotions as they embroider. It is an activity where the mind is able to think on its own and encourages strong reflection on identity, memorabilia, and culture.\nNotes.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9997", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9997", "title": "Edward Mitchell Bannister", "text": "Canadian\u2013American painter (1828\u20131901)\nEdward Mitchell Bannister (November 2, 1828\u00a0\u2013 January 9, 1901) was a Canadian\u2013American oil painter of the American Barbizon school. Born in colonial New Brunswick, he spent his adult life in New England in the United States. There, along with his wife Christiana Carteaux, he was a prominent member of African-American cultural and political communities, such as the Boston abolition movement. Bannister received national recognition after he won a first prize in painting at the 1876 Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition. He was also a founding member of the Providence Art Club and the Rhode Island School of Design.\nBannister's style and predominantly pastoral subject matter reflected his admiration for the French artist Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet and the French Barbizon school. A lifelong sailor, he also looked to the Rhode Island seaside for inspiration. Bannister continually experimented, and his artwork displays his Idealist philosophy and his control of color and atmosphere. He began his professional practice as a photographer and portraitist before developing his better-known landscape style.\nLater in his life, Bannister's style of landscape painting fell out of favor. With decreasing painting sales, he and Christiana Carteaux moved out of College Hill in Providence to Boston and then a smaller house on Wilson Street in Providence. Bannister was overlooked in American art historical studies and exhibitions after his death in 1901, until institutions like the National Museum of African Art returned him to national attention in the 1960s and 1970s.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nBannister was born on November 2, 1828, in Saint Andrews, a settlement in the Colony of New Brunswick near the St. Croix River. His father, Edward Bannister, was born in Barbados. His mother, Hannah Bannister (n\u00e9e\u00a0Alexander), was also born in colonial New Brunswick, according to Bannister, \"a stone's throw of my birthplace on the banks of the St. Croix River.\" Hannah's parents were probably from Barbados. Although both of his parents were black, Bannister was sometimes identified as \"Mulatto\". At the time, this designation was based on skin color as perceived by the Census taker, and did not reflect self-identity or family history.23 Bannister's father died in 1832, so Edward and his younger brother William were raised by their mother. Early on, Bannister was apprenticed to a cobbler, but his drawing skill was already noted among his friends and family.67 Bannister credited his mother with igniting his early interest in art. She died in 1844, after which Bannister and his brother lived on the farm of the wealthy lawyer and merchant Harris Hatch.17 There, he practiced drawing by reproducing Hatch family portraits and copying British engravings in the family library.\nBannister and his brother found work aboard ships as mates and cooks for several months before immigrating to Boston, sometime in the late 1840s.41 In the 1850 US census, they are listed as living at the same boarding house, with the Revaleon family, and working as barbers. The brothers' role as barbers and status as mixed race gave them relatively high standing as middle-class professionals within Boston.23\u201324\nAlthough he aspired to work as a painter, Bannister had difficulty finding an apprenticeship or academic programs that would accept him, due to racial prejudice. Boston was an abolitionist stronghold, but it was also one of the most segregated cities in the US in 1860.17 Bannister would later express his frustration with being blocked from artistic education: \"Whatever may be my success as an artist is due more to inherited potential than to instruction\" and \"All I would do I cannot... simply for the want of proper training.\"\nBannister received his first oil painting commission, \"The Ship Outward Bound\", in 1854 from an African American doctor, John V. DeGrasse. Jacob R. Andrews, a gilder, painter, and member of the Histrionic Club, created the commission's gilt frame.60,67 DeGrasse later commissioned Bannister to paint portraits of him and his wife.42 Patronage like DeGrasse's was critical to Bannister's early career, as the African American community wanted to support and highlight its contributions to high culture.23 African Americans found portraiture an \"ideal medium\" for expressing their freedom and opportunity, which is probably why most of Bannister's earliest commissions are within that genre.9563\nThrough abolitionist newspapers like \"The Anglo-African\" and \"The Liberator\" and the writings of Martin R. Delany, Bannister likely learned about other African American artists like Robert S. Duncanson, James Presley Ball, Patrick H. Reason, and David Bustill Bowser.30\u201331 Their work would have made Bannister's ambition seem all the more possible.32 Although most cultural institutions barred Black Bostonians from entrance, Bannister would have had access to several, like the Boston Athen\u00e6um library, with collections of European art sources and exhibitions of Luminist marine painters like Robert Salmon and Fitz Hugh Lane.36\nBoston activist, artist, and student.\nBannister met Christiana Carteaux, a hairdresser and businesswoman born in Rhode Island to African American and Narragansett parents, in 1853 when he applied to be a barber in her salon. Both were members of Boston's diverse abolitionist movement, and barbershops were important meeting places for African American abolitionists.23 They married on June 10, 1857,23 and she became, in effect, his most important patron.103 The couple boarded for two years with Lewis Hayden and Harriet Bell Hayden at 66 Southac Street, a stop on Boston's Underground Railroad (a support network for escaped slaves).109\nIn 1855 William Cooper Nell acknowledged Bannister's rising artistic status in \"The Colored Patriots of the American Revolution\" for his \"The Ship Outward Bound\". Bannister also received encouragement to continue painting from artist Francis Bicknell Carpenter.42 By 1858, Bannister was listed as an artist in Boston's city directory.23 Around 1862, he spent a year training in photography in New York, likely to support his painting practice. He then found work as a photographer, taking solar plates and tinting photos. One of Bannister's earliest commissioned portraits was of Prudence Nelson Bell in 1864, which is around when he found studio space at the Studio Building in Boston. At the Studio Building, he came into contact with other prominent artists, like Elihu Vedder and John La Farge.170 Once Bannister was established as an artist, abolitionist William Wells Brown praised him in a 1865 book:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Bannister possesses genius, which is now showing itself in his studio in Boston; for he has long since thrown aside the scissors and the comb, and transfers the face to the canvas, instead of taking the hair from the head. [...] Mr. Bannister is spare-made, slim, with an interesting cast of countenance, quick in his walk, and easy in his manners. He is a lover of poetry and the classics, and is always hunting up some new model for his gifted pencil and brush.\nBannister was part of Boston's African American artistic community, which included Edmonia Lewis, William H. Simpson, and Nelson A. Primus. He sang as a tenor in the Crispus Attucks Choir, which performed anti-slavery songs at public events, and acted with the Histrionic Club, as well as serving as a delegate for the New England Colored Citizens Conventions in August 1859 and 1865. His name also appears on several public petitions published in \"The Liberator\".\nBannister and Carteaux were devout members of the militant abolitionist Twelfth Baptist Church,50 located on Southac Street near their home at the Hayden House. In May 1859, Bannister served as the secretary for the church's meetings to respond to the Oberlin\u2013Wellington Rescue of imprisoned fugitive slaves and, in 1863, to plan celebrations for the Emancipation Proclamation.\nDuring the US Civil War, Carteaux lobbied for equal pay for African American soldiers and organized the 1864 soldiers' relief fair for the Massachusetts 54th infantry regiment, 55th infantry regiment, and 5th cavalry regiment, which had gone without pay for over a year and a half. Bannister donated his full-length portrait of Robert Gould Shaw, the commander of the 54th killed in action, to raise money for the cause.25 Bannister's portrait of Gould Shaw was displayed with the label \"Our\" Martyr\", according to abolitionist Lydia Maria Child.38 The portrait was praised in the \"New York Weekly Anglo-African\" as \"a fine specimen of art\" and inspired a poem by Martha Perry Lowe entitled \"The Picture of Col. Shaw in Boston\".99\u2013100 The painting was purchased by the state of Massachusetts and installed in its state house, but its current location is unknown.38\nThe Bannister portrait of Robert Gould Shaw was one of several memorials to Gould Shaw by members of Boston's African American artistic community such as Edmonia Lewis. These artworks, put to the practical purpose of raising money for Black soldiers, contradicted the ideals of Boston Brahmin abolitionists, such as the Gould Shaws. Although the Brahmins supported abolition, they saw it as an abstract good rather than a concrete cause in need of material support.35 The portrait's paternalistic praise from Lowe and Child exemplified the divide between Boston's white abolitionists and the African American community.27 Through art like the 1884 Robert Gould Shaw Memorial, the Boston Brahmins rejected the possessive \"Our Martyr\" label given to him by Black artists like Bannister and Edmonia Lewis.40\nBannister's activism also took other forms: on June 17, 1865, Bannister marshaled around two hundred members of the Twelfth Baptist Sunday School at a Grand Temperance Celebration on Boston Common. They marched under a banner reading \"Equal rights for all men\".\nBannister eventually studied at the Lowell Institute with the artist William Rimmer, while Rimmer taught evening life drawing classes at the Institute between 1863 and 1865.69 Rimmer was known for his skill in artistic anatomy, an area Bannister knew was one of his weaknesses.42 Because of Bannister's daytime photography business, he mostly took his drawing classes at night. Through Rimmer and the community at the Studio Building, Bannister was inspired by the Barbizon School-influenced paintings of William Morris Hunt,17,66 who had studied in Europe and held public exhibitions in Boston around the 1860s. At the Lowell Institute, Bannister formed a lifelong friendship with painter John Nelson Arnold; both later became founding members of the Providence Art Club.43\u201344 Bannister also formed a temporary painting partnership with Asa R. Lewis that lasted from 1868 to 1869. During that partnership of \"Bannister &amp; Lewis\", Bannister began to advertise himself as both a portrait and landscape painter.27\nDespite his early commissions, Bannister still struggled to receive wider recognition for his work due to racism in the US. Following emancipation and the end of the US Civil War, the abolitionists began to disperse and, with them, their patronage.65 Due to increasing competition, Bannister did little to support Primus,163 who had come to him seeking an apprenticeship. An article in the \"New York Herald\" belittled both Bannister and his work: \"The negro has an appreciation for art while being manifestly unable to produce it.\" The article reportedly spurred his desire to achieve success as an artist. At the same time, Bannister had begun to receive more recognition within Boston art circles.\nProvidence.\nSupported by Carteaux, Bannister became a full-time painter in 1870, shortly after they moved to Providence, Rhode Island, at the end of 1869.114 He first took a studio in the Mercantile National Bank Building then moved to the Woods Building in Providence, where he shared a floor with artists like Sydney Burleigh and became friends with Providence painter George William Whitaker. He painted more landscapes over time\u2014receiving an 1872 award at the Rhode Island Industrial Exposition for \"Summer Afternoon\"\u2014and began submitting paintings to the Boston Art Club.29\nBannister received national commendation for his work when he won first prize for his large oil \"Under the Oaks\" at the 1876 Philadelphia Centennial.\nEven then, the judge wanted to rescind the award after learning his identity until other exhibition artists protested; afterwards, Bannister reflected: \"I was and am proud to know that the jury of award did not know anything about me, my antecedents, color or race. There was no sentimental sympathy leading to the award of the medal.\" Bannister had intentionally submitted his painting with only a signature attached to ensure he would be judged fairly.36 As his career matured, he received more commissions and accumulated many honors, several from the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics Association (silver medals in 1881 and 1884). Collectors and local notables Isaac Comstock Bates and Joseph Ely were among his patrons.45\nHe was an original board member of the Rhode Island School of Design in 1878. In 1880 Bannister joined with other professional artists, amateurs, and art collectors to found the Providence Art Club to stimulate the appreciation of art in the community. Their first meeting was in Bannister's studio in the Woods Building at the bottom of College Hill.40 He was the second to sign the club's charter, served on its initial executive board, and taught regular Saturday art classes. He continued to show paintings at Boston Art Club exhibitions, as well as in Connecticut and at New York's National Academy of Design, and exhibited \"A New England Hillside\" at the New Orleans Cotton Exposition in 1885.45 There, Bannister's work was segregated and ignored by the judging committees. With that experience in mind, Bannister decided not to submit any works to the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition since they would have to be pre-judged in Boston before they could even be sent to Chicago.76\nIn the 1880s Bannister bought a small sloop, the \"Fanchon\", and spent summers sketching, painting watercolors, and sailing Narragansett Bay and up to Bar Harbor in Maine. He would return with his studies and use them as the basis for winter commissions. He supplemented his sailing trips with journeys to exhibitions in New York, but a planned trip to Europe fell through due to lack of money.\nIn 1885, with other art club members, Bannister helped found the Anne Eliza Club (or \"A&amp;E Club\")\u2014a communal men's discussion group named after the waitress at the Providence Art Club.47 Through his teaching there and at the Providence Art Club, he became a mentor to younger Providence artists, like Charles Walter Stetson. Stetson often mentioned Bannister in his personal diaries and once praised him by writing, \"He is my only confidant in Art matters &amp; I am his.\" Rhode Island engineer George Henry Corliss commissioned a painting from Bannister in 1886, as his reputation grew.72\nBannister and Carteaux were consistent members of the African American community in Providence. They lived for a time in the boarding house of Ransom Parker, who had participated in the Dorr Rebellion,113 and were friends with merchant George Henry, Reverend Mahlon Van Horne, Brown graduate John Hope, and abolitionist George T. Downing, an ally from the Bannisters' political work in Boston.27 Carteaux founded the Home for Aged Colored Women, which is known as the Bannister Center today. Edward exhibited his painting \"Christ Healing the Sick\" in the home in 1892 and donated his portrait of Carteaux to it as well.117 Although he was a respected member of the Providence Art Club,40 Bannister's abolitionism likely led to conflict with its mostly white members, who exhibited art with minstrel stereotypes by E. W. Kemble and W. L. Shephard in 1887 and 1893.214\nAround 1890, Bannister sold the \"Fanchon\" to Judge George Newman Bliss.75 His largest exhibition of works was held in 1891, when he showed 33 works at the Spring Providence Art Club Exhibition.51 Later in the 1890s, Bannister seems to have sold fewer paintings, perhaps due to waning popularity, and exhibited less often. In 1898 Bannister closed his studio and the couple moved to Boston for a year before returning to a smaller home on Wilson Street, Providence, in 1900.53\nDeath.\nBannister died of a heart attack on January 9, 1901, while attending an evening prayer meeting at his church, Elmwood Avenue Free Baptist Church. He had experienced heart trouble for some time but had completed two paintings only the previous day. During the service, he offered a prayer and shortly after sat down, gasping. His last words were reportedly \"Jesus, help me\".53\nAfter his death the Providence Art Club held a memorial exhibition in his name that focused on his artistic achievements, without mentioning his contribution to abolitionism.218,220 In the exhibition pamphlet, they wrote: \"His gentle disposition, his urbanity of manner, and his generous appreciation of the work of others, made him a welcome guest in all artistic circles. [...] He painted with profound feeling, not for pecuniary results, but to leave upon the canvas his impression of natural scenery, and to express his delight in the wondrous beauty of land and sea and sky.\"\nHe is buried in the North Burial Ground in Providence, under a stone monument designed by artist Mahler B. Ryder, RISD Illustration professor, and colleagues. In 1975, upon finding Bannister's marker damaged beyond repair, Ryder led a fundraising and design campaign to create a new monument, which stands today. The original marker was placed by Bannister's friends upon his death. The disparity between Bannister's financial difficulties at the end of his life and the support shown by Providence's artists after his death led his friend John Nelson Arnold to say about the memorial: \"In the labor incident to this work I was constantly reminded of the remark attributed to the mother of Robert Burns on being shown the splendid monument erected to the memory of her gifted son: 'He asked for bread and they gave him a stone.'\"11851.\nCarteaux was admitted to her Home for Aged Colored Women in September 1902; she died in 1903 in a state mental institution in Cranston.118 She and Bannister are buried together.118\nArtistic style.\nThe young Bannister advertised himself as a portraitist, but later became popular for his landscapes and seascapes.25 Drawing on his knowledge of poetry, classics, and English literature as an autodidact,47 he also painted biblical, mythological, and genre scenes. Much like George Inness,178 his work reflected the composition, mood, and influences of French Barbizon painters Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet, and Charles-Fran\u00e7ois Daubigny. Defending Millet in \"The Artist and His Critics\", Bannister saw him as the most \"spiritual artist of our time\" who voiced \"the sad, uncomplaining life he saw about him\u2014and with which he sympathized so deeply.\"\nHistorian Joseph Skerrett has noted the influence of the Hudson River School on Bannister, while maintaining that he consistently experimented throughout his career: \"Bannister managed to please a conservative New England taste in art while continuing to try new methods and styles.\" For their mutual affinity with the Hudson River School, Bannister has been compared to his contemporary, the Ohio-based African American painter Robert S. Duncanson. Unlike Hudson River School artists,49 Bannister did not create meticulous landscapes126 but paid more attention to creating \"massive but revealing shapes of trees and mountains\" and works more picturesque than sublime.49 Bannister also avoided the \"nationalist grandeur\" often found in Hudson River School paintings.177\nBannister often made pencil or pastel studies in preparation for larger oil paintings. Several of his compositions refer to classical, mathematical methods like the Golden Ratio or \"Harmonic Grid\", and make careful use of symmetry and asymmetry. In other paintings, his contrast of darks and lights create dynamic diagonals or circles that divide the composition.13 His paintings are known for their delicate use of color to depict shadow and atmosphere and their loose brushwork. His later palette exhibited lighter, more muted colors: the Boston Common scene he painted late in his life is a notable example. This change in style stands in contrast to his earlier stated disapproval of Impressionist painting.53\nArt historian Traci Lee Costa has argued that a \"reductive\" emphasis on Bannister's biography has taken attention away from scholarly analysis of his artwork.89 In the lecture \"The Artist and His Critics\" given to the Anne Eliza Club on April 15, 1886, and published afterward, Bannister spelled out his belief that making art is a highly spiritual practice\u2014the pinnacle of human achievement. In its nearly religious approach and focus on subjective representations of nature, Bannister's philosophy has been compared to both German Idealism and American Transcendentalism. In his lecture, Bannister referenced the works of American Transcendentalist Washington Allston. Bannister's friend George W. Whitaker referred to him as \"The Idealist\" in a 1914 article \"Reminiscences of Providence Artists\".100 The lecture and its idealistic view are linked to Bannister's \"Approaching Storm\" (see right), which he completed in the same year. \"Approaching Storm\" features a human figure at its center, which is nonetheless rendered small by the surrounding landscape. Despite the implied drama, Bannister used a cool color palette of blues and greens, with contrasting yellows that provide warmth against the darker, almost purple sky.97 The contrast of melancholy elements against more cheerful pastoral themes appears in many of Bannister's paintings.\nAlthough committed to freedom and equal rights for African Americans, Bannister did not often directly represent those issues in his paintings.46 The farms that Bannister painted were reminders of southern Rhode Island's history of chattel slavery, unlike French Barbizon scenes.59 In \"Hay Gatherers\", Bannister depicts African American field laborers in a rural landscape. Unlike Bannister's idyllic pastorals, \"Hay Gatherers\" represents racial oppression and labor exploitation in Rhode Island, particularly South County where most of the state's plantations were.13 The women workers are separated from the field of wildflowers at the painting's lower left and other field workers in the background by stands of trees, suggesting their closeness to freedom even while they are still within the grasp of plantation labor.61 Through the geometric composition of \"Hay Gatherers\", which divides the figures and the landscapes into triangular sections, Bannister combined his work on seemingly idealized landscapes with his earlier political art, visible in his humanist portraits such as \"Newspaper Boy\". Bannister's \"Fort Dumpling, Jamestown, Rhode Island\" uses a similar triangular composition, whereby people relaxing are juxtaposed against but separated from sailboats in the background, a reminder of the \"maritime legacy of slavery\".67\nBannister often conveyed political meaning in his paintings through allegory and allusion. One of his first commissions, \"The Ship Outward Bound\", might have been a veiled reference to the forced return of Anthony Burns to slavery and Virginia under the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 in 1854. In African American culture, an image of a ship leaving harbor was a reminder of the Transatlantic Slave Trade.20 Bannister's 1885 drawing \"The Woodsman\" is thought to be Bannister's response to the murder of Amasa Sprague, an event that spurred the abolition of capital punishment in Rhode Island after the dubious conviction and hanging of John Gordon.13 Similarly, his \"Governor Sprague's White Horse\" depicted the horse that William Sprague IV rode into the First Battle of Bull Run.15\nBannister has been criticized for not often directly representing African Americans, outside of his early portraiture. He and artists like Henry Ossawa Tanner were deemed inauthentic during the Harlem Renaissance for producing works that appealed to white aesthetics.70 Many of Bannister's works were commissioned landscapes and portraits that reinforced European ideas, even though his art subtly dismantled racial stereotypes.29 In that way, Bannister has been compared to later Bostonian poet William Stanley Braithwaite, whose writing did not clearly reflect his identity.29 Bannister's work reflected his desire to excel and contribute to racial uplift, while still needing to depend on white patronage to reach a wider audience.13,4769 Art historian Juanita Holland wrote of Bannister's dilemma: \"This was a large part of the double bind that [Boston's] black artists faced: they needed to both address and represent an African American identity, while finding a way for their white viewers to look past race to a perception of the work in more universal terms.\"104\nLegacy.\nBannister was the only major African American artist of the late nineteenth century who developed his talents without European exposure; he was well known in the artistic community of Providence and admired within the wider East Coast art world.40 After his death, he was largely forgotten by art history for almost a century, principally due to racial prejudice.70 His art was often omitted from 20th-century art histories,xii and his style of melancholic, serene landscapes also fell out of fashion.51 Still, he and his paintings are an indelible part of a refigured relationship between African American culture and the landscapes of Reconstruction-era America.\nBannister's art continued to be supported by galleries like the Barnett-Aden Gallery and the Art Institute of Chicago.338 Following the civil rights movement in the 1960s, his work was again celebrated and widely collected. In collaboration with the Rhode Island School of Design and the Frederick Douglass Institute, the National Museum of African Art held an exhibition titled \"Edward Mitchell Bannister, 1828\u20131901: Providence Artist\" in 1973. The Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame inducted Bannister in 1976, and Rhode Island College created the Bannister Gallery in 1978 with an inaugural exhibition \"Four from Providence : Bannister, Prophet, Alston, Jennings\".\nThe New York-based Kenkebala Gallery held two exhibitions of Bannister's work, one in 1992 curated by Corrinne Jennings in collaboration with the Whitney and one in 2001 on the centennial of Bannister's death. From June 9 to October 8, 2018, the Gilbert Stuart Museum held an exhibition honoring Bannister and Carteaux's relationship, \"\"My Greatest Successes Have Come Through Her\": The Artistic Partnership of Edward and Christiana Bannister\", as part of its Rhode Island Masters exhibition series. was the center of the exhibition.\nIn September 2017, a Providence City Council committee unanimously voted to rename Magee Street (which had been named after a Rhode Island slave trader) to Bannister Street, in honor of Edward and Christiana Bannister. The Providence Art Club unveiled a bronze bust of Bannister made by Providence artist Gage Prentiss in May 2021. As of 2018, art historian Anne Louise Avery is compiling the first catalogue raisonn\u00e9 and a major biography of Bannister's work.\nIn September 2023, a bronze sculpture of Bannister by artist Gage Prentiss was unveiled in Providence's Market Square. Bannister is depicted in life size, sitting on a bench.\nHouse.\nIn 1884 Bannister and Carteaux moved from the boarding house of Ransom Parker to 93 Benevolent Street, and lived there until 1899.116 The two-and-a-half-story wooden house was built circa 1854 by engineer Charles E. Paine and is now known as \"The Vault\" or \"The Bannister House\". Euchlin Reeves and Louise Herreshoff purchased the house in the late 1930s and renovated it to add a brick exterior. The renovation was made to create consistency with their next-door property, so both houses could hold their \"little museum\" of antiques. Herreshoff died in 1967 and the porcelain collection filling the Bannister House was donated to Washington and Lee University.\nThe house is now listed as contributing to College Hill's historical designation. Brown University bought the property in 1989 and used it to store refrigerators. Due to a lack of plans for its preservation and use, the Providence Preservation Society put the Bannister House on its 2001 list of most endangered buildings in Providence. Brown University president Ruth Simmons assured historian and former Rhode Island deputy secretary of state Ray Rickman that the house would be preserved, although the university debated whether to sell the house to a third party.\nBecause its disrepair and long disuse made the house unsuitable for residence, Brown renovated the property in 2015 and restored it to its original appearance. It was sold in 2016 as part of the Brown to Brown Home Ownership Program\u2014the program specifies that if the house is ever sold, it has to be sold back to the university.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9998", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9998", "title": "Eliezer S. Yudkowsky", "text": ""}
{"id": "10000", "revid": "390477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10000", "title": "Eiffel", "text": "Eiffel usually is a reference to Gustave Eiffel (1832\u20131923), engineer and designer of the Eiffel Tower and the Statue of Liberty, and may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10002", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10002", "title": "Emil Kraepelin", "text": "German psychiatrist (1856\u20131926)\nEmil Wilhelm Georg Magnus Kraepelin (; ; 15 February 1856 \u2013 7 October 1926) was a German psychiatrist. H. J. Eysenck's Encyclopedia of Psychology identifies him as helping to lay the foundation for modern scientific psychiatry, psychopharmacology and psychiatric genetics.\nKraepelin believed the chief origin of psychiatric disease to be biological and genetic malfunction. His theories dominated psychiatry at the start of the 20th century and, despite the later psychodynamic influence of Sigmund Freud and his disciples, enjoyed a revival at century's end. While he proclaimed his own high clinical standards of gathering information \"by means of expert analysis of individual cases\", he also drew on reported observations of officials not trained in psychiatry.\nHis textbooks do not contain detailed case histories of individuals but mosaic-like compilations of typical statements and behaviors from patients with a specific diagnosis. He has been described as \"a scientific manager\" and \"a political operator\", who developed \"a large-scale, clinically oriented, epidemiological research programme\". He developed racist psychiatric theories.\nFamily and early life.\nKraepelin, whose father, Karl Wilhelm, was a former opera singer, music teacher, and later successful story teller, was born in 1856 in Neustrelitz, in the Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz in Germany. He was first introduced to biology by his brother Karl, 10 years older and, later, the director of the Naturhistorisches Museum Hamburg.\nEducation and career.\nKraepelin began his medical studies in 1874 at the University of Leipzig and completed them at the University of W\u00fcrzburg (1877\u201378). At Leipzig, he studied neuropathology under Paul Flechsig and experimental psychology with Wilhelm Wundt. Kraepelin would be a disciple of Wundt and had a lifelong interest in experimental psychology based on his theories. While there, Kraepelin wrote a prize-winning essay, \"The Influence of Acute Illness in the Causation of Mental Disorders\".\nAt W\u00fcrzburg he completed his \"Rigorosum\" (roughly equivalent to a PhD level viva-voce examination, literally \"rigorous exam\") in March 1878, his \"Staatsexamen\" (licensing examination) in July 1878, and his \"Approbation\" (his license to practice medicine; roughly equivalent to an MBBS) on 9 August 1878. From August 1878 to 1882, he worked with Bernhard von Gudden at the University of Munich.\nReturning to the University of Leipzig in February 1882, he worked in Wilhelm Heinrich Erb's neurology clinic and in Wundt's psychopharmacology laboratory. He completed his \"habilitation\" thesis - major postdoc publication and process - at Leipzig; it was entitled \"The Place of Psychology in Psychiatry\". On 3 December 1883 he completed his \"\" (\"habilitation\" at another institution than originally applied for = habilitation recognition procedure) at Munich.\nKraepelin's major work, \"Compendium der Psychiatrie: Zum Gebrauche f\u00fcr Studirende und Aerzte\" (\"Compendium of Psychiatry: For the Use of Students and Physicians\"), was first published in 1883 and was expanded in subsequent multivolume editions to \"Ein Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie\" (\"A Textbook: Foundations of Psychiatry and Neuroscience\"). In it, he argued that psychiatry was a branch of medical science and should be investigated by observation and experimentation like the other natural sciences. He called for research into the physical causes of mental illness, and started to establish the foundations of the modern classification system for mental disorders. Kraepelin proposed that by studying case histories and identifying specific disorders, the progression of mental illness could be predicted, after taking into account individual differences in personality and patient age at the onset of disease.\nIn 1884, he became senior physician in the Prussian provincial town of Leubus, Silesia Province, and the following year he was appointed director of the Treatment and Nursing Institute in Dresden. On 1 July 1886, at the age of 30, Kraepelin was named Professor of Psychiatry at the Imperial University of Dorpat (today the University of Tartu) in what is today Tartu, Estonia (see Burgmair et al., vol. IV). Four years later, on 5 December 1890, he became department head at the University of Heidelberg, where he remained until 1904. While at Dorpat he became the director of the 80-bed University Clinic, where he began to study and record many clinical histories in detail and \"was led to consider the importance of the course of the illness with regard to the classification of mental disorders\".\nIn 1903, Kraepelin moved to Munich to become Professor of Clinical Psychiatry at the University of Munich.\nIn 1908, he was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nIn 1912, at the request of the DVP (Deutscher Verein f\u00fcr Psychiatrie; German Association for Psychiatry), of which he was the head from 1906 to 1920, he began plans to establish a centre for research. Following a large donation from the Jewish German-American banker James Loeb, who had at one time been a patient, and promises of support from \"patrons of science\", the German Institute for Psychiatric Research was founded in 1917 in Munich. Initially housed in existing hospital buildings, it was maintained by further donations from Loeb and his relatives. In 1924 it came under the auspices of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society for the Advancement of Science. The German-American Rockefeller family's Rockefeller Foundation made a large donation enabling the development of a new dedicated building for the institute along Kraepelin's guidelines, which was officially opened in 1928.\nKraepelin spoke out against the barbarous treatment that was prevalent in the psychiatric asylums of the time, and crusaded against alcohol, capital punishment and the imprisonment rather than treatment of the insane. For the sedation of agitated patients, Kraepelin recommended potassium bromide. He rejected psychoanalytical theories that posited innate or early sexuality as the cause of mental illness, and he rejected philosophical speculation as unscientific. He focused on collecting clinical data and was particularly interested in neuropathology (e.g., diseased tissue).\nHe also firmly rejected the assumption of natural difference in relation to homosexuality, which he regarded as a vice caused by masturbation. In 1918 he called for \"educational discipline\": severe punishments for the crime of 'corruption' (seduction), applicable to any act related to sexual gratification. This extended the anti-gay policy of the time, which only punished sexual intercourse between men. These ideas eventually went on to lend legitimacy to Nazi policies that persecuted gay men, allowing the Nazi party to do so under the guise of conforming to scientific opinions. His work legitimized the persecution and inhumane treatment of gay people in Nazi Germany.\nIn the later period of his career, as a convinced champion of social Darwinism, he actively promoted a policy and research agenda in racial hygiene and eugenics.\nKraepelin retired from teaching at the age of 66, spending his remaining years establishing the institute. The ninth and final edition of his \"Textbook\" was published in 1927, shortly after his death. It comprised four volumes and was ten times larger than the first edition of 1883.\nIn the last years of his life, Kraepelin was preoccupied with Buddhist teachings and was planning to visit Buddhist shrines at the time of his death, according to his daughter, Antonie Schmidt-Kraepelin.\nTheories and classification schemes.\nKraepelin announced that he had found a new way of looking at mental illness, referring to the traditional view as \"symptomatic\" and to his view as \"clinical\". This turned out to be his paradigm-setting synthesis of the hundreds of mental disorders classified by the 19th century, grouping diseases together based on classification of syndrome\u2014common \"patterns\" of symptoms over time\u2014rather than by simple similarity of major symptoms in the manner of his predecessors.\nKraepelin described his work in the 5th edition of his textbook as a \"decisive step from a symptomatic to a clinical view of insanity. . . . The importance of external clinical signs has . . . been subordinated to consideration of the conditions of origin, the course, and the terminus which result from individual disorders. Thus, all purely symptomatic categories have disappeared from the nosology\".\nPsychosis and mood.\nKraepelin is specifically credited with the classification of what was previously considered to be a unitary concept of psychosis, into two distinct forms (known as the Kraepelinian dichotomy):\nDrawing on his long-term research, and using the criteria of course, outcome and prognosis, he developed the concept of dementia praecox, which he defined as the \"sub-acute development of a peculiar simple condition of mental weakness occurring at a youthful age\". When he first introduced this concept as a diagnostic entity in the fourth German edition of his \"Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie\" in 1893, it was placed among the degenerative disorders alongside, but separate from, catatonia and dementia paranoides. At that time, the concept corresponded by and large with Ewald Hecker's hebephrenia. In the sixth edition of the \"Lehrbuch\" in 1899 all three of these clinical types are treated as different expressions of one disease, dementia praecox.\nOne of the cardinal principles of his method was the recognition that any given symptom may appear in virtually any one of these disorders; e.g., there is almost no single symptom occurring in dementia praecox which cannot sometimes be found in manic depression. What distinguishes each disease symptomatically (as opposed to the underlying pathology) is not any particular (pathognomonic) symptom or symptoms, but a specific pattern of symptoms. In the absence of a direct physiological or genetic test or marker for each disease, it is only possible to distinguish them by their specific pattern of symptoms. Thus, Kraepelin's system is a method for pattern recognition, not grouping by common symptoms.\nIt has been claimed that Kraepelin also demonstrated specific patterns in the genetics of these disorders and patterns in their course and outcome, but no specific biomarkers have yet been identified. Generally speaking, there tend to be more people with schizophrenia among the relatives of schizophrenic patients than in the general population, while manic depression is more frequent in the relatives of manic depressives. Though, of course, this does not demonstrate genetic linkage, as this might be a socio-environmental factor as well.\nHe also reported a pattern to the course and outcome of these conditions. Kraepelin believed that schizophrenia had a deteriorating course in which mental function continuously (although perhaps erratically) declines, while manic-depressive patients experienced a course of illness which was intermittent, where patients were relatively symptom-free during the intervals which separate acute episodes. This led Kraepelin to name what we now know as schizophrenia, dementia praecox (the dementia part signifying the irreversible mental decline). It later became clear that dementia praecox did not necessarily lead to mental decline and was thus renamed schizophrenia by Eugen Bleuler to correct Kraepelin's misnomer.\nIn addition, as Kraepelin accepted in 1920, \"It is becoming increasingly obvious that we cannot satisfactorily distinguish these two diseases\"; however, he maintained that \"On the one hand we find those patients with irreversible dementia and severe cortical lesions. On the other are those patients whose personality remains intact\". Nevertheless, overlap between the diagnoses and neurological abnormalities (when found) have continued, and in fact a diagnostic category of schizoaffective disorder would be brought in to cover the intermediate cases.\nKraepelin devoted very few pages to his speculations about the etiology of his two major insanities, dementia praecox and manic-depressive insanity. However, from 1896 to his death in 1926 he held to the speculation that these insanities (particularly dementia praecox) would one day probably be found to be caused by a gradual systemic or \"whole body\" disease process, probably metabolic, which affected many of the organs and nerves in the body but affected the brain in a final, decisive cascade.\nPsychopathic personalities.\nIn the first through sixth edition of Kraepelin's influential psychiatry textbook, there was a section on moral insanity, which meant then a disorder of the emotions or moral sense without apparent delusions or hallucinations, and which Kraepelin defined as \"lack or weakness of those sentiments which counter the ruthless satisfaction of egotism\". He attributed this mainly to degeneration. This has been described as a psychiatric redefinition of Cesare Lombroso's theories of the \"born criminal\", conceptualised as a \"moral defect\", though Kraepelin stressed it was not yet possible to recognise them by physical characteristics.\nIn fact from 1904 Kraepelin changed the section heading to \"The born criminal\", moving it from under \"Congenital feeble-mindedness\" to a new chapter on \"Psychopathic personalities\". They were treated under a theory of degeneration. Four types were distinguished: born criminals (inborn delinquents), pathological liars, querulous persons, and Triebmenschen (persons driven by a basic compulsion, including vagabonds, spendthrifts, and dipsomaniacs).\nThe concept of \"psychopathic inferiorities\" had been recently popularised in Germany by Julius Ludwig August Koch, who proposed congenital and acquired types. Kraepelin had no evidence or explanation suggesting a congenital cause, and his assumption therefore appears to have been simple \"biologism\". Others, such as Gustav Aschaffenburg, argued for a varying combination of causes. Kraepelin's assumption of a moral defect rather than a positive drive towards crime has also been questioned, as it implies that the moral sense is somehow inborn and unvarying, yet it was known to vary by time and place, and Kraepelin never considered that the moral sense might just be different.\nKurt Schneider criticized Kraepelin's nosology on topics such as Haltlose for appearing to be a list of behaviors that he considered undesirable, rather than medical conditions, though Schneider's alternative version has also been criticised on the same basis. Nevertheless, many essentials of these diagnostic systems were introduced into the diagnostic systems, and remarkable similarities remain in the DSM-5 and ICD-10. The issues would today mainly be considered under the category of personality disorders, or in terms of Kraepelin's focus on psychopathy.\nKraepelin had referred to psychopathic conditions (or \"states\") in his 1896 edition, including compulsive insanity, impulsive insanity, homosexuality, and mood disturbances. From 1904, however, he instead termed those \"original disease conditions, and introduced the new alternative category of psychopathic personalities. In the eighth edition from 1909 that category would include, in addition to a separate \"dissocial\" type, the excitable, the unstable, the Triebmenschen driven persons, eccentrics, the liars and swindlers, and the quarrelsome. It has been described as remarkable that Kraepelin now considered mood disturbances to be not part of the same category, but only attenuated (more mild) phases of manic depressive illness; this corresponds to current classification schemes.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nKraepelin postulated that there is a specific brain or other biological pathology underlying each of the major psychiatric disorders. As a colleague of Alois Alzheimer, he was a co-discoverer of Alzheimer's disease, and his laboratory discovered its pathological basis. Kraepelin was confident that it would someday be possible to identify the pathological basis of each of the major psychiatric disorders.\nEugenics.\nUpon moving to become Professor of Clinical Psychiatry at the University of Munich in 1903, Kraepelin increasingly wrote on social policy issues. He was a strong and influential proponent of eugenics and racial hygiene. His publications included a focus on alcoholism, crime, degeneration and hysteria.\nKraepelin was convinced that such institutions as the education system and the welfare state, because of their trend to break the processes of natural selection, undermined the Germans' biological \"struggle for survival\". He was concerned to preserve and enhance the German people, the Volk, in the sense of nation or race. He appears to have held Lamarckian concepts of evolution, such that cultural deterioration could be inherited. He was a strong ally and promoter of the work of fellow psychiatrist (and pupil and later successor as director of the clinic) Ernst R\u00fcdin to clarify the mechanisms of genetic inheritance as to make a so-called \"empirical genetic prognosis\".\nMartin Brune has pointed out that Kraepelin and R\u00fcdin also appear to have been ardent advocates of a self-domestication theory, a version of social Darwinism which held that modern culture was not allowing people to be weeded out, resulting in more mental disorder and deterioration of the gene pool. Kraepelin saw a number of \"symptoms\" of this, such as \"weakening of viability and resistance, decreasing fertility, proletarianisation, and moral damage due to \"penning up people\" [\"Zusammenpferchung\"]. He also wrote that \"the number of idiots, epileptics, psychopaths, criminals, prostitutes, and tramps who descend from alcoholic and syphilitic parents, and who transfer their inferiority to their offspring, is incalculable\". He felt that \"the well-known example of the Jews, with their strong disposition towards nervous and mental disorders, teaches us that their extraordinarily advanced domestication may eventually imprint clear marks on the race\". Brune states that Kraepelin's nosological system \"was, to a great deal, built on the degeneration paradigm\".\nInfluence.\nKraepelin's great contribution in classifying schizophrenia and manic depression remains relatively unknown to the general public, and his work, which had neither the literary quality nor paradigmatic power of Freud's, is little read outside scholarly circles. Kraepelin's contributions were also to a large extent marginalized throughout a good part of the 20th century during the success of Freudian etiological theories. However, his views now dominate many quarters of psychiatric research and academic psychiatry. His fundamental theories on the diagnosis of psychiatric disorders form the basis of the major diagnostic systems in use today, especially the American Psychiatric Association's DSM-IV and the World Health Organization's ICD system, based on the Research Diagnostic Criteria and earlier Feighner Criteria developed by espoused \"neo-Kraepelinians\", though Robert Spitzer and others in the DSM committees were keen not to include assumptions about causation as Kraepelin had.\nKraepelin has been described as a \"scientific manager\" and political operator, who developed a large-scale, clinically oriented, epidemiological research programme. In this role he took in clinical information from a wide range of sources and networks. Despite proclaiming high clinical standards for himself to gather information \"by means of expert analysis of individual cases\", he would also draw on the reported observations of officials not trained in psychiatry. The various editions of his textbooks do not contain detailed case histories of individuals, however, but mosaiclike compilations of typical statements and behaviors from patients with a specific diagnosis.\nKraepelin wrote in a \"knapp und klar\" (concise and clear) style that made his books useful tools for physicians. Abridged and clumsy English translations of the sixth and seventh editions of his textbook in 1902 and 1907 (respectively) by Allan Ross Diefendorf (1871\u20131943), an assistant physician at the Connecticut Hospital for the Insane at Middletown, inadequately conveyed the literary quality of his writings that made them so valuable to practitioners.\nAmong the doctors trained by Alois Alzheimer and Emil Kraepelin at Munich at the beginning of the 20th century were the Spanish neuropathologists and neuropsychiatrists Nicol\u00e1s Ach\u00facarro and Gonzalo Rodr\u00edguez Lafora, two distinguished disciples of Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal and members of the Spanish Neurological School.\nDreaming for psychiatry's sake.\nIn the Heidelberg and early Munich years he edited \"Psychologische Arbeiten\", a journal on experimental psychology. One of his own famous contributions to this journal also appeared in the form of a monograph (105 pp.) entitled \"\u00dcber Sprachst\u00f6rungen im Traume\" (\"On Language Disturbances in Dreams\"). Kraepelin, on the basis of the dream-psychosis analogy, studied for more than 20 years language disorder in dreams in order to study indirectly schizophasia. The dreams Kraepelin collected are mainly his own. They lack extensive comment by the dreamer. In order to study them the full range of biographical knowledge available today on Kraepelin is necessary (see, e.g., Burgmair et al., I-IX).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nFor biographies of Kraepelin see:\nFor English translations of Kraepelin's work see:"}
{"id": "10003", "revid": "13445768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10003", "title": "Evoluon", "text": "Building in Eindhoven, the Netherlands\nThe Evoluon is a UFO-shaped building located in Eindhoven, the Netherlands. It was built in 1966 as a science museum by the electronics and electrical company Philips. It quickly became a landmark in Eindhoven, where Philips was headquartered at the time. The museum closed in 1989 and the building became a conference centre and exhibition venue in 1998. In 2022 it reopened for the general public again as the Next Nature Museum.\nThe building is unique due to its very futuristic design, resembling a landed flying saucer. It was designed by architects Leo de Bever and Louis Christiaan Kalff, while the exhibition it housed was conceived by James Gardner. De Bever and Kalff only got two demands for the design of the building, it had to be \"spectacular\" and it had to be possible to hold exhibitions in the building.\nIts concrete dome is in diameter and is held in place by of reinforcing steel bars.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s the Evoluon attracted large numbers of visitors due to its innovative interactive exhibitions. When competing science museums opened in other cities, the number of visitors declined and the original museum closed down in 1989. The building was converted into a conference centre which opened in 1998.\nIn the UK the Evoluon is chiefly remembered from Bert Haanstra's wordless short film entitled simply \"Evoluon\", commissioned by Philips to publicise the museum, and shown as a trade test colour film on BBC television from 1968 to 1972.\nIn October 2013 the Evoluon was used to stage four 3D-concerts by the German electronic band Kraftwerk, each before an audience of 1,200 spectators. Key band member Ralf H\u00fctter handpicked the venue for its retro-futuristic look. Bespoke 3D-visuals of the saucer section of the building descending from space were used in the live rendition of their track \"Spacelab\".\nOn September 24, 2022, the Evoluon reopened to the public with the \"RetroFuture\" exhibition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10004", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10004", "title": "Educational essentialism", "text": "Educational philosophy\nEducational essentialism is an educational philosophy whose adherents believe that children should learn the traditional basic subjects thoroughly. In this philosophical school of thought, the aim is to instill students with the \"essentials\" of academic knowledge, enacting a back-to-basics approach. Essentialism ensures that the accumulated wisdom of our civilization as taught in the traditional academic disciplines is passed on from teacher to student. Such disciplines might include Reading, Writing, Literature, Foreign Languages, History, Mathematics, Classical Languages, Science, Art, and Music. Moreover, this traditional approach is meant to train the mind, promote reasoning, and ensure a common culture.\nPrinciples of essentialism.\nEssentialism is a relatively conservative stance to education that strives to teach students the knowledge of a society and civilization through a core curriculum. This core curriculum involves such areas that include; the study of the surrounding environment, basic natural laws, and the disciplines that promote a happier, more educated living. Other non-traditional areas are also integrated as well in moderation to balance the education. Essentialists' goals are to instill students with the \"essentials\" of academic knowledge, patriotism, and character development through traditional (or back-to-basic) approaches. This is to promote reasoning, train the mind, and ensure a common culture for all citizens.\nEssentialism is the most typically enacted philosophy in American classrooms today. Traces of this can be found in the organized learning centered on teachers and textbooks, in addition to the regular assignments and evaluations.\nEssentialism as a teacher-centered philosophy.\nThe role of the teacher as the leader of the classroom is a very important tenet of Educational essentialism. The teacher is the center of the classroom, so they should be rigid and disciplinary. Establishing order in the classroom is crucial for student learning; effective teaching cannot take place in a loud and disorganized environment. It is the teacher's responsibility to keep order in the classroom. The teacher must interpret essentials of the learning process, take the leadership position and set the tone of the classroom. These needs require an educator who is academically well-qualified with an appreciation for learning and development. The teacher must control the students with distributions of rewards and penalties. It has been argued that recent teacher education policies in some countries extend essentialism to teacher education policy frameworks.\nHistory of essentialism.\nThe Essentialist movement first began in the United States in the year 1938. In Atlantic City, New Jersey, a group met for the first time called \"The Essentialist's Committee for the Advancement of Education.\" Their emphasis was to reform the educational system to a rationality-based system.\nThe term essentialist first appeared in the book \"An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education\" which was written by Michael John Demiashkevich. In his book, Demiashkevich labels some specific educators (including William C. Bagley) as \u201cessentialists.\" Demiashkevich compared the essentialists to the different viewpoints of the Progressive Education Association. He described how the Progressives preached a \u201chedonistic doctrine of change\u201d whereas the essentialists stressed the moral responsibility of man for his actions and looked toward permanent principles of behavior (Demiashkevich likened the arguments to those between the Socratics and the Sophists in Greek philosophy). In 1938 Bagley and other educators met together where Bagley gave a speech detailing the main points of the essentialism movement and attacking the public education in the United States. One point that Bagley noted was that students in the U.S. were not getting an education on the same levels as students in Europe who were the same age.\nA recent branch has emerged within the essentialist school of thought called \"neoessentialism.\" Emerging in the eighties as a response to the essentialist ideals of the thirties as well as to the criticism of the fifties and the advocates for education in the seventies, neoessentialism was created to try to appease the problems facing the United States at the time. The most notable change within this school of thought is that it called for the creation of a new discipline, computer science.\nRenowned essentialists.\nWilliam Bagley (1874\u20131946) was an important historical essentialist. William C. Bagley completed his undergraduate degree at Michigan Agricultural College in 1895. It wasn't until after finishing his undergraduate studies that he truly wanted to be a teacher. Bagley did his Graduate studies at the University of Chicago and at Cornell University. He acquired his Ph.D. in 1900, after which he took his first school job as a Principal in a St. Louis, Missouri Elementary School. Bagley's devotion increased during his work at Montana State Normal School in Dillon, Montana. It was here where he decided to dedicate his time to the education of teachers and where he published \"The Educative Process\", launching his name across the nation. Throughout his career Bagley argued against the conservative position that teachers were not in need of special training for their work. He believed that liberal arts material was important in teacher education. Bagley also believed the dominant theories of education of the time were weak and lacking.\nIn April 1938, he published the \"Essentialist's Platform\", in which he outlined three major points of essentialism. He described the right of students to a well-educated and culturally knowledgeable teacher. Secondly, he discussed the importance of teaching the ideals of community to each group of students. Lastly, Bagley wrote of the importance of accuracy, thoroughness and effort on the part of the student in the classroom.\nAnother important essentialist is E. D. Hirsch (1928-). Hirsch was Founder and Chairman of the Core Knowledge Foundation and authored several books concerning fact-based approaches to education. Now retired, he spent many years teaching at the University of Virginia while also being an advocate for the \"back to basics\" movement. In his most popular book, \"Cultural Literacy \u2014 What Every American Needs To Know\", he offers lists, quotations, and information regarding what he believes is essential knowledge.\nSee also Arthur Bestor.\nSchools enacting an essentialist curriculum.\nThe Core Knowledge Schools were founded on the philosophy of essentialist E.D. Hirsch. Although it is difficult to maintain a pure and strict essentialist-only curriculum, these schools have the central aim of establishing a common knowledge base for all citizens. To do so, they follow a nationwide, content-specific, and teacher-centered curriculum. The Core Knowledge curriculum also allows for local variance above and beyond the core curriculum. Central curricular aims are academic excellence and the learning of knowledge, and teachers who are masters of their knowledge areas serve this aim.\nCriticism of essentialism.\nBecause Essentialism is largely teacher-centered, the role of the student is often called into question. Presumably, in an essentialist classroom, the teacher is the one designing the curriculum for the students based upon the core disciplines. Moreover, he or she is enacting the curriculum and setting the standards which the students must meet. The teacher's evaluative role may undermine students' interest in study. As a result, the students begin to take on more of a passive role in their education as they are forced to meet and learn such standards and information.\nFurthermore, there is also speculation that an essentialist education helps in promoting the cultural lag. This philosophy of education is very traditional in the mindset of passing on the knowledge of the culture via the academic disciplines. Thus, students are forced to think in the mindset of the larger culture, and individual creativity, and subversive investigation are often not emphasized, or even outright discouraged."}
{"id": "10005", "revid": "50482482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10005", "title": "Progressive education", "text": "Pedagogical movement\nProgressive education, or educational progressivism, is a pedagogical movement that began in the late 19th century and has persisted in various forms to the present. In Europe, progressive education took the form of the New Education Movement. The term \"progressive\" was engaged to distinguish this education from the traditional curricula of the 19th century, which was rooted in classical preparation for the early-industrial university and strongly differentiated by social class. By contrast, progressive education finds its roots in modern, post-industrial experience. Most progressive education programs have these qualities in common: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nProgressive education can be traced back to the works of John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, both of whom are known as forerunners of ideas that would be developed by theorists such as John Dewey. Considered one of the first of the British empiricists, Locke believed that \"truth and knowledge\u2026 arise out of observation and experience rather than manipulation of accepted or given ideas\". He further discussed the need for children to have concrete experiences in order to learn. Rousseau deepened this line of thinking in Emile, or On Education, where he argued that subordination of students to teachers and memorization of facts would not lead to an education.\nJohann Bernhard Basedow.\nIn Germany, Johann Bernhard Basedow (1724\u20131790) established the Philanthropinum at Dessau in 1774. He developed new teaching methods based on conversation and play with the child, and a program of physical development. Such was his success that he wrote a treatise on his methods, \"On the best and hitherto unknown method of teaching children of noblemen\".\nChristian Gotthilf Salzmann.\nChristian Gotthilf Salzmann (1744\u20131811) was the founder of the Schnepfenthal institution, a school dedicated to new modes of education (derived heavily from the ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau). He wrote \"Elements of Morality, for the Use of Children\", one of the first books translated into English by Mary Wollstonecraft.\nJohann Heinrich Pestalozzi.\nJohann Heinrich Pestalozzi (1746\u20131827) was a Swiss pedagogue and educational reformer who exemplified Romanticism in his approach. He founded several educational institutions both in German- and French-speaking regions of Switzerland and wrote many works explaining his revolutionary modern principles of education. His motto was \"Learning by head, hand and heart\". His research and theories closely resemble those outlined by Rousseau in Emile. He is further considered by many to be the \"father of modern educational science\" His psychological theories pertain to education as they focus on the development of object teaching, that is, he felt that individuals best learned through experiences and through a direct manipulation and experience of objects. He further speculated that children learn through their own internal motivation rather than through compulsion. (See Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic motivation). A teacher's task will be to help guide their students as individuals through their learning and allow it to unfold naturally.\nFriedrich Fr\u00f6bel.\nFriedrich Wilhelm August Fr\u00f6bel (1782\u20131852) was a student of Pestalozzi who laid the foundation for modern education based on the recognition that children have unique needs and capabilities. He believed in \"self-activity\" and play as essential factors in child education. The teacher's role was not to indoctrinate but to encourage self-expression through play, both individually and in group activities. He created the concept of kindergarten.\nJohann Friedrich Herbart.\nJohann Friedrich Herbart (1776\u20131841) emphasized the connection between individual development and the resulting societal contribution. The five key ideas which composed his concept of individual maturation were Inner Freedom, Perfection, Benevolence, Justice, and Equity or Recompense. According to Herbart, abilities were not innate but could be instilled, so a thorough education could provide the framework for moral and intellectual development. In order to develop a child to lead to a consciousness of social responsibility, Herbart advocated that teachers utilize a methodology with five formal steps: \"Using this structure a teacher prepared a topic of interest to the children, presented that topic, and questioned them inductively, so that they reached new knowledge based on what they had already known, looked back, and deductively summed up the lesson's achievements, then related them to moral precepts for daily living\".\nJohn Melchior Bosco.\nJohn Melchior Bosco (1815\u20131888) was concerned about the education of street children who had left their villages to find work in the rapidly industrialized city of Turin, Italy. Exploited as cheap labor or imprisoned for unruly behavior, Bosco saw the need for creating a space where they would feel at home. He called it an 'Oratory' where they could play, learn, share friendships, express themselves, develop their creative talents and pick up skills for gainful self-employment. With those who had found work, he set up a mutual-fund society (an early version of the Grameen Bank) to teach them the benefits of saving and self-reliance. The principles underlying his educational method that won over the hearts and minds of thousands of youth who flocked to his oratory were: 'be reasonable', 'be kind', 'believe' and 'be generous in service'. Today his method of education is practiced in nearly 3000 institutions set up around the world by the members of the Salesian Society he founded in 1873.\nCecil Reddie.\nWhile studying for his doctorate in G\u00f6ttingen in 1882\u20131883, Cecil Reddie was greatly impressed by the progressive educational theories being applied there. Reddie founded Abbotsholme School in Derbyshire, England, in 1889. Its curriculum enacted the ideas of progressive education. Reddie rejected rote learning, classical languages and corporal punishment. He combined studies in modern languages and the sciences and arts with a program of physical exercise, manual labour, recreation, crafts and arts. Schools modeling themselves after Abbotsholme were established throughout Europe, and the model was particularly influential in Germany. Reddie often engaged foreign teachers, who learned its practices, before returning home to start their own schools. Hermann Lietz an Abbotsholme teacher founded five schools (Landerziehungsheime f\u00fcr Jungen) on Abbotsholme's principles. Other people he influenced included Kurt Hahn, Adolphe Ferri\u00e8re and Edmond Demolins. His ideas also reached Japan, where it turned into \"Taisho-era Free Education Movement\" (Taisho Jiyu Kyoiku Undo)\nJohn Dewey.\nEducation according to John Dewey is the \"participation of the individual in the social consciousness of the race\" (Dewey, 1897, para. 1). As such, education should take into account that the student is a social being. The process begins at birth with the child unconsciously gaining knowledge and gradually developing their knowledge to share and partake in society.\nFor Dewey, education, which regulates \"the process of coming to share in the social consciousness,\" is the \"only sure\" method of ensuring social progress and reform (Dewey, 1897, para. 60). In this respect, Dewey foreshadows Social Reconstructionism, whereby schools are a means to reconstruct society. As schools become a means for social reconstruction, they must be given the proper equipment to perform this task and guide their students.\nHelen Parkhurst.\nThe American teacher Helen Parkhurst (1886\u20131973) developed the Dalton Plan at the beginning of the twentieth century with the goal of reforming the then current pedagogy and classroom management. She wanted to break the teacher-centered lockstep teaching. During her first experiment, which she implemented in a small elementary school as a young teacher in 1904, she noticed that when students are given freedom for self-direction and self-pacing and to help one another, their motivation increases considerably and they learn more. In a later experiment in 1911 and 1912, Parkhurst re-organized the education in a large school for nine- to fourteen-year-olds. Instead of each grade, each subject was appointed its own teacher and its own classroom. The subject teachers made assignments: they converted the subject matter for each grade into learning assignments. In this way, learning became the students' own work; they could carry out their work independently, work at their own pace and plan their work themselves. The classroom turned into a laboratory, a place where students are working, furnished and equipped as work spaces, tailored to meet the requirements of specific subjects. Useful and attractive learning materials, instruments and reference books were put within the students' reach. The benches were replaced by large tables to facilitate co-operation and group instruction. This second experiment formed the basis for the next experiments, those in Dalton and New York, from 1919 onwards. The only addition was the use of graphs, charts enabling students to keep track of their own progress in each subject.\nIn the nineteen-twenties and nineteen-thirties, Dalton education spread throughout the world. There is no certainty regarding the exact numbers of Dalton schools, but there was Dalton education in America, Australia, England, Germany, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union, India, China and Japan.\nRudolf Steiner.\nRudolf Steiner (1861\u20131925) first described the principles of what was to become Waldorf education in 1907. He established a series of schools based on these principles beginning in 1919. The focus of the education is on creating a developmentally appropriate curriculum that holistically integrates practical, artistic, social, and academic experiences. There are more than a thousand schools and many more early childhood centers worldwide; it has also become a popular form of homeschooling.\nMaria Montessori.\nMaria Montessori (1870\u20131952) began to develop her philosophy and methods in 1897. She based her work on her observations of children and experimentation with the environment, materials, and lessons available to them. She frequently referred to her work as \"scientific pedagogy\", arguing for the need to go beyond observation and measurement of students, to developing new methods to transform them. Although Montessori education spread to the United States in 1911 there were conflicts with the American educational establishment and was opposed by William Heard Kilpatrick. However Montessori education returned to the United States in 1960 and has since spread to thousands of schools there.\nIn 1914 the Montessori Society in England organised its first conference. Hosted by Rev Bertram Hawker, who had set up, in partnership with his local elementary school in the Norfolk coastal village of East Runton, the first Montessori School in England. Pictures of this school, and its children, illustrated the 'Montessori's Own Handbook' (1914). Hawker had been impressed by his visit to Montessori's Casa dei Bambini in Rome, he gave numerous talks on Montessori's work after 1912, assisting in generating a national interest in her work. He organised the Montessori Conference 1914 in partnership with Edmond Holmes, ex-Chief Inspector of Schools, who had written a government report on Montessori. The conference decided that its remit was to promote the 'liberation of the child in the school', and though inspired by Montessori, would encourage, support and network teachers and educationalists who sought, through their schools and methods, that aim. They changed their name the following year to New Ideals in Education. Each subsequent conference was opened with reference to its history and origin as a Montessori Conference recognising her inspiration, reports italicized the members of the Montessori Society in the delegate lists, and numerous further events included Montessori methods and case studies. Montessori, through New Ideals in Education, its committee and members, events and publications, greatly influenced progressive state education in England. (references to be added).\nRobert Baden-Powell.\nIn July 1906, Ernest Thompson Seton sent Robert Baden-Powell a copy of his book \"The Birchbark Roll of the Woodcraft Indians\". Seton was a British-born Canadian-American living in the United States. They shared ideas about youth training programs. In 1907 Baden-Powell wrote a draft called \"Boy Patrols\". In the same year, to test his ideas, he gathered 21 boys of mixed social backgrounds and held a week-long camp in August on Brownsea Island in England. His organizational method, now known as the Patrol System and a key part of Scouting training, allowed the boys to organize themselves into small groups with an elected patrol leader. Baden Powell then wrote \"Scouting for Boys\" (London, 1908). The Brownsea camp and the publication of \"Scouting for Boys\" are generally regarded as the start of the Scout movement which spread throughout the world. Baden-Powell and his sister Agnes Baden-Powell introduced the Girl Guides in 1910.\nComparison with traditional education.\nTraditional education uses extrinsic motivation, such as grades and prizes. Progressive education is more likely to use intrinsic motivation, basing activities on the interests of the child. Praise may be discouraged as a motivator. Progressive education is a response to traditional methods of teaching. It is defined as an educational movement which gives more value to experience than formal learning. It is based more on experiential learning that concentrate on the development of a child's talents.\n21st century skills.\n21st century skills are a series of higher-order skills, abilities, and learning dispositions that have been identified as being required for success in the rapidly changing, digital society and workplaces. Many of these skills are also defining qualities of \"progressive education\" as well as being associated with deeper learning, which is based on mastering skills such as analytic reasoning, complex problem solving, and teamwork. These skills differ from traditional academic skills in that they are not primarily content knowledge-based. The focus of progressive pedagogies on fostering 21st-century skills may also explain why these schools maintain their appeal, particularly among a segment of highly-educated, middle-class parents.\nIn the West.\nGermany.\nHermann Lietz founded three Landerziehungsheime (country boarding schools) in 1904 based on Reddie's model for boys of different ages. Lietz eventually succeeded in establishing five more Landerziehungsheime. Edith and Paul Geheeb founded Odenwaldschule in Heppenheim in the Odenwald in 1910 using their concept of progressive education, which integrated the work of the head and hand.\nPoland.\nJanusz Korczak was one notable follower and developer of Pestalozzi's ideas. He wrote\n\"The names of Pestalozzi, Froebel and Spencer shine with no less brilliance than the names of the greatest inventors of the twentieth century. For they discovered more than the unknown forces of nature; they discovered the unknown half of humanity: children.\" His Orphan's Home in Warsaw became a model institution and exerted influence on the educational process in other orphanages of the same type.\nIreland.\nThe Quaker school run in Ballitore, Co Kildare in the 18th century had students from as far away as Bordeaux (where there was a substantial Irish \u00e9migr\u00e9 population), the Caribbean and Norway. Notable pupils included Edmund Burke and Napper Tandy.\nSgoil \u00c9anna, or in English St Enda's was founded in 1908 by P\u00e1draig Pearse on Montessori principles. Its former assistant headmaster Thomas MacDonagh and other teachers including Pearse; games master Con Colbert; Pearse's brother, Willie, the art teacher, and Joseph Plunkett, and occasional lecturer in English, were executed by the British after the 1916 Rising. Pearse and MacDonagh were two of the seven leaders who signed the Irish Declaration of Independence. Pearse's book \"The Murder Machine\" was a denunciation of the English school system of the time and a declaration of his own educational principles. Apart from these examples of progressive education, however, during the decades after the advent of national independence in 1922, Irish educational policy makers generally rejected progressive ideas, focusing instead on curricula and teaching methods that reflected the new country's Catholic heritage and nationalist ethos up until the 1960s.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, an early proponent of progressive education was Alva Myrdal, who with her husband Gunnar co-wrote \"Kris i befolkningsfr\u00e5gan\" (1934), a most influential program for the social-democratic hegemony (1932\u20131976) popularly known as \"Folkhemmet\". School reforms went through government reports in the 1940s and trials in the 1950s, resulting in the introduction in 1962 of public comprehensive schools (\"grundskola\") instead of the previously separated parallel schools for theoretical and non-theoretical education.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe ideas from Reddie's Abbotsholme spread to schools such as Bedales School (1893), King Alfred School, London (1898) and St Christopher School, Letchworth (1915), as well as all the Friends' schools, Steiner Waldorf schools and those belonging to the Round Square Conference. The King Alfred School was radical for its time in that it provided a secular education and that boys and girls were educated together. Alexander Sutherland Neill believed children should achieve self-determination and should be encouraged to think critically rather than blindly obeying. He implemented his ideas with the founding of Summerhill School in 1921. Neill believed that children learn better when they are not compelled to attend lessons. The school was also managed democratically, with regular meetings to determine school rules. Pupils had equal voting rights with school staff.\nUnited States.\nEarly practitioners.\nFr\u00f6bel's student Margarethe Schurz founded the first kindergarten in the United States at Watertown, Wisconsin, in 1856, and she also inspired Elizabeth Peabody, who went on to found the first English-speaking kindergarten in the United States \u2013 the language at Schurz's kindergarten had been German, to serve an immigrant community \u2013 in Boston in 1860. This paved the way for the concept's spread in the USA. The German \u00e9migr\u00e9 Adolph Douai had also founded a kindergarten in Boston in 1859, but was obliged to close it after only a year. By 1866, however, he was founding others in New York City.\nWilliam Heard Kilpatrick (1871\u20131965) was a pupil of Dewey and one of the most effective practitioners of the concept as well as the more adept at proliferating the progressive education movement and spreading word of the works of Dewey. He is especially well known for his \"project method of teaching\". This developed the progressive education notion that students were to be engaged and taught so that their knowledge may be directed to society for a socially useful need. Like Dewey he also felt that students should be actively engaged in their learning rather than actively disengaged with the simple reading and regurgitation of material.\nThe most famous early practitioner of progressive education was Francis Parker; its best-known spokesperson was the philosopher John Dewey. In 1875 Francis Parker became superintendent of schools in Quincy, Massachusetts, after spending two years in Germany studying emerging educational trends on the continent. Parker was opposed to rote learning, believing that there was no value in knowledge without understanding. He argued instead schools should encourage and respect the child's creativity. Parker's Quincy System called for child-centered and experience-based learning. He replaced the traditional curriculum with integrated learning units based on core themes related to the knowledge of different disciplines. He replaced traditional readers, spellers and grammar books with children's own writing, literature, and teacher prepared materials. In 1883 Parker left Massachusetts to become Principal of the Cook County Normal School in Chicago, a school that also served to train teachers in Parker's methods. In 1894 Parker's Talks on Pedagogics, which drew heavily on the thinking of Fr\u00f6bel, Pestalozzi and Herbart, became one of the first American writings on education to gain international fame.\nThat same year, philosopher John Dewey moved from the University of Michigan to the newly established University of Chicago where he became chair of the department of philosophy, psychology and education. He and his wife enrolled their children in Parker's school before founding their own school two years later.\nWhereas Parker started with practice and then moved to theory, Dewey began with hypotheses and then devised methods and curricula to test them. By the time Dewey moved to Chicago at the age of thirty-five, he had already published two books on psychology and applied psychology. He had become dissatisfied with philosophy as pure speculation and was seeking ways to make philosophy directly relevant to practical issues. Moving away from an early interest in Hegel, Dewey proceeded to reject all forms of dualism and dichotomy in favor of a philosophy of experience as a series of unified wholes in which everything can be ultimately related.\nIn 1896, John Dewey opened what he called the laboratory school to test his theories and their sociological implications. With Dewey as the director and his wife as principal, the University of Chicago Laboratory school, was dedicated \"to discover in administration, selection of subject-matter, methods of learning, teaching, and discipline, how a school could become a cooperative community while developing in individuals their own capacities and satisfy their own needs.\" (Cremin, 136) For Dewey the two key goals of developing a cooperative community and developing individuals' own capacities were not at odds; they were necessary to each other. This unity of purpose lies at the heart of the progressive education philosophy. In 1912, Dewey sent out students of his philosophy to found The Park School of Buffalo and The Park School of Baltimore to put it into practice. These schools operate to this day within a similar progressive approach.\nAt Columbia, Dewey worked with other educators such as Charles Eliot and Abraham Flexner to help bring progressivism into the mainstream of American education. In 1917 Columbia established the Lincoln School of Teachers College \"as a laboratory for the working out of an elementary and secondary curriculum which shall eliminate obsolete material and endeavor to work up in usable form material adapted to the needs of modern living.\" (Cremin, 282) Based on Flexner's demand that the modern curriculum \"include nothing for which an affirmative case can not be made out\" (Cremin, 281) the new school organized its activities around four fundamental fields: science, industry, aesthetics and civics. The Lincoln School built its curriculum around \"units of work\" that reorganized traditional subject matter into forms embracing the development of children and the changing needs of adult life. The first and second grades carried on a study of community life in which they actually built a city. A third grade project growing out of the day-to-day life of the nearby Hudson River became one of the most celebrated units of the school, a unit on boats, which under the guidance of its legendary teacher Miss Curtis, became an entr\u00e9e into history, geography, reading, writing, arithmetic, science, art and literature. Each of the units was broadly enough conceived so that different children could concentrate on different aspects depending on their own interests and needs. Each of the units called for widely diverse student activities, and each sought to deal in depth with some critical aspect of contemporary civilization. Finally each unit engaged children working together cooperatively and also provided opportunities for individual research and exploration.\nIn 1924, Agnes de Lima, the lead writer on education for \"The New Republic\" and \"The Nation\", published a collection of her articles on progressive education as a book, titled \"Our Enemy the Child\".\nIn 1918, the National Education Association, representing superintendents and administrators in smaller districts across the country, issued its report \"Cardinal Principles of Secondary Education.\" It emphasized the education of students in terms of health, a command of fundamental processes, worthy home membership, vocation, citizenship, worthy use of leisure, and ethical character. They emphasized life adjustment and reflected the social efficiency model of progressive education.\nFrom 1919 to 1955, the Progressive Education Association founded by Stanwood Cobb and others worked to promote a more student-centered approach to education. During the Great Depression the organization conducted the Eight-Year Study, evaluating the effects of progressive programs. More than 1500 students over four years were compared to an equal number of carefully matched students at conventional schools. When they reached college, the experimental students were found to equal or surpass traditionally educated students on all outcomes: grades, extracurricular participation, dropout rates, intellectual curiosity, and resourcefulness. Moreover, the study found that the more the school departed from the traditional college preparatory program, the better was the record of the graduates. (Kohn, Schools, 232)\nBy mid-century, many public school programs had also adopted elements of progressive curriculum. At mid-century Dewey believed that progressive education had \"not really penetrated and permeated the foundations of the educational institution.\"(Kohn, Schools, 6,7) As the influence of progressive pedagogy grew broader and more diffuse, practitioners began to vary their application of progressive principles. As varying interpretations and practices made evaluation of progressive reforms more difficult to assess, critics began to propose alternative approaches.\nThe seeds of the debate over progressive education can be seen in the differences of Parker and Dewey. These have to do with how much and by whom curriculum should be worked out from grade to grade, how much the child's emerging interests should determine classroom activities, the importance of child-centered vs. societal\u2013centered learning, the relationship of community building to individual growth, and especially the relationship between emotion, thought and experience.\nIn 1955, the publication of Rudolf Flesch's \"Why Johnny Can't Read\" leveled criticism of reading programs at the progressive emphasis on reading in context. The conservative McCarthy era raised questions about the liberal ideas at the roots of the progressive reforms. The launching of Sputnik in 1957 at the height of the Cold War gave rise to a number of intellectually competitive approaches to disciplinary knowledge, such as BSCS biology PSSC physics, led by university professors such as Jerome Bruner and Jerrold Zacharias.\nSome Cold War reforms incorporated elements of progressivism. For example, the work of Zacharias and Bruner was based in the developmental psychology of Jean Piaget and incorporated many of Dewey's ideas of experiential education. Bruner's analysis of developmental psychology became the core of a pedagogical movement known as constructivism, which argues that the child is an active participant in making meaning and must be engaged in the progress of education for learning to be effective. This psychological approach has deep connections to the work of both Parker and Dewey and led to a resurgence of their ideas in second half of the century.\nIn 1965, President Johnson inaugurated the Great Society and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act suffused public school programs with funds for sweeping education reforms. At the same time the influx of federal funding also gave rise to demands for accountability and the behavioral objectives approach of Robert F. Mager and others foreshadowed the No Child Left Behind Act passed in 2002. Against these critics eloquent spokespersons stepped forward in defense of the progressive tradition. The Open Classroom movement, led by Herb Kohl and George Dennison, recalled many of Parker's child centered reforms.\nThe late 1960s and early 1970s saw a rise and decline in the number of progressive schools. There were several reasons for the decline:\nProgressive education has been viewed as an alternative to the test-oriented instruction legislated by the No Child Left Behind educational funding act. Alfie Kohn has been an outspoken critic of the No Child Left Behind Act and a passionate defender of the progressive tradition.\nIn the East.\nIndia.\nRabindranath Tagore (1861\u20131941) was one of the most effective practitioners of the concept of https://. He expanded Santiniketan, which is a small town near Bolpur in the Birbhum district of West Bengal, India, approximately 160\u00a0km north of Kolkata. He de-emphasized textbook learning in favor of varied learning resources from nature. The emphasis here was on self-motivation rather than on discipline, and on fostering intellectual curiosity rather than competitive excellence. There were courses on a great variety of cultures, and study programs devoted to China, Japan, and the Middle East. He was of the view that education should be a \"joyous exercise of our inventive and constructive energies that help us to build up character.\"\nJapan.\nSeikatsu Tsuzurikata is a grassroots movement in Japan that has many parallels to the progressive education movement, but it developed completely independently, beginning in\nthe late 1920s. The Japanese progressive educational movement was one of the stepping stones to the modernization of Japan and it has resonated down to the present.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10006", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10006", "title": "Electronic musical instrument", "text": "Instrument that uses electronic circuits to make sound\nAn electronic musical instrument or electrophone is a musical instrument that produces sound using electronic circuitry. Such an instrument sounds by outputting an electrical, electronic or digital audio signal that ultimately is plugged into a power amplifier which drives a loudspeaker, creating the sound heard by the performer and listener.\nAn electronic instrument might include a user interface for controlling its sound, often by adjusting the pitch, frequency, or duration of each note. A common user interface is the musical keyboard, which functions similarly to the keyboard on an acoustic piano where the keys are each linked mechanically to swinging string hammers - whereas with an electronic keyboard, the keyboard interface is linked to a synth module, computer or other electronic or digital sound generator, which then creates a sound. However, it is increasingly common to separate user interface and sound-generating functions into a music controller (input device) and a music synthesizer, respectively, with the two devices communicating through a musical performance description language such as MIDI or Open Sound Control. The solid state nature of electronic keyboards also offers differing \"feel\" and \"response\", offering a novel experience in playing relative to operating a mechanically linked piano keyboard.\nAll electronic musical instruments can be viewed as a subset of audio signal processing applications. Simple electronic musical instruments are sometimes called sound effects; the border between sound effects and actual musical instruments is often unclear.\nIn the 21st century, electronic musical instruments are now widely used in most styles of music. In popular music styles such as electronic dance music, almost all of the instrument sounds used in recordings are electronic instruments (e.g., bass synth, synthesizer, drum machine). Development of new electronic musical instruments, controllers, and synthesizers continues to be a highly active and interdisciplinary field of research. Specialized conferences, such as the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, have organized to report cutting-edge work, as well as to provide a showcase for artists who perform or create music with new electronic music instruments, controllers, and synthesizers.\nClassification.\nIn musicology, electronic musical instruments are known as electrophones. Electrophones are the fifth category of musical instrument under the Hornbostel-Sachs system. Musicologists typically only classify music as electrophones if the sound is initially produced by electricity, excluding electronically controlled acoustic instruments such as pipe organs and amplified instruments such as electric guitars.\nThe category was added to the Hornbostel-Sachs musical instrument classification system by Sachs in 1940, in his 1940 book \"The History of Musical Instruments\"; the original 1914 version of the system did not include it. Sachs divided electrophones into three subcategories:\nThe last category included instruments such as theremins or synthesizers, which he called radioelectric instruments.\nFrancis William Galpin provided such a group in his own classification system, which is closer to Mahillon than Sachs-Hornbostel. For example, in Galpin's 1937 book \"A Textbook of European Musical Instruments\", he lists electrophones with three second-level divisions for sound generation (\"by oscillation\", \"electro-magnetic\", and \"electro-static\"), as well as third-level and fourth-level categories based on the control method.\nPresent-day ethnomusicologists, such as Margaret Kartomi and Terry Ellingson, suggest that, in keeping with the spirit of the original Hornbostel Sachs classification scheme, if one categorizes instruments by what first produces the initial sound in the instrument, that only subcategory 53 should remain in the electrophones category. Thus, it has been more recently proposed, for example, that the pipe organ (even if it uses electric key action to control solenoid valves) remain in the aerophones category, and that the electric guitar remain in the chordophones category, and so on.\nEarly examples.\nIn the 18th-century, musicians and composers adapted a number of acoustic instruments to exploit the novelty of electricity. Thus, in the broadest sense, the first electrified musical instrument was the Denis d'or keyboard, dating from 1753, followed shortly by the clavecin \u00e9lectrique by the Frenchman Jean-Baptiste de Laborde in 1761. The Denis d'or consisted of a keyboard instrument of over 700 strings, electrified temporarily to enhance sonic qualities. The clavecin \u00e9lectrique was a keyboard instrument with plectra (picks) activated electrically. However, neither instrument used electricity as a sound source.\nThe first electric synthesizer was invented in 1876 by Elisha Gray. The \"Musical Telegraph\" was a chance by-product of his telephone technology when Gray discovered that he could control sound from a self-vibrating electromagnetic circuit and so invented a basic oscillator. The Musical Telegraph used steel reeds oscillated by electromagnets and transmitted over a telephone line. Gray also built a simple loudspeaker device into later models, which consisted of a diaphragm vibrating in a magnetic field.\nA significant invention, which later had a profound effect on electronic music, was the audion in 1906. This was the first thermionic valve, or vacuum tube and which led to the generation and amplification of electrical signals, radio broadcasting, and electronic computation, among other things. Other early synthesizers included the Telharmonium (1897), the Theremin (1919), J\u00f6rg Mager's Spharophon (1924) and Partiturophone, Taubmann's similar Electronde (1933), Maurice Martenot's ondes Martenot (\"Martenot waves\", 1928), Trautwein's Trautonium (1930). The Mellertion (1933) used a non-standard scale, Bertrand's Dynaphone could produce octaves and perfect fifths, while the Emicon was an American, keyboard-controlled instrument constructed in 1930 and the German Hellertion combined four instruments to produce chords. Three Russian instruments also appeared, Oubouhof's Croix Sonore (1934), Ivor Darreg's microtonal 'Electronic Keyboard Oboe' (1937) and the ANS synthesizer, constructed by the Russian scientist Evgeny Murzin from 1937 to 1958. Only two models of this latter were built and the only surviving example is currently stored at the Lomonosov University in Moscow. It has been used in many Russian movies\u2014like \"Solaris\"\u2014to produce unusual, \"cosmic\" sounds.\nHugh Le Caine, John Hanert, Raymond Scott, composer Percy Grainger (with Burnett Cross), and others built a variety of automated electronic-music controllers during the late 1940s and 1950s. In 1959 Daphne Oram produced a novel method of synthesis, her \"Oramics\" technique, driven by drawings on a 35\u00a0mm film strip; it was used for a number of years at the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. This workshop was also responsible for the theme to the TV series \"Doctor Who\" a piece, largely created by Delia Derbyshire, that more than any other ensured the popularity of electronic music in the UK.\nTelharmonium.\nIn 1897 Thaddeus Cahill patented an instrument called the Telharmonium (or Teleharmonium, also known as the Dynamaphone). Using tonewheels to generate musical sounds as electrical signals by additive synthesis, it was capable of producing any combination of notes and overtones, at any dynamic level. This technology was later used to design the Hammond organ. Between 1901 and 1910 Cahill had three progressively larger and more complex versions made, the first weighing seven tons, the last in excess of 200 tons. Portability was managed only by rail and with the use of thirty boxcars. By 1912, public interest had waned, and Cahill's enterprise was bankrupt.\nTheremin.\nAnother development, which aroused the interest of many composers, occurred in 1919\u20131920. In Leningrad, Leon Theremin built and demonstrated his Etherophone, which was later renamed the Theremin. This led to the first compositions for electronic instruments, as opposed to noisemakers and re-purposed machines. The Theremin was notable for being the first musical instrument played without touching it. In 1929, Joseph Schillinger composed \"First Airphonic Suite for Theremin and Orchestra\", premi\u00e8red with the Cleveland Orchestra with Leon Theremin as soloist. The next year Henry Cowell commissioned Theremin to create the first electronic rhythm machine, called the Rhythmicon. Cowell wrote some compositions for it, which he and Schillinger premiered in 1932.\nOndes Martenot.\nThe ondes Martenot is played with a keyboard or by moving a ring along a wire, creating \"wavering\" sounds similar to a theremin. It was invented in 1928 by the French cellist Maurice Martenot, who was inspired by the accidental overlaps of tones between military radio oscillators, and wanted to create an instrument with the expressiveness of the cello.\nThe French composer Olivier Messiaen used the ondes Martenot in pieces such as his 1949 symphony \"Turangal\u00eela-Symphonie,\" and his sister-in-law Jeanne Loriod was a celebrated player. It appears in numerous film and television soundtracks, particularly science fiction and horror films. Contemporary users of the ondes Martenot include Tom Waits, Daft Punk and the Radiohead guitarist Jonny Greenwood.\nTrautonium.\nThe Trautonium was invented in 1928. It was based on the subharmonic scale, and the resulting sounds were often used to emulate bell or gong sounds, as in the 1950s Bayreuth productions of \"Parsifal\". In 1942, Richard Strauss used it for the bell- and gong-part in the Dresden premi\u00e8re of his \"Japanese Festival Music\". This new class of instruments, microtonal by nature, was only adopted slowly by composers at first, but by the early 1930s there was a burst of new works incorporating these and other electronic instruments.\nHammond organ and Novachord.\nIn 1929 Laurens Hammond established his company for the manufacture of electronic instruments. He went on to produce the Hammond organ, which was based on the principles of the Telharmonium, along with other developments, including early reverberation units. The Hammond organ is an electromechanical instrument, as it used both mechanical elements and electronic parts. A Hammond organ used spinning metal tonewheels to produce different sounds. A magnetic pickup similar in design to the pickups in an electric guitar is used to transmit the pitches in the tonewheels to an amplifier and speaker enclosure. While the Hammond organ was designed to be a lower-cost alternative to a pipe organ for church music, musicians soon discovered that the Hammond was an excellent instrument for blues and jazz; indeed, an entire genre of music developed built around this instrument, known as the organ trio (typically Hammond organ, drums, and a third instrument, either saxophone or guitar).\nThe first commercially manufactured synthesizer was the Novachord, built by the Hammond Organ Company from 1938 to 1942, which offered 72-note polyphony using 12 oscillators driving monostable-based divide-down circuits, basic envelope control and resonant low-pass filters. The instrument featured 163 vacuum tubes and weighed 500 pounds. The instrument's use of envelope control is significant, since this is perhaps the most significant distinction between the modern synthesizer and other electronic instruments.\nAnalogue synthesis 1950\u20131980.\nThe most commonly used electronic instruments are synthesizers, so-called because they artificially generate sound using a variety of techniques. All early circuit-based synthesis involved the use of analogue circuitry, particularly voltage-controlled amplifiers, oscillators and filters. An important technological development was the invention of the Clavivox synthesizer in 1956 by Raymond Scott with subassembly by Robert Moog. French composer and engineer Edgard Var\u00e8se created a variety of compositions using electronic horns, whistles, and tape. Most notably, he wrote \"Po\u00e8me \u00e9lectronique\" for the Philips pavilion at the Brussels World Fair in 1958.\nModular synthesizers.\nRCA produced experimental devices to synthesize voice and music in the 1950s. The Mark II Music Synthesizer, housed at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in New York City. Designed by Herbert Belar and Harry Olson at RCA, with contributions from Vladimir Ussachevsky and Peter Mauzey, it was installed at Columbia University in 1957. Consisting of a room-sized array of interconnected sound synthesis components, it was only capable of producing music by programming, using a paper tape sequencer punched with holes to control pitch sources and filters, similar to a mechanical player piano but capable of generating a wide variety of sounds. The vacuum tube system had to be patched to create timbres.\nIn the 1960s, synthesizers were still usually confined to studios due to their size. They were usually modular in design, their stand-alone signal sources and processors connected with patch cords or by other means and controlled by a common controlling device. Harald Bode, Don Buchla, Hugh Le Caine, Raymond Scott and Paul Ketoff were among the first to build such instruments in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Buchla later produced a commercial modular synthesizer, the Buchla Music Easel. Robert Moog, who had been a student of Peter Mauzey and one of the RCA Mark II engineers, created a synthesizer that could reasonably be used by musicians, designing the circuits while he was at Columbia-Princeton. The Moog synthesizer was first displayed at the Audio Engineering Society convention in 1964. It required experience to set up sounds, but was smaller and more intuitive than what had come before, less like a machine and more like a musical instrument. Moog established standards for control interfacing, using a logarithmic 1-volt-per-octave for pitch control and a separate triggering signal. This standardization allowed synthesizers from different manufacturers to operate simultaneously. Pitch control was usually performed either with an organ-style keyboard or a music sequencer producing a timed series of control voltages. During the late 1960s, hundreds of popular recordings used Moog synthesizers. Other early commercial synthesizer manufacturers included ARP, who also started with modular synthesizers before producing all-in-one instruments, and British firm EMS.\nIntegrated synthesizers.\nIn 1970, Moog designed the Minimoog, a non-modular synthesizer with a built-in keyboard. The analogue circuits were interconnected with switches in a simplified arrangement called \"normalization.\" Though less flexible than a modular design, normalization made the instrument more portable and easier to use. The Minimoog sold 12,000 units. Further standardized the design of subsequent synthesizers with its integrated keyboard, pitch and modulation wheels and VCO-&gt;VCF-&gt;VCA signal flow. It has become celebrated for its \"fat\" sound\u2014and its tuning problems. Miniaturized solid-state components allowed synthesizers to become self-contained, portable instruments that soon appeared in live performance and quickly became widely used in popular music and electronic art music.\nPolyphony.\nMany early analog synthesizers were monophonic, producing only one tone at a time. Popular monophonic synthesizers include the Moog Minimoog. A few, such as the Moog Sonic Six, ARP Odyssey and EML 101, could produce two different pitches at a time when two keys were pressed. Polyphony (multiple simultaneous tones, which enables chords) was only obtainable with electronic organ designs at first. Popular electronic keyboards combining organ circuits with synthesizer processing included the ARP Omni and Moog's Polymoog and Opus 3.\nBy 1976, affordable polyphonic synthesizers began to appear, such as the Yamaha CS-50, CS-60 and CS-80, the Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 and the Oberheim Four-Voice. These remained complex, heavy and relatively costly. The recording of settings in digital memory allowed storage and recall of sounds. The first practical polyphonic synth, and the first to use a microprocessor as a controller, was the Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 introduced in late 1977. For the first time, musicians had a practical polyphonic synthesizer that could save all knob settings in computer memory and recall them at the touch of a button. The Prophet-5's design paradigm became a new standard, slowly pushing out more complex and recondite modular designs.\nTape recording.\nIn 1935, another significant development was made in Germany. Allgemeine Elektricit\u00e4ts Gesellschaft (AEG) demonstrated the first commercially produced magnetic tape recorder, called the \"Magnetophon\". Audio tape, which had the advantage of being fairly light as well as having good audio fidelity, ultimately replaced the bulkier wire recorders.\nThe term \"electronic music\" (which first came into use during the 1930s) came to include the tape recorder as an essential element: \"electronically produced sounds recorded on tape and arranged by the composer to form a musical composition\". It was also indispensable to Musique concr\u00e8te.\nTape also gave rise to the first, analogue, sample-playback keyboards, the Chamberlin and its more famous successor the Mellotron, an electro-mechanical, polyphonic keyboard originally developed and built in Birmingham, England in the early 1960s.\nSound sequencer.\nDuring the 1940s\u20131960s, Raymond Scott, an American composer of electronic music, invented various kinds of music sequencers for his electric compositions. Step sequencers played rigid patterns of notes using a grid of (usually) 16 buttons, or steps, each step being 1/16 of a measure. These patterns of notes were then chained together to form longer compositions. Software sequencers were continuously utilized since the 1950s in the context of computer music, including computer-\"played\" music (software sequencer), computer-\"composed\" music (music synthesis), and computer \"sound generation\" (sound synthesis).\nDigital era 1980\u20132000.\nDigital synthesis.\nThe first digital synthesizers were academic experiments in sound synthesis using digital computers. FM synthesis was developed for this purpose, as a way of generating complex sounds digitally with the smallest number of computational operations per sound sample. In 1983, Yamaha introduced the first stand-alone digital synthesizer, the DX-7. It used frequency modulation synthesis (FM synthesis), first developed by John Chowning at Stanford University during the late sixties. Chowning exclusively licensed his FM synthesis patent to Yamaha in 1975. Yamaha subsequently released their first FM synthesizers, the GS-1 and GS-2, which were costly and heavy. There followed a pair of smaller, preset versions, the CE20 and CE25 Combo Ensembles, targeted primarily at the home organ market and featuring four-octave keyboards. Yamaha's third generation of digital synthesizers was a commercial success; it consisted of the DX7 and DX9 (1983). Both models were compact, reasonably priced, and dependent on custom digital integrated circuits to produce FM tonalities. The DX7 was the first mass-market all-digital synthesizer. It became indispensable to many music artists of the 1980s, and demand soon exceeded supply. The DX7 sold over 200,000 units within three years.\nThe DX series was not easy to program but offered a detailed, percussive sound that led to the demise of the electro-mechanical Rhodes piano, which was heavier and larger than a DX synth. Following the success of FM synthesis, Yamaha signed a contract with Stanford University in 1989 to develop digital waveguide synthesis, leading to the first commercial physical modeling synthesizer, Yamaha's VL-1, in 1994. The DX-7 was affordable enough for amateurs and young bands to buy, unlike the costly synthesizers of previous generations, which were mainly used by top professionals.\nSampling.\nThe Fairlight CMI (Computer Musical Instrument), the first polyphonic digital sampler, was the harbinger of sample-based synthesizers. Designed in 1978 by Peter Vogel and Kim Ryrie and based on a dual microprocessor computer designed by Tony Furse in Sydney, Australia, the Fairlight CMI gave musicians the ability to modify volume, attack, decay, and use special effects like vibrato. Sample waveforms could be displayed on-screen and modified using a light pen. The Synclavier from New England Digital was a similar system. Jon Appleton (with Jones and Alonso) invented the Dartmouth Digital Synthesizer, later to become the New England Digital Corp's Synclavier. The Kurzweil K250, first produced in 1983, was also a successful polyphonic digital music synthesizer, noted for its ability to reproduce several instruments synchronously and having a velocity-sensitive keyboard.\nComputer music.\nAn important new development was the advent of computers for the purpose of composing music, as opposed to manipulating or creating sounds. Iannis Xenakis began what is called \"musique stochastique,\" or \"stochastic music\", which is a method of composing that employs mathematical probability systems. Different probability algorithms were used to create a piece under a set of parameters. Xenakis used graph paper and a ruler to aid in calculating the velocity trajectories of glissando for his orchestral composition \"Metastasis\" (1953\u201354), but later turned to the use of computers to compose pieces like \"ST/4\" for string quartet and \"ST/48\" for orchestra (both 1962).\nThe impact of computers continued in 1956. Lejaren Hiller and Leonard Issacson composed \"Illiac Suite\" for string quartet, the first complete work of computer-assisted composition using algorithmic composition.\nIn 1957, Max Mathews at Bell Lab wrote MUSIC-N series, a first computer program family for generating digital audio waveforms through direct synthesis. Then Barry Vercoe wrote MUSIC 11 based on MUSIC IV-BF, a next-generation music synthesis program (later evolving into csound, which is still widely used).\nIn mid 80s, Miller Puckette at IRCAM developed graphic signal-processing software for 4X called Max (after Max Mathews), and later ported it to Macintosh (with Dave Zicarelli extending it for Opcode) for real-time MIDI control, bringing algorithmic composition availability to most composers with modest computer programming background.\nMIDI.\nIn 1980, a group of musicians and music merchants met to standardize an interface by which new instruments could communicate control instructions with other instruments and the prevalent microcomputer. This standard was dubbed MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface). A paper was authored by Dave Smith of Sequential Circuits and proposed to the Audio Engineering Society in 1981. Then, in August 1983, the MIDI Specification 1.0 was finalized.\nThe advent of MIDI technology allows a single keystroke, control wheel motion, pedal movement, or command from a microcomputer to activate every device in the studio remotely and in synchrony, with each device responding according to conditions predetermined by the composer.\nMIDI instruments and software made powerful control of sophisticated instruments easily affordable by many studios and individuals. Acoustic sounds became reintegrated into studios via sampling and sampled-ROM-based instruments.\nModern electronic musical instruments.\nThe increasing power and decreasing cost of sound-generating electronics (and especially of the personal computer), combined with the standardization of the MIDI and Open Sound Control musical performance description languages, has facilitated the separation of musical instruments into music controllers and music synthesizers.\nBy far the most common musical controller is the musical keyboard. Other controllers include the radiodrum, Akai's EWI and Yamaha's WX wind controllers, the guitar-like SynthAxe, the BodySynth, the Buchla Thunder, the Continuum Fingerboard, the Roland Octapad, various isomorphic keyboards including the Thummer, and Kaossilator Pro, and kits like I-CubeX.\nReactable.\nThe Reactable is a round translucent table with a backlit interactive display. By placing and manipulating blocks called \"tangibles\" on the table surface, while interacting with the visual display via finger gestures, a virtual modular synthesizer is operated, creating music or sound effects.\nPercussa AudioCubes.\nAudioCubes are autonomous wireless cubes powered by an internal computer system and rechargeable battery. They have internal RGB lighting, and are capable of detecting each other's location, orientation and distance. The cubes can also detect distances to the user's hands and fingers. Through interaction with the cubes, a variety of music and sound software can be operated. AudioCubes have applications in sound design, music production, DJing and live performance.\nKaossilator.\nThe Kaossilator and Kaossilator Pro are compact instruments where the position of a finger on the touch pad controls two note characteristics; usually the pitch is changed with a left-right motion and the tonal property, filter or other parameter changes with an up-down motion. The touch pad can be set to different musical scales and keys. The instrument can record a repeating loop of adjustable length, set to any tempo, and new loops of sound can be layered on top of existing ones. This lends itself to electronic dance music but is more limited for controlled sequences of notes, as the pad on a regular Kaossilator is featureless.\nEigenharp.\nThe Eigenharp is a large instrument resembling a bassoon, which can be interacted with through big buttons, a drum sequencer and a mouthpiece. The sound processing is done on a separate computer.\nAlphaSphere.\nThe AlphaSphere is a spherical instrument that consists of 48 tactile pads that respond to pressure as well as touch. Custom software allows the pads to be indefinitely programmed individually or by groups in terms of function, note, and pressure parameter among many other settings. The primary concept of the AlphaSphere is to increase the level of expression available to electronic musicians by allowing for the playing style of a musical instrument.\nChip music.\nChiptune, chipmusic, or chip music is music written in sound formats where many of the sound textures are synthesized or sequenced in real time by a computer or video game console sound chip, sometimes including sample-based synthesis and low-bit sample playback. Many chip music devices featured synthesizers in tandem with low-rate sample playback.\nDIY culture.\nDuring the late 1970s and early 1980s, do-it-yourself designs were published in hobby electronics magazines (such the Formant modular synth, a DIY clone of the Moog system, published by Elektor) and kits were supplied by companies such as Paia in the US, and Maplin Electronics in the UK.\nCircuit bending.\nIn 1966, Reed Ghazala discovered and began to teach math \"circuit bending\"\u2014the application of the creative short circuit, a process of chance short-circuiting, creating experimental electronic instruments, exploring sonic elements mainly of timbre and with less regard to pitch or rhythm, and influenced by John Cage\u2019s aleatoric music concept.\nMuch of this manipulation of circuits directly, especially to the point of destruction, was pioneered by Louis and Bebe Barron in the early 1950s, such as their work with John Cage on the \"Williams Mix\" and especially in the soundtrack to \"Forbidden Planet\".\nModern circuit bending is the creative customization of the circuits within electronic devices such as low voltage, battery-powered guitar effects, children's toys and small digital synthesizers to create new musical or visual instruments and sound generators. Emphasizing spontaneity and randomness, the techniques of circuit bending have been commonly associated with noise music, though many more conventional contemporary musicians and musical groups have been known to experiment with \"bent\" instruments. Circuit bending usually involves dismantling the machine and adding components such as switches and potentiometers that alter the circuit. With the revived interest in analogue synthesizers, circuit bending became a cheap solution for many experimental musicians to create their own individual analogue sound generators. Nowadays, many schematics can be found to build noise generators such as the Atari Punk Console or the Dub Siren as well as simple modifications for children's toys such as the Speak &amp; Spell that are often modified by circuit benders.\nModular synthesizers.\nThe modular synthesizer is a type of synthesizer consisting of separate interchangeable modules. These are also available as kits for hobbyist DIY constructors. Many hobbyist designers also make available bare PCB boards and front panels for sale to other hobbyists.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTechnologies\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInstrument families\nIndividual instruments (historical)\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndividual instruments (modern)\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Indian and Asian traditional music\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10008", "revid": "50812974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10008", "title": "Electrode", "text": "Electrical conductor used to make contact with nonmetallic parts of a circuit\nAn electrode is an electrical conductor used to make contact with a nonmetallic part of a circuit (e.g. a semiconductor, an electrolyte, a vacuum or a gas). In electrochemical cells, electrodes are essential parts that can consist of a variety of materials (chemicals) depending on the type of cell. An electrode may be called either a cathode or anode according to the direction of the electric current, unrelated to the potential difference between electrodes.\nMichael Faraday coined the term \"electrode\" in 1833; the word recalls the Greek \u1f24\u03bb\u03b5\u03ba\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd (, \"amber\") and \u1f41\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2 (, \"path, way\").\nThe electrophore, invented by Johan Wilcke in 1762, was an early version of an electrode used to study static electricity.\nAnode and cathode in electrochemical cells.\nElectrodes are an essential part of any battery. The first electrochemical battery was devised by Alessandro Volta and was aptly named the Voltaic cell. This battery consisted of a stack of copper and zinc electrodes separated by brine-soaked paper disks. Due to fluctuation in the voltage provided by the voltaic cell, it was not very practical. The first practical battery was invented in 1839 and named the Daniell cell after John Frederic Daniell. It still made use of the zinc\u2013copper electrode combination. Since then, many more batteries have been developed using various materials. The basis of all these is still using two electrodes, anodes and cathodes.\nAnode.\n'Anode' was coined by William Whewell at Michael Faraday's request, derived from the Greek words \u1f04\u03bd\u03bf (ano), 'upwards' and \u1f41\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2 (hod\u00f3s), 'a way'. The anode is the electrode through which the conventional current enters from the electrical circuit of an electrochemical cell (battery) into the non-metallic cell. The electrons then flow to the other side of the battery. Benjamin Franklin surmised that the electrical flow moved from positive to negative. The electrons flow away from the anode and the conventional current towards it. From both can be concluded that the electric potential of the anode is negative. The electron entering the anode comes from the oxidation reaction that takes place next to it.\nCathode.\nThe cathode is in many ways the opposite of the anode. The name (also coined by Whewell) comes from the Greek words \u03ba\u03ac\u03c4\u03c9 (kato), 'downwards' and \u1f41\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2 (hod\u00f3s), 'a way'. It is the positive electrode, meaning the electrons flow from the electrical circuit through the cathode into the non-metallic part of the electrochemical cell. At the cathode, the reduction reaction takes place with the electrons arriving from the wire connected to the cathode and are absorbed by the oxidizing agent.\nPrimary cell.\nA primary cell is a battery designed to be used once and then discarded. This is due to the electrochemical reactions taking place at the electrodes in the cell not being reversible. An example of a primary cell is the discardable alkaline battery commonly used in flashlights. Consisting of a zinc anode and a manganese oxide cathode in which ZnO is formed.\nThe half-reactions are:\n Zn(s) + 2OH\u2212(aq) \u2192 ZnO(s) + H2O(l) + 2e\u2212 formula_1 [\"E\"0oxidation = \u22121.28\u00a0V]\n 2MnO2(s) + H2O(l) + 2e\u2212 \u2192 Mn2O3(s) + 2OH\u2212(aq)formula_2 [\"E\"0reduction = +0.15\u00a0V]\nOverall reaction:\n Zn(s) + 2MnO2(s) \u21cc ZnO(s) + Mn2O3(s)formula_1 [\"E\"0total = +1.43\u00a0V]\nThe ZnO is prone to clumping and will give less efficient discharge if recharged again. It is possible to recharge these batteries but is due to safety concerns advised against by the manufacturer. Other primary cells include zinc\u2013carbon, zinc\u2013chloride, and lithium iron disulfide.\nSecondary cell.\nContrary to the primary cell a secondary cell can be recharged. The first was the lead\u2013acid battery, invented in 1859 by French physicist Gaston Plant\u00e9. This type of battery is still the most widely used in automobiles, among others. The cathode consists of lead dioxide (PbO2) and the anode of solid lead. Other commonly used rechargeable batteries are nickel\u2013cadmium, nickel\u2013metal hydride, and Lithium-ion. The last of which will be explained more thoroughly in this article due to its importance.\nMarcus's theory of electron transfer.\nMarcus theory is a theory originally developed by Nobel laureate Rudolph A. Marcus and explains the rate at which an electron can move from one chemical species to another, for this article this can be seen as 'jumping' from the electrode to a species in the solvent or vice versa.\nWe can represent the problem as calculating the transfer rate for the transfer of an electron from donor to an acceptor \n D + A \u2192 D+ + A\u2212\nThe potential energy of the system is a function of the translational, rotational, and vibrational coordinates of the reacting species and the molecules of the surrounding medium, collectively called the reaction coordinates. The abscissa the figure to the right represents these. From the classical electron transfer theory, the expression of the reaction rate constant (probability of reaction) can be calculated, if a non-adiabatic process and parabolic potential energy are assumed, by finding the point of intersection (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;). One important thing to note, and was noted by Marcus when he came up with the theory, the electron transfer must abide by the law of conservation of energy and the Frank-Condon principle. \nDoing this and then rearranging this leads to the expression of the free energy activation (&amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;) in terms of the overall free energy of the reaction (&amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;).\nformula_4\nIn which the formula_5 is the reorganisation energy.\nFilling this result in the classically derived Arrhenius equation\nformula_6\nleads to\nformula_7\nwith \"A\" being the pre-exponential factor, which is usually experimentally determined, although a semi-classical derivation provides more information as is explained below.\nThis classically derived result qualitatively reproduced observations of a maximum electron transfer rate under the conditions &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For a more extensive mathematical treatment one could read the paper by Newton. An interpretation of this result and what a closer look at the physical meaning of the formula_8 one can read the paper by Marcus.\nThe situation at hand can be more accurately described by using the displaced harmonic oscillator model, in this model quantum tunneling is allowed. This is needed in order to explain why even at near-zero absolute temperature there are still electron transfers, in contradiction with the classical theory.\nWithout going into too much detail on how the derivation is done, it rests on using Fermi's golden rule from time-dependent perturbation theory with the full Hamiltonian of the system. It is possible to look at the overlap in the wavefunctions of both the reactants and the products (the right and the left side of the chemical reaction) and therefore when their energies are the same and allow for electron transfer. As touched on before this must happen because only then conservation of energy is abided by. Skipping over a few mathematical steps the probability of electron transfer can be calculated (albeit quite difficult) using the following formula\nformula_9\nIn this equation, \"\u03bc\" represents the chemical potential, with \"\u03bc\"o being its reference value. \"T\" stands for the temperature and \"k\" the Boltzmann constant. The term \"\u03b3\" inside the logarithm is the activity and \"x\" is the ratio of the ion to the total composition of the electrode. The novel term \u03a9 is the partial molar volume of the ion in the host and \"\u03c3\" corresponds to the mean stress felt by the system. The result of this equation is that diffusion, which is dependent on chemical potential, gets impacted by the added stress and, therefore changes the battery's performance. Furthermore, mechanical stresses may also impact the electrode's solid-electrolyte-interphase layer. The interface which regulates the ion and charge transfer and can be degraded by stress. Thus, more ions in the solution will be consumed to reform it, diminishing the overall efficiency of the system.\nOther anodes and cathodes.\nIn a vacuum tube or a semiconductor having polarity (diodes, electrolytic capacitors) the anode is the positive (+) electrode and the cathode the negative (\u2212). The electrons enter the device through the cathode and exit the device through the anode. Many devices have other electrodes to control operation, e.g., base, gate, control grid.\nIn a three-electrode cell, a counter electrode, also called an auxiliary electrode, is used only to make a connection to the electrolyte so that a current can be applied to the working electrode. The counter electrode is usually made of an inert material, such as a noble metal or graphite, to keep it from dissolving.\nWelding electrodes.\nIn arc welding, an electrode is used to conduct current through a workpiece to fuse two pieces together. Depending upon the process, the electrode is either consumable, in the case of gas metal arc welding or shielded metal arc welding, or non-consumable, such as in gas tungsten arc welding. For a direct current system, the weld rod or stick may be a cathode for a filling type weld or an anode for other welding processes. For an alternating current arc welder, the welding electrode would not be considered an anode or cathode.\nAlternating current electrodes.\nFor electrical systems which use alternating current, the electrodes are the connections from the circuitry to the object to be acted upon by the electric current but are not designated anode or cathode because the direction of flow of the electrons changes periodically, usually many times per second.\nChemically modified electrodes.\nChemically modified electrodes are electrodes that have their surfaces chemically modified to change the electrode's physical, chemical, electrochemical, optical, electrical, and transportive properties. These electrodes are used for advanced purposes in research and investigation.\nUses.\nElectrodes are used to provide current through nonmetal objects to alter them in numerous ways and to measure conductivity for numerous purposes. Examples include:\nTypes of material used for electrode.\nDifferent electrode materials are selected based on base metal, weld strength, and service conditions. Common examples include:\nMild steels.\nThese electrodes are used for general-purpose welding.\nStainless steels.\nUsed where corrosion resistance is needed.\nCast iron.\nDesigned for repairing or joining cast iron components.\nNickel alloys.\nUsed for high-temperature, corrosive, or dissimilar metal welding.\nAluminum.\nApplied where lightweight, conductive, or corrosion-resistant joints are required.\nTitanium.\nUsed in aerospace, chemical, and high-temperature applications.\nCopper and copper alloys.\nUsed for conductive applications and joining copper-based alloys.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10009", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10009", "title": "Electroconvulsive Therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "10011", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10011", "title": "Epistolary novel", "text": "Novel written as a series of letters\nAn epistolary novel () is a novel written as a series of letters between the fictional characters of a narrative. The term is often extended to cover novels that intersperse other kinds of fictional document with the letters, most commonly diary entries and newspaper clippings, and sometimes considered to include novels composed of documents even if they do not include letters at all. More recently, epistolaries may include electronic documents such as recordings and radio, blog posts, and e-mails. The word \"epistolary\" is derived from Latin from the Greek word (), meaning a letter &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. This type of fiction is also sometimes known by the German term Briefroman or more generally as epistolary fiction.\nThe epistolary form can be seen as adding greater realism to a story, due to the text existing diegetically within the lives of the characters. It is in particular able to demonstrate differing points of view without recourse to the device of an omniscient narrator. An important strategic device in the epistolary novel for creating the impression of authenticity of the letters is the fictional editor.\nClassical antiquity.\nAncient Greek and Roman literature supplied the model for storytelling by letters. While these ancient works are not novels in the modern sense, they established key techniques that became foundational for later epistolary fiction. Greek and Roman authors demonstrated how fictional letters could sustain narrative, present multiple perspectives, and incorporate the material aspects of writing and delivery into storytelling.\nGreek authors embedded letters inside narrative histories, tragedies, and prose romances, and they also produced self-contained collections of fictional letters. Modern scholarship describes a \"wealth of Greek antecedents\" for later epistolary novels that range from embedded missives in the Greek novels to entire story cycles written only as letters.\nLetters are central to plot construction across the surviving Greek prose romances, where intercepts, misdeliveries, and copied messages catalyze reversals and reveal private motives. This epistolary scaffolding is systematic enough to be treated as a narratological feature of the genre. Alongside embedded letters, Imperial-period writers cultivated fictional letter collections that create miniature social worlds. The most influential are attributed to Alciphron, Aelian, and Philostratus, preserved in a standard Loeb Classical Library edition. These collections adopt the voices of fishermen, farmers, parasites, courtesans, and elite lovers, presenting vignette-like \"miniatures\" that dramatize desire, deception, and social pose through the letter form.\nA key Greek example is the anonymous \"Letters of Chion of Heraclea\", an epistolary novella that narrates a philosopher's education and his conspiracy against the tyrant Clearchus entirely through seventeen letters. Recent analysis calls the work a \"historical epistolary novel\" and emphasizes its \"continuous narrative\" achieved through first-person correspondence. However, the date is debated with a second-century CE composition often preferred, while some argue for a later late-antique setting.\nLatin literature also offered powerful epistolary models. Ovid's \"Heroides\" presents mythic heroines speaking in first-person verse letters to absent lovers. Ancient readers knew the collection as letters, and Ovid himself advertises the experiment in \"Ars Amatoria\" 3.345\u2013346. Modern studies treat the \"Heroides\" as a sustained epistolary fiction that explores voice, desire, and addressivity. Late antique Latin romance likewise integrates letters into plot architecture. The widely transmitted \"Historia Apollonii regis Tyri\" shows how epistolary exchange could move a prose narrative forward in Latin as well as Greek.\nEarly works.\nThere are two theories on the genesis of the epistolary novel: The first claims that the genre originated from novels with inserted letters, in which the portion containing the third-person narrative in between the letters was gradually reduced. The other theory claims that the epistolary novel arose from miscellanies of letters and poetry: some of the letters were tied together into a (mostly amorous) plot. There is evidence to support both claims. The first truly epistolary novel, the Spanish \"Prison of Love\" (\"C\u00e1rcel de amor\") (c.\u20091485) by Diego de San Pedro, belongs to a tradition of novels in which a large number of inserted letters already dominated the narrative. Other well-known examples of early epistolary novels are closely related to the tradition of letter-books and miscellanies of letters. Within the successive editions of Edm\u00e9 Boursault's \"Letters of Respect, Gratitude and Love\" (\"Lettres de respect, d'obligation et d'amour\") (1669), a group of letters written to a girl named Babet were expanded and became more and more distinct from the other letters, until it formed a small epistolary novel entitled \"Letters to Babet\" (\"Lettres \u00e0 Babet\"). The immensely famous \"Letters of a Portuguese Nun\" (\"Lettres portugaises\") (1669) generally attributed to Gabriel-Joseph de La Vergne, comte de Guilleragues, though a small minority still regard Marianna Alcoforado as the author, is claimed to be intended to be part of a miscellany of Guilleragues prose and poetry. The founder of the epistolary novel in English is said by many to be James Howell (1594\u20131666) with \"Familiar Letters\" (1645\u201350), who writes of prison, foreign adventure, and the love of women.\nIt has been argued that the first work to fully utilize the potential of an epistolary novel may have been \"Love-Letters Between a Nobleman and His Sister\". This work was published anonymously in three volumes (1684, 1685, and 1687), and has been attributed to Aphra Behn though its authorship remains disputed in the 21st century. The novel shows the genre's results of changing perspectives: individual points were presented by the individual characters, and the central voice of the author and moral evaluation disappeared (at least in the first volume; further volumes introduced a narrator). The author furthermore explored a realm of intrigue with complex scenarios such as letters that fall into the wrong hands, faked letters, or letters withheld by protagonists.\n18th century to modern era.\nThe epistolary novel as a genre became popular in the 18th century in the works of such authors as Samuel Richardson, with his immensely successful novels \"Pamela\" (1740) and \"Clarissa\" (1749). John Cleland's early erotic novel \"Fanny Hill\" (1748) is written as a series of letters from the titular character to an unnamed recipient. In France, there was \"Lettres persanes\" (1721) by Montesquieu, followed by \"Julie, ou la nouvelle H\u00e9lo\u00efse\" (1761) by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Choderlos de Laclos' \"Les Liaisons dangereuses\" (1782), which used the epistolary form to great dramatic effect, because the sequence of events was not always related directly or explicitly. In Germany, there was Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" (\"Die Leiden des jungen Werther\") (1774) and Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin's \"Hyperion\". The first Canadian novel, \"The History of Emily Montague\" (1769) by Frances Brooke, and twenty years later the first American novel, \"The Power of Sympathy\" (1789) by William Hill Brown, were both written in epistolary form.\nStarting in the 18th century, the epistolary form was subject to much ridicule, resulting in a number of savage burlesques. The most notable example of these was Henry Fielding's \"Shamela\" (1741), written as a parody of \"Pamela\". In it, the female narrator can be found wielding a pen and scribbling her diary entries under the most dramatic and unlikely of circumstances. Oliver Goldsmith used the form to satirical effect in \"The Citizen of the World\", subtitled \"Letters from a Chinese Philosopher Residing in London to his Friends in the East\" (1760\u201361). So did the diarist Fanny Burney in a successful comic first novel, \"Evelina\" (1788).\nThe epistolary novel slowly became less popular after the 18th century. Although Jane Austen tried the epistolary in juvenile writings and her novella \"Lady Susan\" (1794), she abandoned this structure for her later work. It is thought that her lost novel \"First Impressions\", which was redrafted to become \"Pride and Prejudice\", may have been epistolary: \"Pride and Prejudice\" contains an unusual number of letters quoted in full and some play a critical role in the plot.\nThe epistolary form nonetheless saw continued use, surviving in exceptions or in fragments in nineteenth-century novels. In Honor\u00e9 de Balzac's novel \"Letters of Two Brides\", two women who became friends during their education at a convent correspond over a 17-year period, exchanging letters describing their lives. Mary Shelley employs the epistolary form in her novel \"Frankenstein\" (1818). Shelley uses the letters as one of a variety of framing devices, as the story is presented through the letters of a sea captain and scientific explorer attempting to reach the north pole who encounters Victor Frankenstein and records the dying man's narrative and confessions. Published in 1848, Anne Bront\u00eb's novel \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\" is framed as a retrospective letter from one of the main heroes to his friend and brother-in-law with the diary of the eponymous tenant inside it. In the late 19th century, Bram Stoker released one of the most widely recognized and successful novels in the epistolary form to date, \"Dracula\". Printed in 1897, the novel is compiled entirely of letters, diary entries, newspaper clippings, telegrams, doctor's notes, ship's logs, and the like.\nThe biographic stylings of the Sherlock Holmes adventures by Arthur Conan Doyle have led to the tradition of a \"Sherlockian game\" among the Sherlock Holmes fandom, where fans discuss the supposed writings of Dr. Watson as though they were a genuine account of a real detective for whom Doyle only acted as a literary agent.\nTypes.\nEpistolary novels can be categorized based on the number of people whose letters are included. This gives three types of epistolary novels: monophonic (giving the letters of only one character, like \"Letters of a Portuguese Nun\" and \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\"), dialogic (giving the letters of two characters, like Mme Marie Jeanne Riccoboni's \"Letters of Fanni Butler\" (1757), and polyphonic (with three or more letter-writing characters, such as in Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\").\nA crucial element in polyphonic epistolary novels like \"Clarissa\" and \"Dangerous Liaisons\" is the dramatic device of 'discrepant awareness': the simultaneous but separate correspondences of the heroines and the villains creating dramatic tension. They can also be classified according to their type and quantity of use of non-letter documents, though this has obvious correlations with the number of voices \u2013 for example, newspaper clippings are unlikely to feature heavily in a monophonic epistolary and considerably more likely in a polyphonic one.\nNotable works.\nThe epistolary novel form has continued to be used after the eighteenth century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10013", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10013", "title": "Evidence-based medicine", "text": "Illness diagnosis, treatment and prevention based on data collection and analysis\nEvidence-based medicine (EBM), sometimes known within healthcare as evidence-based practice (EBP), is \"the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. It means integrating individual clinical expertise with the best available external clinical evidence from systematic research.\" The aim of EBM is to integrate the experience of the clinician, the values of the patient, and the best available scientific information to guide decision-making about clinical management. The term was originally used to describe an approach to teaching the practice of medicine and improving decisions by individual physicians about individual patients.\nThe EBM Pyramid is a tool that helps in visualizing the hierarchy of evidence in medicine, from least authoritative, like expert opinions, to most authoritative, like systematic reviews.\nAdoption of evidence-based medicine is necessary in a human rights-based approach to public health and a precondition for accessing the right to health.\nBackground, history, and definition.\nMedicine has a long history of scientific inquiry into the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of human disease. In the 11th century AD, Avicenna, a Persian physician and philosopher, developed an approach to EBM that was mostly similar to current ideas and practises.\nThe concept of a controlled clinical trial was first described in 1662 by Jan Baptist van Helmont in reference to the practice of bloodletting. Wrote Van Helmont:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let us take out of the Hospitals, out of the Camps, or from elsewhere, 200, or 500 poor People, that have fevers or Pleuritis. Let us divide them in Halfes, let us cast lots, that one halfe of them may fall to my share, and the others to yours; I will cure them without blood-letting and sensible evacuation; but you do, as ye know ... we shall see how many Funerals both of us shall have...\nThe first published report describing the conduct and results of a controlled clinical trial was by James Lind, a Scottish naval surgeon who conducted research on scurvy during his time aboard HMS \"Salisbury\" in the Channel Fleet, while patrolling the Bay of Biscay. Lind divided the sailors participating in his experiment into six groups, so that the effects of various treatments could be fairly compared. Lind found improvement in symptoms and signs of scurvy among the group of men treated with lemons or oranges. He published a treatise describing the results of this experiment in 1753.\nAn early critique of statistical methods in medicine was published in 1835, in Comtes Rendus de l'Acad\u00e9mie des Sciences, Paris, by a man referred to as \"Mr Civiale\".\nIn 1990, Gordon Guyatt, then a young internal medicine residency coordinator at McMaster University, introduced a teaching method he initially termed \"Scientific Medicine.\" This approach emphasized applying critical appraisal techniques directly to bedside clinical decision-making, building on the work of his mentor, David Sackett. However, the concept met resistance from colleagues, as it implied that existing clinical practices lacked scientific rigor, even though this was likely true. To address this, Guyatt rebranded the approach as \"Evidence-Based Medicine\", a term first formally introduced in a 1991 editorial in the ACP Journal Club. Although the name was coined in 1991, it took several years after and a concerted efforts of many other teams to define the foundations of this method.\nAlthough more popular in medicine, the concept of \"evidence-based\" is spreading to other disciplines, such as the humanities, and to languages other than English, albeit at a slower pace.\nClinical decision-making.\nAlvan Feinstein's publication of \"Clinical Judgment\" in 1967 focused attention on the role of clinical reasoning and identified biases that can affect it. In 1972, Archie Cochrane published \"Effectiveness and Efficiency\", which described the lack of controlled trials supporting many practices that had previously been assumed to be effective. In 1973, John Wennberg began to document wide variations in how physicians practiced. Through the 1980s, David M. Eddy described errors in clinical reasoning and gaps in evidence. In the mid-1980s, Alvin Feinstein, David Sackett and others published textbooks on clinical epidemiology, which translated epidemiological methods to physician decision-making. Toward the end of the 1980s, a group at RAND showed that large proportions of procedures performed by physicians were considered inappropriate even by the standards of their own experts.\nEvidence-based guidelines and policies.\nDavid M. Eddy first began to use the term 'evidence-based' in 1987 in workshops and a manual commissioned by the Council of Medical Specialty Societies to teach formal methods for designing clinical practice guidelines. The manual was eventually published by the American College of Physicians. Eddy first published the term 'evidence-based' in March 1990, in an article in the \"Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA)\" that laid out the principles of evidence-based guidelines and population-level policies, which Eddy described as \"explicitly describing the available evidence that pertains to a policy and tying the policy to evidence instead of standard-of-care practices or the beliefs of experts. The pertinent evidence must be identified, described, and analyzed. The policymakers must determine whether the policy is justified by the evidence. A rationale must be written.\" He discussed evidence-based policies in several other papers published in \"JAMA\" in the spring of 1990. Those papers were part of a series of 28 published in \"JAMA\" between 1990 and 1997 on formal methods for designing population-level guidelines and policies.\nMedical education.\nThe term 'evidence-based medicine' was introduced slightly later, in the context of medical education. In the autumn of 1990, Gordon Guyatt used it in an unpublished description of a program at McMaster University for prospective or new medical students. Guyatt and others first published the term two years later (1992) to describe a new approach to teaching the practice of medicine.\nIn 1996, David Sackett and colleagues clarified the definition of this tributary of evidence-based medicine as \"the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. ... [It] means integrating individual clinical expertise with the best available external clinical evidence from systematic research.\" This branch of evidence-based medicine aims to make individual decision making more structured and objective by better reflecting the evidence from research. Population-based data are applied to the care of an individual patient, while respecting the fact that practitioners have clinical expertise reflected in effective and efficient diagnosis and thoughtful identification and compassionate use of individual patients' predicaments, rights, and preferences.\nBetween 1993 and 2000, the Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group at McMaster University published the methods to a broad physician audience in a series of 25 \"Users' Guides to the Medical Literature\" in \"JAMA\". In 1995 Rosenberg and Donald defined individual-level, evidence-based medicine as \"the process of finding, appraising, and using contemporaneous research findings as the basis for medical decisions.\" In 2010, Greenhalgh used a definition that emphasized quantitative methods: \"the use of mathematical estimates of the risk of benefit and harm, derived from high-quality research on population samples, to inform clinical decision-making in the diagnosis, investigation or management of individual patients.\"\nThe two original definitions highlight important differences in how evidence-based medicine is applied to populations versus individuals. When designing guidelines applied to large groups of people in settings with relatively little opportunity for modification by individual physicians, evidence-based policymaking emphasizes that good evidence should exist to document a test's or treatment's effectiveness. In the setting of individual decision-making, practitioners can be given greater latitude in how they interpret research and combine it with their clinical judgment. In 2005, Eddy offered an umbrella definition for the two branches of EBM: \"Evidence-based medicine is a set of principles and methods intended to ensure that to the greatest extent possible, medical decisions, guidelines, and other types of policies are based on and consistent with good evidence of effectiveness and benefit.\"\nProgress.\nIn the area of evidence-based guidelines and policies, the explicit insistence on evidence of effectiveness was introduced by the American Cancer Society in 1980. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) began issuing guidelines for preventive interventions based on evidence-based principles in 1984. In 1985, the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association applied strict evidence-based criteria for covering new technologies. Beginning in 1987, specialty societies such as the American College of Physicians, and voluntary health organizations such as the American Heart Association, wrote many evidence-based guidelines. In 1991, Kaiser Permanente, a managed care organization in the US, began an evidence-based guidelines program. In 1991, Richard Smith wrote an editorial in the \"British Medical Journal\" and introduced the ideas of evidence-based policies in the UK. In 1993, the Cochrane Collaboration created a network of 13 countries to produce systematic reviews and guidelines. In 1997, the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ, then known as the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, or AHCPR) established Evidence-based Practice Centers (EPCs) to produce evidence reports and technology assessments to support the development of guidelines. In the same year, a National Guideline Clearinghouse that followed the principles of evidence-based policies was created by AHRQ, the AMA, and the American Association of Health Plans (now America's Health Insurance Plans). In 1999, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) was created in the UK to circulate evidence and guidance on treatments within the NHS.\nIn the area of medical education, medical schools in Canada, the US, the UK, Australia, and other countries now offer programs that teach evidence-based medicine. A 2009 study of UK programs found that more than half of UK medical schools offered some training in evidence-based medicine, although the methods and content varied considerably, and EBM teaching was restricted by lack of curriculum time, trained tutors and teaching materials. Many programs have been developed to help individual physicians gain better access to evidence. For example, UpToDate was created in the early 1990s. The Cochrane Collaboration began publishing evidence reviews in 1993. In 1995, BMJ Publishing Group launched Clinical Evidence, a 6-monthly periodical that provided brief summaries of the current state of evidence about important clinical questions for clinicians.\nCurrent practice.\nBy 2000, use of the term \"evidence-based\" had extended to other levels of the health care system. An example is evidence-based health services, which seek to increase the competence of health service decision makers and the practice of evidence-based medicine at the organizational or institutional level.\nThe multiple tributaries of evidence-based medicine share an emphasis on the importance of incorporating evidence from formal research in medical policies and decisions. However, because they differ on the extent to which they require good evidence of effectiveness before promoting a guideline or payment policy, a distinction is sometimes made between evidence-based medicine and science-based medicine, which also takes into account factors such as prior plausibility and compatibility with established science (as when medical organizations promote controversial treatments such as acupuncture). Differences also exist regarding the extent to which it is feasible to incorporate individual-level information in decisions. Thus, evidence-based guidelines and policies may not readily \"hybridise\" with experience-based practices orientated towards ethical clinical judgement, and can lead to contradictions, contest, and unintended crises. The most effective \"knowledge leaders\" (managers and clinical leaders) use a broad range of management knowledge in their decision making, rather than just formal evidence. Evidence-based guidelines may provide the basis for governmentality in health care, and consequently play a central role in the governance of contemporary health care systems.\nMethods.\nSteps.\nThe steps for designing explicit, evidence-based guidelines were described in the late 1980s: formulate the question (population, intervention, comparison intervention, outcomes, time horizon, setting); search the literature to identify studies that inform the question; interpret each study to determine precisely what it says about the question; if several studies address the question, synthesize their results (meta-analysis); summarize the evidence in evidence tables; compare the benefits, harms and costs in a balance sheet; draw a conclusion about the preferred practice; write the guideline; write the rationale for the guideline; have others review each of the previous steps; implement the guideline.\nFor the purposes of medical education and individual-level decision making, five steps of EBM in practice were described in 1992 and the experience of delegates attending the 2003 Conference of Evidence-Based Health Care Teachers and Developers was summarized into five steps and published in 2005. This five-step process can broadly be categorized as follows:\nEvidence reviews.\nSystematic reviews of published research studies are a major part of the evaluation of particular treatments. The Cochrane Collaboration is one of the best-known organisations that conducts systematic reviews. Like other producers of systematic reviews, it requires authors to provide a detailed study protocol as well as a reproducible plan of their literature search and evaluations of the evidence. After the best evidence is assessed, treatment is categorized as (1) likely to be beneficial, (2) likely to be harmful, or (3) without evidence to support either benefit or harm.\nA 2007 analysis of 1,016 systematic reviews from all 50 Cochrane Collaboration Review Groups found that 44% of the reviews concluded that the intervention was likely to be beneficial, 7% concluded that the intervention was likely to be harmful, and 49% concluded that evidence did not support either benefit or harm. 96% recommended further research. In 2017, a study assessed the role of systematic reviews produced by Cochrane Collaboration to inform US private payers' policymaking; it showed that although the medical policy documents of major US private payers were informed by Cochrane systematic reviews, there was still scope to encourage the further use.\nAssessing the quality of evidence.\nEvidence-based medicine categorizes different types of clinical evidence and rates or grades them according to the strength of their freedom from the various biases that beset medical research. For example, the strongest evidence for therapeutic interventions is provided by systematic review of randomized, well-blinded, placebo-controlled trials with allocation concealment and complete follow-up involving a homogeneous patient population and medical condition. In contrast, patient testimonials, case reports, and even expert opinion have little value as proof because of the placebo effect, the biases inherent in observation and reporting of cases, and difficulties in ascertaining who is an expert (however, some critics have argued that expert opinion \"does not belong in the rankings of the quality of empirical evidence because it does not represent a form of empirical evidence\" and continue that \"expert opinion would seem to be a separate, complex type of knowledge that would not fit into hierarchies otherwise limited to empirical evidence alone.\").\nSeveral organizations have developed grading systems for assessing the quality of evidence. For example, in 1989 the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) put forth the following system:\nAnother example are the Oxford CEBM Levels of Evidence published by the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. First released in September 2000, the Levels of Evidence provide a way to rank evidence for claims about prognosis, diagnosis, treatment benefits, treatment harms, and screening, which most grading schemes do not address. The original CEBM Levels were Evidence-Based On Call to make the process of finding evidence feasible and its results explicit. In 2011, an international team redesigned the Oxford CEBM Levels to make them more understandable and to take into account recent developments in evidence ranking schemes. The Oxford CEBM Levels of Evidence have been used by patients and clinicians, as well as by experts to develop clinical guidelines, such as recommendations for the optimal use of phototherapy and topical therapy in psoriasis and guidelines for the use of the BCLC staging system for diagnosing and monitoring hepatocellular carcinoma in Canada.\nIn 2000, a system was developed by the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) working group. The GRADE system takes into account more dimensions than just the quality of medical research. It requires users who are performing an assessment of the quality of evidence, usually as part of a systematic review, to consider the impact of different factors on their confidence in the results. Authors of GRADE tables assign one of four levels to evaluate the quality of evidence, on the basis of their confidence that the observed effect (a numeric value) is close to the true effect. The confidence value is based on judgments assigned in five different domains in a structured manner. The GRADE working group defines 'quality of evidence' and 'strength of recommendations' based on the quality as two different concepts that are commonly confused with each other.\nSystematic reviews may include randomized controlled trials that have low risk of bias, or observational studies that have high risk of bias. In the case of randomized controlled trials, the quality of evidence is high but can be downgraded in five different domains.\nIn the case of observational studies per GRADE, the quality of evidence starts off lower and may be upgraded in three domains in addition to being subject to downgrading.\nMeaning of the levels of quality of evidence as per GRADE:\nCategories of recommendations.\nIn guidelines and other publications, recommendation for a clinical service is classified by the balance of risk versus benefit and the level of evidence on which this information is based. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force uses the following system:\nGRADE guideline panelists may make strong or weak recommendations on the basis of further criteria. Some of the important criteria are the balance between desirable and undesirable effects (not considering cost), the quality of the evidence, values and preferences and costs (resource utilization).\nDespite the differences between systems, the purposes are the same: to guide users of clinical research information on which studies are likely to be most valid. However, the individual studies still require careful critical appraisal\nStatistical measures.\nEvidence-based medicine attempts to express clinical benefits of tests and treatments using mathematical methods. Tools used by practitioners of evidence-based medicine include:\nQuality of clinical trials.\nEvidence-based medicine attempts to objectively evaluate the quality of clinical research by critically assessing techniques reported by researchers in their publications.\nLimitations and criticism.\nThere are a number of limitations and criticisms of evidence-based medicine. Two widely cited categorization schemes for the various published critiques of EBM include the three-fold division of Straus and McAlister (\"limitations universal to the practice of medicine, limitations unique to evidence-based medicine and misperceptions of evidence-based-medicine\") and the five-point categorization of Cohen, Stavri and Hersh (EBM is a poor philosophic basis for medicine, defines evidence too narrowly, is not evidence-based, is limited in usefulness when applied to individual patients, or reduces the autonomy of the doctor/patient relationship).\nIn no particular order, some published objections include:\nA 2018 study, \"Why all randomised controlled trials produce biased results\", assessed the 10 most cited RCTs and argued that trials face a wide range of biases and constraints, from trials only being able to study a small set of questions amenable to randomisation and generally only being able to assess the \"average\" treatment effect of a sample, to limitations in extrapolating results to another context, among many others outlined in the study.\nApplication of evidence in clinical settings.\nDespite the emphasis on evidence-based medicine, unsafe or ineffective medical practices continue to be applied, because of patient demand for tests or treatments, because of failure to access information about the evidence, or because of the rapid pace of change in the scientific evidence. For example, between 2003 and 2017, the evidence shifted on hundreds of medical practices, including whether hormone replacement therapy was safe, whether babies should be given certain vitamins, and whether antidepressant drugs are effective in people with Alzheimer's disease. Even when the evidence unequivocally shows that a treatment is either not safe or not effective, it may take many years for other treatments to be adopted.\nThere are many factors that contribute to lack of uptake or implementation of evidence-based recommendations. These include lack of awareness at the individual clinician or patient (micro) level, lack of institutional support at the organisation level (meso) level or higher at the policy (macro) level. In other cases, significant change can require a generation of physicians to retire or die and be replaced by physicians who were trained with more recent evidence.\nPhysicians may also reject evidence that conflicts with their anecdotal experience or because of cognitive biases \u2013 for example, a vivid memory of a rare but shocking outcome (the availability heuristic), such as a patient dying after refusing treatment. They may overtreat to \"do something\" or to address a patient's emotional needs. They may worry about malpractice charges based on a discrepancy between what the patient expects and what the evidence recommends. They may also overtreat or provide ineffective treatments because the treatment feels biologically plausible.\nIt is the responsibility of those developing clinical guidelines to include an implementation plan to facilitate uptake. The implementation process will include an implementation plan, analysis of the context, identifying barriers and facilitators and designing the strategies to address them.\nEducation.\nTraining in evidence based medicine is offered across the continuum of medical education. Educational competencies have been created for the education of health care professionals.\nThe Berlin questionnaire and the Fresno Test are validated instruments for assessing the effectiveness of education in evidence-based medicine. These questionnaires have been used in diverse settings.\nA Campbell systematic review that included 24 trials examined the effectiveness of e-learning in improving evidence-based health care knowledge and practice. It was found that e-learning, compared to no learning, improves evidence-based health care knowledge and skills but not attitudes and behaviour. No difference in outcomes is present when comparing e-learning with face-to-face learning. Combining e-learning and face-to-face learning (blended learning) has a positive impact on evidence-based knowledge, skills, attitude and behavior. As a form of e-learning, some medical school students engage in editing Wikipedia to increase their EBM skills, and some students construct EBM materials to develop their skills in communicating medical knowledge.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10016", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10016", "title": "End zone", "text": "Scoring area on the field in gridiron football\nThe end zone is the scoring area on the field, according to gridiron-based codes of football. It is the area between the end line and goal line bounded by the sidelines. There are two end zones, each being on the opposite side of the field. It is bordered on all sides by a white line indicating its beginning and end points, with orange, square pylons placed at each of the four corners as a visual aid (however, prior to around the early 1970s, flags were used instead to denote the end zone). Canadian rule books use the terms \"goal area\" and \"dead line\" instead of \"end zone\" and \"end line\" respectively, but the latter terms are the more common in colloquial Canadian English. Unlike sports like association football and ice hockey which require the ball/puck to pass completely over the goal line to count as a score, both Canadian and American football merely need any part of the ball to break the vertical plane of the outer edge of the goal line.\nA similar concept exists in both rugby football codes, where it is known as the \"in-goal area\". The difference between rugby and gridiron-based codes is that in rugby, the ball must be touched to the ground in the in-goal area to count as a try (the rugby equivalent of a touchdown), whereas in the gridiron-based games, simply possessing the ball in or over the end zone is sufficient to count as a touchdown.\nUltimate frisbee also uses an end zone scoring area. Scores in this sport are counted when a pass is received in the end zone.\nHistory.\nThe end zones were invented as a result of the legalization of the forward pass in gridiron football. Prior to this, the goal line and end line were the same, and players scored a touchdown by leaving the field of play through that line. Goal posts were placed on the goal line, and any kicks that did not result in field goals but left the field through the end lines were simply recorded as touchbacks (or, in the Canadian game, singles; it was during the pre-end zone era that Hugh Gall set the record for most singles in a game, with eight).\nIn the earliest days of the forward pass, the pass had to be caught in-bounds and could not be thrown across the goal line (as the receiver would be out of bounds). This also made it difficult to pass the ball when very close to one's own goal line, since merely dropping back to pass or kick would result in a safety (rules of the forward pass at the time required the passer to be five yards behind the line of scrimmage, which would make throwing the forward pass when the ball was snapped from behind one's own five-yard line illegal in itself).\nThus, in 1912, the end zone was introduced in American football. In an era when professional football was still in its early years and college football dominated the game, the resulting enlargement of the field was constrained by fact that many college teams were already playing in well-developed stadiums, complete with stands and other structures at the ends of the fields, thereby making any substantial enlargement of the field unfeasible at many schools. Eventually, a compromise was reached: 12 yards of end zone were added to each end of the field, but in return, the playing field was shortened from 110 yards to 100, resulting in the physical size of the field being only slightly longer than before. Goal posts were originally kept on the goal lines, but after they began to interfere with play, they moved back to the end lines in 1927, where they have remained in college football ever since. The National Football League moved the goal posts up to the goal line again in 1933, then back again to the end line in 1974.\nAs with many other aspects of gridiron football, Canadian football adopted the forward pass and end zones much later than American football. The forward pass and end zones were adopted in 1929. In Canada, college football has never reached a level of prominence comparable to U.S. college football, and professional football was still in its infancy in the 1920s. As a result, Canadian football was still being played in rudimentary facilities in the late 1920s. A further consideration was that the Canadian Rugby Union (the governing body of Canadian football at the time, now known as Football Canada) wanted to reduce the prominence of single points (then called \"rouges\") in the game. Therefore, the CRU simply appended 25-yard end zones to the ends of the existing 110-yard field, creating a much larger field of play. Since moving the goal posts back 25 yards would have made the scoring of field goals excessively difficult, and since the CRU did not want to reduce the prominence of field goals, the goal posts were left on the goal line where they remain today. However, the rules governing the scoring of singles were changed: teams were required to either kick the ball out of bounds through the end zone or force the opposition to down a kicked ball in their own end zone in order to be awarded a point. By 1986, at which point CFL stadiums were becoming bigger and comparable in development to their American counterparts in an effort to stay financially competitive, the CFL reduced the depth of the end zone to 20 yards.\nScoring.\nA team scores a touchdown by entering its opponent's end zone while carrying the ball or catching the ball while being within the end zone. If the ball is carried by a player, it is considered a score when any part of the ball is directly above or beyond any part of the goal line between the pylons. In addition, a two-point conversion may be scored after a touchdown by the same means.\nIn Ultimate Frisbee, a goal is scored by completing a pass into the end zone.\nSize.\nThe end zone in American football is 10 yards long by &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;53+1\u20443 yards (160 feet) wide.\nA full-sized end zone in Canadian football is 20 yards long by 65 yards wide. Prior to the 1980s, the Canadian end zone was 25 yards long. The first stadium to use the 20-yard-long end zone was B.C. Place in Vancouver, which was completed in 1983. The floor of B.C. Place was (and is) too short to accommodate a field 160 yards in length. The shorter end zone proved popular enough that the CFL adopted it league-wide in 1986. At BMO Field, home to the Toronto Argonauts, the end zones are only 18 yards. Like their American counterparts, Canadian endzones are marked with four pylons.\nIn Canadian football stadiums that also feature a running track, it is usually necessary to truncate the back corners of the end zones, since a rectangular field 150 yards long and 65 yards wide will not fit completely inside an oval-shaped running track. Such truncations are marked as straight diagonal lines, resulting in an end zone with six corners and six pylons. As of 2019, Montreal's Percival Molson Stadium is the only CFL stadium that has the rounded-off end zones.\nDuring the CFL's failed American expansion in the mid-1990s, several stadiums, by necessity, used 15-yard end zones (some had end zones that were even shorter than 15 yards); only Baltimore and San Antonio had the endzones at the standard 20 yards.\nUltimate Frisbee uses an end zone 40 yards wide and 20 yards deep (37\u00a0m \u00d7 18\u00a0m).\nThe goal post.\nThe location and dimensions of a goal post differ from league to league, but it is usually within the boundaries of the end zone. In earlier football games (both professional and collegiate), the goal post began at the goal line, and was usually an H-shaped bar. Nowadays, for player safety reasons, almost all goal posts in the professional and collegiate levels of American football are T-shaped (resembling a slingshot), and reside just outside the rear of both end zones; such goalposts, first seen in 1966, were invented by Jim Trimble and Joel Rottman in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.\nThe goal posts in Canadian football still reside on the goal line instead of the back of the end zones, partly because the number of field goal attempts would dramatically decrease if the posts were moved 20 yards back in that sport, and also because the larger end zone and wider field makes the resulting interference in play by the goal post a less serious problem.\nAt the high school level, it is not uncommon to see multi-purpose goal posts that include football goal posts at the top and a soccer net at the bottom; these are usually seen at smaller schools and in multi-purpose stadiums where facilities are used for multiple sports. When these or H-shaped goal posts are used in football, the lower portions of the posts are covered with several inches of heavy foam padding to protect the safety of the players.\nLivery.\nMost professional and collegiate teams have their logo (livery), team name, or both painted on the surface of the end zone, with team colors filling the background. Many championship and bowl games at college and professional level are commemorated by the names of the opposing teams each being painted in one of the opposite end zones. In some leagues, along with bowl games, local, national, or bowl game sponsors may also have their logos placed in the end zone. In the CFL, fully painted end zones are nonexistent, though some feature club logos or sponsors. Additionally, the Canadian end zone, being a live-ball part of the field, often features yardage dashes (usually marked every five yards), not unlike the field of play itself.\nIn many places, particularly in smaller high schools and colleges, end zones are undecorated, or have plain white diagonal stripes spaced several yards apart, in lieu of colors and decorations. One notable use of this design in major college football is the Notre Dame Fighting Irish, who have both end zones at Notre Dame Stadium painted with nine diagonal 42\u00ba white lines at each end signifying Notre Dame's founding in 1842 (eighteen lines at 42\u00ba) and directed towards the Main Building and its golden dome. In professional football, since 2004, the Pittsburgh Steelers of the NFL have the south end zone at Acrisure Stadium (formerly Heinz Field) painted with diagonal-lines during most of the regular season, with the north end zone featuring only the city name of Pittsburgh in yellow. This is done because Acrisure Stadium, which has a natural grass playing surface, is also home to the Pittsburgh Panthers of college football and the markings simplify field conversion between the two teams' respective field markings and logos, with both teams sharing a secondary yellow color, but each having different primary colors. After the Panthers' season is over, the Steelers logo is painted in the south end zone.\nLikewise, some end zones are painted in tribute to a recently deceased team figure or fan, as is done with the Steelers' AFC North rival Baltimore Ravens at M&amp;T Bank Stadium, where the city name is painted as usual in the end zone, except for the \"MO\" portion, which is painted in gold, white or black in tribute to the late Mo Gaba, a young fan of both the Ravens and Orioles.\nOne of the major quirks of the American Football League was its use of unusual patterns such as argyle in its end zones, a tradition revived in 2009 by the Denver Broncos to celebrate the team's 50th anniversary, Denver itself a former AFL team. The original XFL standardized its playing fields so that all eight of its teams had uniform fields with the XFL logo in each end zone and no team identification.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10017", "revid": "35681141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10017", "title": "Ettore Ximenes", "text": "Italian sculptor (1855\u20131926)\nEttore Ximenes (11 April 1855 \u2013 20 December 1926) was an Italian sculptor.\nBiography.\nEttore Ximenes was born 11 April 1855 in Palermo, Italy. Son of Antonio Ximenes and Giulia Tolentino, a Sicilian noble woman, Ettore Ximenes initially embarked on literary studies but then took up sculpture and attended the courses at the Palermo Academy of Fine Arts. After 1872, he continued training at the Naples Academy under Domenico Morelli and Stanislao Lista. He also established a close relationship with Vincenzo Gemito.\nHe returned to Palermo in 1874 and won a competition for a four-year grant, which enabled him to study and open a studio for sculpture in Florence. In 1873 at Vienna, he exhibited \"Work without Genius\". In 1877 at Naples, he exhibited a life-size statue titled \"The Equilibrium\" about a gymnast walking on a sphere. He would make copies of this work in small marble and bronze statuettes.\nHe exhibited a stucco \"Christ and the Adultress\" and \"Il cuore del re (Heart of the King)\", the latter depicting an oft-repeated story of King Vittorio Emanuele during one of his frequent hunts, encountering and offering charity to a peasant child. At the 1878 Paris World Exposition he displayed: \"The Brawl\" and \"il Marmiton\". In Paris, he met with Auguste Rodin and Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux.\nIn 1878, he also completed a life-size stucco of \"il Ciceruacchio\", a statue of the Italian patriot Angelo Brunetti and his thirteen-year-old son, depicting them at the moment of their execution in 1849 by Austrian troops. The Cicervacchio statue, with its tinge of revolutionary zeal, did not find commissions for completing the work in marble. He then completed a nude statue of \"Nan\u00e0\" based on the novel by \u00c9mile Zola; the statue was exhibited at the 1879 Salon di Paris. The next year at the Paris Salon, he displayed \"La Pesca meravigliosa\", where a fisherman rescues a bathing maiden. Returning to Italy, he displayed the bust del minister Giuseppe Zanardelli. At the Mostra of Rome, he displayed \"The assassination of Julius Caesar\"; and at the Exposition of Venice, \"Ragazzi messi in fila\". Ximenes' realism gave way to Symbolist and Neo-Renaissance elements. In addition to sculpture, he also produced illustrations for the works of Edmondo De Amicis published by the Treves publishing house.\nXimenes was involved in many of the major official monumental projects in Italy from the 1880s on and devoted his energies as from 1911 primarily to commissions for important public works in S\u00e3o Paulo, Kyiv, New York and Buenos Aires.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10018", "revid": "48121655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10018", "title": "Edsger W. Dijkstra", "text": "Dutch computer scientist (1930\u20132002)\nEdsger Wybe Dijkstra ( ; ; 11 May 1930 \u2013 6 August 2002) was a Dutch computer scientist, programmer, mathematician, and science essayist.\nBorn in Rotterdam in the Netherlands, Dijkstra studied mathematics and physics and then theoretical physics at the University of Leiden. Adriaan van Wijngaarden offered him a job as the first computer programmer in the Netherlands at the Mathematical Centre in Amsterdam, where he worked from 1952 until 1962. He formulated and solved the shortest path problem in 1956, and in 1960 developed the first compiler for the programming language ALGOL 60 in conjunction with colleague Jaap A. Zonneveld. In 1962 he moved to Eindhoven, and later to Nuenen, where he became a professor in the Mathematics Department at the Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven. In the late 1960s he built the THE multiprogramming system, which influenced the designs of subsequent systems through its use of software-based paged virtual memory. Dijkstra joined Burroughs Corporation as its sole research fellow in August 1973. The Burroughs years saw him at his most prolific in output of research articles. He wrote nearly 500 documents in the \"EWD\" series, most of them technical reports, for private circulation within a select group.\nDijkstra accepted the Schlumberger Centennial Chair in the Computer Science Department at the University of Texas at Austin in 1984, working in Austin, USA, until his retirement in November 1999. He and his wife returned from Austin to his original house in Nuenen, where he died on 6 August 2002 after a long struggle with cancer.\nHe received the 1972 Turing Award for fundamental contributions to developing structured programming languages. Shortly before his death, he received the ACM PODC Influential Paper Award in distributed computing for his work on self-stabilization of program computation. This annual award was renamed the Dijkstra Prize the following year, in his honor.\nLife and works.\nEarly years.\nDijkstra was born in Rotterdam. His father Douwe Wybe Dijkstra (1898\u20131970) was a chemist who studied with Frans Maurits Jaeger and was president of the \"Rotterdamsche Chemische Kring\", the Rotterdam branch of the Royal Netherlands Chemical Society; he taught chemistry at a secondary school and was later its superintendent. His mother Brechtje Cornelia Kluijver (1900\u20131994) was a mathematician, but never had a formal job.\nDijkstra had considered a career in law and had hoped to represent the Netherlands in the United Nations. However, after graduating from Gymnasium Erasmianum in 1948, at his parents' suggestion he studied mathematics and physics and then theoretical physics at the University of Leiden.\nIn the early 1950s, electronic computers were a novelty. Dijkstra stumbled on his career by accident, and through his supervisor, Professor Johannes Haantjes, he met Adriaan van Wijngaarden, the director of the Computation Department at the Mathematical Centre in Amsterdam, who offered Dijkstra a job; he officially became the Netherlands' first \"programmer\" in March 1952.\nDijkstra remained committed to physics for some time, working on it in Leiden three days out of each week. With increasing exposure to computing, however, his focus began to shift. As he recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After having programmed for some three years, I had a discussion with A. van Wijngaarden, who was then my boss at the Mathematical Center in Amsterdam, a discussion for which I shall remain grateful to him as long as I live. The point was that I was supposed to study theoretical physics at the University of Leiden simultaneously, and as I found the two activities harder and harder to combine, I had to make up my mind, either to stop programming and become a real, respectable theoretical physicist, or to carry my study of physics to a formal completion only, with a minimum of effort, and to become..., yes what? A programmer? But was that a respectable profession? For after all, what was programming? Where was the sound body of knowledge that could support it as an intellectually respectable discipline? I remember quite vividly how I envied my hardware colleagues, who, when asked about their professional competence, could at least point out that they knew everything about vacuum tubes, amplifiers and the rest, whereas I felt that, when faced with that question, I would stand empty-handed. Full of misgivings I knocked on Van Wijngaarden's office door, asking him whether I could \"speak to him for a moment\"; when I left his office a number of hours later, I was another person. For after having listened to my problems patiently, he agreed that up till that moment there was not much of a programming discipline, but then he went on to explain quietly that automatic computers were here to stay, that we were just at the beginning and could not I be one of the persons called to make programming a respectable discipline in the years to come? This was a turning point in my life and I completed my study of physics formally as quickly as I could.\u2014\u200a\nWhen Dijkstra married Maria \"Ria\" C. Debets in 1957, he was required as a part of the marriage rites to state his profession. He stated that he was a programmer, which was unacceptable to the authorities, there being no such profession then in The Netherlands.\nIn 1959, he received his PhD from the University of Amsterdam for a thesis entitled 'Communication with an Automatic Computer', devoted to a description of the assembly language designed for the first commercial computer developed in the Netherlands, the Electrologica X1. His thesis supervisor was Van Wijngaarden.\nMathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam.\nFrom 1952 until 1962, Dijkstra worked at the Mathematisch Centrum in Amsterdam, where he worked closely with Bram Jan Loopstra and Carel S. Scholten, who had been hired to build a computer. Their mode of interaction was disciplined: They would first decide upon the interface between the hardware and the software, by writing a programming manual. Then the hardware designers would have to be faithful to their part of the contract, while Dijkstra, the programmer, would write software for the nonexistent machine. Two of the lessons he learned from this experience were the importance of clear documentation, and that program debugging can be largely avoided through careful design.\nDijkstra formulated and solved the shortest path problem for a demonstration at the official inauguration of the ARMAC computer in 1956. Because of the absence of journals dedicated to automatic computing, he did not publish the result until 1959.\nAt the Mathematical Centre, Dijkstra and his colleague Jaap Zonneveld developed the first compiler for the programming language ALGOL 60 by August 1960, more than a year before a compiler was produced by another group. ALGOL 60 is known as a key advance in the rise of structured programming.\nEindhoven University of Technology.\nIn 1962, Dijkstra moved to Eindhoven, and later to Nuenen, in the south of the Netherlands, where he became a professor in the Mathematics Department at the Eindhoven University of Technology. The university did not have a separate computer science department and the culture of the mathematics department did not particularly suit him. Dijkstra tried to build a group of computer scientists who could collaborate on solving problems. This was an unusual model of research for the Mathematics Department. In the late 1960s, he built the THE operating system (named for the university, then known as Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven), which has influenced the designs of subsequent operating systems through its use of software-based paged virtual memory.\nBurroughs Corporation.\nDijkstra joined the Burroughs Corporation\u2014a company known then for producing computers based on an innovative hardware architecture\u2014as its research fellow in August 1973. His duties consisted of visiting some of the firm's research centers a few times a year and carrying on his own research, which he did in the smallest Burroughs research facility, namely, his study on the second floor of his house in Nuenen. In fact, Dijkstra was the only research fellow of Burroughs and worked for it from home, occasionally travelling to its branches in the United States. As a result, he reduced his appointment at the university to one day a week. That day, Tuesday, soon became known as the day of the famous 'Tuesday Afternoon Club', a seminar during which he discussed with his colleagues scientific articles, looking at all aspects: notation, organisation, presentation, language, content, etc. Shortly after, he moved in 1984 to the University of Texas at Austin (USA), a new 'branch' of the Tuesday Afternoon Club emerged in Austin, Texas.\nThe Burroughs years saw him at his most prolific in output of research articles. He wrote nearly 500 documents in the EWD series (described below), most of them technical reports, for private circulation within a select group.\nThe University of Texas at Austin.\nDijkstra accepted the Schlumberger Centennial Chair in the Computer Science Department at the University of Texas at Austin in 1984.\nLast years.\nDijkstra worked in Austin until his retirement in November 1999. To mark the occasion and to celebrate his forty-plus years of seminal contributions to computing science, the Department of Computer Sciences organized a symposium, which took place on his 70th birthday in May 2000.\nDijkstra and his wife returned from Austin to his original house in Nuenen, Netherlands, where he found that he had only months to live. He said that he wanted to retire in Austin, Texas, but to die in the Netherlands. Dijkstra died on 6 August 2002 after a long struggle with cancer. He and his wife were survived by their three children: Marcus, Femke, and the computer scientist Rutger M. Dijkstra.\nPersonality.\nCharacter.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You can hardly blame M.I.T. for not taking notice of an obscure computer scientist in a small town in the Netherlands.\u2014\u200a\nIn the world of computing science, Dijkstra is well known as a \"character\". In the preface of his book \"A Discipline of Programming\" (1976) he stated the following: \"For the absence of a bibliography I offer neither explanation nor apology.\" In fact, most of his articles and books have no references at all. Dijkstra chose this way of working to preserve his self-reliance.\nAs a university professor for much of his life, Dijkstra saw teaching not just as a required activity but as a serious research endeavour. His approach to teaching was unconventional. His lecturing style has been described as idiosyncratic. When lecturing, the long pauses between sentences have often been attributed to the fact that English is not Dijkstra's first language. However the pauses also served as a way for him to think on his feet and he was regarded as a quick and deep thinker while engaged in the act of lecturing. His courses for students in Austin had little to do with computer science but they dealt with the presentation of mathematical proofs. At the beginning of each semester, he would take a photo of each of his students in order to memorize their names. He never followed a textbook, with the possible exception of his own while it was under preparation. When lecturing, he would write proofs in chalk on a blackboard rather than using overhead foils. He invited the students to suggest ideas, which he then explored, or refused to explore because they violated some of his tenets. He assigned challenging homework problems, and would study his students' solutions thoroughly. He conducted his final examinations orally, over a whole week. Each student was examined in Dijkstra's office or home, and an exam lasted several hours.\nDijkstra was also highly original in his way of assessing people's capacity for a job. When Vladimir Lifschitz came to Austin in 1990 for a job interview, Dijkstra gave him a puzzle. Lifschitz solved it and has been working in Austin since then.\nUse of technology.\nHe eschewed the use of computers in his own work for many decades. Even after he succumbed to his UT colleagues' encouragement and acquired a Macintosh computer, he used it only for e-mail and for browsing the World Wide Web. Dijkstra never wrote his articles using a computer. He preferred to rely on his typewriter and later on his Montblanc pen. Dijkstra's favorite writing instrument was the Montblanc Meisterst\u00fcck fountain pen.\nHe had no use for word processors, believing that one should be able to write a letter or article without rough drafts, rewriting, or any significant editing. He would work it all out in his head before putting pen to paper, and once mentioned that when he was a physics student he would solve his homework problems in his head while walking the streets of Leiden.\nMost of Dijkstra's publications were written by him alone. He never had a secretary and took care of all his correspondence alone. When colleagues prepared a Festschrift for his sixtieth birthday, published by Springer-Verlag, he took the trouble to thank each of the 61 contributors separately, in a hand-written letter.\nIn \"The Humble Programmer\" (1972), Dijkstra wrote: \"We must not forget that it is not our [computing scientists'] business to make programs, it is our business to design classes of computations that will display a desired behaviour.\"\nDijkstra also opposed the inclusion of software engineering under the umbrella of academic computer science. He wrote that, \"As economics is known as \"The Miserable Science\", software engineering should be known as \"The Doomed Discipline\", doomed because it cannot even approach its goal since its goal is self-contradictory.\" And \"software engineering has accepted as its charter 'How to program if you cannot.'\"\nPersonal life.\nDijkstra led a modest lifestyle, to the point of being spartan. His and his wife's house in Nuenen was simple, small and unassuming. He did not own a television, a video player, or a mobile telephone, and did not go to the movies. He played the piano, and, while in Austin, liked to go to concerts. An enthusiastic listener of classical music, Dijkstra's favorite composer was Mozart.\nEssays and other writing.\nThroughout Dijkstra's career, his work was characterized by elegance and economy. A prolific writer (especially as an essayist), Dijkstra authored more than 1,300 papers, many written by hand in his precise script. They were essays and parables; fairy tales and warnings; comprehensive explanation and pedagogical pretext. Most were about mathematics and computer science; others were trip reports that are more revealing about their author than about the people and places visited. It was his habit to copy each paper and circulate it to a small group of colleagues who would copy and forward the papers to another limited group of scientists.\nEWDs.\nDijkstra was well known for his habit of carefully composing manuscripts with his fountain pen. The manuscripts are called EWDs, since Dijkstra numbered them with \"EWD\", his initials, as a prefix. According to Dijkstra himself, the EWDs started when he moved from the Mathematical Centre in Amsterdam to the Eindhoven University of Technology (then Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven). After going to Eindhoven, Dijkstra experienced a writer's block for more than a year. He distributed photocopies of a new EWD among his colleagues. Many recipients photocopied and forwarded their copies, so the EWDs spread throughout the international computer science community. The topics were computer science and mathematics, and included trip reports, letters, and speeches. These short articles span a period of 40 years. Almost all EWDs appearing after 1972 were hand-written. They are rarely longer than 15 pages and are consecutively numbered. The last one, No. 1318, is from 14 April 2002. Within computer science they are known as the EWD reports, or, simply the EWDs. More than 1300 EWDs have been scanned, with a growing number transcribed to facilitate search, and are available online at the https:// on the website of the University of Texas.\nWriting style.\nHis interest with simplicity came at an early age and under his mother's guidance. He once said he had asked his mother whether trigonometry was a difficult topic. She replied that he must learn all the formulas and that further, if he required more than five lines to prove something, he was on the wrong track.\nDijkstra was famous for his wit, eloquence, rudeness, abruptness and often cruelty to fellow professionals, and way with words, such as in his remark, \"The question of whether Machines Can Think (\u2026) is about as relevant as the question of whether Submarines Can Swim.\" His advice to a promising researcher, who asked how to select a topic for research, was the phrase: \"Do only what only you can do\". Dijkstra was also known for his vocal criticism and absence of social skills when interacting with colleagues. As an outspoken and critical visionary, he strongly opposed the teaching of BASIC.\nRecurring themes.\nIn many of his more witty essays, Dijkstra described a fictional company of which he served as chairman. The company was called Mathematics, Inc., a company that he imagined having commercialized the production of mathematical theorems in the same way that software companies had commercialized the production of computer programs. He invented a number of activities and challenges of Mathematics Inc. and documented them in several papers in the EWD series. The imaginary company had produced a proof of the Riemann Hypothesis but then had great difficulties collecting royalties from mathematicians who had proved results assuming the Riemann Hypothesis. The proof itself was a trade secret. Many of the company's proofs were rushed out the door and then much of the company's effort had to be spent on maintenance. A more successful effort was the Standard Proof for Pythagoras' Theorem, that replaced the more than 100 incompatible existing proofs. Dijkstra described Mathematics Inc. as \"the most exciting and most miserable business ever conceived\". EWD 443 (1974) describes his fictional company as having over 75% of the world's market share.\nLegacy.\nDijkstra won the Turing award in 1972 for his advocacy of structured programming, a programming paradigm that makes use of structured control flow as opposed to unstructured jumps to different sections in a program using Goto statements. His 1968 letter to the editor of \"Communications of ACM, \"Go To statement considered harmful\"\", caused a major debate. Modern programmers generally adhere to the paradigm of structured programming.\nAmong his most famous contributions to computer science is \"Dijkstra's algorithm,\" for finding the shortest path through a network, which is widely taught in modern computer science undergraduate courses, and is used in the computer network routing protocols OSPF and IS-IS.\nOther important work included the \"Shunting yard algorithm\" for parsing; the \"THE\" operating system, an early example of structuring an operating system as a set of layers; the \"Banker's algorithm\" for resource allocation; and the semaphore construct for coordinating multiple processes. Another concept formulated by Dijkstra in the field of distributed computing is that of self-stabilization, a method of ensuring fault-tolerance.\nAwards and honors.\nAmong Dijkstra's awards and honors are:\nIn 1969, the British Computer Society (BCS) received approval for an award and fellowship, Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society (DFBCS), to be awarded under bylaw 7 of their royal charter. In 1971, the first election was made, to Dijkstra.\nIn 1990, on occasion of Dijkstra's 60th birthday, the Department of Computer Science (UTCS) at the University of Texas at Austin organized a two-day seminar in his honor. Speakers came from all over the United States and Europe, and a group of computer scientists contributed research articles which were edited into a book.\nIn 2002, the C&amp;C Foundation of Japan recognized Dijkstra \"for his pioneering contributions to the establishment of the scientific basis for computer software through creative research in basic software theory, algorithm theory, structured programming, and semaphores.\" Dijkstra was alive to receive notice of the award, but it was accepted by his family in an award ceremony after his death.\nShortly before his death in 2002, Dijkstra received the ACM PODC Influential-Paper Award in distributed computing for his work on self-stabilization of program computation. This annual award was renamed the Dijkstra Prize (Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing) the following year, in his honor.\nThe Dijkstra Award for Outstanding Academic Achievement in Computer Science (Loyola University Chicago, Department of Computer Science) is named for Edsger W. Dijkstra. Beginning in 2005, this award recognizes the top academic performance by a graduating computer science major. Selection is based on GPA in all major courses and election by department faculty.\nThe Department of Computer Science (UTCS) at the University of Texas at Austin hosted the inaugural Edsger W. Dijkstra Memorial Lecture on 12 October 2010. Tony Hoare, Emeritus Professor at Oxford and Principal Researcher at Microsoft Research, was the speaker for the event. This lecture series was made possible by a generous grant from Schlumberger to honor the memory of Dijkstra.\nSelected publications.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSelected articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10021", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10021", "title": "Educational perennialism", "text": "Educational philosophy\nEducational perennialism is a normative educational philosophy. Perennialists believe that the priority of education should be to teach principles that have persisted for centuries, not facts. Since people are human, one should teach first about humans, rather than machines or techniques, and about liberal, rather than vocational, topics.\nPerennialism appears similar to essentialism but focuses first on personal development, while essentialism focuses first on essential skills. Essentialist curricula tend to be more vocational and fact-based, and far less liberal and principle-based. Both philosophies are typically considered to be teacher-centered, as opposed to student-centered philosophies of education such as progressivism. Teachers associated with perennialism are authors of the Western masterpieces and are open to student criticism through the associated Socratic method.\nSecular perennialism.\nThe word \"perennial\" in secular perennialism suggests something that lasts an indefinite amount of time, recurs again and again, or is self-renewing. Robert Hutchins and Mortimer Adler promoted a universal curriculum based upon the common and essential nature of all human beings and encompassing humanist and scientific traditions. Hutchins and Adler implemented these ideas with great success at the University of Chicago, where they still strongly influence the Undergraduate Common Core. Other notable figures in the movement include Stringfellow Barr and Scott Buchanan (who together initiated the Great Books program at St. John's College in Annapolis, Maryland), Mark Van Doren, Alexander Meiklejohn, and Sir Richard Livingstone, an English classicist with an American following. Inspired by Adler's lectures, Sister Miriam Joseph wrote a textbook on the scholastic trivium and taught it as the Freshman seminar at Saint Mary's College.\nSecular perennialists espouse the idea that education should focus on the historical development of a continually advancing common orienting base of human knowledge and art, the timeless value of classic thought on central human issues by landmark thinkers, and revolutionary ideas critical to historical paradigm shifts or changes in world view. A program of studies which is highly general, nonspecialized, and nonvocational is advocated. They firmly believe that exposure of all people to the development of thought by those most responsible for the evolution of the occidental oriented tradition is integral to the survival of the freedoms, human rights, and responsibilities inherent to a true democracy.\nAdler states: \n... our political democracy depends upon the reconstitution of our schools. Our schools are not turning out young people prepared for the high office and the duties of citizenship in a democratic republic. Our political institutions cannot thrive, they may not even survive, if we do not produce a greater number of thinking citizens, from whom some statesmen of the type we had in the 18th century might eventually emerge. We are, indeed, a nation at risk, and nothing but radical reform of our schools can save us from impending disaster... Whatever the price... the price we will pay for not doing it will be much greater.\nHutchins writes in the same vein: \nThe business of saying ... that people are not capable of achieving a good education is too strongly reminiscent of the opposition of every extension of democracy. This opposition has always rested on the allegation that the people were incapable of exercising the power they demanded. Always the historic statement has been verified: you cannot expect the slave to show the virtues of the free man unless you first set him free. When the slave has been set free, he has, in the passage of time, become indistinguishable from those who have always been free ... There appears to be an innate human tendency to underestimate the capacity of those who do not belong to \"our\" group. Those who do not share our background cannot have our ability. Foreigners, people who are in a different economic status, and the young seem invariably to be regarded as intellectually backward ...\nAs with the essentialists, perennialists are educationally conservative in the requirement of a curriculum focused upon fundamental subject areas, but they stress that the overall aim should be exposure to history's finest thinkers as models for discovery. The student should be taught such basic subjects as English, languages, history, mathematics, natural science, philosophy, and fine arts. Adler states: \"The three R's, which always signified the formal disciplines, are the essence of liberal or general education.\"\nSecular perennialists agree with progressivists that memorization of vast amounts of factual information and a focus on second-hand information in textbooks and lectures does not develop rational thought. They advocate learning through the development of meaningful conceptual thinking and judgement by means of a directed reading list of the profound, aesthetic, and meaningful great books of the Western canon. These books, secular perennialists argue, are written by the world's finest thinkers, and cumulatively comprise the \"Great Conversation\" of humanity with regard to the central human questions. Their basic argument for the use of original works (abridged translations being acceptable as well) is that these are the products of \"genius\". Hutchins remarks:\nGreat books are great teachers; they are showing us every day what ordinary people are capable of. These books come out of ignorant, inquiring humanity. They are usually the first announcements for success in learning. Most of them were written for, and addressed to, ordinary people.\nThe Great Conversation is not static but, along with the set of related great books, changes as the representative thought of man changes or progresses. In this way, it seeks to represent an evolution of thought not based upon the latest cultural fads. Hutchins clarifies this:\nIn the course of history... new books have been written that have won their place in the list. Books once thought entitled to belong to it have been superseded; and this process of change will continue as long as men can think and write. It is the task of every generation to reassess the tradition in which it lives, to discard what it cannot use, and to bring into context with the distant and intermediate past the most recent contributions to the Great Conversation. ...the West needs to recapture and reemphasize and bring to bear upon its present problems the wisdom that lies in the works of its greatest thinkers and in the name of love\nPerennialism was proposed in response to what many considered a failing educational system. Again Hutchins writes:\nThe products of American high schools are illiterate; and a degree from a famous college or university is no guarantee that the graduate is in any better case. One of the most remarkable features of American society is that the difference between the \"uneducated\" and the \"educated\" is so slight.\nIn this regard John Dewey and Hutchins were in agreement. Hutchins's book \"The Higher Learning in America\" deplored the \"plight of higher learning\" that had turned away from cultivation of the intellect and toward anti-intellectual practicality due, in part, to a lust for money. In a highly negative review of the book, Dewey wrote a series of articles in \"The Social Frontier\" which began by applauding Hutchins' attack on \"the aimlessness of our present educational scheme.\nPerennialists believe in reading being supplemented by mutual investigations involving both teacher and student and minimally-directed discussions through the Socratic method in order to develop a historically oriented understanding of concepts. They argue that accurate, independent reasoning distinguishes the developed or educated mind and stress the development of this faculty. A skilled teacher keeps discussions on topic, corrects errors in reasoning, and accurately formulates problems within the scope of texts being studied but lets the class reach their own conclusions.\nPerennialists argue that many of the historical debates and the development of ideas presented by the great books are relevant to any society at any time, making them suitable for instructional use regardless of their age. They acknowledge disagreement between various great books but believe that the student must learn to recognize these disagreements, think about them, and reach a reasoned, defensible conclusion. This is a major goal of the Socratic discussions.\nReligious perennialism.\nPerennialism was originally religious in nature, developed first by Thomas Aquinas in the thirteenth century in his work \"https://\" (\"On the Teacher\").\nIn the nineteenth century, John Henry Newman presented a defense of religious perennialism in \"The Idea of a University\". Discourse 5 of that work, \"Knowledge Its Own End\", is a recent statement of a Christian educational perennialism.\nThere are several epistemological options, which affect the pedagogical options. The possibilities may be surveyed by considering four extreme positions - idealistic rationalism, idealistic fideism, realistic rationalism and realistic fideism.\nTeaching pupils to think critically and rationally are the main objectives of perennialist educators. A perennialist classroom seeks to be a highly structured and disciplined setting that fosters in pupils a never-ending search for the truth."}
{"id": "10022", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10022", "title": "E.163", "text": ""}
{"id": "10024", "revid": "21678789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10024", "title": "MDMA", "text": "Psychoactive drug, often called ecstasy\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\n3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), commonly known as ecstasy (tablet form), and molly (crystal form), is an entactogen with stimulant and minor psychedelic properties. \nMDMA was first synthesized in 1912 by Merck chemist Anton K\u00f6llisch. It was used to enhance psychotherapy beginning in the 1970s and became popular as a street drug in the 1980s. MDMA is commonly associated with dance parties, raves, and electronic dance music. Tablets sold as ecstasy may be mixed with other substances such as ephedrine, amphetamine, and methamphetamine. In 2016, about 21 million people between the ages of 15 and 64 used ecstasy (0.3% of the world population). In the United States, as of 2017, about 7% of people have used MDMA at some point in their lives and 0.9% have used it in the last year. The lethal risk from one dose of MDMA is estimated to be from 1 death in 20,000 instances to 1 death in 50,000 instances.\nThe purported pharmacological effects that may be prosocial include altered sensations, increased energy, empathy, and pleasure. When taken by mouth, effects begin in 30 to 45 minutes and last three to six hours. Short-term adverse effects include grinding of the teeth, blurred vision, sweating, and a rapid heartbeat, and extended use can also lead to addiction, memory problems, paranoia, and difficulty sleeping. Deaths have been reported due to increased body temperature and dehydration. MDMA acts primarily by increasing the release of the neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine in parts of the brain. It belongs to the substituted amphetamine classes of drugs. MDMA is structurally similar to mescaline (a psychedelic), methamphetamine (a stimulant), as well as endogenous monoamine neurotransmitters such as serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine.\nMDMA has limited approved medical uses in a small number of countries, but is illegal in most jurisdictions. MDMA-assisted psychotherapy is a promising and generally safe treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder when administered in controlled therapeutic settings. In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has given MDMA breakthrough therapy status (though there no current clinical indications in the US). Canada has allowed limited distribution of MDMA upon application to and approval by Health Canada. In Australia, it may be prescribed in the treatment of PTSD by specifically authorised psychiatrists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUses.\nRecreational.\nMDMA is often considered the drug of choice within the rave culture and is also used at clubs, festivals, and house parties. In the rave environment, the sensory effects of music and lighting are often highly synergistic with the drug. The psychedelic amphetamine quality of MDMA offers multiple appealing aspects to users in the rave setting. Some users enjoy the feeling of mass communion from the inhibition-reducing effects of the drug, while others use it as party fuel because of the drug's stimulatory effects. MDMA is used less often than other stimulants, typically less than once per week.\nMDMA is sometimes taken in conjunction with other psychoactive drugs such as LSD, psilocybin mushrooms, 2C-B, and ketamine. The combination with LSD is called \"candy-flipping\". The combination with 2C-B is called \"nexus flipping\". For this combination, most people take the MDMA first, wait until the peak is over, and then take the 2C-B.\nMDMA is often co-administered with alcohol, methamphetamine, and prescription drugs such as SSRIs with which MDMA has several drug-drug interactions. Three life-threatening reports of MDMA co-administration with ritonavir have been reported; with ritonavir having severe and dangerous drug-drug interactions with a wide range of both psychoactive, anti-psychotic, and non-psychoactive drugs. \nMedical.\nAs of 2023, MDMA therapies have only been approved for research purposes, with no widely accepted medical indications, although this varies by jurisdiction. Before it was widely banned, it saw limited use in psychotherapy. In 2017 the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted breakthrough therapy designation for MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). \nSome researchers have proposed that psychedelics in general may act as active \"super placebos\" used for therapeutic purposes.\nOthers.\nSmall doses of MDMA are used by some religious practitioners as an entheogen to enhance prayer or meditation. MDMA has been used as an adjunct to New Age spiritual practices.\nForms.\nMDMA has become widely known as ecstasy (shortened \"E\", \"X\", or \"XTC\"), usually referring to its tablet form, although this term may also include the presence of possible adulterants or diluents. The UK term \"mandy\" and the US term \"molly\" colloquially refer to MDMA in a crystalline powder form that is thought to be free of adulterants. MDMA is also sold in the form of the hydrochloride salt, either as loose crystals or in gelcaps. MDMA tablets can sometimes be found in a shaped form that may depict characters from popular culture. These are sometimes collectively referred to as \"fun tablets\".\nPartly due to the global supply shortage of sassafras oil\u2014a problem largely assuaged by use of improved or alternative modern methods of synthesis\u2014the purity of substances sold as molly have been found to vary widely. Some of these substances contain methylone, ethylone, MDPV, mephedrone, or any other of the group of compounds commonly known as bath salts, in addition to, or in place of, MDMA. Powdered MDMA ranges from pure MDMA to crushed tablets with 30\u201340% purity. MDMA tablets typically have low purity due to bulking agents that are added to dilute the drug and increase profits (notably lactose) and binding agents. Tablets sold as ecstasy sometimes contain 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), 3,4-methylenedioxyethylamphetamine (MDEA), other amphetamine derivatives, caffeine, opiates, or painkillers. Some tablets contain little or no MDMA. The proportion of seized ecstasy tablets with MDMA-like impurities has varied annually and by country. The average content of MDMA in a preparation is 70 to 120mg with the purity having increased since the 1990s.\nMDMA is usually consumed by mouth. It is also sometimes snorted.\nEffects.\nIn general, MDMA users report feeling the onset of subjective effects within 30 to 60 minutes of oral consumption and reaching peak effect at 75 to 120 minutes, which then plateaus for about 3.5 hours. The desired short-term psychoactive effects of MDMA have been reported to include:\nThe experience elicited by MDMA depends on the dose, setting, and user. The variability of the induced altered state is lower compared to other psychedelics. For example, MDMA used at parties is associated with high motor activity, reduced sense of identity, and poor awareness of surroundings. Use of MDMA individually or in small groups in a quiet environment and when concentrating, is associated with increased lucidity, concentration, sensitivity to aesthetic aspects of the environment, enhanced awareness of emotions, and improved capability of communication. In psychotherapeutic settings, MDMA effects have been characterized by infantile ideas, mood lability, and memories and moods connected with childhood experiences.\nMDMA has been described as an \"empathogenic\" drug because of its empathy-producing effects. Results of several studies show the effects of increased empathy with others. When testing MDMA for medium and high doses, it showed increased hedonic and arousal continuum. The effect of MDMA increasing sociability is consistent, while its effects on empathy have been more mixed.\nSide effects.\nShort-term.\nAcute adverse effects are usually the result of high or multiple doses, although single dose toxicity can occur in susceptible individuals. The most serious short-term physical health risks of MDMA are hyperthermia and dehydration. Cases of life-threatening or fatal hyponatremia (excessively low sodium concentration in the blood) have developed in MDMA users attempting to prevent dehydration by consuming excessive amounts of water without replenishing electrolytes.\nThe immediate adverse effects of MDMA use can include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther adverse effects that may occur or persist for up to a week following cessation of moderate MDMA use include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLong-term.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], the long-term effects of MDMA on human brain structure and function have not been fully determined. However, there is consistent evidence of structural and functional deficits in MDMA users with high lifetime exposure. These structural or functional changes appear to be dose dependent and may be less prominent in MDMA users with only a moderate (typically &lt;50 doses used and &lt;100 tablets consumed) lifetime exposure. Nonetheless, moderate MDMA use may still be neurotoxic and what constitutes moderate use is not clearly established.\nFurthermore, it is not clear yet whether \"typical\" recreational users of MDMA (1 to 2 pills of 75 to 125mg MDMA or analogue every 1 to 4 weeks) will develop neurotoxic brain lesions. Long-term exposure to MDMA in humans has been shown to produce marked neurodegeneration in striatal, hippocampal, prefrontal, and occipital serotonergic axon terminals. Neurotoxic damage to serotonergic axon terminals has been shown to persist for more than two years. Elevations in brain temperature from MDMA use are positively correlated with MDMA-induced neurotoxicity. However, most studies on MDMA and serotonergic neurotoxicity in humans focus more on heavy users who consume as much as seven times or more the amount that most users report taking. The evidence for the presence of serotonergic neurotoxicity in casual users who take lower doses less frequently is not conclusive.\nHowever, adverse neuroplastic changes to brain microvasculature and white matter have been observed to occur in humans using low doses of MDMA. Reduced gray matter density in certain brain structures has also been noted in human MDMA users. Global reductions in gray matter volume, thinning of the parietal and orbitofrontal cortices, and decreased hippocampal activity have been observed in long term users. The effects established so far for recreational use of ecstasy lie in the range of moderate to severe effects for serotonin transporter reduction.\nImpairments in multiple aspects of cognition, including attention, learning, memory, visual processing, and sleep, have been found in regular MDMA users. The magnitude of these impairments is correlated with lifetime MDMA usage and are partially reversible with abstinence. Several forms of memory are impaired by chronic ecstasy use; however, the effects for memory impairments in ecstasy users are generally small overall. MDMA use is also associated with increased impulsivity and depression.\nSerotonin depletion following MDMA use can cause depression in subsequent days. In some cases, depressive symptoms persist for longer periods. Some studies indicate repeated recreational use of ecstasy is associated with depression and anxiety, even after quitting the drug. Depression is one of the main reasons for cessation of use.\nAt high doses, MDMA induces a neuroimmune response that, through several mechanisms, increases the permeability of the blood\u2013brain barrier, thereby making the brain more susceptible to environmental toxins and pathogens. In addition, MDMA has immunosuppressive effects in the peripheral nervous system and pro-inflammatory effects in the central nervous system.\nMDMA may increase the risk of cardiac valvulopathy in heavy or long-term users due to activation of serotonin 5-HT2B receptors. MDMA induces cardiac epigenetic changes in DNA methylation, particularly hypermethylation changes.\nReinforcement disorders.\nApproximately 60% of MDMA users experience withdrawal symptoms when they stop taking MDMA. Some of these symptoms include fatigue, loss of appetite, depression, and trouble concentrating. Tolerance to some of the desired and adverse effects of MDMA is expected to occur with consistent MDMA use. A 2007 delphic analysis of a panel of experts in pharmacology, psychiatry, law, policing and others estimated MDMA to have a psychological dependence and physical dependence potential roughly three-fourths to four-fifths that of cannabis.\nMDMA has been shown to induce \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens. Because MDMA releases dopamine in the striatum, the mechanisms by which it induces \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens are analogous to other dopaminergic psychostimulants. Therefore, chronic use of MDMA at high doses can result in altered brain structure and drug addiction that occur as a consequence of \u0394FosB overexpression in the nucleus accumbens. MDMA is less addictive than other stimulants such as methamphetamine and cocaine. Compared with amphetamine, MDMA and its metabolite MDA are less reinforcing.\nOne study found approximately 15% of chronic MDMA users met the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for substance dependence. However, there is little evidence for a specific diagnosable MDMA dependence syndrome because MDMA is typically used relatively infrequently.\nThere are currently no medications to treat MDMA addiction.\nDuring pregnancy.\nMDMA is a moderately teratogenic drug (i.e., it is toxic to the fetus). In utero exposure to MDMA is associated with a neuro- and cardiotoxicity and impaired motor functioning. Motor delays may be temporary during infancy or long-term. The severity of these developmental delays increases with heavier MDMA use. MDMA has been shown to promote the survival of fetal dopaminergic neurons in culture.\nOverdose.\nMDMA overdose symptoms vary widely due to the involvement of multiple organ systems. Some of the more overt overdose symptoms are listed in the table below. The number of instances of fatal MDMA intoxication is low relative to its usage rates. In most fatalities, MDMA was not the only drug involved. Acute toxicity is mainly caused by serotonin syndrome and sympathomimetic effects. MDMA's toxicity in overdose may be exacerbated by caffeine, with which it is frequently cut in order to increase volume. The estimated fatal dose of MDMA in humans is around 15 or 16times a typical recreational dose. Sympathomimetic side effects can be managed with carvedilol. A scheme for management of acute MDMA toxicity has been published focusing on treatment of hyperthermia, hyponatraemia, serotonin syndrome, and multiple organ failure.\nInteractions.\nA number of drug interactions can occur between MDMA and other drugs, including serotonergic drugs. MDMA also interacts with drugs which inhibit CYP450 enzymes, like ritonavir (Norvir), particularly CYP2D6 inhibitors. Life-threatening reactions and death have occurred in people who took MDMA while on ritonavir. Bupropion, a strong CYP2D6 inhibitor, has been found to increase MDMA exposure with administration of MDMA. Concurrent use of MDMA with certain other serotonergic drugs can result in a life-threatening condition called serotonin syndrome. Severe overdose resulting in death has also been reported in people who took MDMA in combination with certain monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), such as phenelzine (Nardil), tranylcypromine (Parnate), or moclobemide (Aurorix, Manerix). Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) such as citalopram (Celexa), duloxetine (Cymbalta), fluoxetine (Prozac), and paroxetine (Paxil) have been shown to block most of the subjective effects of MDMA. Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (NRIs) such as reboxetine (Edronax) have been found to reduce emotional excitation and feelings of stimulation with MDMA but do not appear to influence its entactogenic or mood-elevating effects.\nMDMA induces the release of monoamine neurotransmitters and thereby acts as an indirectly acting sympathomimetic and produces a variety of cardiostimulant effects. It dose-dependently increases heart rate, blood pressure, and cardiac output. SRIs like citalopram and paroxetine, as well as the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonist ketanserin, have been found to partially block the increases in heart rate and blood pressure with MDMA. It is notable in this regard that serotonergic psychedelics such as psilocybin, which act as serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists, likewise have sympathomimetic effects. The NRI reboxetine and the serotonin\u2013norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) duloxetine block MDMA-induced increases in heart rate and blood pressure. Conversely, bupropion, a norepinephrine\u2013dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI) with only weak dopaminergic activity, reduced MDMA-induced heart rate and circulating norepinephrine increases but did not affect MDMA-induced blood pressure increases. On the other hand, the robust NDRI methylphenidate, which has sympathomimetic effects of its own, has been found to augment the cardiovascular effects and increases in circulating norepinephrine and epinephrine levels induced by MDMA.\nThe non-selective beta blocker pindolol blocked MDMA-induced increases in heart rate but not blood pressure. The \u03b12-adrenergic receptor agonist clonidine did not affect the cardiovascular effects of MDMA, though it reduced blood pressure. The \u03b11-adrenergic receptor antagonists doxazosin and prazosin blocked or reduced MDMA-induced blood pressure increases but augmented MDMA-induced heart rate and cardiac output increases. The dual \u03b11- and \u03b2-adrenergic receptor blocker carvedilol reduced MDMA-induced heart rate and blood pressure increases. In contrast to the cases of serotonergic and noradrenergic agents, the dopamine D2 receptor antagonist haloperidol did not affect the cardiovascular responses to MDMA. Due to the theoretical risk of \"unopposed \u03b1-stimulation\" and possible consequences like coronary vasospasm, it has been suggested that dual \u03b11- and \u03b2-adrenergic receptor antagonists like carvedilol and labetalol, rather than selective beta blockers, should be used in the management of stimulant-induced sympathomimetic toxicity, for instance in the context of overdose.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nMDMA is an entactogen or empathogen, as well as a stimulant, euphoriant, and weak psychedelic. It is a substrate of the monoamine transporters (MATs) and acts as a monoamine releasing agent (MRA). The drug is specifically a well-balanced serotonin\u2013norepinephrine\u2013dopamine releasing agent (SNDRA). To a lesser extent, MDMA also acts as a serotonin\u2013norepinephrine\u2013dopamine reuptake inhibitor (SNDRI). MDMA enters monoaminergic neurons via the MATs and then, via poorly understood mechanisms, reverses the direction of these transporters to produce efflux of the monoamine neurotransmitters rather than the usual reuptake. Induction of monoamine efflux by amphetamines in general may involve intracellular Na+ and Ca2+ elevation and PKC and CaMKII\u03b1 activation. MDMA also acts on the vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) on synaptic vesicles to increase the cytosolic concentrations of the monoamine neurotransmitters available for efflux. By inducing release and reuptake inhibition of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, MDMA increases levels of these neurotransmitters in the brain and periphery.\nIn addition to its actions as an SNDRA, MDMA directly interacts with a number of monoamine and other receptors. With varying potencies ranging from high to low, it is a partial agonist of several of the serotonin 5-HT1 receptors, including the serotonin 5-HT1A, 5-HT1B, and 5-HT1D receptors, and is a partial agonist of the serotonin 5-HT2 receptors, including the serotonin 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, and 5-HT2C receptors. The drug also interacts with \u03b12-adrenergic receptors, with the sigma \u03c31 and \u03c32 receptors, with the imidazoline I1 receptor, and with other targets. Along with the preceding receptor interactions, MDMA is a potent partial agonist of the rodent trace amine-associated receptor 1 (TAAR1). Conversely however, due to species differences, it is far weaker in terms of potency as an agonist of the human TAAR1. The drug appears to act as a weak partial agonist of the human TAAR1 rather than as an efficacious agonist. In relation to the preceding findings, MDMA has been said to be essentially inactive as a human TAAR1 agonist. TAAR1 activation is thought to auto-inhibit and constrain the effects of amphetamines that possess TAAR1 agonism, for instance MDMA in rodents.\nElevation of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine levels by MDMA is believed to mediate most of the drug's effects, including its entactogenic, stimulant, euphoriant, hyperthermic, and sympathomimetic effects. The entactogenic effects of MDMA, including increased sociability, empathy, feelings of closeness, and reduced aggression, are thought to be mainly due to induction of serotonin release. The exact serotonin receptors responsible for MDMA's entactogenic effects are unclear, but may include the serotonin 5-HT1A receptor, 5-HT1B receptor, and 5-HT2A receptor, as well as 5-HT1A receptor-mediated oxytocin release and consequent activation of the oxytocin receptor. Induction of dopamine release is thought to be importantly involved in the stimulant and euphoriant effects of MDMA, while induction of norepinephrine release and serotonin 5-HT2A receptor stimulation are believed to mediate its sympathomimetic effects. Activation of serotonin 5-HT1B and 5-HT2A receptors is also thought to be involved in the stimulant and euphoriant effects of MDMA, while serotonin 5-HT2C receptor activation is thought to constrain these effects and limit MDMA's reinforcing potential. Serotonin 5-HT2B receptor signaling appears to be required for MDMA-induced serotonin release and effects. MDMA has been associated with a unique subjective \"magic\" or euphoria that few or no other known entactogens are said to fully reproduce. The mechanisms underlying this property of MDMA are unknown, but it has been theorized to be due to a specific mixture and balance of pharmacological activities, including combined serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine release and direct serotonin receptor agonism.\nMDMA is often said to have mild or weak psychedelic effects. These effects are said to be dose-dependent, such that greater hallucinogenic effects are produced at higher doses. The mild hallucinogenic effects of MDMA include perceptual changes like intensification of visual, auditory, and tactile perception (e.g., brightened colors), a state of dissociation with feelings of depersonalization and derealization (e.g., \"oceanic boundlessness\"), and thinking disturbances. Conversely, overt hallucinations do not occur, MDMA's hallucinogenic effects are described as \"non-problematic\" for users, and are said to be much less than those of 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA) or especially those of fully effective serotonergic psychedelics like psilocybin. The hallucinogenic effects of MDMA have been theorized to be mediated by serotonin 5-HT2A receptor activation analogously to the case of classical psychedelics. Accordingly, the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonist ketanserin has been reported to reduce MDMA-induced perceptual changes in humans. Conversely however, it failed to affect MDMA-induced feelings of dissociation and oceanic boundlessness. In contrast, the serotonin reuptake inhibitor citalopram, which blocks MDMA-induced serotonin release, diminished all of the psychoactive and hallucinogenic effects of MDMA. It has been noted that \"N\"-methylation of psychedelic phenethylamines, as in the structural difference between MDA and MDMA, has invariably greatly reduced or abolished their psychedelic activity. Whereas MDA and psychedelics like psilocybin induce the head-twitch response in rodents, a behavioral proxy of psychedelic effects, findings on MDMA and the head-twitch response are mixed and conflicting. In addition, whereas MDA fully substitutes for psychedelics like LSD and DOM in rodent drug discrimination tests, MDMA does not do so, nor do psychedelics generally fully substitute for MDMA.\nLong-term repeated activation of serotonin 5-HT2B receptors by MDMA is thought to result in increased risk of organ complications such as valvular heart disease (VHD) and primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH). MDMA has been associated with serotonergic neurotoxicity. This may be due to formation of toxic MDMA metabolites and/or induction of simultaneous serotonin and dopamine release, with consequent uptake of dopamine into serotonergic neurons and breakdown into toxic species. Serotonin 5-HT2 receptor agonists or serotonergic psychedelics may potentiate the neurotoxicity of MDMA.\nMDMA is a racemic mixture of two enantiomers, (\"S\")-MDMA and (\"R\")-MDMA. (\"S\")-MDMA is much more potent as an SNDRA \"in vitro\" and in producing MDMA-like subjective effects in humans than (\"R\")-MDMA. By contrast, (\"R\")-MDMA acts as a lower-potency serotonin\u2013norepinephrine releasing agent (SNRA) with weak or negligible effects on dopamine. Relatedly, (\"R\")-MDMA shows weak or negligible stimulant-like and rewarding effects in animals. Both (\"S\")-MDMA and (\"R\")-MDMA produce entactogen-type effects in animals and humans. In addition, both (\"S\")-MDMA and (\"R\")-MDMA are weak agonists of the serotonin 5-HT2 receptors. (\"R\")-MDMA is more potent and efficacious as a serotonin 5-HT2A and 5-HT2B receptor agonist than (\"S\")-MDMA, whereas (\"S\")-MDMA is somewhat more potent as an agonist of the serotonin 5-HT2C receptor. Due to it being a more potent serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonist than (\"S\")-MDMA, (\"R\")-MDMA has been hypothesized to have greater psychedelic effects than (\"S\")-MDMA or racemic MDMA. However, this proved not to be the case in a direct clinical comparison of (\"R\")-MDMA, (\"S\")-MDMA, and racemic MDMA, with equivalent hallucinogen-like effects instead found between the three interventions.\nMDMA produces MDA as a minor active metabolite. Peak levels of MDA are about 5 to 10% of those of MDMA and total exposure to MDA is almost 10% of that of MDMA with oral MDMA administration. As a result, MDA may contribute to some extent to the effects of MDMA. MDA is an entactogen, stimulant, and weak psychedelic similarly to MDMA. Like MDMA, it acts as a potent and well-balanced SNDRA and as a weak serotonin 5-HT2 receptor agonist. However, MDA shows much more potent and efficacious serotonin 5-HT2A, 5-HT2B, and 5-HT2C receptor agonism than MDMA. Accordingly, MDA produces greater psychedelic effects than MDMA in humans and might particularly contribute to the mild psychedelic-like effects of MDMA. On the other hand, MDA may also be importantly involved in toxicity of MDMA, such as cardiac valvulopathy.\nThe duration of action of MDMA (3\u20136hours) is much shorter than its elimination half-life (8\u20139hours) would imply. In relation to this, MDMA's duration and the offset of its effects appear to be determined more by rapid acute tolerance rather than by circulating drug concentrations. Similar findings have been made for amphetamine and methamphetamine. One mechanism by which tolerance to MDMA may occur is internalization of the serotonin transporter (SERT). Although MDMA and serotonin are not significant TAAR1 agonists in humans, TAAR1 activation by MDMA may result in SERT internalization, for instance in rodents in whom MDMA is a potent TAAR1 agonist. It is thought that brain serotonin levels are depleted after MDMA administration but that levels typically return to normal within 24 to 48hours.\nPharmacokinetics.\nAbsorption.\nThe MDMA concentration in the bloodstream starts to rise after about 30minutes, and reaches its maximal concentration between 1.5 and 3hours after oral administration. It is then slowly metabolized and excreted, with levels of MDMA and its metabolites decreasing to half their peak concentration over the next several hours. The duration of action of MDMA is about 3 to 6hours.\nDistribution.\nThe plasma protein binding of MDMA is unknown.\nMetabolism.\nMetabolites of MDMA that have been identified in humans include 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxymethamphetamine (HMMA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyamphetamine (HMA), 3,4-dihydroxyamphetamine (DHA) (also called alpha-methyldopamine (\u03b1-Me-DA)), 3,4-methylenedioxyphenylacetone (MDP2P), and 3,4-methylenedioxy-N-hydroxyamphetamine (MDOH). The contributions of these metabolites to the psychoactive and toxic effects of MDMA are an area of active research. 80% of MDMA is metabolised in the liver, and about 20% is excreted unchanged in the urine.\nMDMA is known to be metabolized by two main metabolic pathways: (1) \"O\"-demethylenation followed by catechol-\"O\"-methyltransferase (COMT)-catalyzed methylation or glucuronide/sulfate conjugation; and (2) \"N\"-dealkylation, deamination, and oxidation to the corresponding benzoic acid derivatives conjugated with glycine. The metabolism may be primarily by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 and COMT. Complex, nonlinear pharmacokinetics arise via autoinhibition of CYP2D6 and CYP2D8, resulting in zeroth order kinetics at higher doses. It is thought that this can result in sustained and higher concentrations of MDMA if the user takes consecutive doses of the drug.\nElimination.\nMDMA and metabolites are primarily excreted as conjugates, such as sulfates and glucuronides. MDMA is a chiral compound and has been almost exclusively administered as a racemate. However, the two enantiomers have been shown to exhibit different kinetics. The disposition of MDMA may also be stereoselective, with the S-enantiomer having a shorter elimination half-life and greater excretion than the R-enantiomer. Evidence suggests that the area under the blood plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) was two to four times higher for the (\"R\")-enantiomer than the (\"S\")-enantiomer after a 40mg oral dose in human volunteers. Likewise, the plasma half-life of (\"R\")-MDMA was significantly longer than that of the (\"S\")-enantiomer (5.8\u00b12.2 hours vs 3.6\u00b10.9 hours). However, because MDMA excretion and metabolism have nonlinear kinetics, the half-lives would be higher at more typical doses (100mg is sometimes considered a typical dose).\nChemistry.\nMDMA is in the substituted methylenedioxyphenethylamine and substituted amphetamine classes of chemicals. As a free base, MDMA is a colorless oil insoluble in water. The most common salt of MDMA is the hydrochloride salt; pure MDMA hydrochloride is water-soluble and appears as a white or off-white powder or crystal.\nSynthesis.\nThere are numerous methods available to synthesize MDMA via different intermediates. The original MDMA synthesis described in Merck's patent involves brominating safrole to 1-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2-bromopropane and then reacting this adduct with methylamine. Most illicit MDMA is synthesized using MDP2P (3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl-2-propanone) as a precursor. MDP2P in turn is generally synthesized from piperonal, safrole or isosafrole. One method is to isomerize safrole to isosafrole in the presence of a strong base, and then oxidize isosafrole to MDP2P. Another method uses the Wacker process to oxidize safrole directly to the MDP2P intermediate with a palladium catalyst. Once the MDP2P intermediate has been prepared, a reductive amination leads to racemic MDMA (an equal parts mixture of (\"R\")-MDMA and (\"S\")-MDMA). Relatively small quantities of essential oil are required to make large amounts of MDMA. The essential oil of \"Ocotea cymbarum\", for example, typically contains between 80 and 94% safrole. This allows 500mL of the oil to produce between 150 and 340 grams of MDMA.\nDetection in body fluids.\nMDMA and MDA may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor for use, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in the forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal violation or a sudden death. Some drug abuse screening programs rely on hair, saliva, or sweat as specimens. Most commercial amphetamine immunoassay screening tests cross-react significantly with MDMA or its major metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish and separately measure each of these substances. The concentrations of MDA in the blood or urine of a person who has taken only MDMA are, in general, less than 10% those of the parent drug.\nHistory.\nEarly research and use.\nMDMA was first synthesized and patented in 1912 by Merck chemist Anton K\u00f6llisch. At the time, Merck was interested in developing substances that stopped abnormal bleeding. Merck wanted to avoid an existing patent held by Bayer for one such compound: hydrastinine. K\u00f6llisch developed a preparation of a hydrastinine analogue, methylhydrastinine, at the request of fellow lab members, Walther Beckh and Otto Wolfes. MDMA (called methylsafrylamin, safrylmethylamin or N-Methyl-a-Methylhomopiperonylamin in Merck laboratory reports) was an intermediate compound in the synthesis of methylhydrastinine. Merck was not interested in MDMA itself at the time. On 24 December 1912, Merck filed two patent applications that described the synthesis and some chemical properties of MDMA and its subsequent conversion to methylhydrastinine. Merck records indicate its researchers returned to the compound sporadically. A 1920 Merck patent describes a chemical modification to MDMA.\nMDMA's analogue 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA) was first synthesized in 1910 as a derivative of adrenaline. Gordon A. Alles, the discoverer of the psychoactive effects of amphetamine, also discovered the psychoactive effects of MDA in 1930 in a self-experiment in which he administered a high dose (126mg) to himself. However, he did not subsequently describe these effects until 1959. MDA was later tested as an appetite suppressant by Smith, Kline &amp; French and for other uses by other groups in the 1950s. In relation to the preceding, the psychoactive effects of MDA were discovered well before those of MDMA.\nIn 1927, Max Oberlin studied the pharmacology of MDMA while searching for substances with effects similar to adrenaline or ephedrine, the latter being structurally similar to MDMA. Compared to ephedrine, Oberlin observed that it had similar effects on vascular smooth muscle tissue, stronger effects at the uterus, and no \"local effect at the eye\". MDMA was also found to have effects on blood sugar levels comparable to high doses of ephedrine. Oberlin concluded that the effects of MDMA were not limited to the sympathetic nervous system. Research was stopped \"particularly due to a strong price increase of safrylmethylamine\", which was still used as an intermediate in methylhydrastinine synthesis. Albert van Schoor performed simple toxicological tests with the drug in 1952, most likely while researching new stimulants or circulatory medications. After pharmacological studies, research on MDMA was not continued. In 1959, Wolfgang Fruhstorfer synthesized MDMA for pharmacological testing while researching stimulants. It is unclear if Fruhstorfer investigated the effects of MDMA in humans.\nOutside of Merck, other researchers began to investigate MDMA. In 1953 and 1954, the United States Army commissioned a study of toxicity and behavioral effects in animals injected with mescaline and several analogues, including MDMA. Conducted at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, these investigations were declassified in October 1969 and published in 1973. A 1960 Polish paper by Biniecki and Krajewski describing the synthesis of MDMA as an intermediate was the first published scientific paper on the substance.\nMDA appeared as a recreational drug in the mid-1960s. MDMA may have been in non-medical use in the western United States in 1968. An August 1970 report at a meeting of crime laboratory chemists indicates MDMA was being used recreationally in the Chicago area by 1970. MDMA likely emerged as a substitute for MDA, a drug at the time popular among users of psychedelics which was made a Schedule 1 controlled substance in the United States in 1970.\nShulgin's research.\nAmerican chemist and psychopharmacologist Alexander Shulgin reported he synthesized MDMA in 1965 while researching methylenedioxy compounds at Dow Chemical Company, but did not test the psychoactivity of the compound at this time. Around 1970, Shulgin sent instructions for N-methylated MDA (MDMA) synthesis to the founder of a Los Angeles chemical company who had requested them. This individual later provided these instructions to a client in the Midwest. Shulgin may have suspected he played a role in the emergence of MDMA in Chicago.\nShulgin first heard of the psychoactive effects of N-methylated MDA around 1975 from a young student who reported \"amphetamine-like content\". Around 30 May 1976, Shulgin again heard about the effects of N-methylated MDA, this time from a graduate student in a medicinal chemistry group he advised at San Francisco State University who directed him to the University of Michigan study. She and two close friends had consumed 100mg of MDMA and reported positive emotional experiences. Following the self-trials of a colleague at the University of San Francisco, Shulgin synthesized MDMA and tried it himself in September and October 1976. Shulgin first reported on MDMA in a presentation at a conference in Bethesda, Maryland in December 1976. In 1978, he and David E. Nichols published a report on the drug's psychoactive effect in humans. They described MDMA as inducing \"an easily controlled altered state of consciousness with emotional and sensual overtones\" comparable \"to marijuana, to psilocybin devoid of the hallucinatory component, or to low levels of MDA\".\nWhile not finding his own experiences with MDMA particularly powerful, Shulgin was impressed with the drug's disinhibiting effects and thought it could be useful in therapy. Believing MDMA allowed users to strip away habits and perceive the world clearly, Shulgin called the drug \"window\". Shulgin occasionally used MDMA for relaxation, referring to it as \"my low-calorie martini\", and gave the drug to friends, researchers, and others who he thought could benefit from it. One such person was Leo Zeff, a psychotherapist who had been known to use psychedelic substances in his practice. When he tried the drug in 1977, Zeff was impressed with the effects of MDMA and came out of his semi-retirement to promote its use in therapy. Over the following years, Zeff traveled around the United States and occasionally to Europe, eventually training an estimated four thousand psychotherapists in the therapeutic use of MDMA. Zeff named the drug \"Adam\", believing it put users in a state of primordial innocence.\nPsychotherapists who used MDMA believed the drug eliminated the typical fear response and increased communication. Sessions were usually held in the home of the patient or the therapist. The role of the therapist was minimized in favor of patient self-discovery accompanied by MDMA induced feelings of empathy. Depression, substance use disorders, relationship problems, premenstrual syndrome, and autism were among several psychiatric disorders MDMA assisted therapy was reported to treat. According to psychiatrist George Greer, therapists who used MDMA in their practice were impressed by the results. Anecdotally, MDMA was said to greatly accelerate therapy. According to David Nutt, MDMA was widely used in the western US in couples counseling, and was called \"empathy\". Only later was the term \"ecstasy\" used for it, coinciding with rising opposition to its use.\nRising recreational use.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, \"Adam\" spread through personal networks of psychotherapists, psychiatrists, users of psychedelics, and yuppies. Hoping MDMA could avoid criminalization like LSD and mescaline, psychotherapists and experimenters attempted to limit the spread of MDMA and information about it while conducting informal research. Early MDMA distributors were deterred from large scale operations by the threat of possible legislation. Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, this network of MDMA users consumed an estimated 500,000 doses.\nA small recreational market for MDMA developed by the late 1970s, consuming perhaps 10,000 doses in 1976. By the early 1980s MDMA was being used in Boston and New York City nightclubs such as Studio 54 and Paradise Garage. Into the early 1980s, as the recreational market slowly expanded, production of MDMA was dominated by a small group of therapeutically minded Boston chemists. Having commenced production in 1976, this \"Boston Group\" did not keep up with growing demand and shortages frequently occurred.\nPerceiving a business opportunity, Michael Clegg, the Southwest distributor for the Boston Group, started his own \"Texas Group\" backed financially by Texas friends. In 1981, Clegg had coined \"Ecstasy\" as a slang term for MDMA to increase its marketability. Starting in 1983, the Texas Group mass-produced MDMA in a Texas lab or imported it from California and marketed tablets using pyramid sales structures and toll-free numbers. MDMA could be purchased via credit card and taxes were paid on sales. Under the brand name \"Sassyfras\", MDMA tablets were sold in brown bottles. The Texas Group advertised \"Ecstasy parties\" at bars and discos, describing MDMA as a \"fun drug\" and \"good to dance to\". MDMA was openly distributed in Austin and Dallas\u2013Fort Worth area bars and nightclubs, becoming popular with yuppies, college students, and gays.\nRecreational use also increased after several cocaine dealers switched to distributing MDMA following experiences with the drug. A California laboratory that analyzed confidentially submitted drug samples first detected MDMA in 1975. Over the following years the number of MDMA samples increased, eventually exceeding the number of MDA samples in the early 1980s. By the mid-1980s, MDMA use had spread to colleges around the United States.\nMedia attention and scheduling.\nUnited States.\nIn an early media report on MDMA published in 1982, a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) spokesman stated the agency would ban the drug if enough evidence for abuse could be found. By mid-1984, MDMA use was becoming more noticed. Bill Mandel reported on \"Adam\" in a 10 June San Francisco Chronicle article, but misidentified the drug as methyloxymethylenedioxyamphetamine (MMDA). In the next month, the World Health Organization identified MDMA as the only substance out of twenty phenethylamines to be seized a significant number of times.\nAfter a year of planning and data collection, MDMA was proposed for scheduling by the DEA on 27 July 1984, with a request for comments and objections. The DEA was surprised when a number of psychiatrists, psychotherapists, and researchers objected to the proposed scheduling and requested a hearing. In a Newsweek article published the next year, a DEA pharmacologist stated that the agency had been unaware of its use among psychiatrists. An initial hearing was held on 1 February 1985 at the DEA offices in Washington, D.C., with administrative law judge Francis L. Young presiding. It was decided there to hold three more hearings that year: Los Angeles on 10 June, Kansas City, Missouri on 10\u201311 July, and Washington, D.C., on 8\u201311 October.\nSensational media attention was given to the proposed criminalization and the reaction of MDMA proponents, effectively advertising the drug. In response to the proposed scheduling, the Texas Group increased production from 1985 estimates of 30,000 tablets a month to as many as 8,000 per day, potentially making two million ecstasy tablets in the months before MDMA was made illegal. By some estimates the Texas Group distributed 500,000 tablets per month in Dallas alone. According to one participant in an ethnographic study, the Texas Group produced more MDMA in eighteen months than all other distribution networks combined across their entire histories. By May 1985, MDMA use was widespread in California, Texas, southern Florida, and the northeastern United States. According to the DEA there was evidence of use in twenty-eight states and Canada. Urged by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the DEA announced an emergency Schedule I classification of MDMA on 31 May 1985. The agency cited increased distribution in Texas, escalating street use, and new evidence of MDA (an analog of MDMA) neurotoxicity as reasons for the emergency measure. The ban took effect one month later on 1 July 1985 in the midst of Nancy Reagan's \"Just Say No\" campaign.\nAs a result of several expert witnesses testifying that MDMA had an accepted medical usage, the administrative law judge presiding over the hearings recommended that MDMA be classified as a Schedule III substance. Despite this, DEA administrator John C. Lawn overruled and classified the drug as Schedule I. Harvard psychiatrist Lester Grinspoon then sued the DEA, claiming that the DEA had ignored the medical uses of MDMA, and the federal court sided with Grinspoon, calling Lawn's argument \"strained\" and \"unpersuasive\", and vacated MDMA's Schedule I status. Despite this, less than a month later Lawn reviewed the evidence and reclassified MDMA as Schedule I again, claiming that the expert testimony of several psychiatrists claiming over 200 cases where MDMA had been used in a therapeutic context with positive results could be dismissed because they were not published in medical journals. In 2017, the FDA granted breakthrough therapy designation for its use with psychotherapy for PTSD. However, this designation has been questioned and problematized.\nUnited Nations.\nWhile engaged in scheduling debates in the United States, the DEA also pushed for international scheduling. In 1985, the World Health Organization's Expert Committee on Drug Dependence recommended that MDMA be placed in Schedule I of the 1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances. The committee made this recommendation on the basis of the pharmacological similarity of MDMA to previously scheduled drugs, reports of illicit trafficking in Canada, drug seizures in the United States, and lack of well-defined therapeutic use. While intrigued by reports of psychotherapeutic uses for the drug, the committee viewed the studies as lacking appropriate methodological design and encouraged further research. Committee chairman Paul Grof dissented, believing international control was not warranted at the time and a recommendation should await further therapeutic data. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs added MDMA to Schedule I of the convention on 11 February 1986.\nPost-scheduling.\nThe use of MDMA in Texas clubs declined rapidly after criminalization, but by 1991, the drug became popular among young middle-class whites and in nightclubs. In 1985, MDMA use became associated with acid house on the Spanish island of Ibiza. Thereafter, in the late 1980s, the drug spread alongside rave culture to the United Kingdom and then to other European and American cities. Illicit MDMA use became increasingly widespread among young adults in universities and later, in high schools. Since the mid-1990s, MDMA has become the most widely used amphetamine-type drug by college students and teenagers. MDMA became one of the four most widely used illicit drugs in the US, along with cocaine, heroin, and cannabis. According to some estimates as of 2004, only marijuana attracts more first time users in the United States.\nAfter MDMA was criminalized, most medical use stopped, although some therapists continued to prescribe the drug illegally. Later, Charles Grob initiated an ascending-dose safety study in healthy volunteers. Subsequent FDA-approved MDMA studies in humans have taken place in the United States in Detroit (Wayne State University), Chicago (University of Chicago), San Francisco (UCSF and California Pacific Medical Center), Baltimore (NIDA\u2013NIH Intramural Program), and South Carolina. Studies have also been conducted in Switzerland (University Hospital of Psychiatry, Z\u00fcrich), the Netherlands (Maastricht University), and Spain (Universitat Aut\u00f2noma de Barcelona).\n\"Molly\", short for 'molecule', was recognized as a slang term for crystalline or powder MDMA in the 2000s.\nIn 2010, the BBC reported that use of MDMA had decreased in the UK in previous years. This may be due to increased seizures during use and decreased production of the precursor chemicals used to manufacture MDMA. Unwitting substitution with other drugs, such as mephedrone and methamphetamine, as well as legal alternatives to MDMA, such as BZP, MDPV, and methylone, are also thought to have contributed to its decrease in popularity.\nIn 2017, it was found that some pills being sold as MDMA contained pentylone, which can cause very unpleasant agitation and paranoia.\nAccording to David Nutt, when safrole was restricted by the United Nations in order to reduce the supply of MDMA, producers in China began using anethole instead, but this gives para-methoxyamphetamine (PMA, also known as \"Dr Death\"), which is much more toxic than MDMA and can cause overheating, muscle spasms, seizures, unconsciousness, and death. People wanting MDMA are sometimes sold PMA instead.\nIn 2025, the BBC reported on a study of 650 survivors from the Nova music festival massacre. Two-thirds were under the influence of recreational drugs (MDMA, LSD, marijuana or psilocybin) when Hamas attacked the festival on October 7, 2023. MDMA appeared to have a protective effect against later problems with sleeping and emotional distress.\nSociety and culture.\nLegal status.\nMDMA is legally controlled in most of the world under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances and other international agreements, although exceptions exist for research and limited medical use. In general, the unlicensed use, sale or manufacture of MDMA are all criminal offences.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, MDMA was rescheduled on 1 July 2023 as a schedule 8 substance (available on prescription) when used in the treatment of PTSD, while remaining a schedule 9 substance (prohibited) for all other uses. For the treatment of PTSD, MDMA can only be prescribed by psychiatrists with specific training and authorisation.\nIn 1986, MDMA was declared an illegal substance because of its allegedly harmful effects and potential for misuse. Any non-authorised sale, use or manufacture is strictly prohibited by law. Permits for research uses on humans must be approved by a recognized ethics committee on human research.\nIn Western Australia under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 4.0g of MDMA is the amount required determining a court of trial, 2.0g is considered a presumption with intent to sell or supply and 28.0g is considered trafficking under Australian law.\nThe Australian Capital Territory passed legislation to decriminalise the possession of small amounts of MDMA, which took effect in October 2023.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, MDMA is listed as a Schedule 1 as it is an analogue of amphetamine. The Controlled Drugs and Substances Act was updated as a result of the Safe Streets and Communities Act changing amphetamines from Schedule III to Schedule I in March 2012. In 2022, the federal government granted British Columbia a 3-year exemption, legalizing the possession of up to of MDMA in the province from February 2023 until February 2026.\nFinland.\nScheduled in the \"government decree on substances, preparations and plants considered to be narcotic drugs\". Ecstasy is considered a very dangerous illegal drug.\nNetherlands.\nIn 2024, a Dutch state commission issued a report advocating for MDMA to be made available to patients with PTSD.\nIn June 2011, the Expert Committee on the List (Expertcommissie Lijstensystematiek Opiumwet) issued a report which discussed the evidence for harm and the legal status of MDMA, arguing in favor of maintaining it on List I.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, MDMA was made illegal in 1977 by a modification order to the existing Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. Although MDMA was not named explicitly in this legislation, the order extended the definition of Class A drugs to include various ring-substituted phenethylamines. The drug is therefore illegal to sell, buy, or possess without a licence in the UK. Penalties include a maximum of seven years and/or unlimited fine for possession; life and/or unlimited fine for production or trafficking.\nSome researchers such as David Nutt have criticized the scheduling of MDMA, which he determined to be a relatively harmless drug. An editorial he wrote in the \"Journal of Psychopharmacology\", where he compared the risk of harm for horse riding (1 adverse event in 350) to that of ecstasy (1 in 10,000) resulted in his dismissal, leading to the resignation of several of his colleagues from the ACMD.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, MDMA is listed in Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act. In a 2011 federal court hearing, the American Civil Liberties Union successfully argued that the sentencing guideline for MDMA/ecstasy is based on outdated science, leading to excessive prison sentences. Other courts have upheld the sentencing guidelines. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee explained its ruling by noting that \"an individual federal district court judge simply cannot marshal resources akin to those available to the Commission for tackling the manifold issues involved with determining a proper drug equivalency.\"\nDemographics.\nIn 2014, 3.5% of 18-to-25-year-olds had used MDMA in the United States. In the European Union as of 2018, 4.1% of adults (15\u201364 years old) have used MDMA at least once in their life, and 0.8% had used it in the last year. Among young adults, 1.8% had used MDMA in the last year.\nIn Europe, an estimated 37% of regular club-goers aged 14 to 35 used MDMA in the past year according to the 2015 European Drug report. The highest one-year prevalence of MDMA use in Germany in 2012 was 1.7% among people aged 25 to 29 compared with a population average of 0.4%. Among adolescent users in the United States between 1999 and 2008, girls were more likely to use MDMA than boys.\nEconomics.\nEurope.\nIn 2008 the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction noted that although there were some reports of tablets being sold for as little as \u20ac1, most countries in Europe then reported typical retail prices in the range of \u20ac3 to \u20ac9 per tablet, typically containing 25\u201365mg of MDMA. By 2014 the EMCDDA reported that the range was more usually between \u20ac5 and \u20ac10 per tablet, typically containing 57\u2013102mg of MDMA, although MDMA in powder form was becoming more common.\nNorth America.\nThe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime stated in its 2014 World Drug Report that US ecstasy retail prices range from US$1 to $70 per pill, or from $15,000 to $32,000 per kilogram. A new research area named Drug Intelligence aims to automatically monitor distribution networks based on image processing and machine learning techniques, in which an Ecstasy pill picture is analyzed to detect correlations among different production batches. These novel techniques allow police scientists to facilitate the monitoring of illicit distribution networks.\nAs of October 2015[ [update]], most of the MDMA in the United States is produced in British Columbia, Canada and imported by Canada-based Asian transnational criminal organizations. The market for MDMA in the United States is relatively small compared to methamphetamine, cocaine, and heroin. In the United States, about 0.9 million people used ecstasy in 2010.\nAustralia.\nMDMA is particularly expensive in Australia, costing A$15\u2013A$30 per tablet. In terms of purity data for Australian MDMA, the average is around 34%, ranging from less than 1% to about 85%. The majority of tablets contain 70\u201385mg of MDMA. Most MDMA enters Australia from the Netherlands, the UK, Asia, and the US.\nCorporate logos on pills.\nA number of ecstasy manufacturers brand their pills with a logo, often that of an unrelated corporation. Some pills depict logos of products or media popular with children, such as Shaun the Sheep.\nResearch.\nMDMA-assisted psychotherapy shows promising efficacy and a generally tolerable safety profile for treating PTSD, with meta-analyses indicating symptom reduction, though careful dosing and controlled therapeutic settings are essential to minimize risks.\nMDMA is being investigated as a potential treatment for social impairments in autism.\nThe British critical psychiatrist Joanna Moncrieff has critiqued the use and study of MDMA and related drugs like psychedelics for treatment of psychiatric disorders, highlighting concerns including excessive hype around these drugs, blurred lines between medical and recreational use, flawed clinical trial findings, financial conflicts of interest, strong expectancy effects and large placebo responses, short-term benefits over placebo, and their potential for adverse effects, among others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10025", "revid": "50590089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10025", "title": "Flag of Europe", "text": "Official symbol used by the Council of Europe and the European Union\nThe flag of Europe or European flag consists of twelve golden stars forming a circle on a blue field. It was designed and adopted in 1955 by the Council of Europe (CoE) as a symbol for the whole of Europe.\nSince 1985, the flag has also been a symbol of the European Union (EU), whose 27 member states are all also CoE members, although in that year the EU had not yet assumed its present name or constitutional form (which came in steps in 1993 and 2009). Adoption by the EU, or EC as it then was, reflected a long-standing CoE desire to see the flag used by other European organisations. Official EU use widened greatly in the 1990s. Nevertheless, the flag has to date received \"no status\" in any of the EU's treaties. Its adoption as an official symbol was planned as part of the 2004 \"Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe\" but this failed to be ratified. Mention of the flag was removed in 2007 from the text of the Treaty of Lisbon, which \"was\" ratified. On the other hand, 16 EU members that year, plus France in 2017, have officially affirmed (by Declaration No. 5224) their attachment to the flag as an EU symbol.\nThe flag is used by other European entities, such as unified golf teams under the rubric Team Europe.\nBlazon.\nIn 1955, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe unanimously chose the blazon for the European flag and emblem of '12 gold stars not touching, on an azure blue background. The stars represent perfection, completeness and the months of the year.\nSymbolism.\nThe flag used is the Flag of Europe, which consists of a circle of twelve golden stars on a blue background. Originally designed in 1955 for the Council of Europe, the flag was adopted by the European Communities, the predecessors of the present European Union, in 1986. The Council of Europe gave the flag a symbolic description in the following terms, though the official symbolic description adopted by the EU omits the reference to the \"Western world\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Against the blue sky of the Western world, the stars symbolise the peoples of Europe in a form of a circle, a sign of union. Their number is invariably twelve, the figure twelve being the symbol of perfection and entirety.\u2014\u200a\nOther symbolic interpretations have been offered based on the account of its design by Paul M. Levy. The five-pointed star is used on many national flags and represents aspiration and education. Their golden colour is that of the sun, which is said to symbolise glory and enlightenment.\nTheir arrangement in a circle represents the constellation of Corona Borealis and can be seen as a crown and the stability of government. The blue background resembles the sky and symbolises truth and the intellect. It is also the colour traditionally used to represent the Virgin Mary. In many paintings of the Virgin Mary as Stella Maris she is crowned with a circle of twelve stars.\nMarian interpretation.\nIn 1987, following the adoption of the flag by the EC, Ars\u00e8ne Heitz (1908\u20131989), one of the designers who had submitted proposals for the flag's design, suggested a religious inspiration for it. He stated that the circle of stars was based on the iconographic tradition of showing the Blessed Virgin Mary as the Woman of the Apocalypse, wearing a \"crown of twelve stars\".\nHeitz also made a connection to the date of the flag's adoption, 8 December 1955, coinciding with the Feast of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary.\nPaul M. G. L\u00e9vy, then Director of Information at the Council of Europe responsible for designing the flag, in a 1989 statement maintained that he had not been aware of any religious connotations.\nIn an interview given 26 February 1998, L\u00e9vy denied not only awareness of the Marian connection, but also denied that the final design of a circle of twelve stars was Heitz's. To the question \"Who really designed the flag?\" L\u00e9vy replied:\nI did, and I calculated the proportions to be used for the geometric design. Ars\u00e8ne Heitz, who was an employee in the mail service, put in all sorts of proposals, including the 15-star design. But he submitted too many designs. He wanted to do the European currencies with 15 stars in the corner. He wanted to do national flags incorporating the Council of Europe flag.\nCarlo Curti Gialdino (2005) has reconstructed the design process to the effect that Heitz's proposal contained varying numbers of stars, from which the version with twelve stars was chosen by the Committee of Ministers meeting at Deputy level in January 1955 as one out of two remaining candidate designs.\nL\u00e9vy's 1998 interview apparently gave rise to a new variant of the Marian anecdote. An article published in in August 1998 alleged that it was L\u00e9vy himself who was inspired to introduce a Marian element as he walked past a statue of the Blessed Virgin Mary.\nAn article posted in \"La Raison\" in February 2000 further connected the donation of a stained glass window for Strasbourg Cathedral by the Council of Europe on 21 October 1956. This window, a work by Parisian master Max Ingrand, shows a blessing Madonna underneath a circle of 12 stars on dark blue ground. The overall design of the Madonna is inspired by the banner of the cathedral's \"Congr\u00e9gation Mariale des Hommes\", and the twelve stars are found on the statue venerated by this congregation inside the cathedral (twelve is also the number of members of the congregation's council). The Regional Office for Cultural Affairs describe this stained glass window called \"Le vitrail de l'Europe de Max Ingrand\" (The Glass Window of Europe of Max Ingrand).\nSpecifications.\nAccording to graphical specifications published online by the Council of Europe in 2004, the flag is rectangular with 2:3 proportions: its fly (width) is one and a half times the length of its hoist (height). Twelve yellow stars are centred in a circle (the radius of which is a third of the length of the hoist) upon a blue background. All the stars are upright (one point straight up), have five points and are spaced equally, like the hour positions on the face of a clock. The diameter of each star is equal to one-ninth of the height of the hoist.\nThe colours are regulated in the 1996 guide by the EC, and equivalently in the 2004 guide by the Council of Europe. The base colour of the flag is defined as Pantone \"Reflex Blue\", while the golden stars are portrayed in Pantone \"Yellow\":\nThe 2013 logo of the Council of Europe has the colours:\nAdoption and usage.\nThe twelve-star \"flag of Europe\" was designed in 1950 and officially adopted by the Council of Europe in 1955. The same flag was adopted by the European Parliament in 1983. The European Council adopted it as an \"emblem\" for the European Communities in 1985. Its status in the European Communities was inherited by the European Union upon its formation in 1993. The proposal to adopt it as official flag of the European Union failed with the ratification of the European Constitution in 2005, and mention of all emblems suggesting statehood was removed from the Treaty of Lisbon of 2007, although sixteen member states signed a declaration supporting the continued use of the flag. In 2007, the European Parliament officially adopted the flag for its own use.\n1950\u2013present: Council of Europe.\nThe Council of Europe in 1950 appointed a committee to study the question of adopting a symbol.\nNumerous proposals were looked into.\nAmong the unsuccessful proposals was the flag of Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi's International Paneuropean Union, which he had himself recently adopted for the European Parliamentary Union.\nThe design was a blue field with a red cross inside an orange circle at the centre. \nKalergi was very committed to defending the cross as \"the great symbol of Europe's moral unity\", the Red Cross in particular being \"recognized by the whole world, by Christian and non-Christian nations[,] as a symbol of international charity and of the brotherhood of man\", but the proposal was rejected by Turkey (a member of the Council of Europe since 1949) on grounds of its religious associations in spite of Kalergi's suggestion of adding a crescent alongside the cross to overcome the Muslim objections.\nOther proposals included the flag was the European Movement, which had a large green E on a white background,\na design was based on the Olympic rings, eight golden rings on a blue background, rejected due to the rings' similarity with \"dial\", \"chain\" and \"zeros\", or a large yellow star on a blue background, rejected due to its equality with the flag of the Belgian Congo.\nThe Consultative Assembly narrowed their choice to two designs. One was by Salvador de Madariaga, the founder of the College of Europe, who suggested a constellation of stars on a blue background (positioned according to capital cities, with a large star for Strasbourg, the seat of the council). He had circulated his flag round many European capitals and the concept had found favour. \nThe second was a variant by Ars\u00e8ne Heitz, who worked for the council's postal service and had submitted dozens of designs, one of which was accepted by the Assembly. The design was similar to Salvador de Madariaga's, but rather than a constellation, the stars were arranged in a circle. Ars\u00e8ne Heitz was one of several people who proposed a circle of gold stars on a blue background. None of his proposals perfectly match the design that was adopted. Paul Levy claims that he was the one who designed the template for the flag, not Ars\u00e8ne Heitz.\nIn 1987, Heitz would claim that his inspiration had been the crown of twelve stars of the Woman of the Apocalypse, often found in Marian iconography (see below).\nOn 25 September 1953, the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe recommended that a blue flag with fifteen gold stars be adopted as an emblem for the organisation, the number fifteen reflecting the number of states of the Council of Europe. West Germany objected to the fifteen-star design, as one of the members was Saar Protectorate, and to have its own star would imply sovereignty for the region. The Committee of Ministers (the council's main decision-making body) agreed with the Assembly that the flag should be a circle of stars, but opted for a fixed number of twelve stars, \"representing perfection and entirety\". The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 25 October 1955 agreed to this. Paul M. G. L\u00e9vy drew up the exact design of the new flag. Officially adopted on 8 December 1955, the flag was unveiled at the Ch\u00e2teau de la Muette in Paris on 13 December 1955.\nFor the flag of the Council of Europe, many stylistic proposals were made in regards to colours and symbolism. These first proposals were made 19 January 1950 by Paul Levy in a letter to the Secretary-General. He proposed that the flag should contain a cross for several reasons. Firstly, the cross symbolizes roads crossing, and also represents the east, the west, the north, and the south with its arms. Furthermore, the cross appears in most of the European Council members' flags, and it is the oldest and most noble symbol in Europe. Moreover, the cross depicted Christianity. As far as the colours are concerned, he proposed them to be white and green, colours of the European Movement, which was of great significance since 1947. Green also depicted hope, and the green cross over a white background was a design that had not been used yet. Finally, Levy proposed that the arms of Strasbourg was an important element to be added as it represented where the council would be, and being located in the heart of the cross meant that the council was the point where the European roads met.\nShortly after this design considerations by Paul Levy, on 27 July 1950, Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi, president of the Pan-European movement wrote a memorandum which contained some rules that a flag for such union should follow. The rules he stated where:\nAfter these statements, Coudenhove-Kalergi proposed that the Pan-European movement flag would be the perfect one to fit these criteria\n15 July 1951, the consultative assembly put forward a final memorandum on the European flag. The symbols proposed where the following\nFurthermore, several colours were also proposed:\nIn the end, the flag of Europe was chosen to have 12 five-pointed golden stars in a circle over a blue background, probably inspired by the Pan-European flag and other designs such as Salvador de Madariaga's and Ars\u00e8ne Heitz's proposals.\n1983\u2013present: From European Communities to European Union.\nFollowing Expo 58 in Brussels, the flag caught on and the Council of Europe lobbied for other European organisations to adopt the flag as a sign of European unity. \nThe European Parliament took the initiative in seeking a flag to be adopted by the European Communities. Shortly after the first direct elections in 1979 a draft resolution was put forward on the issue. The resolution proposed that the Communities' flag should be that of the Council of Europe and it was adopted by the Parliament on 11 April 1983.\nThe June 1984 European Council (the Communities' leaders) summit in Fontainebleau stressed the importance of promoting a European image and identity to citizens and the world. The European Council appointed an \"ad hoc\" committee, named \"Committee for 'a People's Europe'\" (Adonnino Committee).\nThis committee submitted a substantial report, including wide-ranging suggestions, from organising a \"European lottery\" to campaigning for the introduction of local voting rights for foreign nationals throughout Europe. Under the header of \"strengthening of the Community's image and identity\", the Committee suggested the introduction of \"a flag and an emblem\", recommending a design based on the Council of Europe flag, but with the addition of \"a gold letter E\" in the center of the circle of stars. The European Council held in Milan on 28/29 June 1985 largely followed the recommendations of the Adonnino Committee. But as the adoption of a flag was strongly reminiscent of a national flag representing statehood and was extremely controversial with some member states (in particular the United Kingdom, as the proposed flag closely resembled the Queen's personal standard), the Council of Europe's \"flag of Europe\" design was adopted, without the letter E, only with the official status of a \"logo\". This compromise was widely disregarded from the beginning, and the \"European logo\", in spite of the explicit language of giving it the status of a \"logo\", was referred to as the \"Community flag\" or even \"European flag\" from the outset.\nThe Communities began to use the \"emblem\" as its \"de facto\" flag from 1986, raising it outside the Berlaymont building (the seat of the European Commission) for the first time on 29 May 1986.\nThe European Union, which was established by the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 to replace the European Communities and encompass its functions, has retained \"de facto\" use of the \"Community logo\" of the EC. Technically and officially, the \"European flag\" as used by the European Union remains not a \"flag\" but \"a Community 'logo' \u2014 or 'emblem' \u2014 [...] eligible to be reproduced on rectangular pieces of fabric\".\nIn 1997, the \"Central and Eastern Eurobarometer\" poll included a section intending to \"discover the level of public awareness of the European Union\" in what were then candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe. Interviewees were shown \"a sticker of the European flag\" and asked to identify it. Responses considered correct were: the European Union, the European Community, the Common Market, and \"Europe in general\". 52% of those interviewed gave one of the correct answers, 15% gave a wrong answer (naming another institution, such as NATO or the United Nations), and 35% could or would not identify it.\nIn 2002, Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas designed a symbol, dubbed the \"barcode\", which displayed the colours of the national flags of the EU member states in vertical stripes. It was reported as a replacement for the European flag, which was not the intention. It was not adopted by the EU or any other organisation at the time, but an updated version was used in the visual identity of the Austrian EU Presidency in 2006.\nThe official status of the emblem as the flag of the European Union was to be formalised as part of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe. However, as the proposed treaty failed ratification, the mention of all state-like emblems, including the flag, were not included in the replacement Treaty of Lisbon, which entered into force in 2009.\nInstead, a separate declaration by sixteen Member States was included in the final act of the Treaty of Lisbon stating that the flag, the anthem, the motto and the currency and Europe Day \"will for them continue as symbols to express the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it.\"\nIn reaction to the removal of the flag from the treaty, the European Parliament, which had supported the inclusion of such symbols, backed a proposal to use these symbols \"more often\" on behalf of the Parliament itself; Jo Leinen, MEP for Germany, suggested that the Parliament should take \"an \"avant-garde\" role\" in their use.\nIn September 2008, the Parliament's Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposed a formal change in the institution's rules of procedure to make \"better use of the symbols\". Specifically, the flag would be present in all meeting rooms (not just the hemicycle) and at all official events. The proposal was passed on 8 October 2008 by 503 votes to 96 (15 abstentions).\nIn 2015, a set of commemorative Euro coins was issued on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the adoption of the emblem by the European Communities.\nIn April 2004, the European flag was flown on behalf of the European Space Agency, by Dutch astronaut Andr\u00e9 Kuipers while on board the International Space Station, in reference to the Framework Agreement establishing the legal basis for co-operation between the European Space Agency and the European Union.\nFollowing the 2004 Summer Olympics, President Romano Prodi expressed his hope \"to see the EU Member State teams in Beijing [viz., the 2008 games] carry the flag of the European Union alongside their own national flag as a symbol of our unity\".\nUse of the flag has also been reported as representing the European team at the Ryder Cup golf competition in the early 2000s, although most European participants preferred to use their own national flags.\nThe flag has been widely used by advocates of European integration since the late 1990s or early 2000s. It is often displayed in the context of Europe Day, on 9 May. \nOutside the EU, it was used in the context of several of the \"colour revolutions\" during the 2000s. In Belarus, it was used on protest marches alongside the white-red-white flag and other flags of opposition movements, such as \"Zubr\", during the protests of 2004\u20132006. The flag was used widely in a 2007 pro-EU march in Minsk. Similar uses were reported from Moldova in 2009.\nIn Georgia, the flag has been on most government buildings since the coming to power of Mikheil Saakashvili (2007), who used it during his inauguration, stating: \"[the European] flag is Georgia's flag as well, as far as it embodies our civilisation, our culture, the essence of our history and perspective, and our vision for the future of Georgia.\"\nIt was used in 2008 by pro-western Serbian voters ahead of an election.\nThe flag became a symbol of European integration of Ukraine in the 2010s, particularly after Euromaidan. Ukraine is not a part of the EU but is a member of the Council of Europe. The flag is used by the Cabinet of Ukraine, Prime Minister of Ukraine, and MFA UA during official meetings. It was flown during the 2013 Euromaidan protests in Ukraine,\nand in 2016 by the pro-EU faction in the EU membership referendum campaigns in the United Kingdom.\nThe flag has also been adopted as a symbol for EU policies and expansionism by EU-sceptics. \nIn an early instance, Macedonian protesters burned \"the flag of the EU\" in the context of EU involvement in the 2001 insurgency in the Republic of Macedonia.\nIn the 2005 Islamic protests \nagainst the \"Jyllands-Posten Muhammad\" cartoons, the Danish flag was most frequently burned, but (as the cartoons were reprinted in many European countries), some protesters opted for burning \"the EU flag\" instead.\nProtesters during the Greek government-debt crisis of 2012 \"burned the EU flag and shouted 'EU out' \".\nBurning of the EU flag has been reported from other anti-EU rallies since.\nBy the 2010s, the association of the emblem with the EU had become so strong that the Council of Europe saw it necessary to design a new logo, to \"avoid confusion\", officially adopted in 2013.\nThe EU emblem (\"EU flag\") is depicted on the euro banknotes. Euro coins also display a circle of twelve stars on both the national and common sides.\nIt is also depicted on many driving licences and vehicle registration plates issued in the Union. Diplomatic missions of EU member states fly the EU flag alongside their national flag. In October 2000, the then-new British Embassy in Berlin sparked controversy between the UK and Germany and the EU when the embassy did not have a second external flagpole for the EU flag. After diplomatic negotiations, it was agreed that the outside flagpole would have the diplomatic Union Flag while inside the embassy, the EU flag would accompany the UK flag. Some member states' national airlines such as Lufthansa have the EU flag alongside their national flags on aircraft as part of their aircraft registration codes, but this is not an EU-mandated directive.\nA number of logos used by EU institutions, bodies and agencies are derived from the design and colours of the EU emblem.\nOther emblems make reference to the European flag, such as the EU organic food label that uses the twelve stars but reorders them into the shape of a leaf on a green background. The original logo of the European Broadcasting Union used the twelve stars on a blue background adding ray beams to connect the countries.\nThere was a proposal in 2003 to deface national civil ensigns with the EU emblem. The proposal was rejected by Parliament in 2004.\nThe flag is usually flown by the government of the country holding the rotating presidency Council of Ministers.\nIn 2009, Czech President V\u00e1clav Klaus, a eurosceptic, refused to fly the flag from his castle. In response, Greenpeace projected an image of the flag onto the castle and attempted to fly the flag from the building themselves.\nExtraordinary flying of the flag is common on Europe Day, celebrated annually on 9 May. On Europe Day 2008, the flag was flown for the first time above the German Reichstag.\nThe flag has also been displayed in the context of EU military operations (EUFOR Althea).\nSixteen out of twenty-seven member states in 2007 signed the declaration recognising \"the flag with a circle of twelve golden stars on a blue background\" as representing \"the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it.\"\nIn 2017, president of France Emmanuel Macron signed a declaration endorsing the 2007 statement,\nso that, as of 2018, 17 out of 27 member states have recognised the emblem as a flag representing \"allegiance to the EU\":\nAustria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain.\nItaly has incorporated the EU flag into its flag code. According to an Italian law passed in 2000, it is mandatory for most public offices and buildings to hoist the European Flag alongside the Italian national flag (Law 22/1998 and Presidential Decree 121/2000). Outside official use, the flag may not be used for \"aims incompatible with European values\".\nThe 2000 Italian flag code expressly replaces the Italian flag with the European flag in precedence when dignitaries from other EU countries visit \u2013 for example the EU flag would be in the middle of a group of three flags rather than the Italian flag. In Germany, the federal flag code of 1996 is only concerned with the German flag, but some of the states have legislated additional provisions for the European flag, such as Bavaria in its flag regulation of 2001, which mandates that the European flag take the third order of precedence, after the federal and state flags, except on Europe Day, where it is to take the first order of precedence.\nIn Ireland \non occasions of \"European Union Events\" (for example, at a European Council meeting), where the European flag is flown alongside all national flags of member states, the national flags are placed in alphabetical order (according to their name in the main language of that state) with the European flag either at the head, or the far-right, of the order of flags.\nIn most member states, use of the EU flag is only \"de facto\" and not regulated by legislation, and as such subject to \"ad hoc\" revision. In national usage, national protocol usually demands the national flag takes precedence over the European flag (which is usually displayed to the right of the national flag from the observer's perspective). In November 2014, the speaker of the Hungarian Parliament L\u00e1szl\u00f3 K\u00f6v\u00e9r ordered the removal of the EU flag from the parliament building, following an incident in which a member of parliament had \"defenestrated\" two EU flags from a fourth story window. In November 2015, the newly elected Polish government under Beata Szyd\u0142o removed the EU flag from government press conferences.\nDerivative designs.\nThe design of the European flag has been used in a variation, such as that of the Council of Europe mentioned above, and also to a greater extent such as the flag of the Western European Union (WEU; now defunct), which uses the same colours and the stars but has a number of stars based on membership and in a semicircle rather than a circle. It is also defaced with the initials of the former Western European Union in two languages.\nThe European Parliament used its own flag from 1973, but never formally adopted it. It fell out of use with the adoption of the twelve-star flag by the Parliament in 1983. The flag followed the yellow and blue colour scheme however instead of twelve stars there were the letters EP and PE (initials of the European Parliament in the six community languages at the time) surrounded by a wreath. Sometime later, the Parliament chose to use a logo consisting of a stylised hemicycle and the EU flag at the bottom right.\nThe flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina, imposed by High Representative Carlos Westendorp after the country's parliament failed to agree on a design, is reminiscent of the symbolism of the EU flag, using the same blue and yellow colours; also, the stars (although of a different number and colour) are a direct reference to those of the European flag.\nLikewise, Kosovo uses blue, yellow and stars in its flag, which has been mocked as a \"none too subtle nod to the flag of the European Union, which is about to become Kosovo's new best friend as it takes over protector status from the United Nations\".\nThe flag of the Brussels-Capital Region (introduced in 2016) consists of a yellow iris with a white outline upon a blue background. Its colours are based on the colours of the Flag of Europe, because Brussels is considered the unofficial capital of the EU.\nHeraldry.\nThe coat of arms of the chairman of the European Union Military Committee (CEUMC), the highest-ranking officer within the EU's Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), depicts the European emblem as a coat of arms, i.e. emblazoned on an escutcheon. In heraldic terms, this makes the European flag is the banner of arms, i.e. the flag form of this coat of arms. In English blazon, the arms is \"Azure, a circle of 12 mullets or, their points not touching\".\nSeveral EU publications related to the CSDP generally, and its prospective development as a defence arm, have also displayed the European emblem in this manner, albeit as a graphical design element rather than an official symbol.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10026", "revid": "1318219794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10026", "title": "Anthem of Europe", "text": "The European Anthem or Anthem of Europe, also known as Ode to Joy, is a piece of instrumental music adapted from the prelude of the final movement of Beethoven's 9th Symphony composed in 1823, originally set to words adapted from Friedrich Schiller's 1785 poem \"Ode to Joy\". In 1972, the Council of Europe adopted it as an anthem to represent Europe, and later in 1985 it was also adopted by the European Union.\nIts purpose is to honour shared European values. The EU describes it as expressing the ideals of freedom, peace and solidarity. The anthem is played on official occasions such as political or civil events.\nHistory.\nFriedrich Schiller wrote the poem \"An die Freude\" (\"To Joy\") in 1785 as a \"celebration of the brotherhood of man\". In later life, the poet was contemptuous of this popularity and dismissed the poem as typical of \"the bad taste of the age\" in which it had been written. After Schiller's death, the poem provided the words for the choral movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's 9th Symphony.\nIn 1971 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe decided to propose adopting the prelude to the \"Ode to Joy\" from Beethoven's 9th Symphony as the anthem, taking up a suggestion made by Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi in 1955. Beethoven was generally seen as the natural choice for a European anthem. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe officially announced the European Anthem on 19 January 1972 at Strasbourg: the prelude to \"Ode to Joy\", 4th movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's 9th symphony.\nConductor Herbert von Karajan was asked to write three instrumental arrangements\u00a0\u2013 for solo piano, for wind instruments and for symphony orchestra and he conducted the performance used to make the official recording. Karajan decided on a decidedly slower tempo, using crotchet (quarter note) = 120 whereas Beethoven had written minim (half note) = 80.\nThe anthem was launched via a major information campaign on Europe Day in 1972, without a public holiday, since it is close to May Day. In 1985, it was adopted by EU heads of state and government as the official anthem of the then European Community\u00a0\u2013 since 1993 the European Union. It is not intended to replace the national anthems of the member states but rather to celebrate the values they all share and their unity in diversity. It expresses the ideals of a united Europe: freedom, peace, and solidarity.\nIt was to have been included in the European Constitution along with the other European symbols; however, the treaty failed ratification and was replaced by the Treaty of Lisbon, which does not include any symbols. A declaration was attached to the treaty, in which sixteen member states formally recognised the proposed symbols. In response, the European Parliament decided that it would make greater use of the anthem, for example at official occasions. In October 2008, the Parliament changed its rules of procedure to have the anthem played at the opening of Parliament after elections and at formal sittings.\nUsage.\n\"Ode to Joy\" is the anthem of the Council of Europe (CoE) and the European Union (EU). In the context of the CoE, the anthem is used to represent all of Europe. In the context of the EU, the anthem is used to represent the union and its people. It is used on occasions such as Europe Day and formal events such as the signing of treaties. The European Parliament seeks to make greater use of the music; then-Parliament President Hans-Gert P\u00f6ttering stated he was moved when the anthem was played for him on his visit to Israel and ought to be used in Europe more often.\nThe German public radio station Deutschlandfunk has broadcast the anthem together with the shortly before midnight since New Year's Eve 2006. The two anthems were specially recorded by the Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra in versions characterized by \"modesty and intensity\".\nAt the 2007 signing ceremony for the Treaty of Lisbon, the plenipotentiaries of the European Union's twenty-seven member states stood in attendance while the \"Ode to Joy\" was played and a choir of 26 Portuguese children sang the original German lyrics.\nIn 2008 it was used by Kosovo as its national anthem until it adopted its own, and it was played at its declaration of independence, as a nod to the EU's role in its independence from Serbia.\n\"Ode to Joy\", automatically orchestrated in seven different styles, was used on 18 June 2015 during the ceremony celebrating the 5000th ERC grantee as anthem of the European Research Council to represent achievements of European research.\n\"Ode to Joy\" is used as the theme song to the 2016 UEFA Euro qualifying and World Cup qualification since the European qualifying of the 2018 FIFA World Cup football competition at the introduction of every match.\nIn 2017, members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from the Scottish National Party first whistled and then sang \"Ode to Joy\" during a vote at the House of Commons to protest against Brexit.\nIn 2018, the anthem of Japan and the anthem of the EU were performed in Tokyo during the official signing of the EU-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement. The European anthem is often played at the signing of official economic or political agreements with foreign governments.\nIn 2023, it was played after the anthem of Ukraine during President of Ukraine Volodymyr Zelenskyy's visit to the EU parliament.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10027", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10027", "title": "Eugene Paul Wigner", "text": ""}
{"id": "10029", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10029", "title": "Timeline of life", "text": "The timeline of life represents the current scientific theory outlining the major events during the development of life on Earth. Dates in this article are consensus estimates based on scientific evidence, mainly fossils.\nIn biology, evolution is any change across successive generations in the heritable characteristics of biological populations. Evolutionary processes give rise to diversity at every level of biological organization, from kingdoms to species, and individual organisms and molecules, such as DNA and proteins. The similarities between all present day organisms imply a common ancestor from which all known species, living and extinct, have diverged. More than 99 percent of all species that ever lived (over five billion) are estimated to be extinct. Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10 million to 14 million, with about 1.2 million or 14% documented, the rest not yet described. However, a 2016 report estimates an additional 1 trillion microbial species, with only 0.001% described.\nThere has been controversy between more traditional views of steadily increasing biodiversity, and a newer view of cycles of annihilation and diversification, so that certain past times, such as the Cambrian explosion, experienced maximums of diversity followed by sharp winnowing.\nExtinction.\nSpecies go extinct constantly as environments change, as organisms compete for environmental niches, and as genetic mutation leads to the rise of new species from older ones. At long irregular intervals, Earth's biosphere suffers a catastrophic die-off, a mass extinction, often comprising an accumulation of smaller extinction events over a relatively brief period.\nThe first known mass extinction was the Great Oxidation Event 2.4 billion years ago, which killed most of the planet's obligate anaerobes. Researchers have identified five other major extinction events in Earth's history, with estimated losses below:\nSmaller extinction events have occurred in the periods between, with some dividing geologic time periods and epochs. The Holocene extinction event is currently under way.\nFactors in mass extinctions include continental drift, changes in atmospheric and marine chemistry, volcanism and other aspects of mountain formation, changes in glaciation, changes in sea level, and impact events.\nDetailed timeline.\nIn this timeline, Ma (for \"megaannum\") means \"million years ago,\" ka (for \"kiloannum\") means \"thousand years ago,\" and ya means \"years ago.\"\nHadean Eon.\n4540 Ma \u2013 4031 Ma\nArchean Eon.\n4031 Ma \u2013 2500 Ma\nProterozoic Eon.\n2500 Ma \u2013 539 Ma. Contains the Palaeoproterozoic, Mesoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic eras.\nPhanerozoic Eon.\n539 Ma \u2013 present\nThe Phanerozoic Eon (Greek: period of well-displayed life) marks the appearance in the fossil record of abundant, shell-forming and/or trace-making organisms. It is subdivided into three eras, the Paleozoic, Mesozoic and Cenozoic, with major mass extinctions at division points.\nPalaeozoic Era.\n538.8 Ma \u2013 251.9 Ma and contains the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous and Permian periods.\nMesozoic Era.\nFrom 251.9 Ma to 66 Ma and containing the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods.\nCenozoic Era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10030", "revid": "48439861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10030", "title": "Edmund Burke", "text": "Anglo-Irish politician, journalist, writer and philosopher (1729\u20131797)\nEdmund Burke (; 12 January [NS] 1729 \u2013 9 July 1797) was an Anglo-Irish writer, philosopher, and politician who is regarded as the founder of the cultural and political philosophy of conservatism. Regarded as one of the most influential conservative thinkers and political writers of the 18th century, Burke spent the majority of his career in Great Britain and was elected as a member of Parliament (MP) from 1766 to 1794 in the House of Commons of Great Britain with the Whig Party. His writings played a crucial role in influencing public views and opinions in both Britain and France following the 1789 French Revolution, and he remains a major figure in modern conservative political circles.\nBurke was a proponent of underpinning virtues with manners in society and of the importance of religious institutions for the moral stability and good of the state. These views were expressed in his satirical work, \"A Vindication of Natural Society\" (1756). He also criticised the actions of the British government towards the American colonies, including its taxation policies. Burke supported the rights of the colonists to resist metropolitan authority, although he opposed the attempt to achieve independence. He is further remembered for his long-term support for Catholic emancipation, the impeachment of Warren Hastings from the East India Company, and his opposition to the French Revolution. In 1774, Burke was elected a member of Parliament for Bristol.\nIn his \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" (1790), Burke asserted that the revolution was destroying the fabric of good society and traditional institutions of state and society, and he condemned the persecution of the Catholic Church that resulted from it. This led to his becoming a popular leading figure within the conservative faction of the Whig Party which he dubbed the Old Whigs as opposed to the pro-French Revolution New Whigs led by Charles James Fox. Burke had a close relation with some of the public intellectuals of his time, including Samuel Johnson, David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith and Joshua Reynolds. In his debates, he often argued against unrestricted ruling power and the importance of political parties having the ability to maintain a principled opposition that was capable of preventing abuse of power.\nIn the 19th century, Burke was praised by both conservatives and liberals. Subsequently, in the 20th century, he became widely regarded, especially in the United States and the United Kingdom, as the philosophical founder of conservatism, along with his ultra-royalist and ultramontane\u00a0counterpart Joseph de Maistre. His writings and literary publications influenced British conservative thought to a great extent, and helped establish the earliest foundations for modern conservatism and liberal democracy.\nEarly life.\nBurke was born in Dublin, Ireland. His mother Mary, \"n\u00e9e\" Nagle, was a Roman Catholic who hailed from a County Cork family and a cousin of the Catholic educator Nano Nagle, whereas his father Richard, a successful solicitor, was a member of the Church of Ireland. It remains unclear whether this is the same Richard Burke who converted from Catholicism. The Burgh (Burke) dynasty descends from the Anglo-Norman knight, William de Burgh, who arrived in Ireland in 1185 following Henry II's 1171 invasion of Ireland and is among the \"chief Gall or Old English families that assimilated into Gaelic society\" (the surname de Burgh (Latinised as \"de Burgo\") was gaelicised in Irish as \"de B\u00farca\" or \"B\u00farc\" which over the centuries became Burke).\nBurke adhered to his father's faith and remained a practising Anglican throughout his life, unlike his sister Juliana, who was brought up as and remained a Roman Catholic. Later, his political enemies repeatedly accused him of having been educated at the Jesuit College of St. Omer, near Calais, France; and of harbouring secret Catholic sympathies at a time when membership in the Catholic Church would disqualify him from public office per Penal Laws in Ireland. As Burke told Frances Crewe:\nMr. Burke's Enemies often endeavoured to convince the World that he had been bred up in the Catholic Faith, &amp; that his Family were of it, &amp; that he himself had been educated at St. Omer\u2014but this was false, as his father was a regular practitioner of the Law at Dublin, which he could not be unless of the Established Church: &amp; it so happened that though Mr. B was twice at Paris, he never happened to go through the Town of St. Omer.\nAfter being elected to the House of Commons, Burke took the required oath of allegiance and abjuration, the oath of supremacy and the declaration against transubstantiation.\nAs a child, Burke sometimes spent time away from the unhealthy air of Dublin with his mother's family near Killavullen in the Blackwater Valley in County Cork. He received his early education at a Quaker school in Ballitore, County Kildare, some from Dublin; and possibly like his cousin Nano Nagle at a hedge school near Killavullen. He remained in correspondence with his schoolmate from there, Mary Leadbeater, the daughter of the school's owner, throughout his life.\nIn 1744, Burke started at Trinity College Dublin, a Protestant establishment which up until 1793 did not permit Catholics to take degrees. In 1747, he set up a debating society, Edmund Burke's Club, which in 1770 merged with Trinity's Historical Club to form the College Historical Society, the oldest undergraduate society in the world. The minutes of the meetings of Burke's Club remain in the collection of the Historical Society. Burke graduated from Trinity in 1748. Burke's father wanted him to read Law and with this in mind, he went to London in 1750, where he entered the Middle Temple, before soon giving up legal study to travel in Continental Europe. After eschewing the Law, he pursued a livelihood through writing.\nEarly writing.\nThe late Lord Bolingbroke's \"Letters on the Study and Use of History\" was published in 1752 and his collected works appeared in 1754. This provoked Burke into writing his first published work, \"A Vindication of Natural Society: A View of the Miseries and Evils Arising to Mankind\", appearing in Spring 1756. Burke imitated Bolingbroke's style and ideas in a \"reductio ad absurdum\" of his arguments for deistic rationalism in order to demonstrate their absurdity.\nBurke claimed that Bolingbroke's arguments against revealed religion could apply to all social and civil institutions as well. Lord Chesterfield and Bishop Warburton as well as others initially thought that the work was genuinely by Bolingbroke rather than a satire. All the reviews of the work were positive, with critics especially appreciative of Burke's quality of writing. Some reviewers failed to notice the ironic nature of the book which led to Burke stating in the preface to the second edition (1757) that it was a satire.\nRichard Hurd believed that Burke's imitation was near-perfect and that this defeated his purpose, arguing that an ironist \"should take care by a constant exaggeration to make the \"ridicule\" shine through the Imitation. Whereas this \"Vindication\" is everywhere enforc'd, not only in the language, and on the principles of L. Bol., but with so apparent, or rather so real an earnestness, that half his purpose is sacrificed to the other\". A minority of scholars have taken the position that in fact Burke did write the \"Vindication\" in earnest, later disowning it only for political reasons.\nIn 1757, Burke published a treatise on aesthetics titled \"A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful\" that attracted the attention of prominent Continental thinkers such as Denis Diderot and Immanuel Kant. It was his only purely philosophical work, completed in 1753. When asked by Sir Joshua Reynolds and French Laurence to expand it thirty years later, Burke replied that he was no longer fit for abstract speculation.\nOn 25 February 1757, Burke signed a contract with Robert Dodsley to write a \"history of England from the time of Julius Caesar to the end of the reign of Queen Anne\", its length being eighty quarto sheets (640 pages), nearly 400,000 words. It was to be submitted for publication by Christmas 1758. Burke completed the work to the year 1216 and stopped; it was not published until after Burke's death, in an 1812 collection of his works, \"An Essay Towards an Abridgement of the English History\". G. M. Young did not value Burke's history and claimed that it was \"demonstrably a translation from the French\". On commenting on the story that Burke stopped his history because David Hume published his, Lord Acton said \"it is ever to be regretted that the reverse did not occur\".\nDuring the year following that contract, Burke founded with Dodsley the influential \"Annual Register\", a publication in which various authors evaluated the international political events of the previous year. The extent to which Burke contributed to the \"Annual Register\" is unclear. In his biography of Burke, Robert Murray quotes the \"Register\" as evidence of Burke's opinions, yet Philip Magnus in his biography does not cite it directly as a reference. Burke remained the chief editor of the publication until at least 1789 and there is no evidence that any other writer contributed to it before 1766.\nOn 12 March 1757, Burke married Jane Mary Nugent (1734\u20131812), daughter of Dr. Christopher Nugent, a Catholic physician who had provided him with medical treatment at Bath. Their son Richard was born on 9 February 1758 while a second son, Christopher (born that December), died in infancy. Burke also helped raise a ward, Edmund Nagle (later Admiral Sir Edmund Nagle), the son of a maternal cousin orphaned in 1763.\nAt about this same time, Burke was introduced to William Gerard Hamilton (known as \"Single-speech Hamilton\"). When Hamilton was appointed Chief Secretary for Ireland, Burke accompanied him to Dublin as his private secretary, a position he held for three years. In 1765, Burke became private secretary to the liberal Whig politician Charles, Marquess of Rockingham, then Prime Minister of Great Britain, who remained Burke's close friend and associate until his death in 1782.\nMember of Parliament.\nIn December 1765, Burke entered the House of Commons of the British Parliament as Member for Wendover in Buckinghamshire, a pocket borough in the gift of Lord Fermanagh, later 2nd Earl Verney and a close political ally of Rockingham. After Burke delivered his maiden speech, William Pitt the Elder said he had \"spoken in such a manner as to stop the mouths of all Europe\" and that the Commons should congratulate itself on acquiring such a Member.\nThe first great subject Burke addressed was the controversy with the American colonies which soon developed into war and ultimate separation. In reply to the 1769 Grenvillite pamphlet \"The Present State of the Nation\", he published his own pamphlet titled \"Observations on a Late State of the Nation\". Surveying the finances of France, Burke predicts \"some extraordinary convulsion in that whole system\".\nDuring the same year, with mostly borrowed money, Burke purchased Gregories, a estate near Beaconsfield. Although the estate included saleable assets such as art works by Titian, Gregories proved a heavy financial burden in the following decades and Burke was never able to repay its purchase price in full. His speeches and writings, having made him famous, led to the suggestion that he was the author of the \"Letters of Junius\".\nAt about this time, Burke joined the circle of leading intellectuals and artists in London of whom Samuel Johnson was the central luminary. This circle also included David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith and Joshua Reynolds. Edward Gibbon described Burke as \"the most eloquent and rational madman that I ever knew\". Although Johnson admired Burke's brilliance, he found him a dishonest politician.\nBurke took a leading role in the debate regarding the constitutional limits to the executive authority of the king. He argued strongly against unrestrained royal power and for the role of political parties in maintaining a principled opposition capable of preventing abuses, either by the monarch or by specific factions within the government. His most important publication in this regard was his \"Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents\" of 23 April 1770. Burke identified the \"discontents\" as stemming from the \"secret influence\" of a neo-Tory group he labelled as the \"king's friends\", whose system \"comprehending the exterior and interior administrations, is commonly called, in the technical language of the Court, \"Double Cabinet\"\". Britain needed a party with \"an unshaken adherence to principle, and attachment to connexion, against every allurement of interest\". Party divisions, \"whether operating for good or evil, are things inseparable from free government\".\nDuring 1771, Burke wrote a bill that would have given juries the right to determine what was libel, if passed. Burke spoke in favour of the bill, but it was opposed by some, including Charles James Fox, not becoming law. When introducing his own bill in 1791 in opposition, Fox repeated almost verbatim the text of Burke's bill without acknowledgement. Burke was prominent in securing the right to publish debates held in Parliament.\nSpeaking in a Parliamentary debate on the prohibition on the export of grain on 16 November 1770, Burke argued in favour of a free market in corn: \"There are no such things as a high, &amp; a low price that is encouraging, &amp; discouraging; there is nothing but a natural price, which grain brings at an universal market\". In 1772, Burke was instrumental in the passing of the Repeal of Certain Laws Act 1772 which repealed various old laws against dealers and forestallers in corn.\nIn the \"Annual Register\" for 1772 (published in July 1773), Burke condemned the partition of Poland. He saw it as \"the first very great breach in the modern political system of Europe\" and as upsetting the balance of power in Europe.\nOn 3 November 1774, Burke was elected Member for Bristol, at the time \"England's second city\" with a large constituency in a genuine electoral contest. At the conclusion of the poll, he made his \"Speech to the Electors of Bristol at the Conclusion of the Poll\", a remarkable disclaimer of the constituent-imperative form of democracy, for which he substituted his statement of the \"representative mandate\" form. He failed to win re-election for that seat in the subsequent 1780 general election.\nIn May 1778, Burke supported a Parliamentary motion revising restrictions on Irish trade. His constituents, citizens of the great trading city of Bristol, urged Burke to oppose free trade with Ireland. Burke resisted their protestations and said: \"If, from this conduct, I shall forfeit their suffrages at an ensuing election, it will stand on record an example to future representatives of the Commons of England, that one man at least had dared to resist the desires of his constituents when his judgment assured him they were wrong.\"\nBurke published \"Two Letters to Gentlemen of Bristol on the Bills relative to the Trade of Ireland\" in which he espoused \"some of the chief principles of commerce; such as the advantage of free intercourse between all parts of the same kingdom ... the evils attending restriction and monopoly ... and that the gain of others is not necessarily our loss, but on the contrary an advantage by causing a greater demand for such wares as we have for sale.\"\nBurke also supported the attempts of Sir George Savile to repeal some of the penal laws against Catholics. Burke also called capital punishment \"the Butchery which we call justice\" in 1776 and in 1780 condemned the use of the pillory for two men convicted for attempting to practice sodomy.\nThis support for unpopular causes, notably free trade with Ireland and Catholic emancipation, led to Burke losing his seat in 1780. For the remainder of his Parliamentary career, Burke represented Malton, another pocket borough under the Marquess of Rockingham's patronage.\nAmerican War of Independence.\nBurke expressed his support for the grievances of the American Thirteen Colonies under the government of King George III and his appointed representatives. On 19 April 1774, Burke made a speech, \"On American Taxation\" (published in January 1775), on a motion to repeal the tea duty:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Again and again, revert to your old principles\u2014seek peace and ensue it; leave America, if she has taxable matter in her, to tax herself. I am not here going into the distinctions of rights, nor attempting to mark their boundaries. I do not enter into these metaphysical distinctions; I hate the very sound of them. Leave the Americans as they anciently stood, and these distinctions, born of our unhappy contest, will die along with it ... Be content to bind America by laws of trade; you have always done it ... Do not burthen them with taxes... But if intemperately, unwisely, fatally, you sophisticate and poison the very source of government by urging subtle deductions, and consequences odious to those you govern, from the unlimited and illimitable nature of supreme sovereignty, you will teach them by these means to call that sovereignty itself in question ... If that sovereignty and their freedom cannot be reconciled, which will they take? They will cast your sovereignty in your face. No body of men will be argued into slavery.\nOn 22 March 1775, Burke delivered in the House of Commons a speech (published in May 1775) on reconciliation with America. Burke appealed for peace as preferable to civil war and reminded the House of Commons of America's growing population, its industry and its wealth. He warned against the notion that the Americans would back down in the face of force since most Americans were of British descent:\n[T]he people of the colonies are descendants of Englishmen... They are therefore not only devoted to liberty, but to liberty according to English ideas and on English principles. The people are Protestants ... a persuasion not only favourable to liberty, but built upon it ... My hold of the colonies is in the close affection which grows from common names, from kindred blood, from similar privileges, and equal protection. These are ties which, though light as air, are as strong as links of iron. Let the colonies always keep the idea of their civil rights associated with your government\u2014they will cling and grapple to you, and no force under heaven will be of power to tear them from their allegiance. But let it be once understood that your government may be one thing and their privileges another, that these two things may exist without any mutual relation\u2014the cement is gone, the cohesion is loosened, and everything hastens to decay and dissolution. As long as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty, the sacred temple consecrated to our common faith, wherever the chosen race and sons of England worship freedom, they will turn their faces towards you. The more they multiply, the more friends you will have; the more ardently they love liberty, the more perfect will be their obedience. Slavery they can have anywhere. It is a weed that grows in every soil. They may have it from Spain, they may have it from Prussia. But, until you become lost to all feeling of your true interest and your natural dignity, freedom they can have from none but you.\nBurke prized peace with America above all else, pleading with the House of Commons to remember that the interest by way of money received from the American colonies was far more attractive than any sense of putting the colonists in their place:\nThe proposition is peace. Not peace through the medium of war, not peace to be hunted through the labyrinth of intricate and endless negotiations, not peace to arise out of universal discord ... [I]t is simple peace, sought in its natural course and in its ordinary haunts. It is peace sought in the spirit of peace, and laid in principles purely pacific.\nBurke was not merely presenting a peace agreement to Parliament, but rather he stepped forward with four reasons against using force, carefully reasoned. He laid out his objections in an orderly manner, focusing on one before moving to the next. His first concern was that the use of force would have to be temporary and that the uprisings and objections to British governance in Colonial America would not be. Second, Burke worried about the uncertainty surrounding whether Britain would win a conflict in America. \"An armament,\" Burke said, \"is not a victory.\" Third, Burke brought up the issue of impairment, stating that it would do the British government no good to engage in a scorched earth war and have the object they desired (America) become damaged or even useless. The American colonists could always retreat into the mountains, but the land they left behind would most likely be unusable, whether by accident or design. The fourth and final reason to avoid the use of force was experience, as the British had never attempted to rein in an unruly colony by force and they did not know if it could be done, let alone accomplished thousands of miles away from home. Not only were all of these concerns reasonable, but some turned out to be prophetic\u2014the American colonists did not surrender, even when things looked extremely bleak and the British were ultimately unsuccessful in their attempts to win a war fought on American soil.\nIt was not temporary force, uncertainty, impairment, or even experience that Burke cited as the primary reason for avoiding war with the American colonies. Rather, it was the character of the American people themselves: \"In this character of Americans, a love of freedom is the predominating feature which marks and distinguishes the whole ... [T]his fierce spirit of liberty is stronger in the English colonies, probably, than in any other people of the earth ... [The] men [are] acute, inquisitive, dextrous, prompt in attack, ready in defence, full of resources.\" Burke concludes with another plea for peace and a prayer that Britain might avoid actions which in Burke's words \"may bring on the destruction of this Empire.\"\nBurke proposed six resolutions to settle the American conflict peacefully:\nHad they been passed, though the effect of these resolutions can never be known, they might have quelled the colonials' revolutionary spirit. Unfortunately, Burke delivered this speech less than a month before the explosive conflict at Concord and Lexington. As these resolutions were not enacted, little was done that would help to prevent armed conflict.\nAmong the reasons this speech was so greatly admired was its passage on Lord Bathurst (1684\u20131775) in which Burke describes an angel in 1704 prophesying to Bathurst the future greatness of England and also of America: \"Young man, There is America\u2014which at this day serves little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men, and uncouth manners; yet shall, before you taste of death, shew itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world.\" Samuel Johnson was so irritated at hearing it continually praised that he made a parody of it, where the devil appears to a young Whig and predicts that in a short time Whiggism will poison even the paradise of America.\nThe administration of Lord North (1770\u20131782) tried to defeat the colonist rebellion by military force. British and American forces clashed in 1775 and in 1776 came the United States Declaration of Independence. Burke was appalled by celebrations in Britain of the defeat of the Americans in New York and Pennsylvania. He claimed the English national character was being changed by this authoritarianism. Burke wrote: \"As to the good people of England, they seem to partake every day more and more of the Character of that administration which they have been induced to tolerate. I am satisfied, that within a few years there has been a great Change in the National Character. We seem no longer that eager, inquisitive, jealous, fiery people, which we have been formerly.\"\nIn Burke's view, the British government was fighting \"the American English\" (\"our English Brethren in the Colonies\"), employing \"the hireling sword of German boors and vassals\" to destroy the \"English privileges\" of the colonists. On American independence, Burke wrote: \"I do not know how to wish success to those whose Victory is to separate from us a large and noble part of our Empire. Still less do I wish success to injustice, oppression and absurdity.\"\nDuring the Gordon Riots in 1780, Burke became a target of hostility and his home was placed under armed guard by the military.\nPaymaster of the Forces.\nThe fall of North led to Rockingham being recalled to power in March 1782. Burke was appointed Paymaster of the Forces and a Privy Counsellor, but without a seat in Cabinet. Rockingham's unexpected death in July 1782 and replacement with Shelburne as Prime Minister put an end to his administration after only a few months, but Burke did manage to introduce two Acts.\nThe Paymaster General Act 1782 ended the post as a lucrative sinecure. Previously, Paymasters had been able to draw on money from HM Treasury at their discretion. Instead, now they were required to put the money they had requested to withdraw from the Treasury into the Bank of England, from where it was to be withdrawn for specific purposes. The Treasury would receive monthly statements of the Paymaster's balance at the Bank. This Act was repealed by Shelburne's administration, but the Act that replaced it repeated verbatim almost the whole text of the Burke Act.\nThe Civil List and Secret Service Money Act 1782 was a watered-down version of Burke's original intentions as outlined in his famous \"Speech on Economical Reform\" of 11 February 1780. However, he managed to abolish 134 offices in the royal household and civil administration. The third Secretary of State and the Board of Trade were abolished and pensions were limited and regulated. The Act was anticipated to save \u00a372,368 a year.\nIn February 1783, Burke resumed the post of Paymaster of the Forces when Shelburne's government fell and was replaced by a coalition headed by North that included Charles James Fox. That coalition fell in 1783 and was succeeded by the long Tory administration of William Pitt the Younger which lasted until 1801. Accordingly, having supported Fox and North, Burke was in opposition for the remainder of his political life.\nRepresentative government.\nIn 1774, Burke's \"Speech to the Electors at Bristol at the Conclusion of the Poll\" was noted for its defence of the principles of representative government against the notion that those elected to assemblies like Parliament are, or should be, merely delegates:\nCertainly, Gentlemen, it ought to be the happiness and glory of a Representative, to live in the strictest union, the closest correspondence, and the most unreserved communication with his constituents. Their wishes ought to have great weight with him; their opinion, high respect; their business, unremitted attention. It is his duty to sacrifice his repose, his pleasures, his satisfactions, to theirs; and above all, ever, and in all cases, to prefer their interest to his own. But his unbiassed opinion, his mature judgment, his enlightened conscience, he ought not to sacrifice to you, to any man, or to any sett of men living. These he does not derive from your pleasure; no, nor from the Law and the Constitution. They are a trust from Providence, for the abuse of which he is deeply answerable. Your Representative owes you, not his industry only, but his judgment; and he betrays, instead of serving you, if he sacrifices it to your opinion.My worthy Colleague says, his Will ought to be subservient to yours. If that be all, the thing is innocent. If Government were a matter of Will upon any side, yours, without question, ought to be superior. But Government and Legislation are matters of reason and judgement, and not of inclination; and, what sort of reason is that, in which the determination precedes the discussion; in which one sett of men deliberate, and another decide; and where those who form the conclusion are perhaps three hundred miles distant from those who hear the arguments?To deliver an opinion is the right of all men; that of constituents is a weighty and respectable opinion which a Representative ought always to rejoice to hear; and which he ought always most seriously to consider. But \"authoritative\" instructions; \"mandates\" issued, which the member is bound blindly and implicitly to obey, to vote, and to argue for, though contrary to the clearest conviction of his judgment and conscience; these are things utterly unknown to the laws of this land, and which arise from a fundamental mistake of the whole order and tenour of our constitution.Parliament is not a \"congress\" of ambassadors from different and hostile interests; which interests each must maintain, as an agent and advocate, against other agents and advocates; but Parliament is a \"deliberative\" assembly of \"one\" nation, with \"one\" interest, that of the whole; where, not local purposes, not local prejudices ought to guide, but the general good, resulting from the general reason of the whole. You choose a member, indeed; but when you have chosen him, he is not a member of Bristol, but he is a member of \"Parliament\".\nIt is often forgotten in this connection that Burke, as detailed below, was an opponent of slavery, and therefore his conscience was refusing to support a trade in which many of his Bristol electors were lucratively involved.\nPolitical scientist Hanna Pitkin points out that Burke linked the interest of the district with the proper behaviour of its elected official, explaining: \"Burke conceives of broad, relatively fixed interest, few in number and clearly defined, of which any group or locality has just one. These interests are largely economic or associated with particular localities whose livelihood they characterize, in his over-all prosperity they involve\".\nBurke was a leading sceptic with respect to democracy. While admitting that theoretically in some cases it might be desirable, he insisted a democratic government in Britain in his day would not only be inept, but also oppressive. He opposed democracy for three basic reasons. First, government required a degree of intelligence and breadth of knowledge of the sort that occurred rarely among the common people. Second, he thought that if they had the vote, common people had dangerous and angry passions that could be aroused easily by demagogues, fearing that the authoritarian impulses that could be empowered by these passions would undermine cherished traditions and established religion, leading to violence and confiscation of property. Third, Burke warned that democracy would create a tyranny over unpopular minorities, who needed the protection of the upper classes.\nOpposition to the slave trade.\nBurke proposed a bill to ban slaveholders from being able to sit in the House of Commons, claiming they were a danger incompatible with traditional notions of English liberty. He described slavery as a \"weed that grows on every soil. While Burke did believe that Africans were \"barbaric\" and needed to be \"civilised\" by Christianity, Gregory Collins argues that this was not an unusual attitude amongst abolitionists at the time. Furthermore, Burke seemed to believe that Christianity would provide a civilising benefit to any group of people, as he believed Christianity had \"tamed\" European civilisation and regarded Southern European peoples as equally savage and barbarous. Collins also suggests that Burke viewed the \"uncivilised\" behaviour of African slaves as being partially caused by slavery itself, as he believed that making someone a slave stripped them of any virtues and rendered them mentally deficient, regardless of race. Burke proposed a gradual program of emancipation called Sketch of a Negro Code, which Collins argues was quite detailed for the time. Collins concludes that Burke's \"gradualist\" position on the emancipation of slaves, while perhaps seeming ridiculous to some modern-day readers, was nonetheless sincere.\nIndia and the impeachment of Warren Hastings.\nFor years, Burke pursued impeachment efforts against Warren Hastings, formerly Governor-General of Bengal, that resulted in the trial during 1786. His interaction with the British dominion of India began well before Hastings' impeachment trial. For two decades prior to the impeachment, Parliament had dealt with the Indian issue. This trial was the pinnacle of years of unrest and deliberation. In 1781, Burke was first able to delve into the issues surrounding the East India Company when he was appointed Chairman of the Commons Select Committee on East Indian Affairs\u2014from that point until the end of the trial, India was Burke's primary concern. This committee was charged \"to investigate alleged injustices in Bengal, the war with Hyder Ali, and other Indian difficulties\". While Burke and the committee focused their attention on these matters, a second secret committee was formed to assess the same issues. Both committee reports were written by Burke. Among other purposes, the reports conveyed to the Indian princes that Britain would not wage war on them, along with demanding that the East India Company should recall Hastings. This was Burke's first call for substantive change regarding imperial practices. When addressing the whole House of Commons regarding the committee report, Burke described the Indian issue as one that \"began 'in commerce' but 'ended in empire'\".\nOn 28 February 1785, Burke delivered a now-famous speech, \"The Nabob of Arcot's Debts\", wherein he condemned the damage to India by the East India Company. In the province of the Carnatic, the Indians had constructed a system of reservoirs to make the soil fertile in a naturally dry region, and centred their society on the husbandry of water:\nThese are the monuments of real kings, who were the fathers of their people; testators to a posterity which they embraced as their own. These are the grand sepulchres built by ambition; but by the ambition of an insatiable benevolence, which, not contented with reigning in the dispensation of happiness during the contracted term of human life, had strained, with all the reachings and graspings of a vivacious mind, to extend the dominion of their bounty beyond the limits of nature, and to perpetuate themselves through generations of generations, the guardians, the protectors, the nourishers of mankind.\nBurke claimed that the advent of East India Company domination in India had eroded much that was good in these traditions and that as a consequence of this and the lack of new customs to replace them the Indian populace under Company rule was needlessly suffering. He set about establishing a set of imperial expectations, whose moral foundation would in his opinion warrant an overseas empire.\nOn 4 April 1786, Burke presented the House of Commons with the \"Article of Charge of High Crimes and Misdemeanors\" against Hastings. The impeachment in Westminster Hall which did not begin until 14 February 1788 would be the \"first major public discursive event of its kind in England\", bringing the morality of imperialism to the forefront of public perception. Burke was already known for his eloquent rhetorical skills and his involvement in the trial only enhanced its popularity and significance. Burke's indictment, fuelled by emotional indignation, branded Hastings a \"captain-general of iniquity\" who never dined without \"creating a famine\", whose heart was \"gangrened to the core\" and who resembled both a \"spider of Hell\" and a \"ravenous vulture devouring the carcasses of the dead\". The House of Commons eventually impeached Hastings, but subsequently the House of Lords acquitted him of all charges.\nFrench Revolution: 1688 versus 1789.\nInitially, Burke did not condemn the French Revolution. In a letter of 9 August 1789, he wrote: \"England gazing with astonishment at a French struggle for Liberty and not knowing whether to blame or to applaud! The thing indeed, though I thought I saw something like it in progress for several years, has still something in it paradoxical and Mysterious. The spirit it is impossible not to admire; but the old Parisian ferocity has broken out in a shocking manner\". The events of 5\u20136 October 1789, when a crowd of Parisian women marched on Versailles to compel King Louis XVI to return to Paris, turned Burke against it. In a letter to his son Richard Burke dated 10 October, he said: \"This day I heard from Laurence who has sent me papers confirming the portentous state of France\u2014where the Elements which compose Human Society seem all to be dissolved, and a world of Monsters to be produced in the place of it\u2014where Mirabeau presides as the Grand Anarch; and the late Grand Monarch makes a figure as ridiculous as pitiable\". On 4 November, Charles-Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Depont wrote to Burke, requesting that he endorse the Revolution. Burke replied that any critical language of it by him should be taken \"as no more than the expression of doubt\", but he added: \"You may have subverted Monarchy, but not recover'd freedom\". In the same month, he described France as \"a country undone\". Burke's first public condemnation of the Revolution occurred during the debate in Parliament on the army estimates on 9 February 1790 provoked by praise of the Revolution by Pitt and Fox:\nSince the House had been prorogued in the summer much work was done in France. The French had shewn themselves the ablest architects of ruin that had hitherto existed in the world. In that very short space of time they had completely pulled down to the ground, their monarchy; their church; their nobility; their law; their revenue; their army; their navy; their commerce; their arts; and their manufactures...[There was a danger of] an imitation of the excesses of an irrational, unprincipled, proscribing, confiscating, plundering, ferocious, bloody and tyrannical democracy...[In religion] the danger of their example is no longer from intolerance, but from Atheism; a foul, unnatural vice, foe to all the dignity and consolation of mankind; which seems in France, for a long time, to have been embodied into a faction, accredited, and almost avowed.\nIn January 1790, Burke read Richard Price's sermon of 4 November 1789 entitled \"A Discourse on the Love of Our Country\" to the Revolution Society. That society had been founded to commemorate the Glorious Revolution of 1688. In this sermon, Price espoused the philosophy of universal \"Rights of Men\". Price argued that love of our country \"does not imply any conviction of the superior value of it to other countries, or any particular preference of its laws and constitution of government\". Instead, Price asserted that Englishmen should see themselves \"more as citizens of the world than as members of any particular community\".\nA debate between Price and Burke ensued that was \"the classic moment at which two fundamentally different conceptions of national identity were presented to the English public\". Price claimed that the principles of the Glorious Revolution included \"the right to choose our own governors, to cashier them for misconduct, and to frame a government for ourselves\".\nImmediately after reading Price's sermon, Burke wrote a draft of what eventually became \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\". On 13 February 1790, a notice in the press said that shortly Burke would publish a pamphlet on the Revolution and its British supporters, but he spent the year revising and expanding it. On 1 November, he finally published the \"Reflections\" and it was an immediate best-seller. Priced at five shillings, it was more expensive than most political pamphlets, but by the end of 1790, it had gone through ten printings and sold approximately 17,500 copies. A French translation appeared on 29 November and on 30 November the translator Pierre-Ga\u00ebton Dupont wrote to Burke saying 2,500 copies had already been sold. The French translation ran to ten printings by June 1791.\nWhat the Glorious Revolution had meant was as important to Burke and his contemporaries as it had been for the last one hundred years in British politics. In the \"Reflections\", Burke argued against Price's interpretation of the Glorious Revolution and instead, gave a classic Whig defence of it. Burke argued against the idea of abstract, metaphysical rights of humans and instead advocated national tradition:\nThe Revolution was made to preserve our \"antient\" indisputable laws and liberties, and that \"antient\" constitution of government which is our only security for law and liberty...The very idea of the fabrication of a new government, is enough to fill us with disgust and horror. We wished at the period of the Revolution, and do now wish, to derive all we possess as \"an inheritance from our forefathers\". Upon that body and stock of inheritance we have taken care not to inoculate any cyon [scion] alien to the nature of the original plant...Our oldest reformation is that of Magna Charta. You will see that Sir Edward Coke, that great oracle of our law, and indeed all the great men who follow him, to Blackstone, are industrious to prove the pedigree of our liberties. They endeavour to prove that the ancient charter...were nothing more than a re-affirmance of the still more ancient standing law of the kingdom...In the famous law...called the \"Petition of Right\", the parliament says to the king, \"Your subjects have \"inherited\" this freedom\", claiming their franchises not on abstract principles \"as the rights of men\", but as the rights of Englishmen, and as a patrimony derived from their forefathers.\nBurke said: \"We fear God, we look up with awe to kings; with affection to Parliaments; with duty to magistrates; with reverence to priests; and with respect to nobility. Why? Because when such ideas are brought before our minds, it is \"natural\" to be so affected\". Burke defended this prejudice on the grounds that it is \"the general bank and capital of nations, and of ages\" and superior to individual reason, which is small in comparison. \"Prejudice\", Burke claimed, \"is of ready application in the emergency; it previously engages the mind in a steady course of wisdom and virtue, and does not leave the man hesitating in the moment of decision, sceptical, puzzled, and unresolved. Prejudice renders a man's virtue his habit\". Burke criticised social contract theory by claiming that society is indeed a contract, although it is \"a partnership not only between those who are living, but between those who are living, those who are dead, and those who are to be born\".\nThe most famous passage in Burke's \"Reflections\" was his description of the events of 5\u20136 October 1789 and the part of Marie-Antoinette in them. Burke's account differs little from modern historians who have used primary sources. His use of flowery language to describe it provoked both praise and criticism. Philip Francis wrote to Burke saying that what he wrote of Marie-Antoinette was \"pure foppery\". Edward Gibbon reacted differently: \"I adore his chivalry\". Burke was informed by an Englishman who had talked with the Duchesse de Biron that when Marie-Antoinette was reading the passage she burst into tears and took considerable time to finish reading it. Price had rejoiced that the French king had been \"led in triumph\" during the October Days, but to Burke, this symbolised the opposing revolutionary sentiment of the Jacobins and the natural sentiments of those who shared his own view with horror\u2014that the ungallant assault on Marie-Antoinette was a cowardly attack on a defenceless woman.\nLouis XVI translated the \"Reflections\" \"from end to end\" into French. Fellow Whig MPs Richard Sheridan and Charles James Fox disagreed with Burke and split with him. Fox thought the \"Reflections\" to be \"in very bad taste\" and \"favouring Tory principles\". Other Whigs such as the Duke of Portland and Earl Fitzwilliam privately agreed with Burke, but they did not wish for a public breach with their Whig colleagues. Burke wrote on 29 November 1790: \"I have received from the Duke of Portland, Lord Fitzwilliam, the Duke of Devonshire, Lord John Cavendish, Montagu (Frederick Montagu MP), and a long et cetera of the old Stamina of the Whiggs a most full approbation of the principles of that work and a kind indulgence to the execution\". The Duke of Portland said in 1791 that when anyone criticised the \"Reflections\" to him, he informed them that he had recommended the book to his sons as containing the true Whig creed.\nIn the opinion of Paul Langford, Burke crossed something of a Rubicon when he attended a levee on 3 February 1791 to meet the King, later described by Jane Burke as follows:\nOn his coming to Town for the Winter, as he generally does, he went to the Levee with the Duke of \"Portland\", who went with Lord William to kiss hands on his going into the Guards\u2014while Lord William was kissing hands, The King was talking to The Duke, but his Eyes were fixed on [Burke] who was standing in the Crowd, and when He said His say to The Duke, without waiting for [Burke]'s coming up in his turn, The King went up to him, and, after the usual questions of how long have you been in Town and the weather, He said you have been very much employed of late, and very much confined. [Burke] said, no, Sir, not more than usual\u2014You have and very well employed too, but there are none so deaf as those that w'ont hear, and none so blind as those that w'ont see\u2014[Burke] made a low bow, Sir, I certainly now understand you, but was afraid my vanity or presumption might have led me to imagine what Your Majesty has said referred to what I have done\u2014You cannot be vain\u2014You have been of \"use to us all\", it is a general opinion, is it not so Lord Stair? who was standing near. It is said Lord Stair;\u2014Your Majesty's adopting it, Sir, will make the opinion general, said [Burke]\u2014I know it is the general opinion, and I know that there is no Man who calls himself a Gentleman that must not think himself obliged to you, for you have supported the cause of the Gentlemen\u2014You know the tone at Court is a whisper, but The King said all this loud, so as to be heard by every one at Court.\nBurke's \"Reflections\" sparked a pamphlet war. Mary Wollstonecraft was one of the first into print, publishing \"A Vindication of the Rights of Men\" a few weeks after Burke. Thomas Paine followed with the \"Rights of Man\" in 1791. James Mackintosh, who wrote \"Vindiciae Gallicae\", was the first to see the \"Reflections\" as \"the manifesto of a Counter Revolution\". Mackintosh later agreed with Burke's views, remarking in December 1796 after meeting him that Burke was \"minutely and accurately informed, to a wonderful exactness, with respect to every fact relating to the French Revolution\". Mackintosh later said: \"Burke was one of the first thinkers as well as one of the greatest orators of his time. He is without parallel in any age, excepting perhaps Lord Bacon and Cicero; and his works contain an ampler store of political and moral wisdom than can be found in any other writer whatever\".\nIn November 1790, Fran\u00e7ois-Louis-Thibault de Menonville, a member of the National Assembly of France, wrote to Burke, praising \"Reflections\" and requesting more \"very refreshing mental food\" that he could publish. This Burke did in April 1791 when he published \"A Letter to a Member of the National Assembly\". Burke called for external forces to reverse the Revolution and included an attack on the late French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau as being the subject of a personality cult that had developed in revolutionary France. Although Burke conceded that Rousseau sometimes showed \"a considerable insight into human nature\", he mostly was critical. Although he did not meet Rousseau on his visit to Britain in 1766\u20131767, Burke was a friend of David Hume, with whom Rousseau had stayed. Burke said Rousseau \"entertained no principle either to influence of his heart, or to guide his understanding\u2014but \"vanity\"\"\u2014which he \"was possessed to a degree little short of madness\". He also cited Rousseau's \"Confessions\" as evidence that Rousseau had a life of \"obscure and vulgar vices\" that was not \"chequered, or spotted here and there, with virtues, or even distinguished by a single good action\". Burke contrasted Rousseau's theory of universal benevolence and his having sent his children to a foundling hospital, stating that he was \"a lover of his kind, but a hater of his kindred\".\nThese events and the disagreements that arose from them within the Whigs led to its break-up and to the rupture of Burke's friendship with Fox. In a debate in Parliament on Britain's relations with Russia, Fox praised the principles of the Revolution, although Burke was not able to reply at this time as he was \"overpowered by continued cries of question from his own side of the House\". When Parliament was debating the Quebec Bill for a constitution for Canada, Fox praised the Revolution and criticised some of Burke's arguments such as hereditary power. On 6 May 1791, Burke used the opportunity to answer Fox during another debate in Parliament on the Quebec Bill and condemn the new French Constitution and \"the horrible consequences flowing from the French idea of the Rights of Man\". Burke asserted that those ideas were the antithesis of both the British and the American constitutions. Burke was interrupted and Fox intervened, saying that Burke should be allowed to carry on with his speech. However, a vote of censure was moved against Burke for noticing the affairs of France which was moved by Lord Sheffield and seconded by Fox. Pitt made a speech praising Burke and Fox made a speech\u2014both rebuking and complimenting Burke. He questioned the sincerity of Burke, who seemed to have forgotten the lessons he had learned from him, quoting from Burke's own speeches of fourteen and fifteen years before. Burke's response was as follows:\nIt certainly was indiscreet at any period, but especially at his time of life, to parade enemies, or give his friends occasion to desert him; yet if his firm and steady adherence to the British constitution placed him in such a dilemma, he would risk all, and, as public duty and public experience taught him, with his last words exclaim, \"Fly from the French Constitution\".\nAt this point, Fox whispered that there was \"no loss of friendship\". \"I regret to say there is\", Burke replied, \"I have indeed made a great sacrifice; I have done my duty though I have lost my friend. There is something in the detested French constitution that envenoms every thing it touches\". This provoked a reply from Fox, yet he was unable to give his speech for some time since he was overcome with tears and emotion. Fox appealed to Burke to remember their inalienable friendship, but he also repeated his criticisms of Burke and uttered \"unusually bitter sarcasms\". This only aggravated the rupture between the two men. Burke demonstrated his separation from the party on 5 June 1791 by writing to Fitzwilliam, declining money from him.\nBurke was dismayed that some Whigs, instead of reaffirming the principles of the Whig Party he laid out in the \"Reflections\", had rejected them in favour of \"French principles\" and that they criticised Burke for abandoning Whig principles. Burke wanted to demonstrate his fidelity to Whig principles and feared that acquiescence to Fox and his followers would allow the Whig Party to become a vehicle for Jacobinism.\nBurke knew that many members of the Whig Party did not share Fox's views and he wanted to provoke them into condemning the French Revolution. Burke wrote that he wanted to represent the whole Whig Party \"as tolerating, and by a toleration, countenancing those proceedings\" so that he could \"stimulate them to a public declaration of what every one of their acquaintance privately knows to be...their sentiments\". On 3 August 1791, Burke published his \"Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs\" in which he renewed his criticism of the radical revolutionary programmes inspired by the French Revolution and attacked the Whigs who supported them as holding principles contrary to those traditionally held by the Whig Party.\nBurke owned two copies of what has been called \"that practical compendium of Whig political theory\", namely \"The Tryal of Dr. Henry Sacheverell\" (1710). Burke wrote of the trial: \"It rarely happens to a party to have the opportunity of a clear, authentic, recorded, declaration of their political tenets upon the subject of a great constitutional event like that of the [Glorious] Revolution\". Writing in the third person, Burke asserted in his \"Appeal\":\n[The] foundations laid down by the Commons, on the trial of Doctor Sacheverel, for justifying the revolution of 1688, are the very same laid down in Mr. Burke's Reflections; that is to say,\u2014a breach of the \"original contract\", implied and expressed in the constitution of this country, as a scheme of government fundamentally and inviolably fixed in King, Lords and Commons.\u2014That the fundamental subversion of this antient constitution, by one of its parts, having been attempted, and in effect accomplished, justified the Revolution. That it was justified \"only\" upon the \"necessity\" of the case; as the \"only\" means left for the recovery of that \"antient\" constitution, formed by the \"original contract\" of the British state; as well as for the future preservation of the \"same\" government. These are the points to be proved.\nBurke then provided quotations from Paine's \"Rights of Man\" to demonstrate what the New Whigs believed. Burke's belief that Foxite principles corresponded to Paine's was genuine. Finally, Burke denied that a majority of \"the people\" had, or ought to have, the final say in politics and alter society at their pleasure. People had rights, but also duties and these duties were not voluntary. According to Burke, the people could not overthrow morality derived from God.\nAlthough Whig grandees such as Portland and Fitzwilliam privately agreed with Burke's \"Appeal\", they wished he had used more moderate language. Fitzwilliam saw the \"Appeal\" as containing \"the doctrines I have sworn by, long and long since\". Francis Basset, a backbench Whig MP, wrote to Burke that \"though for reasons which I will not now detail I did not then deliver my sentiments, I most perfectly differ from Mr. Fox &amp; from the great Body of opposition on the French Revolution\". Burke sent a copy of the \"Appeal\" to the King and the King requested a friend to communicate to Burke that he had read it \"with great Satisfaction\". Burke wrote of its reception: \"Not one word from one of our party. They are secretly galled. They agree with me to a title; but they dare not speak out for fear of hurting Fox... They leave me to myself; they see that I can do myself justice\". Charles Burney viewed it as \"a most admirable book\u2014the best &amp; most useful on political subjects that I have ever seen\", but he believed the differences in the Whig Party between Burke and Fox should not be aired publicly.\nEventually, most of the Whigs sided with Burke and gave their support to William Pitt the Younger's Tory government which in response to France's declaration of war against Britain declared war on France's Revolutionary Government in 1793.\nIn December 1791, Burke sent government ministers his \"Thoughts on French Affairs\" where he put forward three main points, namely that no counter-revolution in France would come about by purely domestic causes; that the longer the Revolutionary Government exists, the stronger it becomes; and that the Revolutionary Government's interest and aim is to disturb all of the other governments of Europe.\nAs a Whig, Burke did not wish to see an absolute monarchy again in France after the extirpation of Jacobinism. Writing to an \"\u00e9migr\u00e9\" in 1791, Burke expressed his views against a restoration of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\":\nWhen such a complete convulsion has shaken the State, and hardly left any thing whatsoever, either in civil arrangements, or in the Characters and disposition of men's minds, exactly where it was, whatever shall be settled although in the former persons and upon old forms, will be in some measure a new thing and will labour under something of the weakness as well as other inconveniences of a Change. My poor opinion is that you mean to establish what you call 'L'ancien R\u00e9gime,' If any one means that system of Court Intrigue miscalled a Government as it stood, at Versailles before the present confusions as the thing to be established, that I believe will be found absolutely impossible; and if you consider the Nature, as well of persons, as of affairs, I flatter myself you must be of my opinion. That was tho' not so violent a State of Anarchy as well as the present. If it were even possible to lay things down exactly as they stood, before the series of experimental politicks began, I am quite sure that they could not long continue in that situation. In one Sense of L'Ancien R\u00e9gime I am clear that nothing else can reasonably be done.\nBurke delivered a speech on the debate of the Aliens Bill on 28 December 1792. He supported the Bill as it would exclude \"murderous atheists, who would pull down Church and state; religion and God; morality and happiness\". The peroration included a reference to a French order for 3,000 daggers. Burke revealed a dagger he had concealed in his coat and threw it to the floor: \"This is what you are to gain by an alliance with France\". Burke picked up the dagger and continued:\nWhen they smile, I see blood trickling down their faces; I see their insidious purposes; I see that the object of all their cajoling is\u2014blood! I now warn my countrymen to beware of these execrable philosophers, whose only object it is to destroy every thing that is good here, and to establish immorality and murder by precept and example\u2014'Hic niger est hunc tu Romane caveto' ['Such a man is evil; beware of him, Roman'. Horace, \"Satires\" I. 4. 85.].\nBurke supported the war against Revolutionary France, seeing Britain as fighting on the side of the royalists and \"\u00e9migres\" in a civil war, rather than fighting against the whole nation of France. Burke also supported the royalist uprising in La Vend\u00e9e, describing it on 4 November 1793 in a letter to William Windham as \"the sole affair I have much heart in\". Burke wrote to Henry Dundas on 7 October urging him to send reinforcements there as he viewed it as the only theatre in the war that might lead to a march on Paris, but Dundas did not follow Burke's advice.\nBurke believed the British government was not taking the uprising seriously enough, a view reinforced by a letter he had received from the Prince Charles of France (\"S.A.R. le comte d'Artois\"), dated 23 October, requesting that he intercede on behalf of the royalists to the government. Burke was forced to reply on 6 November: \"I am not in His Majesty's Service; or at all consulted in his Affairs\". Burke published his \"Remarks on the Policy of the Allies with Respect to France\", begun in October, where he said: \"I am sure every thing has shewn us that in this war with France, one Frenchman is worth twenty foreigners. La Vend\u00e9e is a proof of this\".\nOn 20 June 1794, Burke received a vote of thanks from the House of Commons for his services in the Hastings Trial and he immediately resigned his seat, being replaced by his son Richard. A blow fell upon Burke with the loss of Richard in August 1794, to whom he was tenderly attached and in whom he saw signs of promise which were not patent to others and which in fact appear to have been non-existent, although this view may have rather reflected the fact that his son Richard had worked successfully in the early battle for Catholic emancipation. King George III, whose favour he had gained by his attitude on the French Revolution, wished to create him Earl of Beaconsfield, but the death of his son deprived the opportunity of such an honour and all its attractions, so the only award he would accept was a pension of \u00a32,500. Even this modest reward was attacked by the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Lauderdale, to whom Burke replied in his \"Letter to a Noble Lord\" (1796): \"It cannot at this time be too often repeated; line upon line; precept upon precept; until it comes into the currency of a proverb, \"To innovate is not to reform\"\". He argued that he was rewarded on merit, but the Duke of Bedford received his rewards from inheritance alone, his ancestor being the original pensioner: \"Mine was from a mild and benevolent sovereign; his from Henry the Eighth\". Burke also hinted at what would happen to such people if their revolutionary ideas were implemented and included a description of the English Constitution:\nBut as to \"our\" country and \"our\" race, as long as the well compacted structure of our church and state, the sanctuary, the holy of holies of that ancient law, defended by reverence, defended by power, a fortress at once and a temple, shall stand inviolate on the brow of the British Sion\u2014as long as the British Monarchy, not more limited than fenced by the orders of the State, shall, like the proud Keep of Windsor, rising in the majesty of proportion, and girt with the double belt of its kindred and coeval towers, as long as this awful structure shall oversee and guard the subjected land\u2014so long as the mounds and dykes of the low, fat, Bedford level will have nothing to fear from all the pickaxes of all the levellers of France.\nBurke's last publications were the \"Letters on a Regicide Peace\" (October 1796), called forth by negotiations for peace with France by the Pitt government. Burke regarded this as appeasement, injurious to national dignity and honour. In his \"Second Letter\", Burke wrote of the French Revolutionary government: \"Individuality is left out of their scheme of government. The State is all in all. Everything is referred to the production of force; afterwards, everything is trusted to the use of it. It is military in its principle, in its maxims, in its spirit, and in all its movements. The State has dominion and conquest for its sole objects\u2014dominion over minds by proselytism, over bodies by arms\".\nThis is held to be the first explanation of the modern concept of totalitarian state. Burke regarded the war with France as ideological, against an \"armed doctrine\". He wished that France would not be partitioned due to the effect this would have on the balance of power in Europe and that the war was not against France, but against the revolutionaries governing her. Burke said: \"It is not France extending a foreign empire over other nations: it is a sect aiming at universal empire, and beginning with the conquest of France\".\nLater life.\nIn November 1795, there was a debate in Parliament on the high price of corn and Burke wrote a memorandum to Pitt on the subject. In December, Samuel Whitbread MP introduced a bill giving magistrates the power to fix minimum wages and Fox said he would vote for it. This debate probably led Burke to edit his memorandum as there appeared a notice that Burke would soon publish a letter on the subject to the Secretary of the Board of Agriculture Arthur Young, but he failed to complete it. These fragments were inserted into the memorandum after his death and published posthumously in 1800 as \"Thoughts and Details on Scarcity\". In it, Burke expounded \"some of the doctrines of political economists bearing upon agriculture as a trade\". Burke criticised policies such as maximum prices and state regulation of wages and set out what the limits of government should be:\nThat the State ought to confine itself to what regards the State, or the creatures of the State, namely, the exterior establishment of its religion; its magistracy; its revenue; its military force by sea and land; the corporations that owe their existence to its fiat; in a word, to every thing that is \"truly and properly\" public, to the public peace, to the public safety, to the public order, to the public prosperity.\nThe economist Adam Smith remarked that Burke was \"the only man I ever knew who thinks on economic subjects exactly as I do, without any previous communications having passed between us\".\nWriting to a friend in May 1795, Burke surveyed the causes of discontent: \"I think I can hardly overrate the malignity of the principles of Protestant ascendency, as they affect Ireland; or of Indianism [i.e. corporate tyranny, as practised by the British East Indies Company], as they affect these countries, and as they affect Asia; or of Jacobinism, as they affect all Europe, and the state of human society itself. The last is the greatest evil\". By March 1796, Burke had changed his mind: \"Our Government and our Laws are beset by two different Enemies, which are sapping its foundations, Indianism, and Jacobinism. In some Cases they act separately, in some they act in conjunction: But of this I am sure; that the first is the worst by far, and the hardest to deal with; and for this amongst other reasons, that it weakens discredits, and ruins that force, which ought to be employed with the greatest Credit and Energy against the other; and that it furnishes Jacobinism with its strongest arms against all \"formal\" Government\".\nIllness and death.\nFor more than a year prior to his death, Burke knew that his stomach was \"irrecoverably ruind\". He is believed to have had stomach cancer.\nAfter hearing that Burke was nearing death, Fox wrote to Mrs. Burke enquiring after him. Fox received the reply the next day:\nMrs. Burke presents her compliments to Mr. Fox, and thanks him for his obliging inquiries. Mrs. Burke communicated his letter to Mr. Burke, and by his desire has to inform Mr. Fox that it has cost Mr. Burke the most heart-felt pain to obey the stern voice of his duty in rending asunder a long friendship, but that he deemed this sacrifice necessary; that his principles continue the same; and that in whatever of life may yet remain to him, he conceives that he must live for others and not for himself. Mr. Burke is convinced that the principles which he has endeavoured to maintain are necessary to the welfare and dignity of his country, and that these principles can be enforced only by the general persuasion of his sincerity.\nBurke died in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, on 9 July 1797 and was buried there alongside his son and brother.\nPersonal life.\nBurke married Jane Mary Nugent (1734\u20131812) in 1757. They had 2 sons: Christopher died age 5, and Richard age 36. Jane managed Burke's household affairs for him, and was involved in his work.\nLegacy.\nBurke is regarded by most political historians in the English-speaking world as a liberal conservative and the father of modern British conservatism. Burke was utilitarian and empirical in his arguments while Joseph de Maistre, a fellow European conservative, was more providentialist and sociological and deployed a more confrontational tone in his arguments.\nBurke believed that property was essential to human life. Because of his conviction that people desire to be ruled and controlled, the division of property formed the basis for social structure, helping develop control within a property-based hierarchy. He viewed the social changes brought on by property as the natural order of events which should be taking place as the human race progressed. With the division of property and the class system, he also believed that it kept the monarch in check to the needs of the classes beneath the monarch. Since property largely aligned or defined divisions of social class, class too was seen as natural\u2014part of a social agreement that the setting of persons into different classes, is the mutual benefit of all subjects. Concern for property is not Burke's only influence. Christopher Hitchens summarises as follows: \"If modern conservatism can be held to derive from Burke, it is not just because he appealed to property owners in behalf of stability but also because he appealed to an everyday interest in the preservation of the ancestral and the immemorial\".\nBurke's support for the causes of the \"oppressed majorities\", such as Irish Catholics and Indians, led him to be at the receiving end of hostile criticism from Tories; while his opposition to the spread of the French Republic (and its radical ideals) across Europe led to similar charges from Whigs. As a consequence, Burke often became isolated in Parliament.\nIn the 19th century, Burke was praised by both liberals and conservatives. Burke's friend Philip Francis wrote that Burke \"was a man who truly &amp; prophetically foresaw all the consequences which would rise from the adoption of the French principles\", but because Burke wrote with so much passion, people were doubtful of his arguments. William Windham spoke from the same bench in the House of Commons as Burke had when he had separated from Fox and an observer said Windham spoke \"like the ghost of Burke\" when he made a speech against peace with France in 1801. William Hazlitt, a political opponent of Burke, regarded him as amongst his three favourite writers (the others being Junius and Rousseau) and made it \"a test of the sense and candour of any one belonging to the opposite party, whether he allowed Burke to be a great man\". William Wordsworth was originally a supporter of the French Revolution and attacked Burke in \"A Letter to the Bishop of Llandaff\" (1793), but by the early 19th century he had changed his mind and came to admire Burke. In his \"Two Addresses to the Freeholders of Westmorland\", Wordsworth called Burke \"the most sagacious Politician of his age\", whose predictions \"time has verified\". He later revised his poem \"The Prelude\" to include praise of Burke (\"Genius of Burke! forgive the pen seduced/By specious wonders\") and portrayed him as an old oak. Samuel Taylor Coleridge came to have a similar conversion as he had criticised Burke in \"The Watchman\", but in his \"Friend\" (1809\u20131810) had defended Burke from charges of inconsistency. Later in his \"Biographia Literaria\" (1817), Coleridge hails Burke as a prophet and praises Burke for referring \"habitually to \"principles\". He was a \"scientific\" statesman; and therefore a \"seer\"\". Henry Brougham wrote of Burke that \"all his predictions, save one momentary expression, had been more than fulfilled: anarchy and bloodshed had borne sway in France; conquest and convulsion had desolated Europe...[T]he providence of mortals is not often able to penetrate so far as this into futurity\". George Canning believed that Burke's \"Reflections\" \"has been justified by the course of subsequent events; and almost every prophecy has been strictly fulfilled\". In 1823, Canning wrote that he took Burke's \"last works and words [as] the manual of my politics\". The Conservative Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli \"was deeply penetrated with the spirit and sentiment of Burke's later writings\".\nThe 19th-century Liberal Prime Minister William Gladstone considered Burke \"a magazine of wisdom on Ireland and America\" and in his diary recorded: \"Made many extracts from Burke\u2014\"sometimes almost divine\"\". The Radical MP and anti-Corn Law activist Richard Cobden often praised Burke's \"Thoughts and Details on Scarcity\". The Liberal historian Lord Acton considered Burke one of the three greatest Liberals, along with Gladstone and Thomas Babington Macaulay. Lord Macaulay recorded in his diary: \"I have now finished reading again most of Burke's works. Admirable! The greatest man since Milton\". The Gladstonian Liberal MP John Morley published two books on Burke (including a biography) and was influenced by Burke, including his views on prejudice. The Cobdenite Radical Francis Hirst thought Burke deserved \"a place among English libertarians, even though of all lovers of liberty and of all reformers he was the most conservative, the least abstract, always anxious to preserve and renovate rather than to innovate. In politics, he resembled the modern architect who would restore an old house instead of pulling it down to construct a new one on the site\". Burke's \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" was controversial at the time of its publication, but after his death, it was to become his best-known and most influential work and a manifesto for Conservative thinking.\nTwo contrasting assessments of Burke also were offered long after his death by Karl Marx and Winston Churchill. In a footnote to Volume One of \"Das Kapital\", Marx wrote:\nThe sycophant\u2014who in the pay of the English oligarchy played the romantic \"laudator temporis acti\" against the French Revolution just as, in the pay of the North American colonies at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the liberal against the English oligarchy\u2014was an out-and-out vulgar bourgeois. \"The laws of commerce are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws of God.\" (E. Burke, l.c., pp. 31, 32) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and Nature, he always sold himself in the best market.\nIn \"Consistency in Politics\", Churchill wrote:\nOn the one hand [Burke] is revealed as a foremost apostle of Liberty, on the other as the redoubtable champion of Authority. But a charge of political inconsistency applied to this life appears a mean and petty thing. History easily discerns the reasons and forces which actuated him, and the immense changes in the problems he was facing which evoked from the same profound mind and sincere spirit these entirely contrary manifestations. His soul revolted against tyranny, whether it appeared in the aspect of a domineering Monarch and a corrupt Court and Parliamentary system, or whether, mouthing the watch-words of a non-existent liberty, it towered up against him in the dictation of a brutal mob and wicked sect. No one can read the Burke of Liberty and the Burke of Authority without feeling that here was the same man pursuing the same ends, seeking the same ideals of society and Government, and defending them from assaults, now from one extreme, now from the other.\nThe historian Piers Brendon asserts that Burke laid the moral foundation for the British Empire, epitomised in the trial of Warren Hastings, that was ultimately to be its undoing. When Burke stated that \"[t]he British Empire must be governed on a plan of freedom, for it will be governed by no other\", this was \"an ideological bacillus that would prove fatal. This was Edmund Burke's paternalistic doctrine that colonial government was a trust. It was to be so exercised for the benefit of subject people that they would eventually attain their birthright\u2014freedom\". As a consequence of these opinions, Burke objected to the opium trade which he called a \"smuggling adventure\" and condemned \"the great Disgrace of the British character in India\". According to political scientist Jennifer Pitts, Burke \"was arguably the first political thinker to undertake a comprehensive critique of British imperial practice in the name of justice for those who suffered from its moral and political exclusions.\" The extent of Burke's critique of imperial practices has been challenged by other political scientists and literary theorists who highlight Burke's strong support of British imperial practices in the New World.\nA Royal Society of Arts blue plaque commemorates Burke at 37 Gerrard Street now in London's Chinatown.\nStatues of Burke are in Bristol, England, Trinity College Dublin and Washington, D.C. Burke is also the namesake of a private college preparatory school in Washington, Edmund Burke School.\nBurke Avenue, in The Bronx, New York, is named for him.\nCriticism.\nOne of Burke's largest and most developed critics was the American political theorist Leo Strauss. In his book \"Natural Right and History\", Strauss makes a series of points in which he somewhat harshly evaluates Burke's writings.\nOne of the topics that he first addresses is the fact that Burke creates a definitive separation between happiness and virtue and explains that \"Burke, therefore, seeks the foundation of government 'in a conformity to our duties' and not in 'imaginary rights of man\". Strauss views Burke as believing that government should focus solely on the duties that a man should have in society as opposed to trying to address any additional needs or desires. Government is simply a practicality to Burke and not necessarily meant to function as a tool to help individuals live as well as possible. Strauss also argues that in a sense Burke's theory could be seen as opposing the very idea of forming such philosophies. Burke expresses the view that theory cannot adequately predict future occurrences and therefore men need to have instincts that cannot be practised or derived from ideology.\nThis leads to an overarching criticism that Strauss holds regarding Burke which is his rejection of the use of logic. Burke dismisses a widely held view amongst theorists that reason should be the primary tool in the forming of a constitution or contract. Burke instead believes that constitutions should be made based on natural processes as opposed to rational planning for the future. However, Strauss points out that criticising rationality actually works against Burke's original stance of returning to traditional ways because some amount of human reason is inherent and therefore is in part grounded in tradition. In regards to this formation of legitimate social order, Strauss does not necessarily support Burke's opinion\u2014that order cannot be established by individual wise people, but exclusively by a culmination of individuals with historical knowledge of past functions to use as a foundation. Strauss notes that Burke would oppose more newly formed republics due to this thought, although Lenzner adds the fact that he did seem to believe that America's constitution could be justified given the specific circumstances. On the other hand, France's constitution was much too radical as it relied too heavily on enlightened reasoning as opposed to traditional methods and values.\nReligious thought.\nBurke's religious writing comprises published works and commentary on the subject of religion. Burke's religious thought was grounded in the belief that religion is the foundation of civil society. He sharply criticised deism and atheism and emphasised Christianity as a vehicle of social progress. Born in Ireland to a Catholic mother and a Protestant father, Burke vigorously defended the Church of England, but he also demonstrated sensitivity to Catholic concerns. He linked the conservation of a state-established religion with the preservation of citizens' constitutional liberties and highlighted Christianity's benefit not only to the believer's soul, but also to political arrangements.\nMisattributed quotation.\n\"When good men do nothing\".\nThe well-known maxim that \"The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing\" is widely misattributed to Burke. It is known that, in 1770, Burke wrote the following passage in \"Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[W]hen bad men combine, the good must associate; else they will fall, one by one, an unpitied sacrifice in a contemptible struggle.\nIn 1867, John Stuart Mill made a similar statement in an inaugural address delivered at the University of St Andrews:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMain sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10033", "revid": "49473503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10033", "title": "Early music", "text": "Musical period\nEarly music generally comprises Medieval music (500\u20131400) and Renaissance music (1400\u20131600), but can also include Baroque music (1600\u20131750) or Ancient music (before 500 AD). Originating in Europe, early music is a broad musical era for the beginning of Western classical music.\nTerminology.\nInterpretations of historical scope of \"early music\" vary. The original Academy of Ancient Music formed in 1726 defined \"Ancient\" music as works written by composers who lived before the end of the 16th century. Johannes Brahms and his contemporaries would have understood Early music to range from the High Renaissance and Baroque, while some scholars consider that Early music should include the music of ancient Greece or Rome before 500 AD (a period that is generally covered by the term Ancient music). Music critic Michael Kennedy excludes Baroque, defining Early music as \"musical compositions from [the] earliest times up to and including music of [the] Renaissance period\".\nMusicologist Thomas Forrest Kelly considers that the essence of Early music is the revival of \"forgotten\" musical repertoire and that the term is intertwined with the rediscovery of old performance practice. According to the UK's National Centre for Early Music, the term \"early music\" refers to both a repertory (European music written between 1250 and 1750 embracing Medieval, Renaissance and the Baroque) \u2013 and a historically informed approach to the performance of that music.\nToday, the understanding of \"Early music\" has come to include \"any music for which a historically appropriate style of performance must be reconstructed on the basis of surviving scores, treatises, instruments and other contemporary evidence.\"\nRevival.\nIn the later 20th century there was a resurgence of interest in the performance of music from the Medieval and Renaissance eras, and a number of instrumental consorts and choral ensembles specialising in Early music repertoire were formed. Groups such as the Tallis Scholars, the Early Music Consort and the Taverner Consort and Players have been influential in bringing Early music to modern audiences through performances and popular recordings.\nPerformance practice.\nThe revival of interest in Early music has given rise to a scholarly approach to the performance of music. Through academic musicological research of music treatises, urtext editions of musical scores and other historical evidence, performers attempt to be faithful to the performance style of the musical era in which a work was originally conceived. Additionally, there has been a rise in the use of original or reproduction period instruments as part of the performance of Early music, such as the revival of the harpsichord, lute, or viol.\nThe practice of \"historically informed performance\" is nevertheless dependent on stylistic inference. Renaissance notation is not as prescriptive as modern scoring, and there is much that was left to the performer's interpretation. Margaret Bent says: \"Renaissance notation is under-prescriptive by our standards; when translated into modern form it acquires a prescriptive weight that overspecifies and distorts its original openness. Accidentals \u2026 may or may not have been notated, but what modern notation requires would then have been perfectly apparent without notation to a singer versed in counterpoint\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10035", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10035", "title": "Elfenland", "text": "Board game\nElfenland is a German-style board game designed by Alan R. Moon and published by Amigo Spiele in German and Rio Grande Games in English in 1998. \"Elfenland\" won the Spiel des Jahres award in 1998. \nBackground.\nThe game was originally based on his earlier game \"Elfenroads\" (published by White Wind), but since \"Elfenroads\" took about four hours for a game, the play was simplified to reduce the time closer to an hour, making it appeal more as a family game.\nGameplay.\nThe game is played by 2\u20136 players, with 4\u20135 making for the best game. \nEach player tries to reach as many cities as possible and then return to his \"home city.\" \nHome cities are drawn at the beginning of the game from a pack of city cards and they remain hidden throughout the game.\nThe game is thus reminiscent of the traveling salesman problem.\nPlayers move using transportation cards. \nElves can travel on a wide variety of vehicles including troll wagons, elf cycles, rafts, giant pigs, unicorns, dragons and magic clouds. \nDifferent types of transportation will travel better over different terrain, and some methods of transport cannot cross certain terrains at all. \nThere is only one problem: you cannot travel over a route (except water) unless there is a tile on that road, and only the type of transport shown on the tile can be used to move along that road. Before anyone can move, tiles are drawn and laid out across the board. This part is the one that calls for the most strategy, as players try to line up their tiles to set up a nice route for themselves and a difficult one for their opponents at the same time.\nAs well as normal tiles, each player receives one trouble tile for use during the game.\nThese hinder other players by forcing them to use an extra transportation card at that point. \nAlso, any player can simply use any three cards to pass over any route that has a tile already there, allowing the type of transport shown on the tile to be ignored.\nThe game has subtle strategies to make others navigate through the cities. \nWhen a player puts a transportation type you don't want in your path then you have to find a way around it. \nAll of the aspects of the game make for a very exciting race to visit the most cities while never quite being sure who is winning until the last round.\nExpansion.\nThere was an expansion for \"Elfenland\" published, called \"Elfengold\".\nNote that this is different from the original \"Elfengold\" published by White Wind.\nReception.\nBernhard Fischer from \"Spieltest\" praised the game's mechanisms, and accessibility, but was mixed on the luck elements. It also won the 1998 Spiel des Jahres award, and placed third place in the 1998 Deutscher Spiele Preis award.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
