{"id": "9317", "revid": "9868430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9317", "title": "European Union", "text": "Supranational political and economic union\nThe European Union (EU) is a supranational political and economic union of 27 member states that are located primarily in Europe. The Union has a total area of and an estimated population of more than 450million as of 2025. The EU is often described as a \"sui generis\" political entity combining characteristics of both a federation and a confederation.\nContaining 5.5% of the world population in 2023, EU member states generated a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of around \u20ac17.935 trillion in 2024, accounting for approximately one sixth of global economic output. Its cornerstone, the Customs Union, paved the way to establishing an internal single market based on standardised legal framework and legislation that applies in all member states in those matters, and only those matters, where the states have agreed to act as one. EU policies aim to ensure the free movement of people, goods, services and capital within the internal market; enact legislation in justice and home affairs; and maintain common policies on trade, agriculture, fisheries, and regional development.\nPassport controls have been abolished for travel within the Schengen Area. The eurozone is a group composed of the 20 EU member states that have fully implemented the EU's economic and monetary union and use the euro currency. Through the Common Foreign and Security Policy, the union has developed a role in external relations and defence. It maintains permanent diplomatic missions throughout the world and represents itself at the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the G7 and the G20. In 2012, the EU was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.\nThe EU was established, along with its citizenship, when the Maastricht Treaty came into force in 1993, and was incorporated as an international legal juridical person upon entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in 2009. Its beginnings can be traced to the Inner Six states (Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany) at the start of modern European integration in 1948, and to the Western Union, the International Authority for the Ruhr, the European Coal and Steel Community, the European Economic Community and the European Atomic Energy Community, which were established by treaties. These increasingly amalgamated bodies grew, with their legal successor the EU, both in size through the accessions of a further 22 states from 1973 to 2013, and in power through acquisitions of policy areas. In 2020, the United Kingdom became the only member state to leave the EU; ten countries are aspiring or negotiating to join it.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n An Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational European organisations and agreements \nBackground: World Wars and aftermath.\nInternationalism and visions of European unity had existed since well before the 19th century, but gained particularly as a reaction to World War I and its aftermath. In this light the first advances for the idea of European integration were made. In 1920 John Maynard Keynes proposed a European customs union for the struggling post-war European economies, and in 1923 the oldest organisation for European integration, the Paneuropean Union was founded, led by Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, who later would found in June 1947 the European Parliamentary Union (EPU). Aristide Briand\u2014who was Prime Minister of France, a follower of the Paneuropean Union, and Nobel Peace Prize laureate for the Locarno Treaties\u2014delivered a widely recognised speech at the League of Nations in Geneva on 5 September 1929 for a federal Europe to secure Europe and settle the historic Franco-German enmity.\nWith large-scale war being waged in Europe once again in the 1930s and becoming World War II, the question of what to fight against and what for had to be agreed on. A first agreement was the Declaration of St James's Palace of 1941, when Europe's resistance gathered in London. This was expanded on by the 1941 Atlantic Charter, establishing the Allies and their common goals, inciting a new wave of global international institutions like the United Nations (founded 1945) or the Bretton Woods System (1944).\nIn 1943 at the Moscow Conference and Tehran Conference, plans to establish joint institutions for a post-war world and Europe increasingly became a part of the agenda. This led to a decision at the Yalta Conference in 1944 to form a European Advisory Commission, later replaced by the Council of Foreign Ministers and the Allied Control Council, following the German surrender and the Potsdam Agreement in 1945.\nBy the end of the war, European integration became seen as an antidote to the extreme nationalism that had caused the war. On 19 September 1946, in a much recognised speech, Winston Churchill, speaking at the University of Z\u00fcrich, reiterated his calls since 1930 for a \"European Union\" and \"Council of Europe\", coincidentally parallel to the Hertenstein Congress of the Union of European Federalists, one of the then founded and later constituent members of the European Movement. One month later, the French Union was installed by the new Fourth French Republic to direct the decolonisation of its colonies so that they would become parts of a European community.\nBy 1947, a growing rift between the western Allied Powers and the Soviet Union became evident as a result of the rigged 1947 Polish legislative election, which constituted an open breach of the Yalta Agreement. March of that year saw two important developments. First was the signing of the Treaty of Dunkirk between France and the United Kingdom. The treaty assured mutual assistance in the event of future military aggression against either nation. Though it officially named Germany as a threat, in reality the actual concern was for the Soviet Union. A few days later came the announcement of the Truman Doctrine which pledged American support for democracies to counter the Soviets.\nInitial years and the Paris Treaty (1948\u200d\u2013\u200d1957).\nImmediately following the February 1948 coup d'\u00e9tat by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, the London Six-Power Conference was held, resulting in the Soviet boycott of the Allied Control Council and its incapacitation, an event marking the beginning of the Cold War. The year 1948 marked the beginning of the institutionalised modern European integration. In March 1948 the Treaty of Brussels was signed, establishing the Western Union (WU), followed by the International Authority for the Ruhr. Furthermore, the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation (OEEC), the predecessor of the OECD, was also founded in 1948 to manage the Marshall Plan, which led to the Soviets creating Comecon in response. The ensuing Hague Congress of May 1948 was a pivotal moment in European integration, as it led to the creation of the European Movement International, the College of Europe, and most importantly to the foundation of the Council of Europe on 5 May 1949 (which is now Europe Day). The Council of Europe was one of the first institutions to bring the sovereign states of (then only Western) Europe together, raising great hopes and fevered debates in the following two years for further European integration. It has since been a broad forum to further cooperation and shared issues, achieving for example the European Convention on Human Rights in 1950.\nEssential for the actual birth of the institutions of the EU was the Schuman Declaration on 9 May 1950 (the day after the fifth Victory in Europe Day) and the decision by six nations (France, Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg, West Germany, and Italy) to follow Schuman and draft the Treaty of Paris. This treaty was created in 1952 the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC), which was built on the International Authority for the Ruhr, installed by the Western Allies in 1949 to regulate the coal and steel industries of the Ruhr area in West Germany. Backed by the Marshall Plan with large funds coming from the United States since 1948, the ECSC became a milestone organisation, enabling European economic development and integration and being the origin of the main institutions of the EU such as the European Commission and Parliament.\nFounding fathers of the European Union understood that coal and steel were the two industries essential for waging war, and believed that by tying their national industries together, a future war between their nations became much less likely. In parallel with Schuman, the Pleven Plan of 1951 tried but failed to tie the institutions of the developing European community under the European Political Community, which was to include the also proposed European Defence Community, an alternative to West Germany joining NATO which was established in 1949 under the Truman Doctrine. In 1954 the Modified Brussels Treaty transformed the Western Union into the Western European Union (WEU). West Germany eventually joined both the WEU and NATO in 1955, prompting the Soviet Union to form the Warsaw Pact in 1955 as an institutional framework for its military domination in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. Assessing the progress of European integration the Messina Conference was held in 1955, ordering the Spaak report, which in 1956 recommended the next significant steps of European integration.\nTreaty of Rome (1958\u200d\u2013\u200d1972).\nIn 1957, Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany signed the Treaty of Rome, which created the European Economic Community (EEC) and established a customs union. They also signed another pact creating the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) for cooperation in developing nuclear power. Both treaties came into force in 1958. Although the EEC and Euratom were created separately from the ECSC, they shared the same courts and the Common Assembly. The EEC was headed by Walter Hallstein (Hallstein Commission) and Euratom was headed by Louis Armand (Armand Commission) and then \u00c9tienne Hirsch (Hirsch Commission).\nThe OEEC was in turn reformed in 1961 into the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and its membership was extended to states outside of Europe, the United States and Canada. During the 1960s, tensions began to show, with France seeking to limit supranational power. Nevertheless, in 1965 an agreement was reached, and on 1 July 1967 the Merger Treaty created a single set of institutions for the three communities, which were collectively referred to as the \"European Communities\". Jean Rey presided over the first merged commission (Rey Commission).\nFirst enlargement and European co-operation (1973\u200d\u2013\u200d1993).\nIn 1973, the communities were enlarged to include Denmark (including Greenland), Ireland, and the United Kingdom. Norway had negotiated to join at the same time, but Norwegian voters rejected membership in a referendum. The \"Ostpolitik\" and the ensuing d\u00e9tente led to establishment of a first truly pan-European body, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), predecessor of the modern Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). In 1979, the first direct elections to the European Parliament were held. Greece joined in 1981. In 1985, Greenland left the Communities, following a dispute over fishing rights. During the same year, the Schengen Agreement paved the way for the creation of open borders without passport controls between most member states and some non-member states. In 1986, the Single European Act was signed. Portugal and Spain joined in 1986. In 1990, after the fall of the Eastern Bloc, the former East Germany became part of the communities as part of a reunified Germany.\nTreaties of Maastricht, Amsterdam and Nice (1993\u200d\u2013\u200d2004).\nThe European Union was formally established when the Maastricht Treaty\u2014whose main architects were Horst K\u00f6hler, Helmut Kohl and Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand\u2014came into force on 1 November 1993. The treaty also gave the name \"European Community\" to the EEC, even if it was referred to as such before the treaty. With further enlargement planned to include the former communist states of Central and Eastern Europe, as well as Cyprus and Malta, the Copenhagen criteria for candidate members to join the EU were agreed upon in June 1993. The expansion of the EU introduced a new level of complexity and discord.\nIn 1995, Austria, Finland, and Sweden joined the EU. In 2002, euro banknotes and coins replaced national currencies in 12 of the member states. Since then, the eurozone has increased to encompass 20 countries. The euro currency became the second-largest reserve currency in the world. In 2004, the EU saw its biggest enlargement to date when Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia joined the union.\nTreaty of Lisbon and Brexit (2004\u200d\u2013\u200dpresent).\nIn 2007, Bulgaria and Romania became EU members. Later that year, Slovenia adopted the euro, followed by Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, Estonia in 2011, Latvia in 2014, Lithuania in 2015, and Croatia in 2023. On 1 December 2009, the Lisbon Treaty entered into force and reformed many aspects of the EU. In particular, it changed the legal structure of the EU, merging the EU three pillars system into a single legal entity provisioned with a legal personality, created a permanent president of the European Council, the first of which was Herman Van Rompuy, and strengthened the position of the high representative of the union for foreign affairs and security policy.\nIn 2012, the EU received the Nobel Peace Prize for having \"contributed to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy, and human rights in Europe\". In 2013, Croatia became the 28th EU member. From the beginning of the 2010s, the cohesion of the European Union has been tested by several issues, including a debt crisis in some of the eurozone countries, a surge in asylum seekers in 2015, and the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the EU. A referendum in the UK on its membership of the European Union was held in 2016, with 51.9 per cent of participants voting to leave. The UK formally notified the European Council of its decision to leave on 29 March 2017, initiating the formal withdrawal procedure for leaving the EU; following extensions to the process, the UK left the European Union on 31 January 2020, although most areas of EU law continued to apply to the UK for a transition period which lasted until 31 December 2020.\nThe early 2020s saw Denmark abolishing one of its three opt-outs and Croatia adopting the euro. After the economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the EU leaders agreed for the first time to create common debt to finance the European Recovery Program called Next Generation EU (NGEU). On 24 February 2022, after massing on the borders of Ukraine, the Russian Armed Forces undertook an attempt for a full-scale invasion of Ukraine. The European Union imposed heavy sanctions on Russia and agreed on a pooled military aid package to Ukraine for lethal weapons funded via the European Peace Facility off-budget instrument.\nNGEU is a European Commission economic recovery package to support the EU member states to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, in particular those that have been particularly hard hit. It is sometimes styled NextGenerationEU and Next Gen EU, and also called the European Union Recovery Instrument. Agreed in principle by the European Council on 21 July 2020 and adopted on 14 December 2020, the instrument is worth \u20ac. NGEU will operate from 2021 to 2026, and will be tied to the regular 2021\u20132027 budget of the EU's Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF). The comprehensive NGEU and MFF packages are projected to reach \u20ac1824.3\u00a0billion.\nPreparing the EU for a new great enlargement is one of its political priorities, with the goal of achieving 35 member states by 2030. Institutional and budgetary reforms are being discussed in order for the EU to be ready for the new members. In May 2024, concerns rise, that the outcome of the elections in June, can undermine some of the crucial policies of the EU in the domain of environment, diplomacy, and economy. The war in Ukraine by creating inflation, lowering life level created a possibility of strong changes in the 2024 elections.\nTimeline.\nSince the end of World War II, most sovereign European countries have entered into treaties and thereby co-operated and harmonised policies (or \"pooled sovereignty\") in an increasing number of areas, in the European integration project or the \"construction of Europe\" (). The following timeline outlines the legal inception of the European Union (EU)\u2014the principal framework for this unification. The EU inherited many of its present organizations, institutions, and responsibilities from the European Communities (EC), which were founded in the 1950s in the spirit of the Schuman Declaration.\n&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolitics.\nThe European Union operates through a hybrid system of supranational and intergovernmental decision-making, and according to the principle of conferral (which says that it should act only within the limits of the competences conferred on it by the treaties) and of subsidiarity (which says that it should act only where an objective cannot be sufficiently achieved by the member states acting alone). Laws made by the EU institutions are passed in a variety of forms. Generally speaking, they can be classified into two groups: those which come into force without the necessity for national implementation measures (regulations) and those which specifically require national implementation measures (directives). EU policy is in general promulgated by EU directives, which are then implemented in the domestic legislation of its member states, and EU regulations, which are immediately enforceable in all member states. Lobbying at the EU level by special interest groups is regulated to try to balance the aspirations of private initiatives with public interest decision-making process.\nMember states.\nThrough successive enlargements, the EU and its predecessors have grown from the six founding states of the EEC to 27 members. Countries accede to the union by becoming a party to the founding treaties, thereby subjecting themselves to the privileges and obligations of EU membership. This entails a partial delegation of sovereignty to the institutions in return for representation within those institutions, a practice often referred to as \"pooling of sovereignty\". In some policies, there are several member states that ally with strategic partners within the union. Examples of such alliances include the Baltic Assembly, the Benelux Union, the Bucharest Nine, the Craiova Group, the EU Med Group, the Lublin Triangle, the New Hanseatic League, the Three Seas Initiative, the Visegr\u00e1d Group, and the Weimar Triangle.\nTo become a member, a country must meet the Copenhagen criteria, defined at the 1993 meeting of the European Council in Copenhagen. These require a stable democracy that respects human rights and the rule of law; a functioning market economy; and the acceptance of the obligations of membership, including EU law. Evaluation of a country's fulfilment of the criteria is the responsibility of the European Council.\nThe four countries forming the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) are not EU members, but have partly committed to the EU's economy and regulations: Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, which are a part of the single market through the European Economic Area, and Switzerland, which has similar ties through bilateral treaties. The relationships of the European microstates Andorra, Monaco, San Marino, and Vatican City include the use of the euro and other areas of co-operation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSubdivisions.\nSubdivisions of member-states are based on the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS), a geocode standard for statistical purposes. The standard, adopted in 2003, is developed and regulated by the European Union, and thus only covers the member states of the EU in detail. The Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics is instrumental in the European Union's Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund delivery mechanisms and for locating the area where goods and services subject to European public procurement legislation are to be delivered.\n | NUTS 1\n | NUTS 2\n | NUTS 3\nCandidate countries.\nThere are nine countries that are recognised as candidates for membership: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia, Turkey, and Ukraine. Norway, Switzerland and Iceland have submitted membership applications in the past, but subsequently frozen or withdrawn them. Additionally Kosovo is officially recognised as a potential candidate, and submitted a membership application.\nFormer members.\nArticle 50 of the Lisbon Treaty provides the basis for a member to leave the EU. Two territories have left the union: Greenland (an autonomous province of Denmark) withdrew in 1985; the United Kingdom formally invoked Article 50 of the Consolidated Treaty on European Union in 2017, and became the only sovereign state to leave when it withdrew from the EU in 2020.\nGovernance.\nMember states retain in principle all powers except those that they have agreed collectively to delegate to the Union as a whole, though the exact delimitation has on occasions become a subject of scholarly or legal disputes. In certain fields, members have awarded exclusive competence and exclusive mandate to the Union. These are areas in which member states have entirely renounced their own capacity to enact legislation. In other areas, the EU and its member states share the competence to legislate. While both can legislate, the member states can only legislate to the extent to which the EU has not. In other policy areas, the EU can only co-ordinate, support and supplement member state action but cannot enact legislation with the aim of harmonising national laws. That a particular policy area falls into a certain category of competence is not necessarily indicative of what legislative procedure is used for enacting legislation within that policy area. Different legislative procedures are used within the same category of competence, and even with the same policy area. The distribution of competences in various policy areas between member states and the union is divided into the following three categories:\nThe European Union has seven principal decision-making bodies, its institutions: the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council of the European Union, the European Commission, the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank and the European Court of Auditors. Competence in scrutinising and amending legislation is shared between the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament, while executive tasks are performed by the European Commission and in a limited capacity by the European Council (not to be confused with the aforementioned Council of the European Union). The monetary policy of the eurozone is determined by the European Central Bank. The interpretation and the application of EU law and the treaties are ensured by the Court of Justice of the European Union. The EU budget is scrutinised by the European Court of Auditors. There are also a number of ancillary bodies which advise the EU or operate in a specific area.\nBranches of power.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Union's executive branch is organised as a directorial system, where the executive power is jointly exercised by several people. The executive branch consists of the European Council and European Commission.\nThe European Council sets the broad political direction of the Union. It convenes at least four times a year and comprises the president of the European Council (presently Ant\u00f3nio Costa), the president of the European Commission and one representative per member state (either its head of state or head of government). The high representative of the union for foreign affairs and security policy (presently Kaja Kallas) also takes part in its meetings. Described by some as the union's \"supreme political leadership\", it is actively involved in the negotiation of treaty changes and defines the EU's policy agenda and strategies. Its leadership role involves solving disputes between member states and the institutions, and to resolving any political crises or disagreements over controversial issues and policies. It acts as a \"collective head of state\" and ratifies important documents (for example, international agreements and treaties). Tasks for the president of the European Council are ensuring the external representation of the EU, driving consensus and resolving divergences among member states, both during meetings of the European Council and over the periods between them. The European Council should not be mistaken for the Council of Europe, an international organisation independent of the EU and based in Strasbourg.\nThe European Commission acts both as the EU's executive arm, responsible for the day-to-day running of the EU, and also the legislative initiator, with the sole power to propose laws for debate. The commission is 'guardian of the Treaties' and is responsible for their efficient operation and policing. It has 27 European commissioners for different areas of policy, one from each member state, though commissioners are bound to represent the interests of the EU as a whole rather than their home state. The leader of the 27 is the president of the European Commission (presently Ursula von der Leyen for 2019{{ndash}}2024, reelected for the 2024\u20132029 term), proposed by the European Council, following and taking into account the result of the European elections, and is then elected by the European Parliament. The President retains, as the leader responsible for the entire cabinet, the final say in accepting or rejecting a candidate submitted for a given portfolio by a member state, and oversees the commission's permanent civil service. After the President, the most prominent commissioner is the high representative of the union for foreign affairs and security policy, who is \"ex-officio\" a vice-president of the European Commission and is also chosen by the European Council. The other 25 commissioners are subsequently appointed by the Council of the European Union in agreement with the nominated president. The 27 commissioners as a single body are subject to approval (or otherwise) by a vote of the European Parliament. All commissioners are first nominated by the government of the respective member state.\nLegislative branch.\nThe council, as it is now simply called (also called the Council of the European Union and the \"Council of Ministers\", its former title), forms one half of the EU's legislature. It consists of a representative from each member state's government and meets in different compositions depending on the policy area being addressed. Notwithstanding its different configurations, it is considered to be one single body. In addition to the legislative functions, members of the council also have executive responsibilities, such as the development of a Common Foreign and Security Policy and the coordination of broad economic policies within the Union. The Presidency of the council rotates between member states, with each holding it for six months. Beginning on 1 July 2025, the position is held by Denmark.\nThe European Parliament is one of three legislative institutions of the EU, which together with the Council of the European Union is tasked with amending and approving the European Commission's proposals. 705 members of the European Parliament (MEPs) are directly elected by EU citizens every five years on the basis of proportional representation. MEPs are elected on a national basis and they sit according to political groups rather than their nationality. Each country has a set number of seats and is divided into sub-national constituencies where this does not affect the proportional nature of the voting system. In the ordinary legislative procedure, the European Commission proposes legislation, which requires the joint approval of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union to pass. This process applies to nearly all areas, including the EU budget. The parliament is the final body to approve or reject the proposed membership of the commission, and can attempt motions of censure on the commission by appeal to the Court of Justice. The president of the European Parliament carries out the role of speaker in Parliament and represents it externally. The president and vice-presidents are elected by MEPs every two and a half years.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial branch of the European Union is formally called the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) and consists of two courts: the Court of Justice and the General Court. The Court of Justice is the supreme court of the European Union in matters of European Union law. As a part of the CJEU, it is tasked with interpreting EU law and ensuring its uniform application across all EU member states under Article 263 of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). The Court was established in 1952, and is based in Luxembourg. It is composed of one judge per member state \u2013 currently 27 \u2013 although it normally hears cases in panels of three, five or fifteen judges. The Court has been led by president Koen Lenaerts since 2015. The CJEU is the highest court of the European Union in matters of Union law. Its case-law provides that EU law has supremacy over any national law that is inconsistent with EU law. It is not possible to appeal against the decisions of national courts in the CJEU, but rather national courts refer questions of EU law to the CJEU (a preliminary reference). However, it is ultimately for the national court to apply the resulting interpretation (the preliminary ruling) to the facts of any given case. Although, only courts of final appeal are bound to refer a question of EU law when one is addressed. The treaties give the CJEU the power for consistent application of EU law across the EU as a whole. The court also acts as an administrative and constitutional court between the other EU institutions and the Member States and can annul or invalidate unlawful acts of EU institutions, bodies, offices and agencies.\nThe General Court is a constituent court of the European Union. It hears actions taken against the institutions of the European Union by individuals and member states, although certain matters are reserved for the Court of Justice. Decisions of the General Court can be appealed to the Court of Justice, but only on a point of law. Prior to the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty on 1 December 2009, it was known as the Court of First Instance. Since the amendments to the Statute of the CJEU in October 2024, the Court of Justice shares its jurisdiction over references for a preliminary ruling with the General Court. The General Court is since then competent to handle preliminary references falling under one of the six following areas: the common system of value added tax; excise duties; the Customs Code; the tariff classification of goods under the Combined Nomenclature; compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of denied boarding or delay or cancellation of transport services; the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading.\nAdditional branches.\nThe European Central Bank (ECB) is one of the institutions of the monetary branch of the European Union, the prime component of the Eurosystem and the European System of Central Banks. It is one of the world's most important central banks. The ECB Governing Council makes monetary policy for the eurozone and the European Union, administers the foreign exchange reserves of EU member states, engages in foreign exchange operations, and defines the intermediate monetary objectives and key interest rate of the EU. The ECB Executive Board enforces the policies and decisions of the Governing Council, and may direct the national central banks when doing so. The ECB has the exclusive right to authorise the issuance of euro banknotes. Member states can issue euro coins, but the volume must be approved by the ECB beforehand. The bank also operates the T2 (RTGS) payments system. The European System of Central Banks (ESCB) consists of the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs) of all 27 member states of the European Union. The ESCB is not the monetary authority of the eurozone, because not all EU member states have joined the euro. The ESCB's objective is price stability throughout the European Union. Secondarily, the ESCB's goal is to improve monetary and financial cooperation between the Eurosystem and member states outside the eurozone.\nThe European Court of Auditors (ECA) is the auditory branch of the European Union. It was established in 1975 in Luxembourg in order to improve EU financial management. It has 27 members (1 from each EU member-state) supported by approximately 800 civil servants. The European Personnel Selection Office (EPSO) is the EU's civil service recruitment body and operates its selection of candidates via generalist and specialist competitions. Each institution is then able to recruit staff from among the pool of candidates selected by EPSO. On average, EPSO receives around 60,000\u201370,000 applications a year with around 1,500\u20132,000 candidates recruited by the European Union institutions. The European Ombudsman is the ombudsman branch of the European Union that holds the institutions, bodies and agencies of the EU to account, and promotes good administration. The Ombudsman helps people, businesses and organisations facing problems with the EU administration by investigating complaints, as well as by proactively looking into broader systemic issues. The current Ombudsman is Emily O'Reilly. The European Public Prosecutor's Office (EPPO) is the prosecutory branch of the union with juridical personality, established under the Treaty of Lisbon between 23 of the 27 states of the EU following the method of enhanced cooperation. It is based in Kirchberg, Luxembourg City alongside the Court of Justice of the European Union and the European Court of Auditors\nBudget.\nThe European Union had an agreed budget of {{Euro|170.6}}\u00a0billion in 2022. The EU had a long-term budget of \u20ac1,082.5 billion for the period 2014\u20132020, representing 1.02% of the EU-28's GNI. In 1960, the budget of the European Community was 0.03 per cent of GDP. Of this, \u20ac54bn subsidised agriculture enterprise, \u20ac42bn was spent on transport, building and the environment, \u20ac16bn on education and research, \u20ac13bn on welfare, \u20ac20bn on foreign and defence policy, \u20ac2bn in finance, \u20ac2bn in energy, \u20ac1.5bn in communications, and \u20ac13bn in administration. In November 2020, two members of the union, Hungary and Poland, blocked approval to the EU's budget at a meeting in the Committee of Permanent Representatives (Coreper), citing a proposal that linked funding with adherence to the rule of law. The budget included a COVID-19 recovery fund of {{Euro|750}}{{nbsp}}billion. The budget was finally approved by 12 December when Hungary and Poland withdrew their vetoes after further negotiations in the council and the European Council.\nBodies combatting fraud have also been established, including the European Anti-fraud Office and the European Public Prosecutor's Office. The latter is a decentralised independent body of the European Union (EU), established under the Treaty of Lisbon between 22 of the 27 states of the EU following the method of enhanced cooperation. The European Public Prosecutor's Office investigate and prosecute fraud against the budget of the European Union and other crimes against the EU's financial interests including fraud concerning EU funds of over \u20ac10,000 and cross-border VAT fraud cases involving damages above \u20ac10 million.\nLaw.\nConstitutionally, the EU bears some resemblance to both a confederation and a federation, but has not formally defined itself as either. (It does not have a formal constitution: its status is defined by the Treaty of European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union). It is more integrated than a traditional confederation of states because the general level of government widely employs qualified majority voting in some decision-making among the member states, rather than relying exclusively on unanimity.\nThe EU is less integrated than a federal state because it is not a state in its own right: sovereignty continues to flow 'from the bottom up', from the several peoples of the separate member states, rather than from a single undifferentiated whole. This is reflected in the fact that the member states remain the 'masters of the Treaties', retaining control over the allocation of competences to the union through constitutional change (thus retaining so-called \"Kompetenz-kompetenz\"); in that they retain control of the use of armed force; they retain control of taxation; and in that they retain a right of unilateral withdrawal under Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. In addition, the principle of subsidiarity requires that only those matters that need to be determined collectively are so determined.\nUnder the principle of supremacy, national courts are required to enforce the treaties that their member states have ratified, even if doing so requires them to ignore conflicting national law, and (within limits) even constitutional provisions. The direct effect and supremacy doctrines were not explicitly set out in the European Treaties but were developed by the Court of Justice itself over the 1960s, apparently under the influence of its then most influential judge, Frenchman Robert Lecourt. The question whether the secondary law enacted by the EU has a comparable status in relation to national legislation, has been a matter of debate among legal scholars.\nPrimary law.\nThe European Union is based on a series of treaties. These first established the European Community and the EU, and then made amendments to those founding treaties. These are power-giving treaties which set broad policy goals and establish institutions with the necessary legal powers to implement those goals. These legal powers include the ability to enact legislation which can directly affect all member states and their inhabitants. The EU has legal personality, with the right to sign agreements and international treaties.\nSecondary law.\nThe main legal acts of the European Union come in three forms: regulations, directives, and decisions. Regulations become law in all member states the moment they come into force, without the requirement for any implementing measures, and automatically override conflicting domestic provisions. Directives require member states to achieve a certain result while leaving them discretion as to how to achieve the result. The details of how they are to be implemented are left to member states. When the time limit for implementing directives passes, they may, under certain conditions, have direct effect in national law against member states. Decisions offer an alternative to the two above modes of legislation. They are legal acts which only apply to specified individuals, companies or a particular member state. They are most often used in competition law, or on rulings on State Aid, but are also frequently used for procedural or administrative matters within the institutions. Regulations, directives, and decisions are of equal legal value and apply without any formal hierarchy.\nForeign relations.\nForeign policy co-operation between member states dates from the establishment of the community in 1957, when member states negotiated as a bloc in international trade negotiations under the EU's common commercial policy. Steps for more wide-ranging co-ordination in foreign relations began in 1970 with the establishment of European Political Cooperation which created an informal consultation process between member states with the aim of forming common foreign policies. In 1987 the European Political Cooperation was introduced on a formal basis by the Single European Act. EPC was renamed as the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) by the Maastricht Treaty.\nThe stated aims of the CFSP are to promote both the EU's own interests and those of the international community as a whole, including the furtherance of international co-operation, respect for human rights, democracy, and the rule of law. The CFSP requires unanimity among the member states on the appropriate policy to follow on any particular issue. The unanimity and difficult issues treated under the CFSP sometimes lead to disagreements, such as those which occurred over the war in Iraq.\nThe coordinator and representative of the CFSP within the EU is the high representative of the union for foreign affairs and security policy who speaks on behalf of the EU in foreign policy and defence matters, and has the task of articulating the positions expressed by the member states on these fields of policy into a common alignment. The high representative heads up the European External Action Service (EEAS), a unique EU department that has been officially implemented and operational since 1 December 2010 on the occasion of the first anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon. The EEAS serves as a foreign ministry and diplomatic corps for the European Union.\nBesides the emerging international policy of the European Union, the international influence of the EU is also felt through enlargement. The perceived benefits of becoming a member of the EU act as an incentive for both political and economic reform in states wishing to fulfil the EU's accession criteria, and are considered an important factor contributing to the reform of European formerly Communist countries.{{rp|762}} This influence on the internal affairs of other countries is generally referred to as \"soft power\", as opposed to military \"hard power\".\nHumanitarian aid.\nThe European Commission's Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection department, or \"ECHO\", provides humanitarian aid from the EU to developing countries. In 2012, its budget amounted to {{Euro|874}}{{nbsp}}million, 51 per cent of the budget went to Africa and 20 per cent to Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and Pacific, and 20 per cent to the Middle East and Mediterranean. Humanitarian aid is financed directly by the budget (70 per cent) as part of the financial instruments for external action and also by the European Development Fund (30 per cent). The EU's external action financing is divided into geographic instruments and thematic instruments. The geographic instruments provide aid through the Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI, {{Euro|16.9}}{{nbsp}}billion, 2007\u20132013), which must spend 95 per cent of its budget on official development assistance (ODA), and from the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI), which contains some relevant programmes.\nThe European Development Fund (EDF, {{Euro|22.7}}{{nbsp}}billion for the period 2008\u20132013 and {{Euro|30.5}}{{nbsp}}billion for the period 2014\u20132020) is made up of voluntary contributions by member states, but there is pressure to merge the EDF into the budget-financed instruments to encourage increased contributions to match the 0.7 per cent target and allow the European Parliament greater oversight. In 2016, the average among EU countries was 0.4 per cent and five had met or exceeded the 0.7 per cent target: Denmark, Germany, Luxembourg, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.\nInternational cooperation and development partnerships.\nThe European Union uses foreign relations instruments like the European Neighbourhood Policy which seeks to tie those countries to the east and south of the European territory of the EU to the union. These countries, primarily developing countries, include some who seek to one day become either a member state of the European Union, or more closely integrated with the European Union. The EU offers financial assistance to countries within the European Neighbourhood, so long as they meet the strict conditions of government reform, economic reform and other issues surrounding positive transformation. This process is normally underpinned by an Action Plan, as agreed by both Brussels and the target country.\nThere is also the worldwide European Union Global Strategy. International recognition of sustainable development as a key element is growing steadily. Its role was recognised in three major UN summits on sustainable development: the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg, South Africa; and the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD) in Rio de Janeiro. Other key global agreements are the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (United Nations, 2015). The SDGs recognise that all countries must stimulate action in the following key areas \u2013 people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnership \u2013 in order to tackle the global challenges that are crucial for the survival of humanity.\nEU development action is based on the European Consensus on Development, which was endorsed on 20 December 2005 by EU Member States, the council, the European Parliament and the commission. It is applied from the principles of Capability approach and Rights-based approach to development. Funding is provided by the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance and the Global Europe programmes. Partnership and cooperation agreements are bilateral agreements with non-member nations.\nDefence.\nThe predecessors of the European Union were not devised as a military alliance because NATO was largely seen as appropriate and sufficient for defence purposes.{{sfn|Wilkinson|2007|page=100}} In 2025, Europe initiated the ReArm program, a strategic breakthrough aimed at mobilising local industrial capabilities and bolstering European equipment production, involves a financial investment of \u20ac800 billion to support the development and procurement, simultaneously enhancing the continent's overall military readiness and self-sufficiency.\nTwenty-three EU members are members of NATO while the remaining member states follow policies of neutrality. The Western European Union, a military alliance with a mutual defence clause, closed in 2011 as its role had been transferred to the EU. Following the Kosovo War in 1999, the European Council agreed that \"the Union must have the capacity for autonomous action, backed by credible military forces, the means to decide to use them, and the readiness to do so, in order to respond to international crises without prejudice to actions by NATO\". To that end, a number of efforts were made to increase the EU's military capability, notably the Helsinki Headline Goal process. After much discussion, the most concrete result was the EU Battlegroups initiative, each of which is planned to be able to deploy quickly about 1500\u00a0personnel. The EU Strategic Compass adopted in 2022 reaffirmed the bloc's partnership with NATO, committed to increased military mobility and formation of a 5,000-strong EU Rapid Deployment Capacity\nSince the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, France is the only member officially recognised as a nuclear weapon state and the sole holder of a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. France and Italy are also the only EU countries that have power projection capabilities outside of Europe. Italy, Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium participate in NATO nuclear sharing. Most EU member states opposed the Nuclear Weapon Ban Treaty.\nEU forces have been deployed on peacekeeping missions from middle and northern Africa to the western Balkans and western Asia. EU military operations are supported by a number of bodies, including the European Defence Agency, European Union Satellite Centre and the European Union Military Staff. The European Union Military Staff is the highest military institution of the European Union, established within the framework of the European Council, and follows on from the decisions of the Helsinki European Council (10\u201311 December 1999), which called for the establishment of permanent political-military institutions. The European Union Military Staff is under the authority of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the Political and Security Committee. It directs all military activities in the EU context, including planning and conducting military missions and operations in the framework of the Common Security and Defence Policy and the development of military capabilities, and provides the Political and Security Committee with military advice and recommendations on military issues. In an EU consisting of 27 members, substantial security and defence co-operation is increasingly relying on collaboration among all member states.\nThe European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex) is an agency of the EU aiming to detect and stop illegal immigration, human trafficking and terrorist infiltration. The EU also operates the European Travel Information and Authorisation System, the Entry/Exit System, the Schengen Information System, the Visa Information System and the Common European Asylum System which provide common databases for police and immigration authorities. The impetus for the development of this co-operation was the advent of open borders in the Schengen Area and the associated cross-border crime.\nGeography.\nThe EU's member states cover an area of {{convert|4,233,262|km2|sqmi|0}}, and therefore a large part of the European continent. The EU's highest peak is Mont Blanc in the Graian Alps, {{convert|4810.45|m|ft|0}} above sea level. The lowest points in the EU are Lammefjorden, Denmark, and Zuidplaspolder, Netherlands, at {{convert|7|m|ft|0|abbr=on}} below sea level. The landscape, climate, and economy of the EU are influenced by its coastline, which is {{convert|65993|km|mi|0}} long. In addition to national territories in Europe, there are 32 special territories of members of the European Economic Area, not all of which are part of the EU. The largest by area is Greenland, which is not part of the EU but whose citizens are EU citizens, while the largest by population are the Canary Islands off Africa, which are part of the EU and the Schengen area. French Guiana in South America is part of the EU and the eurozone, as is Mayotte, north of Madagascar.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the European Union is of a temperate, continental nature, with a maritime climate prevailing on the western coasts and a mediterranean climate in the south. The climate is strongly conditioned by the Gulf Stream, which warms the western region to levels unattainable at similar latitudes on other continents. Western Europe is oceanic, while eastern Europe is continental and dry. Four seasons occur in western Europe, while southern Europe experiences a wet season and a dry season. Southern Europe is hot and dry during the summer months. The heaviest precipitation occurs downwind of water bodies due to the prevailing westerlies, with higher amounts also seen in the Alps.\nEnvironment.\nIn 1957, when the European Economic Community was founded, it had no environmental policy.{{sfn|Jordan|Adelle|2012}} Over the past 50 years, an increasingly dense network of legislation has been created, extending to all areas of environmental protection, including air pollution, water quality, waste management, nature conservation, and the control of chemicals, industrial hazards, and biotechnology.{{sfn|Jordan|Adelle|2012}} According to the Institute for European Environmental Policy, environmental law comprises over 500 Directives, Regulations and Decisions, making environmental policy a core area of European politics.\nEuropean policy-makers originally increased the EU's capacity to act on environmental issues by defining it as a trade problem.{{sfn|Jordan|Adelle|2012}} Trade barriers and competitive distortions in the Common Market could emerge due to the different environmental standards in each member state. In subsequent years, the environment became a formal policy area, with its own policy actors, principles and procedures. The legal basis for EU environmental policy was established with the introduction of the Single European Act in 1987.\nInitially, EU environmental policy focused on Europe. More recently, the EU has demonstrated leadership in global environmental governance, e.g. the role of the EU in securing the ratification and coming into force of the Kyoto Protocol despite opposition from the United States. This international dimension is reflected in the EU's Sixth Environmental Action Programme, which recognises that its objectives can only be achieved if key international agreements are actively supported and properly implemented both at EU level and worldwide. The Lisbon Treaty further strengthened the leadership ambitions.{{sfn|Jordan|Adelle|2012}} EU law has played a significant role in improving habitat and species protection in Europe, as well as contributing to improvements in air and water quality and waste management.\nMitigating climate change is one of the top priorities of EU environmental policy. In 2007, member states agreed that, in the future, 20 per cent of the energy used across the EU must be renewable, and carbon dioxide emissions have to be lower in 2020 by at least 20 per cent compared to 1990 levels. In 2017, the EU emitted 9.1 per cent of global greenhouse-gas emissions. The European Union claims that already in 2018, its GHG emissions were 23% lower than in 1990.\nThe EU has adopted an emissions trading system to incorporate carbon emissions into the economy. The European Green Capital is an annual award given to cities that focuses on the environment, energy efficiency, and quality of life in urban areas to create smart city. In the 2019 elections to the European Parliament, the green parties increased their power, possibly because of the rise of post materialist values. Proposals to reach a zero carbon economy in the European Union by 2050 were suggested in 2018\u20132019. Almost all member states supported that goal at an EU summit in June 2019. The Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, and Poland disagreed. In June 2021, the European Union passed a European Climate Law with targets of 55% GHG emissions reduction by 2030 and carbon neutrality by 2050. Also in the same year, the European Union and the United States pledged to cut methane emissions by 30% by 2030. The pledge is considered as a big achievement for climate change mitigation. A research report from November 2024 declared that the Czech Republic is the EU's most toxic country in Europe for care emissions.\nIn 2025, The European Union together with China, Brazil and others, joined the Global carbon market coalition. According to some calculations, a global carbon market can speed up emission reduction seven-fold.\nEconomy.\nThe gross domestic product (GDP), a measure of economic activity, of EU member states was US$16.64 trillion in 2022, around 16.6 per cent of the world GDP. There is a significant variation in GDP per capita between and within individual EU states. The difference between the richest and poorest regions (281 NUTS-2 regions of the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) ranged, in 2017, from 31 per cent (Severozapaden, Bulgaria) of the EU28 average ({{Euro|30,000}}) to 253 per cent (Luxembourg), or from {{Euro|4,600}} to {{Euro|92,600}}.\nEU member states own the estimated third largest after the United States ({{US$|140}}{{nbsp}}trillion) and China ({{US$|84}}{{nbsp}}trillion) net wealth in the world, equal to around one sixth ({{US$|76}}{{nbsp}}trillion) of the {{US$|454}}{{nbsp}}trillion global wealth. Of the top 500 largest corporations in the world measured by revenue in 2024, 90 had their headquarters in the EU. In 2016, unemployment in the EU stood at 8.9 per cent while inflation was at 2.2 per cent, and the account balance at \u22120.9 per cent of GDP. The average annual net earnings in the European Union was around {{Euro|25,000}} in 2021.\nEconomic and monetary union.\nThe euro is the official currency in 20 member states of the EU. The creation of a European single currency became an official objective of the European Economic Community in 1969. In 1992, having negotiated the structure and procedures of a currency union, the member states signed the Maastricht Treaty and were legally bound to fulfil the agreed-on rules including the convergence criteria if they wanted to join the monetary union. The states wanting to participate had first to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. To prevent the joining states from getting into financial trouble or crisis after entering the monetary union, they were obliged in the Maastricht treaty to fulfil important financial obligations and procedures, especially to show budgetary discipline and a high degree of sustainable economic convergence, as well as to avoid excessive government deficits and limit the government debt to a sustainable level, as agreed in the European Fiscal Pact.\nCapital Markets Union and financial institutions.\nFree movement of capital is intended to permit movement of investments such as property purchases and buying of shares between countries. Until the drive towards economic and monetary union the development of the capital provisions had been slow. Post-Maastricht there has been a rapidly developing corpus of ECJ judgements regarding this initially neglected freedom. The free movement of capital is unique insofar as it is granted equally to non-member states.\nThe European System of Financial Supervision is an institutional architecture of the EU's framework of financial supervision composed by three authorities: the European Banking Authority, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and the European Securities and Markets Authority. To complement this framework, there is also a European Systemic Risk Board under the responsibility of the central bank. The aim of this financial control system is to ensure the economic stability of the EU.\nEurozone and banking union.\nIn 1999, the currency union started to materialise through introducing a common accounting (virtual) currency in eleven of the member states. In 2002, it was turned into a fully-fledged conventible currency, when euro notes and coins were issued, while the phaseout of national currencies in the eurozone (consisting by then of 12 member states) was initiated. The eurozone (constituted by the EU member states which have adopted the euro) has since grown to 20 countries.\nThe 20 EU member states known collectively as the eurozone have fully implemented the currency union by superseding their national currencies with the euro. The currency union represents 345{{nbsp}}million EU citizens. The euro is the second largest reserve currency as well as the second most traded currency in the world after the United States dollar.\nThe euro, and the monetary policies of those who have adopted it in agreement with the EU, are under the control of the ECB. The ECB is the central bank for the eurozone, and thus controls monetary policy in that area with an agenda to maintain price stability. It is at the centre of the Eurosystem, which comprehends all the eurozone national central banks. The ECB is also the central institution of the Banking Union established within the eurozone, as the hub of European Banking Supervision. There is also a Single Resolution Mechanism in case of a bank default.\nTrade.\nAs a political entity, the European Union is represented in the World Trade Organization (WTO). Two of the original core objectives of the European Economic Community were the development of a common market, subsequently becoming a single market, and a customs union between its member states.\nSingle market.\nThe single market involves the free circulation of goods, capital, people, and services within the EU, The free movement of services and of establishment allows self-employed persons to move between member states to provide services on a temporary or permanent basis. While services account for 60 per cent to 70 per cent of GDP, legislation in the area is not as developed as in other areas. This lacuna has been addressed by the Services in the Internal Market Directive 2006 which aims to liberalise the cross border provision of services. According to the treaty the provision of services is a residual freedom that only applies if no other freedom is being exercised.\nCustoms union.\nThe customs union involves the application of a common external tariff on all goods entering the market. Once goods have been admitted into the market they cannot be subjected to customs duties, discriminatory taxes or import quotas, as they travel internally. The non-EU member states of Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein and Switzerland participate in the single market but not in the customs union. Half the trade in the EU is covered by legislation harmonised by the EU.\nThe European Union Association Agreement does something similar for a much larger range of countries, partly as a so-called soft approach ('a carrot instead of a stick') to influence the politics in those countries.\nThe European Union represents all its members at the World Trade Organization (WTO), and acts on behalf of member states in any disputes. When the EU negotiates trade related agreement outside the WTO framework, the subsequent agreement must be approved by each individual EU member state government.\nCompetition and consumer protection.\nThe EU operates a competition policy intended to ensure undistorted competition within the single market. In 2001 the commission for the first time prevented a merger between two companies based in the United States (General Electric and Honeywell) which had already been approved by their national authority. Another high-profile case, against Microsoft, resulted in the commission fining Microsoft over {{Euro|777}}\u00a0million following nine years of legal action.\nExternal trade.\nThe European Union has concluded free trade agreements (FTAs) and other agreements with a trade component with many countries worldwide and is negotiating with many others. The European Union's services trade surplus rose from $16 billion in 2000 to more than $250 billion in 2018. In 2020, in part due to the COVID-19 pandemic, China became the EU's largest trading partner, displacing the United States. The European Union is the largest exporter in the world and in 2008 was the largest importer of goods and services. Internal trade between the member states is aided by the removal of barriers to trade such as tariffs and border controls. In the eurozone, trade is helped by not having any currency differences to deal with amongst most members. Externally, the EU's free-trade agreement with Japan is perhaps its most notable one. The EU-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement was officially signed on 17 July 2018, becoming the world's largest bilateral free trade deal when it went into effect on 1 February 2019, creating an open trade zone covering nearly one-third of global GDP.\nEnergy.\nThe total energy supply of the EU was 59 billion GJ in 2019, about 10.2 per cent of the world total. Approximately three fifths of the energy available in the EU came from imports (mostly of fossil fuels). Renewable energy contributed 18.1 per cent of the EU's total energy supply in 2019, and 11.1 per cent of the final energy consumption. The EU has had legislative power in the area of energy policy for most of its existence; this has its roots in the original European Coal and Steel Community. The introduction of a mandatory and comprehensive European energy policy was approved at the meeting of the European Council in October 2005, and the first draft policy was published in January 2007.\nThe EU has five key points in its energy policy: increase competition in the internal market, encourage investment and boost interconnections between electricity grids; diversify energy resources with better systems to respond to a crisis; establish a new treaty framework for energy co-operation with Russia while improving relations with energy-rich states in Central Asia and North Africa; use existing energy supplies more efficiently while increasing renewable energy commercialisation; and finally increase funding for new energy technologies.\nIn 2007, EU countries as a whole imported 82 per cent of their oil, 57 per cent of their natural gas and 97.48 per cent of their uranium demands. The three largest suppliers of natural gas to the European Union are Russia, Norway and Algeria, that amounted for about three quarters of the imports in 2019. There is a strong dependence on Russian energy that the EU has been attempting to reduce.\nIn May 2022, it was reported that the European Union was preparing another sanction against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. It is expected to target Russian oil, Russian and Belarusian banks, as well as individuals and companies. According to an article by Reuters, two diplomats stated that the European Union may impose a ban on imports of Russian oil by the end of 2022. Also in May 2022, the European Commission published the RePowerEU initiative, a \u20ac300 billion plan outlining the path towards the end of EU dependence on Russian fossil fuels by 2030 and the acceleration on the clean energy transition.\nTransport.\nThe European Union manages cross-border road, railway, airport and water infrastructure through the Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T), created in 1990, and the Trans-European Combined Transport network. TEN-T comprises two network layers: the Core Network, which is to be completed by 2030; and the Comprehensive Network, which is to be completed by 2050. The network is currently made up of 9 core corridors: the Baltic\u2013Adriatic Corridor, the North Sea\u2013Baltic Corridor, the Mediterranean Corridor, the Orient/East\u2013Med Corridor, the Scandinavian\u2013Mediterranean Corridor, the Rhine\u2013Alpine Corridor, the Atlantic Corridor, the North Sea\u2013Mediterranean Corridor, and the Rhine\u2013Danube Corridor. Road transportation was organised under the TEN-T by the Trans-European road network. Bundesautobahn 7 is the longest national motorway in the EU at 963\u00a0km (598\u00a0mi).\nMaritime transportation is organised under the TEN-T by the Trans-European Inland Waterway network, and the Trans-European Seaport network. European seaports are categorised as international, community, or regional. The Port of Rotterdam is the busiest in the EU, and the world's largest seaport outside of East Asia, located in and near the city of Rotterdam, in the province of South Holland in the Netherlands. The European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA), founded in 2002 in Lisbon, Portugal, is charged with reducing the risk of maritime accidents, marine pollution from ships and the loss of human lives at sea by helping to enforce the pertinent EU legislation.\nAir transportation is organised under the TEN-T by the Trans-European Airport network. European airports are categorised as international, community, or regional. The Charles de Gaulle Airport is the busiest in the EU, located in and near the city of Paris, in France. The European Common Aviation Area (ECAA) is a single market in aviation. ECAA agreements were signed on 5 May 2006 in Salzburg, Austria between the EU and some third countries. The ECAA liberalises the air transport industry by allowing any company from any ECAA member state to fly between any ECAA member states airports, thereby allowing a \"foreign\" airline to provide domestic flights. The Single European Sky (SES) is an initiative that seeks to reform the European air traffic management system through a series of actions carried out in four different levels (institutional, operational, technological and control and supervision) with the aim of satisfying the needs of the European airspace in terms of capacity, safety, efficiency and environmental impact. Civil aviation safety is under the responsibility of the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). It carries out certification, regulation and standardisation and also performs investigation and monitoring. The idea of a European-level aviation safety authority goes back to 1996, but the agency was only legally established in 2002, and began operating in 2003.\nRail transportation is organised under the TEN-T by the Trans-European Rail network, made up of the high-speed rail network and the conventional rail network. The Gare du Nord railway station is the busiest in the EU, located in and near the city of Paris, in France. Rail transport in Europe is being synchronised with the European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) with the goal of greatly enhancing safety, increase efficiency of train transports and enhance cross-border interoperability. This is done by replacing former national signalling equipment and operational procedures with a single new Europe-wide standard for train control and command systems. This system is conducted by the European Union Agency for Railways (ERA).\nSchengen Area.\nThe Schengen Area is an area comprising 29 European countries that have officially abolished all passport and all other types of border control at their mutual borders. Being an element within the wider area of freedom, security and justice policy of the EU, it mostly functions as a single jurisdiction under a common visa policy for international travel purposes. The area is named after the 1985 Schengen Agreement and the 1990 Schengen Convention, both signed in Schengen, Luxembourg. Of the 27 EU member states, 25 participate in the Schengen Area. Of the EU members that are not part of the Schengen Area, one\u2014Cyprus\u2014is legally obligated to join the area in the future; Ireland maintains an opt-out, and instead operates its own visa policy. The four European Free Trade Association (EFTA) member states, Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland, are not members of the EU, but have signed agreements in association with the Schengen Agreement. Also, three European microstates \u2013 Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican City \u2013 maintain open borders for passenger traffic with their neighbours, and are therefore considered \"de facto\" members of the Schengen Area due to the practical impossibility of travelling to or from them without transiting through at least one Schengen member country.\nElectronic communications and space.\n | Telecommunications in the European Union\n | European Union Space Programme\n | Agency for Support for BEREC\n | European Union Agency for the Space Programme\n | European Space Agency\nMobile communication roaming charges are abolished throughout the EU, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.\nThe European Union Agency for the Space Programme (EUSPA), headquartered in Prague, Czech Republic, was established in 2021 to manage the European Union Space Programme in order to implement the pre-existing \"European Space Policy\", established on 22 May 2007 between the EU and the European Space Agency (ESA), known collectively as the \"European Space Council\". This was the first common political framework for space activities established by the EU. Each member state has pursued to some extent their own national space policy, though often co-ordinating through the ESA. G\u00fcnter Verheugen, the European Commissioner for Enterprise and Industry, has stated that even though the EU is \"a world leader in the technology\", it was \"being put on the defensive by the United States and Russia and that it only has about a 10-year technological advantage on China and India, which are racing to catch up\".\nGalileo is a global navigation satellite system (GNSS) that went live in 2016, created by the EU through the ESA, operated by the EUSPA, with two ground operations centres in Fucino, Italy, and Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany. The \u20ac10 billion project is named after the Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei. One of the aims of Galileo is to provide an independent high-precision positioning system so European political and military authorities do not have to rely on the US GPS, or the Russian GLONASS systems, which could be disabled or degraded by their operators at any time. The European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service (EGNOS) is a satellite-based augmentation system (SBAS) developed by the ESA and EUROCONTROL. Currently, it supplements the GPS by reporting on the reliability and accuracy of their positioning data and sending out corrections. The system will supplement Galileo in a future version. The Copernicus Programme is the EU's Earth observation programme coordinated and managed by EUSPA in partnership with ESA. It aims at achieving a global, continuous, autonomous, high quality, wide range Earth observation capacity, providing accurate, timely and easily accessible information to, among other things, improve the management of the environment, understand and mitigate the effects of climate change, and ensure civil security.\nAgriculture and fisheries.\n | Common Agricultural Policy\n | Common Fisheries Policy\n | European Fisheries Control Agency\n | European Food Safety Authority\nThe Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is the agricultural policy of the European Union. It implements a system of agricultural subsidies and other programmes. It was introduced in 1962 and has since then undergone several changes to reduce the EEC budget cost (from 73% in 1985 to 37% in 2017) and consider rural development in its aims. It has, however, been criticised on the grounds of its cost and its environmental and humanitarian effects.\nLikewise, the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) is the fisheries policy of the European Union. It sets quotas for which member states are allowed to catch each type of fish, as well as encouraging the fishing industry by various market interventions and fishing subsidies. It was introduced in 2009 with the Treaty of Lisbon, which formally enshrined fisheries conservation policy as one of the handful of \"exclusive competences\" reserved for the European Union.\nLabour.\nThe free movement of persons means that EU citizens can move freely between member states to live, work, study or retire in another country. This required the lowering of administrative formalities and recognition of professional qualifications of other states. The EU seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 6.7 per cent in September 2018. The euro area unemployment rate was 8.1 per cent. Among the member states, the lowest unemployment rates were recorded in the Czech Republic (2.3 per cent), Germany and Poland (both 3.4 per cent), and the highest in Spain (10.61 per cent in 2024) and Greece (9.6 per cent in November 2024). The European Union has long sought to mitigate the effects of free markets by protecting workers' rights and preventing social and environmental dumping.{{citation needed|date=October 2022}} To this end, it has adopted laws establishing minimum employment and environmental standards. These included the Working Time Directive and the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive. The European Directive about Minimum Wage, which looks to lift minimum wages and strengthen collective bargaining was approved by the European Parliament in September 2022.\nRegional development.\nThe five European Structural and Investment Funds are supporting the development of the EU regions, primarily the underdeveloped ones, located mostly in the states of central and southern Europe. Another fund (the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance) provides support for candidate members to transform their country to conform to the EU's standard. Demographic transition to a society of ageing population, low fertility-rates and depopulation of non-metropolitan regions is tackled within this policies.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nThe population of the EU in 2024 was about 450\u00a0million people, corresponding to 5.8 per cent of the world population. The population density across the EU was 106 inhabitants per square kilometre, which is more than the world average. It is highest in areas in central and western Europe, sometimes referred to as the \"blue banana\", while Sweden and Finland in the north are much more sparsely populated. The total population of the EU has been slightly decreasing for several years, contracting by 0.04 per cent in 2021. This is due to a low birth rate of about 1.5 children per woman, less than the world average of 2.3. In total, 4.1 million babies were born in the EU in 2021.\nImmigration to Europe partially compensates for the natural population decrease. Of the people residing in the EU, 5.3 per cent are not EU citizens. There were 31 non-EU citizenships that each accounted for at least 1 per cent of non-EU citizens living in the EU, of which the largest were Moroccan, Turkish, Syrian and Chinese. Around 1.9 million people immigrated to one of the EU member states from a non-EU country during 2020, and a total of 956,000 people emigrated from a member state to go to a non-EU country during the same year.\nUrbanisation.\nMore than two thirds (68.2%) of EU inhabitants lived in urban areas in 2020, which is slightly less than the world average. Cities are largely spread out across the EU with a large grouping in and around the Benelux. The EU contains about 40 urban areas with populations of over 1{{nbsp}}million. With a population of over 13 million, Paris is the largest metropolitan area and the only megacity in the EU.\nParis is followed by Madrid, Barcelona, Berlin, the Ruhr, Milan, and Rome, all with a metropolitan population of over 4{{nbsp}}million. The EU also has numerous polycentric urbanised regions like Rhine-Ruhr (Cologne, Dortmund, D\u00fcsseldorf et al.), Randstad (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht et al.), Frankfurt Rhine-Main (Frankfurt, Wiesbaden, Mainz et al.), the Flemish Diamond (Antwerp, Brussels, Leuven, Ghent et al.) and Upper Silesian-Moravian area (Katowice, Ostrava et al.).\nLanguages.\nThe EU has 24 official languages: Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Irish, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovene, Spanish, and Swedish. Important documents, such as legislation, are translated into every official language and the European Parliament provides translation for documents and plenary sessions. Most EU institutions use only a handful of working languages: the European Commission conducts its internal business in three \"procedural languages\": English, French, and German; the Court of Justice uses French as the working language, and the European Central Bank conducts its business primarily in English. Even though language policy is the responsibility of member states, EU institutions promote multilingualism among its citizens.\nThe most widely spoken language in the EU is English; the language is spoken by 50 per cent of the population and studied by 95 per cent of school students, although following the withdrawal of the United Kingdom only 2% of the population speak it natively. German and French are spoken by 29 per cent and 25 per cent of the population. More than half (59 per cent) of EU citizens are able to engage in a conversation in a language other than their mother tongue, and more than a tenth (11%) are quadrilingual.\nLuxembourgish (in Luxembourg) and Turkish (in Cyprus) are the only two national languages that are not official languages of the EU. Catalan, Galician and Basque are not recognised official languages of the EU but have official status in Spain. Therefore, official translations of the treaties are made into them and citizens have the right to correspond with the institutions in these languages. There are about 150 regional and minority languages in the EU, spoken by up to 50\u00a0million people. The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages ratified by most EU states provides general guidelines that states can follow to protect their linguistic heritage. The European Day of Languages is held annually on 26 September and is aimed at encouraging language learning across Europe.\nReligion.\nThe EU has no formal connection to any religion. Article 17 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union recognises the \"status under national law of churches and religious associations\" as well as that of \"philosophical and non-confessional organisations\". The preamble to the Treaty on European Union mentions the \"cultural, religious and humanist inheritance of Europe\". Discussion over the draft texts of the European Constitution and later the Treaty of Lisbon included proposals to mention Christianity or a god, or both, in the preamble of the text, but the idea faced opposition and was dropped.\nChristians in the EU include Catholics of both Roman and Eastern Rite, numerous Protestant denominations with Lutherans, Anglicans, and Reformed forming the majority of Protestant affiliations, and the Eastern Orthodox Church. In 2009, the EU had an estimated Muslim population of 13\u00a0million, and an estimated Jewish population of over a million. The other world religions of Buddhism, Hinduism, and Sikhism are also represented in the EU population. Eurostat's Eurobarometer opinion polls showed in 2005 that 52 per cent of EU citizens believed in a god, 27 per cent in \"some sort of spirit or life force\", and 18 per cent had no form of belief.\nInto the 21st century, many countries have experienced falling church attendance and membership. The countries where the fewest people reported a religious belief were Estonia (16 per cent) and the Czech Republic (19 per cent). The most religious countries were Malta (95 per cent, predominantly Catholic) as well as Cyprus and Romania (both predominantly Orthodox) each with about 90 per cent of citizens professing a belief in God. Across the EU, belief was higher among women, older people, those with religious upbringing, those who left school at 15 or 16, and those \"positioning themselves on the right of the political scale\".\nEducation and research.\nBasic education is an area where the EU's role is limited to supporting national governments. In higher education, the policy was developed in the 1980s in programmes supporting exchanges and mobility. The most visible of these has been the Erasmus Programme, a university exchange programme which began in 1987. In its first 20\u00a0years, it supported international exchange opportunities for well over 1.5\u00a0million university and college students and became a symbol of European student life.\nThere are similar programmes for school pupils and teachers, for trainees in vocational education and training, and for adult learners in the Lifelong Learning Programme 2007\u20132013. These programmes are designed to encourage a wider knowledge of other countries and to spread good practices in the education and training fields across the EU. Through its support of the Bologna Process, the EU is supporting comparable standards and compatible degrees across Europe. Scientific development is facilitated through the EU's Framework Programmes, the first of which started in 1984. The aims of EU policy in this area are to co-ordinate and stimulate research. The independent European Research Council allocates EU funds to European or national research projects. EU research and technological framework programmes deal in a number of areas, for example energy where the aim is to develop a diverse mix of renewable energy to help the environment and to reduce dependence on imported fuels.\nHealth.\nArticle 35 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union affirms that \"A high level of human health protection shall be ensured in the definition and implementation of all Union policies and activities\". The European Commission's Directorate-General for Health and Consumers seeks to align national laws on the protection of people's health, on the consumers' rights, on the safety of food and other products.\nAll EU and many other European countries offer their citizens a free European Health Insurance Card which, on a reciprocal basis, provides insurance for emergency medical treatment insurance when visiting other participating European countries. A directive on cross-border healthcare aims at promoting co-operation on health care between member states and facilitating access to safe and high-quality cross-border healthcare for European patients.\nThe life expectancy in the EU was 80.1 year at birth in 2021, among the highest in the world and around nine years higher than the world average. In general, life expectancy is lower in Eastern Europe than in Western Europe. In 2018, the EU region with the highest life expectancy was Madrid, Spain at 85.2 years, followed by the Spanish regions of La Rioja and Castilla y Le\u00f3n both at 84.3 years, Trentino in Italy at 84.3 years and \u00cele-de-France in France at 84.2 years.\nSocial rights and equality.\nThe EU has also sought to coordinate the social security and health systems of member states to facilitate individuals exercising free movement rights and to ensure they maintain their ability to access social security and health services in other member states. Since 2019 there has been a European commissioner for equality and the European Institute for Gender Equality has existed since 2007. A Directive on countering gender-based violence has been proposed. In September 2022, a European Care strategy was approved in order to provide \"quality, affordable and accessible care services\". The European Social Charter is the main body that recognises the social rights of European citizens. In 2020, the first ever European Union Strategy on LGBTIQ equality was approved under Helena Dalli mandate. In December 2021, the commission announced the intention of codifying a union-wide law against LGBT hate crimes.\nFreedom, security and justice.\nSince the creation of the European Union in 1993, it has developed its competencies in the area of justice and home affairs; initially at an intergovernmental level and later by supranationalism. Accordingly, the union has legislated in areas such as extradition, family law, asylum law, and criminal justice.\nThe EU has also established agencies to co-ordinate police, prosecution and civil litigations across the member states: Europol for police co-operation, CEPOL for training of police forces and the Eurojust for co-operation between prosecutors and courts. It also operates the EUCARIS database of vehicles and drivers, the Eurodac, the European Criminal Records Information System, the European Cybercrime Centre, FADO, PRADO and others.\nProhibitions against discrimination have a long standing in the treaties. In more recent years, these have been supplemented by powers to legislate against discrimination based on race, religion, disability, age, and sexual orientation. The treaties declare that the European Union itself is \"founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities\u00a0... in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail.\" By virtue of these powers, the EU has enacted legislation on sexism in the work-place, age discrimination, and racial discrimination.\nIn 2009, the Lisbon Treaty gave legal effect to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The charter is a codified catalogue of fundamental rights against which the EU's legal acts can be judged. It consolidates many rights which were previously recognised by the Court of Justice and derived from the \"constitutional traditions common to the member states\". The Court of Justice has long recognised fundamental rights and has, on occasion, invalidated EU legislation based on its failure to adhere to those fundamental rights. Signing the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) is a condition for EU membership. Previously, the EU itself could not accede to the convention as it is neither a state nor had the competence to accede. The Lisbon Treaty and Protocol 14 to the ECHR have changed this: the former binds the EU to accede to the convention while the latter formally permits it.\nThe EU is independent from the Council of Europe, although they share purpose and ideas, especially on the rule of law, human rights and democracy. Furthermore, the European Convention on Human Rights and European Social Charter, as well as the source of law for the Charter of Fundamental Rights are created by the Council of Europe. The EU has also promoted human rights issues in the wider world. The EU opposes the death penalty and has proposed its worldwide abolition. Abolition of the death penalty is a condition for EU membership. On 19 October 2020, the European Union revealed new plans to create a legal structure to act against human rights violations worldwide. The new plan was expected to provide the European Union with greater flexibility to target and sanction those responsible for serious human rights violations and abuses around the world.\nCulture.\nCultural co-operation between member states has been an interest of the European Union since its inclusion as a community competency in the Maastricht Treaty. Actions taken in the cultural area by the EU include the Culture 2000 seven-year programme, the European Cultural Month event, and orchestras such as the European Union Youth Orchestra. The European Capital of Culture programme selects one or more cities in every year to assist the cultural development of that city.\nSport.\nSport is mainly the responsibility of the member states or other international organisations, rather than of the EU. There are some EU policies that have affected sport, such as the free movement of workers, which was at the core of the Bosman ruling that prohibited national football leagues from imposing quotas on foreign players with EU member state citizenship. The Treaty of Lisbon requires any application of economic rules to take into account the specific nature of sport and its structures based on voluntary activity. This followed lobbying by governing organisations such as the International Olympic Committee and FIFA, due to objections over the application of free market principles to sport, which led to an increasing gap between rich and poor clubs. The EU does fund a programme for Israeli, Jordanian, Irish, and British football coaches, as part of the Football 4 Peace project.\nSymbols.\nThe flag of Europe consists of a circle of 12 golden stars on a blue background. Originally designed in 1955 for the Council of Europe, the flag was adopted by the European Communities, the predecessors of the present European Union, in 1986. The Council of Europe gave the flag a symbolic description in the following terms, although the official symbolic description adopted by the EU omits the reference to the \"Western world\".\n\"United in Diversity\" was adopted as the motto of the union in 2000, having been selected from proposals submitted by school pupils.{{sfn|Simons|2002|page=110}} Since 1985, the flag day of the union has been Europe Day, on 9 May (the date of the 1950 Schuman declaration). The anthem of the EU is an instrumental version of the prelude to the \"Ode to Joy\", the 4th movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's ninth symphony. The anthem was adopted by European Community leaders in 1985 and has since been played on official occasions.\nCharles the Great, also known as Charlemagne ({{langx|la|Carolus Magnus}}) and later recognised as \"Pater Europae\" (\"Father of Europe\"), has a symbolic relevance to Europe. The commission has named one of its central buildings in Brussels after Charlemagne and the city of Aachen has since 1949 awarded the Charlemagne Prize to champions of European unification. Since 2008, the organisers of this prize, in conjunction with the European Parliament, have awarded the Charlemagne Youth Prize in recognition of similar efforts led by young people.\nMedia.\nMedia freedom is a fundamental right that applies to all member states of the European Union and its citizens, as defined in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights as well as the European Convention on Human Rights.{{rp|1}} Within the EU enlargement process, guaranteeing media freedom is named a \"key indicator of a country's readiness to become part of the EU\".\nThe majority of media in the European Union are national-orientated, although some EU-wide media focusing on European affairs have emerged since the early 1990s, such as Euronews, Eurosport, EUobserver, EURACTIV or Politico Europe. Arte is a public Franco-German TV network that promotes programming in the areas of culture and the arts. 80 per cent of its programming are provided in equal proportion by the two member companies, while the remainder is being provided by the European Economic Interest Grouping \"ARTE GEIE\" and the channel's European partners. The MEDIA Programme of the European Union has supported the European popular film and audiovisual industries since 1991. It provides support for the development, promotion and distribution of European works within Europe and beyond.\nInfluence.\nThe European Union has had a significant positive economic effect on most member states. According to a 2019 study of the member states who joined from 1973 to 2004, \"without European integration, per capita incomes would have been, on average, approximately 10% lower in the first ten years after joining the EU\". Greece was the exception reported by the study, which analysed up to 2008, \"to avoid confounding effects from the global financial crisis\". A 2021 study in the \"Journal of Political Economy\" found that the 2004 enlargement had aggregate beneficial economic effects on all groups in both the old and new member states. The largest winners were the new member states, in particular unskilled labour in the new member states.\nThe European Union is frequently cited as having made a major contribution to peace in Europe, in particular by pacifying border disputes, and to the spread of democracy, especially by encouraging democratic reforms in aspiring Eastern European member states after the collapse of the USSR. Scholar Thomas Risse wrote in 2009, \"there is a consensus in the literature on Eastern Europe that the EU membership perspective had a huge anchoring effects for the new democracies.\" However, R. Daniel Kelemen argues that the EU has proved beneficial to leaders who are overseeing democratic backsliding, as the EU is reluctant to intervene in domestic politics, gives authoritarian governments funds which they can use to strengthen their regimes, and because freedom of movement within the EU allows dissenting citizens to leave their backsliding countries. At the same time, the union might provide through Article 7 of the Treaty on European Union an external constraint that prevents electoral autocracies, currently Hungary, from progressing into closed autocracies."}
{"id": "9319", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9319", "title": "Eriocaulales", "text": ""}
{"id": "9320", "revid": "1316274103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9320", "title": "Ericales", "text": "Order of eudicot flowering plants\nThe Ericales are a large and diverse order of flowering plants in the asterid group of the eudicots. Well-known and economically important members of this order include tea and ornamental camellias, persimmon, ebony, blueberry, cranberry, lingonberry, huckleberry, kiwifruit, Brazil nut, argan, sapote, azaleas and rhododendrons, heather, heath, impatiens, phlox, Jacob's ladder, primroses, cyclamens, shea, sapodilla, pouterias, and trumpet pitchers.\nThe order includes 22 families, according to the APG IV system of classification.\nThe Ericales include trees, bushes, lianas, and herbaceous plants. Together with ordinary autophytic plants, they include chlorophyll-deficient mycoheterotrophic plants (e.g., \"Sarcodes sanguinea\") and carnivorous plants (e.g., genus \"Sarracenia\"). Mycorrhizal associations are quite common among the order representatives, and three kinds of mycorrhiza are found exclusively among Ericales (namely, ericoid, arbutoid and monotropoid mycorrhiza). In addition, some families among the order are notable for their exceptional ability to accumulate aluminum.\nMany species have five petals, often grown together. Fusion of the petals as a trait was traditionally used to place the order in the subclass Sympetalae.\nEricales are a cosmopolitan order. Areas of distribution of families vary largely \u2013 while some are restricted to tropics, others exist mainly in Arctic or temperate regions. The entire order contains over 8,000 species, of which the Ericaceae account for 2,000\u20134,000 species (by various estimates).\nAccording to molecular studies, the lineage that led to Ericales diverged from other plants about 127 million years or diversified 110 million years ago.\nEconomic importance.\nThe most commercially used plant in the order is tea (\"Camellia sinensis\") from the family Theaceae. The order also includes some edible fruits, including kiwifruit (esp. \"Actinidia chinensis\" var. \"deliciosa\"), persimmon (genus \"Diospyros\"), blueberry, huckleberry, cranberry, Brazil nut, and Mamey sapote. The order also includes shea (\"Vitellaria paradoxa\"), which is the major dietary lipid source for millions of sub-Saharan Africans. Many Ericales species are cultivated for their showy flowers: well-known examples are azalea, rhododendron, camellia, heather, polyanthus, cyclamen, phlox, and busy Lizzie.\nClassification.\n22 families are recognized as members of the Ericales in the APG IV system of classification:\nLikely phylogenetic relationships between the families of the Ericales:\nPreviously included families.\nThese families are not recognized in the APG III system but have been in common use in the recent past:\nThese make up an early diverging group of asterids. Under the Cronquist system, the Ericales included a smaller group of plants, which were placed among the Dilleniidae:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9321", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9321", "title": "Edward Sapir", "text": "American linguist and anthropologist (1884\u20131939)\nEdward Sapir (; January 26, 1884 \u2013 February 4, 1939) was an American anthropologist-linguist, who is widely considered to be one of the most important figures in the development of the discipline of linguistics in the United States.\nSapir was born in German Pomerania, in what is now northern Poland. His family emigrated to the United States of America when he was a child. He studied Germanic linguistics at Columbia, where he came under the influence of Franz Boas, who inspired him to work on Native American languages. While finishing his Ph.D. he went to California to work with Alfred Kroeber documenting the indigenous languages there. He was employed by the Geological Survey of Canada for fifteen years, where he came into his own as one of the most significant linguists in North America, the other being Leonard Bloomfield. He was offered a professorship at the University of Chicago, and stayed for several years continuing to work for the professionalization of the discipline of linguistics. By the end of his life he was professor of anthropology at Yale. Among his many students were the linguists Mary Haas and Morris Swadesh, and anthropologists such as Fred Eggan and Hortense Powdermaker.\nWith his linguistic background, Sapir became the one student of Boas to develop most completely the relationship between linguistics and anthropology. Sapir studied the ways in which language and culture influence each other, and he was interested in the relation between linguistic differences, and differences in cultural world views. This part of his thinking was developed by his student Benjamin Lee Whorf into the principle of linguistic relativity or the \"Sapir\u2013Whorf\" hypothesis. In anthropology Sapir is known as an early proponent of the importance of psychology to anthropology, maintaining that studying the nature of relationships between different individual personalities is important for the ways in which culture and society develop.\nAmong his major contributions to linguistics is his classification of Indigenous languages of the Americas, upon which he elaborated for most of his professional life. He played an important role in developing the modern concept of the phoneme, greatly advancing the understanding of phonology.\nBefore Sapir it was generally considered impossible to apply the methods of historical linguistics to languages of indigenous peoples because they were believed to be more primitive than the Indo-European languages. Sapir was the first to prove that the methods of comparative linguistics were equally valid when applied to indigenous languages. In the 1929 edition of \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" he published what was then the most authoritative classification of Native American languages, and the first based on evidence from modern comparative linguistics. He was the first to produce evidence for the classification of the Algic, Uto-Aztecan, and Na-Dene languages. He proposed some language families that are not considered to have been adequately demonstrated, but which continue to generate investigation such as Hokan and Penutian.\nHe specialized in the study of Athabascan languages, Chinookan languages, and Uto-Aztecan languages, producing important grammatical descriptions of Takelma, Wishram, Southern Paiute. Later in his career he also worked with Yiddish, Hebrew, and Chinese, as well as Germanic languages, and he also was invested in the development of an International Auxiliary Language.\nLife.\nChildhood and youth.\nSapir was born into a family of Lithuanian Jews in Lauenburg (now L\u0119bork) in the Province of Pomerania where his father, Jacob David Sapir, worked as a cantor. The family was not Orthodox, and his father maintained his ties to Judaism through its music. The Sapir family did not stay long in Pomerania and never accepted German as a nationality. Edward Sapir's first language was Yiddish, and later English. In 1888, when he was four years old, the family moved to Liverpool, England, and in 1890 to the United States, to Richmond, Virginia. Here Edward Sapir lost his younger brother Max to typhoid fever. His father had difficulty keeping a job in a synagogue and finally settled in New York on the Lower East Side, where the family lived in poverty. As Jacob Sapir could not provide for his family, Sapir's mother, Eva Seagal Sapir, opened a shop to supply the basic necessities. They formally divorced in 1910. After settling in New York, Edward Sapir was raised mostly by his mother, who stressed the importance of education for upward social mobility, and turned the family increasingly away from Judaism. Even though Eva Sapir was an important influence, Sapir received his lust for knowledge and interest in scholarship, aesthetics, and music from his father. At age 14 Sapir won a Pulitzer scholarship to the prestigious Horace Mann high school, but he chose not to attend the school which he found too posh, going instead to DeWitt Clinton High School, and saving the scholarship money for his college education. Through the scholarship Sapir supplemented his mother's meager earnings.\nColumbia.\nSapir entered Columbia in 1901, still paying with the Pulitzer scholarship. Columbia at this time was one of the few elite private universities that did not limit admission of Jewish applicants with implicit quotas around 12 percent\u2014approximately 40% of incoming students at Columbia were Jewish. Sapir earned both a B.A. (1904) and an M.A. (1905) in Germanic philology from Columbia, before embarking on his Ph.D. in Anthropology which he completed in 1909.\nCollege.\nSapir emphasized language study in his college years at Columbia, studying Latin, Greek, and French for eight semesters. From his sophomore year he additionally began to focus on Germanic languages, completing coursework in Gothic, Old High German, Old Saxon, Icelandic, Dutch, Swedish, and Danish. Through Germanics professor William Carpenter, Sapir was exposed to methods of comparative linguistics that were being developed into a more scientific framework than the traditional philological approach. He also took courses in Sanskrit, and complemented his language studies by studying music in the department of the famous composer Edward MacDowell (though it is uncertain whether Sapir ever studied with MacDowell himself). In his last year in college Sapir enrolled in the course \"Introduction to Anthropology\", with Professor Livingston Farrand, who taught the Boas \"four field\" approach to anthropology. He also enrolled in an advanced anthropology seminar taught by Franz Boas, a course that would completely change the direction of his career.\nInfluence of Boas.\nAlthough still in college, Sapir was allowed to participate in the Boas graduate seminar on American Languages, which included translations of Native American and Inuit myths collected by Boas. In this way Sapir was introduced to Indigenous American languages while he kept working on his M.A. in Germanic linguistics. Robert Lowie later said that Sapir's fascination with indigenous languages stemmed from the seminar with Boas in which Boas used examples from Native American languages to disprove all of Sapir's common-sense assumptions about the basic nature of language. Sapir's 1905 Master's thesis was an analysis of Johann Gottfried Herder's \"Treatise on the Origin of Language\", and included examples from Inuit and Native American languages, not at all familiar to a Germanicist. The thesis criticized Herder for retaining a Biblical chronology, too shallow to allow for the observable diversification of languages, but he also argued with Herder that all of the world's languages have equal aesthetic potentials and grammatical complexity. He ended the paper by calling for a \"very extended study of all the various existing stocks of languages, in order to determine the most fundamental properties of language\" \u2013 almost a program statement for the modern study of linguistic typology, and a very Boasian approach.\nIn 1906 he finished his coursework, having focused the last year on courses in anthropology and taking seminars such as Primitive Culture with Farrand, Ethnology with Boas, Archaeology and courses in Chinese language and culture with Berthold Laufer. He also maintained his Indo-European studies with courses in Celtic, Old Saxon, Swedish, and Sanskrit. Having finished his coursework, Sapir moved on to his doctoral fieldwork, spending several years in short-term appointments while working on his dissertation.\nEarly fieldwork.\nSapir's first fieldwork was on the Wishram Chinook language in the summer of 1905, funded by the Bureau of American Ethnology. This first experience with Native American languages in the field was closely overseen by Boas, who was particularly interested in having Sapir gather ethnological information for the Bureau. Sapir gathered a volume of Wishram texts, published 1909, and he managed to achieve a much more sophisticated understanding of the Chinook sound system than Boas. In the summer of 1906 he worked on Takelma and Chasta Costa. Sapir's work on Takelma became his doctoral dissertation, which he defended in 1908. The dissertation foreshadowed several important trends in Sapir's work, particularly the careful attention to the intuition of native speakers regarding sound patterns that later would become the basis for Sapir's formulation of the phoneme.\nIn 1907\u20131908 Sapir was offered a position at the University of California at Berkeley, where Boas' first student Alfred Kroeber was the head of a project under the California state survey to document the Indigenous languages of California. Kroeber suggested that Sapir study the nearly extinct Yana language, and Sapir set to work. Sapir worked first with Betty Brown, one of the language's few remaining speakers. Later he began work with Sam Batwi, who spoke another dialect of Yana, but whose knowledge of Yana mythology was an important fount of knowledge. Sapir described the way in which the Yana language distinguishes grammatically and lexically between the speech of men and women.\nThe collaboration between Kroeber and Sapir was made difficult by the fact that Sapir largely followed his own interest in detailed linguistic description, ignoring the administrative pressures to which Kroeber was subject, among them the need for a speedy completion and a focus on the broader classification issues. In the end Sapir didn't finish the work during the allotted year, and Kroeber was unable to offer him a longer appointment.\nDisappointed at not being able to stay at Berkeley, Sapir devoted his best efforts to other work, and did not get around to preparing any of the Yana material for publication until 1910, to Kroeber's deep disappointment.\nSapir ended up leaving California early to take up a fellowship at the University of Pennsylvania, where he taught Ethnology and American Linguistics. At Pennsylvania he worked closely with another student of Boas, Frank Speck, and the two undertook work on Catawba in the summer of 1909. Also in the summer of 1909, Sapir went to Utah with his student J. Alden Mason. Intending originally to work on Hopi, he studied the Southern Paiute language; he decided to work with Tony Tillohash, who proved to be the perfect informant. Tillohash's strong intuition about the sound patterns of his language led Sapir to propose that the phoneme is not just an abstraction existing at the structural level of language, but in fact has psychological reality for speakers.\nTillohash became a good friend of Sapir, and visited him at his home in New York and Philadelphia. Sapir worked with his father to transcribe a number of Southern Paiute songs that Tillohash knew. This fruitful collaboration laid the ground work for the classical description of the Southern Paiute language published in 1930, and enabled Sapir to produce conclusive evidence linking the Shoshonean languages to the Nahuan languages \u2013 establishing the Uto-Aztecan language family. Sapir's description of Southern Paiute is known by linguistics as \"a model of analytical excellence\".\nAt Pennsylvania, Sapir was urged to work at a quicker pace than he felt comfortable. His \"Grammar of Southern Paiute\" was supposed to be published in Boas' \"Handbook of American Indian Languages\", and Boas urged him to complete a preliminary version while funding for the publication remained available, but Sapir did not want to compromise on quality, and in the end the \"Handbook\" had to go to press without Sapir's piece. Boas kept working to secure a stable appointment for his student, and by his recommendation Sapir ended up being hired by the Canadian Geological Survey, who wanted him to lead the institutionalization of anthropology in Canada. Sapir, who by then had given up the hope of working at one of the few American research universities, accepted the appointment and moved to Ottawa.\nIn Ottawa.\nIn the years 1910\u201325 Sapir established and directed the Anthropological Division in the Geological Survey of Canada in Ottawa. When he was hired, he was one of the first full-time anthropologists in Canada. He brought his parents with him to Ottawa, and also quickly established his own family, marrying Florence Delson, who also had Lithuanian Jewish roots. Neither the Sapirs nor the Delsons were in favor of the match. The Delsons, who hailed from the prestigious Jewish center of Vilna, considered the Sapirs to be rural upstarts and were less than impressed with Sapir's career in an unpronounceable academic field. Edward and Florence had three children together: Herbert Michael, Helen Ruth, and Philip.\nCanada's Geological Survey.\nAs director of the Anthropological division of the Geological Survey of Canada, Sapir embarked on a project to document the Indigenous cultures and languages of Canada. His first fieldwork took him to Vancouver Island to work on the Nootka language. Apart from Sapir the division had two other staff members, Marius Barbeau and Harlan I. Smith. Sapir insisted that the discipline of linguistics was of integral importance for ethnographic description, arguing that just as nobody would dream of discussing the history of the Catholic Church without knowing Latin or study German folksongs without knowing German, so it made little sense to approach the study of Indigenous folklore without knowledge of the indigenous languages. At this point the only Canadian first nation languages that were well known were Kwakiutl, described by Boas, Tshimshian and Haida. Sapir explicitly used the standard of documentation of European languages, to argue that the amassing knowledge of indigenous languages was of paramount importance. By introducing the high standards of Boasian anthropology, Sapir incited antagonism from those amateur ethnologists who felt that they had contributed important work. Unsatisfied with efforts by amateur and governmental anthropologists, Sapir worked to introduce an academic program of anthropology at one of the major universities, in order to professionalize the discipline.\nSapir enlisted the assistance of fellow Boasians: Frank Speck, Paul Radin and Alexander Goldenweiser, who with Barbeau worked on the peoples of the Eastern Woodlands: the Ojibwa, the Iroquois, the Huron and the Wyandot. Sapir initiated work on the Athabascan languages of the Mackenzie valley and the Yukon, but it proved too difficult to find adequate assistance, and he concentrated mainly on Nootka and the languages of the North West Coast.\nDuring his time in Canada, together with Speck, Sapir also acted as an advocate for Indigenous rights, arguing publicly for introduction of better medical care for Indigenous communities, and assisting the Six Nation Iroquois in trying to recover eleven wampum belts that had been stolen from the reservation and were on display in the museum of the University of Pennsylvania. (The belts were finally returned to the Iroquois in 1988.) He also argued for the reversal of a Canadian law prohibiting the Potlatch ceremony of the West Coast tribes.\nWork with Ishi.\nIn 1915 Sapir returned to California, where his expertise on the Yana language made him urgently needed. Kroeber had come into contact with Ishi, the last native speaker of the Yahi language, closely related to Yana, and needed someone to document the language urgently. Ishi, who had grown up without contact with European-Americans, was monolingual in Yahi and was the last surviving member of his people. He had been adopted by the Kroebers, but had fallen ill with tuberculosis, and was not expected to live long. Sam Batwi, the speaker of Yana who had worked with Sapir, was unable to understand the Yahi variety, and Krober was convinced that only Sapir would be able to communicate with Ishi. Sapir traveled to San Francisco and worked with Ishi over the summer of 1915, having to invent new methods for working with a monolingual speaker. The information from Ishi was invaluable for understanding the relation between the different dialects of Yana. Ishi died of his illness in early 1916, and Kroeber partly blamed the exacting nature of working with Sapir for his failure to recover. Sapir described the work: \"I think I may safely say that my work with Ishi is by far the most time-consuming and nerve-racking that I have ever undertaken. Ishi's imperturbable good humor alone made the work possible, though it also at times added to my exasperation\".\nMoving on.\nThe First World War took its toll on the Canadian Geological Survey, cutting funding for anthropology and making the academic climate less agreeable. Sapir continued work on Athabascan, working with two speakers of the Alaskan languages Kutchin and Ingalik. Sapir was now more preoccupied with testing hypotheses about historical relationships between the Na-Dene languages than with documenting endangered languages, in effect becoming a theoretician. He was also growing to feel isolated from his American colleagues. From 1912 Florence's health deteriorated due to a lung abscess, and a resulting depression. The Sapir household was largely run by Eva Sapir, who did not get along well with Florence, and this added to the strain on both Florence and Edward. Sapir's parents had by now divorced and his father seemed to develop psychosis, which made it necessary for him to leave Canada for Philadelphia, where Edward continued to support him financially. Florence was hospitalized for long periods both for her depressions and for the lung abscess, and she died in 1924 due to an infection following surgery, providing the final incentive for Sapir to leave Canada. When the University of Chicago offered him a position, he happily accepted.\nDuring his period in Canada, Sapir came into his own as the leading figure in linguistics in North America. Among his substantial publications from this period were his book on \"Time Perspective in the Aboriginal American Culture\" (1916), in which he laid out an approach to using historical linguistics to study the prehistory of Native American cultures. Particularly important for establishing him in the field was his seminal book \"\" (1921), which was a layman's introduction to the discipline of linguistics as Sapir envisioned it. He also participated in the formulation of a report to the American Anthropological Association regarding the standardization of orthographic principles for writing Indigenous languages.\nWhile in Ottawa, he also collected and published French Canadian Folk Songs, and wrote a volume of his own poetry. His interest in poetry led him to form a close friendship with another Boasian anthropologist and poet, Ruth Benedict. Sapir initially wrote to Benedict to commend her for her dissertation on \"The Guardian Spirit\", but soon realized that Benedict had published poetry pseudonymously. In their correspondence the two critiqued each other's work, both submitting to the same publishers, and both being rejected. They also were both interested in psychology and the relation between individual personalities and cultural patterns, and in their correspondences they frequently psychoanalyzed each other. However, Sapir often showed little understanding for Benedict's private thoughts and feelings, and particularly his conservative gender ideology jarred with Benedict's struggles as a female professional academic. Though they were very close friends for a while, it was ultimately the differences in worldview and personality that led their friendship to fray.\nBefore departing Canada, Sapir had a short affair with Margaret Mead, Benedict's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 at Columbia. But Sapir's conservative ideas about marriage and the woman's role were anathema to Mead, as they had been to Benedict, and as Mead left to do field work in Samoa, the two separated permanently. Mead received news of Sapir's remarriage while still in Samoa, and burned their correspondence there on the beach.\nChicago years.\nSettling in Chicago reinvigorated Sapir intellectually and personally. He socialized with intellectuals, gave lectures, participated in poetry and music clubs. His first graduate student at Chicago was Li Fang-Kuei. The Sapir household continued to be managed largely by Grandmother Eva, until Sapir remarried in 1926. Sapir's second wife, Jean Victoria McClenaghan, was sixteen years younger than he. She had first met Sapir when a student in Ottawa, but had since also come to work at the University of Chicago's department of Juvenile Research. Their son Paul Edward Sapir was born in 1928. Their other son J. David Sapir became a linguist and anthropologist specializing in West African Languages, especially Jola languages. Sapir also exerted influence through his membership in the Chicago School of Sociology, and his friendship with psychologist Harry Stack Sullivan.\nAt Yale.\nFrom 1931 until his death in 1939, Sapir taught at Yale University, where he became the head of the Department of Anthropology. He was invited to Yale to found an interdisciplinary program combining anthropology, linguistics and psychology, aimed at studying \"the impact of culture on personality\". While Sapir was explicitly given the task of founding a distinct anthropology department, this was not well received by the department of sociology who worked by William Graham Sumner's \"Evolutionary sociology\", which was anathema to Sapir's Boasian approach, nor by the two anthropologists of the Institute for Human Relations Clark Wissler and G. P. Murdock. Sapir never thrived at Yale, where as one of only four Jewish faculty members out of 569 he was denied membership to the faculty club where the senior faculty discussed academic business.\nAt Yale, Sapir's graduate students included Morris Swadesh, Benjamin Lee Whorf, Mary Haas, Charles Hockett, and Harry Hoijer, several of whom he brought with him from Chicago. Sapir came to regard a young Semiticist named Zellig Harris as his intellectual heir, although Harris was never a formal student of Sapir. (For a time he dated Sapir's daughter.) In 1936 Sapir clashed with the Institute for Human Relations over the research proposal by anthropologist Hortense Powdermaker, who proposed a study of the black community of Indianola, Mississippi. Sapir argued that her research should be funded instead of the more sociological work of John Dollard. Sapir eventually lost the discussion and Powdermaker had to leave Yale.\nDuring his tenure at Yale, Sapir was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the United States National Academy of Sciences, and the American Philosophical Society.\nIn the summer of 1937 while teaching at the Linguistic Institute of the Linguistic Society of America in Ann Arbor, Sapir began having problems with a heart condition that had been diagnosed a couple of years earlier. In 1938, he had to take a leave from Yale, during which Benjamin Lee Whorf taught his courses and G. P. Murdock advised some of his students. After Sapir's death in 1939, G. P. Murdock became the chair of the anthropology department. Murdock, who despised the Boasian paradigm of cultural anthropology, dismantled most of Sapir's efforts to integrate anthropology, psychology, and linguistics.\nAnthropological thought.\nSapir's anthropological thought has been described as isolated within the field of anthropology in his own days. Instead of searching for the ways in which culture influences human behavior, Sapir was interested in understanding how cultural patterns themselves were shaped by the composition of individual personalities that make up a society. This made Sapir cultivate an interest in individual psychology and his view of culture was more psychological than many of his contemporaries. It has been suggested that there is a close relation between Sapir's literary interests and his anthropological thought. His literary theory saw individual aesthetic sensibilities and creativity to interact with learned cultural traditions to produce unique and new poetic forms, echoing the way that he also saw individuals and cultural patterns to dialectically influence each other.\nBreadth of languages studied.\nSapir's special focus among American languages was in the Athabaskan languages, a family which especially fascinated him. In a private letter, he wrote: \"Dene is probably the son-of-a-bitchiest language in America to actually \"know\"...most fascinating of all languages ever invented.\" Sapir also studied the languages and cultures of Wishram Chinook, Navajo, Nootka, Colorado River Numic, Takelma, and Yana. His research on Southern Paiute, in collaboration with consultant Tony Tillohash, led to a 1933 article which would become influential in the characterization of the phoneme.\nAlthough noted for his work on American linguistics, Sapir wrote prolifically in linguistics in general. His book \"Language\" provides everything from a grammar-typological classification of languages (with examples ranging from Chinese to Nootka) to speculation on the phenomenon of language drift, and the arbitrariness of associations between language, race, and culture. Sapir was also a pioneer in Yiddish studies (his first language) in the United States (cf. \"Notes on Judeo-German phonology\", 1915).\nSapir was active in the international auxiliary language movement. In his paper \"The Function of an International Auxiliary Language\", he argued for the benefits of a regular grammar and advocated a critical focus on the fundamentals of language, unbiased by the idiosyncrasies of national languages, in the choice of an international auxiliary language.\nHe was the first Research Director of the International Auxiliary Language Association (IALA), which presented the Interlingua conference in 1951. He directed the Association from 1930 to 1931, and was a member of its Consultative Counsel for Linguistic Research from 1927 to 1938. Sapir consulted with Alice Vanderbilt Morris to develop the research program of IALA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9322", "revid": "17216044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9322", "title": "English", "text": "English usually refers to:\nEnglish may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt; \nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9323", "revid": "17196804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9323", "title": "Easter Sunday", "text": ""}
{"id": "9324", "revid": "13294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9324", "title": "Easter egg", "text": "Decorated egg for the celebration of Easter\nEaster eggs, also called Paschal eggs, are eggs that are decorated for the Christian holiday of Easter, which celebrates the resurrection of Jesus. As such, Easter eggs are commonly used during the season of Eastertide (Easter season). The oldest tradition, which continues to be used in Central and Eastern Europe, is to dye and paint chicken eggs.\nAlthough eggs, in general, were a traditional symbol of fertility and rebirth, in Christianity, for the celebration of Eastertide, Easter eggs symbolize the empty tomb of Jesus, from which Jesus was resurrected. In addition, one ancient tradition was the staining of Easter eggs with the colour red \"in memory of the blood of Christ, shed as at that time of his crucifixion.\"\nThis custom of the Easter egg, according to many sources, can be traced to early Christians of Mesopotamia, and from there it spread into Eastern Europe and Siberia through the Orthodox Churches, and later into Europe through the Catholic and Protestant Churches. Additionally, the widespread usage of Easter eggs, according to mediaevalist scholars, is due to the prohibition of eggs during Lent after which, on Easter, they are blessed for the occasion.\nA modern custom in some places is to substitute chocolate eggs wrapped in coloured foil, hand-carved wooden eggs, or plastic eggs filled with confectionery such as chocolate.\nHistory.\nThe practice of decorating eggshells is quite ancient, with decorated, engraved ostrich eggs found in Africa which are 60,000 years old. In the pre-dynastic period of Egypt and the early cultures of Mesopotamia and Crete, eggs were associated with death and rebirth, as well as with kingship, with decorated ostrich eggs, and representations of ostrich eggs in gold and silver, were commonly placed in graves of the ancient Sumerians and Egyptians as early as 5,000 years ago. These cultural relationships may have influenced early Christian and Islamic cultures in those areas, as well as through mercantile, religious, and political links from those areas around the Mediterranean.\nEggs in Christianity carry a Trinitarian symbolism as shell, yolk, and albumen are three parts of one egg. According to many sources, the Christian custom of Easter eggs started among the early Christians of Mesopotamia, who stained them with red colouring \"in memory of the blood of Christ, shed at His crucifixion\". The Christian Church officially adopted the custom, regarding the eggs as a symbol of the resurrection of Jesus, with the Roman Ritual, the first edition of which was published in 1610 but which has texts of much older date, containing among the Easter Blessings of Food, one for eggs, along with those for lamb, bread, and new produce. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Lord, let the grace of your blessing + come upon these eggs, that they be healthful food for your faithful who eat them in thanksgiving for the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with you forever and ever.\nSociology professor Kenneth Thompson discusses the spread of the Easter egg throughout Christendom, writing that \"use of eggs at Easter seems to have come from Persia into the Greek Christian Churches of Mesopotamia, thence to Russia and Siberia through the medium of Orthodox Christianity. From the Greek Church the custom was adopted by either the Roman Catholics or the Protestants and then spread through Europe.\" Both Thompson, as well as British orientalist Thomas Hyde state that in addition to dyeing the eggs red, the early Christians of Mesopotamia also stained Easter eggs green and yellow.\nPeter Gainsford maintains that the association between eggs and Easter most likely arose in western Europe during the Middle Ages as a result of the fact that Catholic Christians were prohibited from eating eggs during Lent, but were allowed to eat them when Easter arrived.\nInfluential 19th century folklorist and philologist Jacob Grimm speculates, in the second volume of his \"Deutsche Mythologie\", that the folk custom of Easter eggs among the continental Germanic peoples may have stemmed from springtime festivities of a Germanic goddess known in Old English as \u0112ostre (namesake of modern English \"Easter\") and possibly known in Old High German as *\"Ostara\" (and thus namesake of Modern German 'Easter'). However, despite Grimm's speculation, there is no evidence to connect eggs with a speculative deity named Ostara. The use of eggs as favors or treats at Easter originated when they were prohibited during Lent. A common practice in England in the medieval period was for children to go door-to-door begging for eggs on the Saturday before Lent began. People handed out eggs as special treats for children prior to their fast.\nAlthough one of the Christian traditions are to use dyed or painted chicken eggs, a modern custom is to substitute chocolate eggs, or plastic eggs filled with candy such as jelly beans; as many people give up sweets as their Lenten sacrifice, individuals enjoy them at Easter after having abstained from them during the preceding forty days of Lent. These eggs can be hidden for children to find on Easter morning, which may be left by the Easter Bunny. They may also be put in a basket filled with real or artificial straw to resemble a bird's nest.\nWhile the practice of giving away easter eggs is, to this day, popular, it was briefly banned in 1916s Hungary in the Easter Egg Act, due to the scarcity caused by the ongoing war, and the ban was only lifted when the war ended. The contemporary news reports emphasised however, that the locsol\u00e1s was still legal to practice.\nTraditions and customs.\nLenten tradition.\nThe Easter egg tradition may also have merged into the celebration of the end of the privations of Lent. Traditionally, eggs are among the foods forbidden on fast days, including all of Lent, an observance which continues among the Eastern Christian Churches but has fallen into disuse in Western Christianity.\nHistorically, it has been traditional to use up all of the household's eggs before Lent began.\nThis established the tradition of Pancake Day being celebrated on Shrove Tuesday. This day, the Tuesday before Ash Wednesday when Lent begins, is also known as Mardi Gras, a French phrase which translates as \"Fat Tuesday\" to mark the last consumption of eggs and dairy before Lent begins.\nIn the Orthodox Church, Great Lent begins on Clean Monday, rather than Wednesday, so the household's dairy products would be used up in the preceding week, called Cheesefare Week.\nDuring Lent, since chickens would not stop producing eggs during this time, a larger than usual store might be available at the end of the fast. This surplus, if any, had to be eaten quickly to prevent spoiling. Then, with the coming of Easter, the eating of eggs resumes. Some families cook a special meatloaf with eggs in it to be eaten with the Easter dinner.\nTo avoid waste, it was common for families to hard boil or pickle eggs that their chickens produced during lent, and for this reason the Spanish dish hornazo (traditionally eaten on and around Easter) contains hard-boiled eggs as a primary ingredient. In Spain it is common for godparents to give a Easter mona to their godchildren during Easter period. \nIn Hungary, eggs are used sliced in potato casseroles around the Easter period.\nSymbolism and related customs.\nSome Christians symbolically link the cracking open of Easter eggs with the empty tomb of Jesus.\nIn the Orthodox churches, Easter eggs are blessed by the priest at the end of the Paschal Vigil (which is equivalent to Holy Saturday), and distributed to the faithful. The egg is seen by followers of Christianity as a symbol of resurrection: while being dormant it contains a new life sealed within it.\nSimilarly, in the Roman Catholic Church in Poland, the so-called \u015bwi\u0119conka, i.e. blessing of decorative baskets with a sampling of Easter eggs and other symbolic foods, is one of the most enduring and beloved Polish traditions on Holy Saturday.\nDuring Paschaltide, in some traditions the Pascal greeting with the Easter egg is even extended to the deceased. On either the second Monday or Tuesday of Pascha, after a memorial service people bring blessed eggs to the cemetery and bring the joyous paschal greeting, \"Christ has risen\", to their beloved departed (see Radonitza).\nIn Greece, women traditionally dye the eggs with onion skins and vinegar on Thursday (also the day of Communion). These ceremonial eggs are known as kokkina avga. They also bake tsoureki for the Easter Sunday feast. Red Easter eggs are sometimes served along the centerline of tsoureki (braided loaf of bread).\nIn Egypt, it is a tradition to decorate boiled eggs during Sham el-Nessim holiday, which falls every year after the Eastern Christian Easter.\nCoincidentally, every Passover, Jews place a hard-boiled egg on the Passover ceremonial plate, and the celebrants also eat hard-boiled eggs dipped in salt water as part of the ceremony.\nColouring.\nThe dyeing of Easter eggs in different colours is commonplace, with colour being achieved through boiling the egg in natural substances (such as, onion peel (brown colour), oak or alder bark or walnut nutshell (black), beet juice (pink) etc.), or using artificial colourings.\nA greater variety of colour was often provided by tying on the onion skin with different coloured woollen yarn. In the North of England these are called pace-eggs or paste-eggs, from a dialectal form of Middle English \"pasche\". King Edward I's household accounts in 1290 list an item of 'one shilling and sixpence for the decoration and distribution of 450 Pace-eggs!', which were to be coloured or gilded and given to members of the royal household. Traditionally in England, eggs were wrapped in onion skins and boiled to make their shells look like mottled gold, or wrapped in flowers and leaves first in order to leave a pattern, which parallels a custom practised in traditional Scandinavian culture. Eggs could also be drawn on with a wax candle before staining, often with a person's name and date on the egg. Pace Eggs were generally eaten for breakfast on Easter Sunday breakfast. Alternatively, they could be kept as decorations, used in egg-jarping (egg tapping) games, or given to Pace Eggers. In more recent centuries in England, eggs have been stained with coffee grains or simply boiled and painted in their shells.\nIn the Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches, Easter eggs are dyed red to represent the blood of Christ, with further symbolism being found in the hard shell of the egg symbolizing the sealed Tomb of Christ\u2014the cracking of which symbolized his resurrection from the dead. The tradition of red easter eggs was used by the Russian Orthodox Church. The tradition to dyeing the easter eggs in an Onion tone exists in the cultures of Armenia, Bulgaria, Georgia, Lithuania, Ukraine, Belarus, Russia, Czechia, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Israel. The colour is made by boiling onion peel in water.\nPatterning.\nWhen boiling them with onion skins, leaves can be attached prior to dyeing to create leaf patterns. The leaves are attached to the eggs before they are dyed with a transparent cloth to wrap the eggs with like inexpensive muslin or nylon stockings, leaving patterns once the leaves are removed after the dyeing process. These eggs are part of Easter custom in many areas and often accompany other traditional Easter foods. Passover haminados are prepared with similar methods.\nPysanky are Ukrainian Easter eggs, decorated using a wax-resist (batik) method. The word comes from the verb \"pysaty\", \"to write\", as the designs are not painted on, but written with beeswax. Lithuanians create intricately detailed margu\u010diai using a hot wax application and dipping method, and also by dipping the eggs first and then etching designs into the shells.\nDecorating eggs for Easter using wax resistant batik is a popular method in some other eastern European countries.\nUse of Easter eggs in decorations.\nIn some Mediterranean countries, especially in Lebanon, chicken eggs are boiled and decorated by dye and/or painting and used as decoration around the house. Then, on Easter Day, young kids would duel with them saying \"Christ is resurrected, Indeed, He is\", breaking and eating them. This also happens in Georgia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece, North Macedonia, Romania, Russia, Serbia and Ukraine. In Easter Sunday friends and family hit each other's egg with their own. The one whose egg does not break is believed to be in for good luck in the future.\nIn Germany, eggs decorate trees and bushes as Easter egg trees, and in several areas public wells as Osterbrunnen.\nThere used to be a custom in Ukraine, during Easter celebrations to have \"krashanky\" on a table in a bowl with wheatgrass. The number of the \"krashanky\" equalled the number of departed family members.\nEaster egg games.\nEgg hunts.\nAn egg hunt is a game in which decorated eggs, which may be hard-boiled chicken eggs, chocolate eggs, or artificial eggs containing candies, are hidden for children to find. The eggs often vary in size, and may be hidden both indoors and outdoors. When the hunt is over, prizes may be given for the largest number of eggs collected, or for the largest or the smallest egg.\nSome Central European nations (Czechs, Slovaks, etc.) have a tradition of men gathering eggs from women in return for whipping them with an easter whip and splashing them with water. The ritual is traditionally believed to preserve the women's health and beauty.\nCascarones, a Latin American tradition now shared by many US States with high Hispanic demographics, are emptied and dried chicken eggs stuffed with confetti and sealed with a piece of tissue paper. The eggs are hidden in a similar tradition to the American Easter egg hunt and when found the children (and adults) break them over each other's heads.\nIn order to enable children to take part in egg hunts despite visual impairment, eggs have been created that emit various clicks, beeps, noises, or music so that visually impaired children can easily hunt for Easter eggs.\nEgg rolling.\nEgg rolling is also a traditional Easter Egg game played with eggs at Easter. In the United Kingdom, Germany, and other countries children traditionally rolled eggs down hillsides at Easter. This tradition was taken to the New World by European settlers, and continues to this day each Easter with an Easter egg roll on the White House lawn. Rutherford B. Hayes started the tradition of the Easter Egg Roll at the White House. The Easter Monday Egg Roll was normally held at the United States Capitol, however, by the mid-1870s, Congress passed a law forbidding the Capitol's grounds to be used for the activity due to the toll it was taking on the landscape. The law was enforced in 1877, but the rain that year canceled all outdoor activities. In 1878, Hayes was approached by many young Easter Egg rollers who asked for the event to be held at the White House. He invited any children who wanted to roll eggs to come to the White House in order to do so. The tradition still occurs every year on the South Lawn of the White House. Now, there are many other games and activities that take place such as \"Egg Picking\" and \"Egg Ball\". Different nations have different versions of the Easter Egg roll game.\nEgg tapping.\nIn the North of England, during Eastertide, a traditional game is played where hard boiled \"pace eggs\" are distributed and each player hits the other player's egg with their own. This is known as \"egg tapping\", \"egg dumping\", or \"egg jarping\". The winner is the holder of the last intact egg. The annual egg jarping world championship is held every year over Easter in Peterlee, Durham.\nIt is also practiced in Italy (where it is called \"scuccetta\"), Poland, Belarus, Bulgaria, Hungary, Croatia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lebanon, North Macedonia, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia (where it is called \"tur\u010danje\" or \"trkanje\"), Ukraine, Russia, and other countries. In parts of Austria, Bavaria and German-speaking Switzerland it is called \"Ostereiertitschen\" or \"Eierpecken\". In parts of Europe it is also called \"epper\", presumably from the German name , meaning \"offering\" and in Greece it is known as \"tsougrisma\". In South Louisiana, this practice is called pocking eggs and is slightly different. The Louisiana Creoles hold that the winner eats the eggs of the losers in each round.\nIn the Greek Orthodox tradition, red eggs are also cracked together when people exchange Easter greetings.\nEgg dance.\nEgg dance is a traditional Easter game in which eggs are laid on the ground or floor and the goal is to dance among them without damaging any eggs which originated in Germany.\nPace egg plays.\nThe Pace Egg plays are traditional village plays, with a rebirth theme. The drama takes the form of a combat between the hero and villain, in which the hero is killed and brought back to life. The plays take place in England during Easter.\nVariants.\nChocolate.\nChocolate eggs first appeared at the court of Louis XIV in Versailles and in 1725 the widow Giambone in Turin started producing chocolate eggs by filling empty chicken egg shells with molten chocolate. In 1873, J.S. Fry &amp; Sons produced the first hollow chocolate egg making a smooth paste that could be poured into egg moulds. Manufacturing their first Easter egg in 1875, Cadbury created the modern chocolate Easter egg after developing a pure cocoa butter that could be moulded into smooth shapes.\nIn Western cultures, the giving of chocolate eggs is now commonplace, with 80 million Easter eggs sold in the UK alone. Formerly, the containers Easter eggs were sold in contained large amounts of plastic, although in the United Kingdom this has gradually been replaced with recyclable paper and cardboard.\nIn Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Uruguay and Paraguay, hollow chocolate eggs known as or (Easter eggs) are popular and are commonly sold around Easter in supermarkets. Variations of this dessert containing fillings such as pistachio cream, hazelnut cream, or doce de leite, are known as (Spoon Easter eggs) or (Spoon eggs).\nMarzipan eggs.\nIn the Indian state of Goa, the Goan Catholic version of marzipan is used to make easter eggs. In the Philippines, mazap\u00e1n de pili (Spanish for \"pili marzipan\") is made from pili nuts.\nArtificial eggs.\nThe jewelled Easter eggs made by the Faberg\u00e9 firm for the two last Russian Tsars are regarded as masterpieces of decorative arts. Most of these creations themselves contained hidden surprises such as clock-work birds, or miniature ships.\nIn Bulgaria, Poland, Romania, Russia, Ukraine, and other Central European countries' folk traditions, Easter eggs are carved from wood and hand-painted, and making artificial eggs out of porcelain for ladies is common.\nEaster eggs are frequently depicted in sculpture, including a sculpture of a pysanka standing in Vegreville, Alberta.\nLegends.\nChristian traditions.\nWhile the origin of Easter eggs can be explained in the symbolic terms described above, among followers of Eastern Christianity the legend says that Mary Magdalene was bringing cooked eggs to share with the other women at the tomb of Jesus, and the eggs in her basket miraculously turned bright red when she saw the risen Christ.\nA different, but not necessarily conflicting legend concerns Mary Magdalene's efforts to spread the Gospel. According to this tradition, after the Ascension of Jesus, Mary went to the Emperor of Rome and greeted him with \"Christ has risen,\" whereupon he pointed to an egg on his table and stated, \"Christ has no more risen than that egg is red.\" After making this statement it is said the egg immediately turned blood red.\nRed Easter eggs, known as () in Greece and \"krashanki\" in Ukraine, are an Easter tradition and a distinct type of Easter egg prepared by various Orthodox Christian peoples. The red eggs are part of Easter custom in many areas and often accompany other traditional Easter foods. Passover haminados are prepared with similar methods.\nDark red eggs are a tradition in Greece and represent the blood of Christ shed on the cross. The practice dates to the early Christian church in Mesopotamia.\nIn Greece, superstitions of the past included the custom of placing the first-dyed red egg at the home's iconostasis (place where icons are displayed) to ward off evil. The heads and backs of small lambs were also marked with the red dye to protect them.\nParallels in other faiths.\nThe egg is widely used as a symbol of the start of new life, just as new life emerges from an egg when the chick hatches out.\nPainted eggs are used at the Iranian spring holidays, the Nowruz that marks the first day of spring or Equinox, and the beginning of the year in the Persian calendar. It is celebrated on the day of the astronomical Northward equinox, which usually occurs on March 21 or the previous/following day depending on where it is observed. The painted eggs symbolize fertility and are displayed on the Nowruz table, called Haft-Seen together with various other symbolic objects. There are sometimes one egg for each member of the family. The ancient Zoroastrians painted eggs for Nowruz, their New Year celebration, which falls on the Spring equinox. The tradition continues among Persians of Islamic, Zoroastrian, and other faiths today. The Nowruz tradition has existed for at least 2,500 years. The sculptures on the walls of Persepolis show people carrying eggs for Nowruz to the king.\nThe Neopagan holiday of Ostara occurs at roughly the same time as Easter. While it is often claimed that the use of painted eggs is an ancient, pre-Christian component of the celebration of Ostara, there are no historical accounts that ancient celebrations included this practice, apart from the Old High German lullaby which is believed by most to be a modern fabrication. Rather, the use of painted eggs has been adopted under the assumption that it might be a pre-Christian survival. In fact, modern scholarship has been unable to trace any association between eggs and a supposed goddess named Ostara before the 19th century, when early folklorists began to speculate about the possibility.\nThere are good grounds for the association between hares (later termed Easter bunnies) and bird eggs, through folklore confusion between hares' forms (where they raise their young) and plovers' nests.\nIn Judaism, a hard-boiled egg is an element of the Passover Seder, representing festival sacrifice. The children's game of hunting for the afikomen (a half-piece of matzo) has similarities to the Easter egg hunt tradition, by which the child who finds the hidden matzah will be awarded a prize. In other homes, the children hide the afikoman and a parent must look for it; when the parents give up, the children demand a prize for revealing its location.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9325", "revid": "445772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9325", "title": "Easter", "text": "Christian commemoration of the resurrection of Jesus\nEaster, also called Pasch () or Pascha (Aramaic: \u05e4\u05b7\u05bc\u05e1\u05b0\u05d7\u05b8\u05d0 , \"paskha\"; Greek: \u03c0\u03ac\u03c3\u03c7\u03b1, \"p\u00e1skha\") or Resurrection Sunday, is a Christian festival and cultural holiday commemorating the resurrection of Jesus from the dead, described in the New Testament as having occurred on the third day of his burial following his crucifixion by the Romans at Calvary c.\u200930 AD. It is the culmination of the Passion of Jesus, preceded by Lent (or Great Lent), a 40-day period of fasting, prayer, and penance.\nEaster-observing Christians commonly refer to the last week of Lent, before Easter, as Holy Week, which in Western Christianity begins on Palm Sunday (marking the entrance of Jesus in Jerusalem), includes Spy Wednesday (on which the betrayal of Jesus is mourned), and contains the days of the Easter Triduum including Maundy Thursday, commemorating the Maundy and Last Supper, as well as Good Friday, commemorating the crucifixion and death of Jesus. In Eastern Christianity, the same events are commemorated with the names of days all starting with \"Holy\" or \"Holy and Great\", and Easter itself might be called Great and Holy Pascha. In both Western and Eastern Christianity, Eastertide\u2014also known as the Easter or Paschal season\u2014begins on Easter Sunday and continues for seven weeks, concluding on the 50th day, Pentecost Sunday. However, in Eastern Christianity, the leavetaking of the feast occurs on the 39th day, the eve of the Feast of the Ascension.\nEaster and its related holidays are moveable feasts, not falling on a fixed date; its date is computed based on a lunisolar calendar (solar year plus Moon phase) similar to the Hebrew calendar, generating a number of controversies. The First Council of Nicaea (325) established common Paschal observance by all Christians on the first Sunday after the first full moon on or after the vernal equinox. Even if calculated on the basis of the Gregorian calendar, the date of that full moon sometimes differs from that of the astronomical first full moon after the March equinox.\nThe English term may derive from the Anglo-Saxon goddess name ; Easter is linked to the Jewish Passover by its name (Hebrew: \"pesach\", Aramaic: \"pascha\" are the basis of the term Pascha), by its origin (according to the synoptic Gospels, both the crucifixion and the resurrection took place during the week of Passover) and by much of its symbolism, as well as by its position in the calendar. In most European languages, both the Christian Easter and the Jewish Passover are called by the same name; and in the older English translations of the Bible, as well, the term Easter was used to translate Passover.\nEaster traditions vary across the Christian world, and include sunrise services or late-night vigils, exclamations and exchanges of Paschal greetings, flowering the cross, the wearing of Easter bonnets by women, clipping the church, and the decoration and the communal breaking of Easter eggs (a symbol of the empty tomb). The Easter lily, a symbol of the resurrection in Western Christianity, traditionally decorates the chancel area of churches on this day and for the rest of Eastertide. In addition to the viewing of Passion Plays during Lent and Easter, many television channels air films related to the resurrection, such as \"The Passion of the Christ\", \"The Greatest Story Ever Told\" and \"The Jesus Film\". Additional customs that have become associated with Easter and are observed by both Christians and some non-Christians include Easter parades, communal dancing (Eastern Europe), the Easter Bunny and egg hunting. There are also traditional Easter foods that vary by region and culture.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English term \"Easter\", cognate with German , developed from an Old English word that usually appears in the form , , or ; but also as , ; and or . In the 8th century AD, Anglo-Saxon monk and scholar Bede recorded in his \"The Reckoning of Time\" that (Old English for 'Month of \u0112ostre', translated in Bede's time as \"Paschal month\") was an English month, corresponding to April, which he says \"was once called after a goddess of theirs named \u0112ostre, in whose honour feasts were celebrated in that month\".\nIn Latin and Greek, the Christian celebration was, and still is, called (Greek: ), a word derived from Aramaic (), cognate to the Hebrew (). The word originally denoted the Jewish festival known in English as Passover, commemorating the Jewish Exodus from slavery in Egypt. As early as 50 AD, Paul the Apostle, writing from Ephesus to the Christians in Corinth, applied the term to Christ. It is unlikely that the Ephesian and Corinthian Christians were the first to hear Exodus 12 interpreted as speaking about the death of Jesus, not just about the Jewish Passover ritual. In most languages, the feast is known by names derived from the Greek and Latin . Pascha is also a name by which Jesus himself is remembered in the Orthodox Church, especially in connection with his resurrection and with the season of its celebration. Others call the holiday \"Resurrection Sunday\" or \"Resurrection Day\", after the Greek day.\nTheological significance.\nEaster celebrates Jesus' supernatural resurrection from the dead, which is one of the chief tenets of the Christian faith. Paul writes that, for those who trust in Jesus's death and resurrection, \"death is swallowed up in victory\". The First Epistle of Peter declares that God has given believers \"a new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead\". Christian theology holds that, through faith in the working of God, those who follow Jesus are spiritually resurrected with him so that they may walk in a new way of life and receive eternal salvation, and can hope to be physically resurrected to dwell with him in the Kingdom of Heaven.\nEaster is linked to Passover and the Exodus from Egypt recorded in the Old Testament through the Last Supper, sufferings, and crucifixion of Jesus that preceded the resurrection. According to the three Synoptic Gospels, Jesus gave the Passover meal a new meaning, as in the upper room during the Last Supper he prepared himself and his disciples for his death. He identified the bread and cup of wine as his body, soon to be sacrificed, and his blood, soon to be shed. The Apostle Paul states in his First Epistle to the Corinthians: \"Get rid of the old yeast that you may be a new batch without yeast\u2014as you really are. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed.\" This refers to the requirement in Jewish law that Jews eliminate all , or leavening, from their homes in advance of Passover, and to the allegory of Jesus as the Passover lamb.\nEarly Christianity.\nAs the Gospels assert that both the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus occurred during the week of Passover, the first Christians timed the observance of the annual celebration of the resurrection in relation to Passover. Direct evidence for a more fully formed Christian festival of Pascha (Easter) begins to appear in the mid-2nd century. Perhaps the earliest extant primary source referring to Easter is a mid-2nd-century Paschal homily attributed to Melito of Sardis, which characterizes the celebration as a well-established one. Evidence for another kind of annually recurring Christian festival, those commemorating the martyrs, began to appear at about the same time as the above homily.\nWhile martyrs' days (usually the individual dates of martyrdom) were celebrated on fixed dates in the local solar calendar, the date of Easter was fixed by means of the local Jewish lunisolar calendar. This is consistent with the celebration of Easter having entered Christianity during its earliest, Jewish period, but does not leave the question free of doubt.\nDate.\nEaster and the holidays that are related to it are moveable feasts, in that they do not fall on a fixed date in the Gregorian or Julian calendars (both of which follow the cycle of the sun and the seasons). Instead, the date for Easter is determined on a lunisolar calendar similar to the Hebrew calendar.\nEarly Church controversies.\nThe precise date of Easter has at times been a matter of contention. By the later 2nd century, it was widely accepted that the celebration of the holiday was a practice of the disciples and an undisputed tradition. The Quartodeciman controversy, the first of several Easter controversies, arose concerning the date on which the holiday should be celebrated.\nThe term \"Quartodeciman\" refers to the practice of ending the Lenten fast on Nisan 14 of the Hebrew calendar, \"the LORD's passover\". According to the church historian Eusebius, the Quartodeciman Polycarp (bishop of Smyrna, by tradition a disciple of John the Apostle) debated the question with Anicetus (bishop of Rome). The Roman province of Asia was Quartodeciman, while the Roman and Alexandrian churches continued the fast until the Sunday following (the Sunday of Unleavened Bread), wishing to associate Easter with Sunday. Neither Polycarp nor Anicetus persuaded the other, but they did not consider the matter schismatic either, parting in peace and leaving the question unsettled.\nControversy arose when Victor, bishop of Rome a generation after Anicetus, attempted to excommunicate Polycrates of Ephesus and all other bishops of Asia for their Quartodecimanism. According to Eusebius, a number of synods were convened to deal with the controversy, which he regarded as all ruling in support of Easter on Sunday. Polycrates (c.\u2009190), however, wrote to Victor defending the antiquity of Asian Quartodecimanism. Victor's attempted excommunication was apparently rescinded, and the two sides reconciled upon the intervention of bishop Irenaeus and others, who reminded Victor of the tolerant precedent of Anicetus.\nQuartodecimanism seems to have lingered into the 4th century, when Socrates of Constantinople recorded that some Quartodecimans were deprived of their churches by John Chrysostom and that some were harassed by Nestorius.\nIt is not known how long the Nisan 14 practice continued. But both those who followed the Nisan 14 custom, and those who set Easter to the following Sunday, had in common the custom of consulting their Jewish neighbors to learn when the month of Nisan would fall, and setting their festival accordingly. By the later 3rd century, however, some Christians began to express dissatisfaction with the custom of relying on the Jewish community to determine the date of Easter. The chief complaint was that the Jewish communities sometimes erred in setting Passover to fall before the Northern Hemisphere spring equinox. The Sardica paschal table confirms these complaints, for it indicates that the Jews of some eastern Mediterranean city (possibly Antioch) fixed Nisan 14 on dates well before the spring equinox on multiple occasions.\nBecause of this dissatisfaction with reliance on the Jewish calendar, some Christians began to experiment with independent computations. Others, however, believed that the customary practice of consulting Jews should continue, even if the Jewish computations were in error.\nFirst Council of Nicaea (325 AD).\nThe settlement of the controversy about the Paschal season caused by the Quartodeciman practice of Asian churches is listed in our principal source for the works of the Council of Nicaea, Socrates Scholasticus's \"Ecclesiastical History\", as one of the two reasons for which emperor Constantine convened the Council in 325. The Canons of the Council preserved by Dionysius Exiguus and his successors do not include any relevant provision, but letters of individuals present at the Council mention a decision prohibiting Quartodecimanism and requiring that all Christians adopt a common method to independently determine Paschal observance following the churches of Rome and Alexandria, the latter \"since there was among the Egyptians an ancient science for the computation.\"\nAlready in the end of the 4th century and, later on, Dionysius Exiguus and others following him maintained that the bishops assembled at Nicaea had promulgated the celebration of Easter on the first Sunday after the first full moon on or after the vernal equinox and that they had adopted the use of the 19-year lunar cycle, better known as Metonic cycle, to determine the date; subsequent scholarship has refuted this tradition, but, with regards to the rule of the equinox, evidence that the church of Alexandria had implemented it before 325 suggests that the Council of Nicaea implicitly endorsed it.\nCanons and sermons condemning the custom of computing Easter's date based on the Jewish calendar indicate that this custom (called \"protopaschite\" by historians) did not die out at once, but persisted for a time after the Council of Nicaea. In any case, in the years following the council, the computational system that was worked out by the church of Alexandria came to be normative. The Alexandrian system, however, was not immediately adopted throughout Christian Europe. Following Augustalis' treatise (On the Measurement of Easter), Rome retired the earlier 8-year cycle in favor of Augustalis' 84-year lunisolar calendar cycle, which it used until 457. It then switched to Victorius of Aquitaine's adaptation of the Alexandrian system.\nBecause this Victorian cycle differed from the unmodified Alexandrian cycle in the dates of some of the Paschal full moons, and because it tried to respect the Roman custom of fixing Easter to the Sunday in the week of the 16th to the 22nd of the lunar month (rather than the 15th to the 21st as at Alexandria), by providing alternative \"Latin\" and \"Greek\" dates in some years, occasional differences in the date of Easter as fixed by Alexandrian rules continued. The Alexandrian rules were adopted in the West following the tables of Dionysius Exiguus in 525.\nEarly Christians in Britain and Ireland also used an 84-year cycle. From the 5th century onward this cycle set its equinox to 25 March and fixed Easter to the Sunday falling in the 14th to the 20th of the lunar month inclusive. This 84-year cycle was replaced by the Alexandrian method in the course of the 7th and 8th centuries. Churches in western continental Europe used a late Roman method until the late 8th century during the reign of Charlemagne, when they finally adopted the Alexandrian method. Since 1582, when the Roman Catholic Church adopted the Gregorian calendar while most of Europe used the Julian calendar, the date on which Easter is celebrated has again differed.\nComputations.\nIn 725, Bede succinctly wrote: \"The Sunday following the full Moon which falls on or after the equinox will give the lawful Easter.\" However, this does not precisely reflect the ecclesiastical rules. The full moon referred to (called the Paschal full moon) is not an astronomical full moon, but the 14th day of a lunar month. Another difference is that the astronomical equinox is a natural astronomical phenomenon, which can fall on 19, 20, or 21 March, while the ecclesiastical date is fixed by convention on 21 March.\nIn addition, the lunar tables of the Julian calendar are currently five days behind those of the Gregorian calendar. Therefore, the Julian computation of the Paschal full moon is a full five days later than the astronomical full moon. The result of this combination of solar and lunar discrepancies is divergence in the date of Easter in most years (see table).\nEaster is determined on the basis of lunisolar cycles. The lunar year consists of 30-day and 29-day lunar months, generally alternating, with an embolismic month added periodically to bring the lunar cycle into line with the solar cycle. In each solar year (1 January to 31 December inclusive), the lunar month beginning with an ecclesiastical new moon falling in the 29-day period from 8 March to 5 April inclusive is designated as the paschal lunar month for that year.\nEaster is the third Sunday in the paschal lunar month, or, in other words, the Sunday after the paschal lunar month's 14th day. The 14th of the paschal lunar month is designated by convention as the Paschal full moon, although the 14th of the lunar month may differ from the date of the astronomical full moon by up to two days. Since the ecclesiastical new moon falls on a date from 8 March to 5 April inclusive, the paschal full moon (the 14th of that lunar month) must fall on a date from 22 March to 18 April inclusive.\nThe Gregorian calculation of Easter was based on a method devised by the Calabrian doctor Aloysius Lilius (or Lilio) for adjusting the epacts of the Moon, and has been adopted by almost all Western Christians and by Western countries which celebrate national holidays at Easter. For the British Empire and colonies, a determination of the date of Easter Sunday using Golden Numbers and Sunday letters was defined by the Calendar (New Style) Act 1750 with its Annexe. This was designed to match exactly the Gregorian calculation.\nWestern-Eastern divergence.\nIn Western Christianity, using the Gregorian calendar, Easter always falls on a Sunday between 22 March and 25 April, within about seven days after the astronomical full moon. The preceding Friday, Good Friday, and following Monday, Easter Monday, are legal holidays in many countries with predominantly Christian traditions.\nEastern Orthodox Christians use the same rule but base their 21 March according to the Julian calendar. Because of the thirteen-day difference between the calendars from 1900 through 2099, 21 March Julian corresponds to 3 April in the Gregorian calendar (during the 20th and 21st centuries). Consequently, the date of Orthodox Easter varies between 4 April and 8 May in the Gregorian calendar. Orthodox Easter is usually several days or more than a month later than Western Easter.\nAmong the Oriental Orthodox, some churches have changed from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar and the date for Easter, as for other fixed and moveable feasts, is the same as in the Western church.\nThe Greek island of Syros, whose population is divided almost equally between Catholics and Orthodox, is one of the few places where the two Churches share a common date for Easter, with the Catholics accepting the Orthodox date\u2014a practice helping considerably in maintaining good relations between the two communities. Conversely, Orthodox Christians in Finland celebrate Easter according to the Western Christian date.\nProposed reforms of the date.\nIn the 20th and 21st centuries, some individuals and institutions have propounded changing the method of calculating the date for Easter, the most prominent proposal being the Sunday after the second Saturday in April. Despite having some support, proposals to reform the date have not been implemented. An Orthodox congress of Eastern Orthodox bishops, which included representatives mostly from the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Serbian Patriarch, met in Constantinople in 1923, where the bishops agreed to the Revised Julian calendar.\nThe original form of this calendar would have determined Easter using precise astronomical calculations based on the meridian of Jerusalem. However, all the Eastern Orthodox countries that subsequently adopted the Revised Julian calendar adopted only that part of the revised calendar that applied to festivals falling on fixed dates in the Julian calendar. The revised Easter computation that had been part of the original 1923 agreement was never permanently implemented in any Orthodox diocese.\nIn the United Kingdom, Parliament passed the Easter Act 1928 to change the date of Easter to be the first Sunday after the second Saturday in April (or, in other words, the Sunday in the period from 9 to 15 April). However, the legislation has not been implemented, although it remains on the Statute book and could be implemented, subject to approval by the various Christian churches.\nAt a summit in Aleppo, Syria, in 1997, the World Council of Churches (WCC) proposed a reform in the calculation of Easter which would have replaced the present divergent practices of calculating Easter with modern scientific knowledge taking into account actual astronomical instances of the spring equinox and full moon based on the meridian of Jerusalem, while also following the tradition of Easter being on the Sunday following the full moon. The recommended World Council of Churches changes would have sidestepped the calendar issues and eliminated the difference in date between the Eastern and Western churches. The reform was proposed for implementation starting in 2001, and despite repeated calls for reform, it was not ultimately adopted by any member body.\nIn January 2016, the Anglican Communion, Coptic Orthodox Church, Greek Orthodox Church, and Roman Catholic Church again considered agreeing on a common, universal date for Easter, while also simplifying the calculation of that date, with either the second or third Sunday in April being popular choices.\nIn November 2022, the Patriarch of Constantinople said that conversations between the Roman Catholic Church and the Orthodox Churches had begun to determine a common date for the celebration of Easter. The agreement is expected to be reached for the 1700th anniversary of the Council of Nicaea in 2025.\nTable of the dates of Easter by Gregorian and Julian calendars.\nThe WCC presented comparative data of the relationships:\nPosition in the church year.\nWestern Christianity.\nIn most branches of Western Christianity, Easter is preceded by Lent, a period of penitence that begins on Ash Wednesday, lasts 40 days (not counting Sundays), and is often marked with fasting. The week before Easter, known as Holy Week, is an important time for observers to commemorate the final week of Jesus' life on earth. The Sunday before Easter is Palm Sunday, with the Wednesday before Easter being known as Spy Wednesday (or Holy Wednesday). The last three days before Easter are Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Holy Saturday (sometimes referred to as Silent Saturday).\nPalm Sunday, Maundy Thursday and Good Friday respectively commemorate Jesus's entry in Jerusalem, the Last Supper and the crucifixion. Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and Holy Saturday are sometimes referred to as the Easter Triduum (Latin for \"Three Days\"). Many churches begin celebrating Easter late in the evening of Holy Saturday at a service called the Easter Vigil.\nThe week beginning with Easter Sunday is called Easter Week or the Octave of Easter, and each day is prefaced with \"Easter\", e.g. Easter Monday (a public holiday in many countries), Easter Tuesday (a much less widespread public holiday), etc. Easter Saturday is therefore the Saturday \"after\" Easter Sunday. The day before Easter is properly called Holy Saturday. Eastertide, or Paschaltide, the season of Easter, begins on Easter Sunday and lasts until the day of Pentecost, seven weeks later.\nEastern Christianity.\nIn Eastern Christianity, the spiritual preparation for Easter/Pascha begins with Great Lent, which starts on Clean Monday and lasts for 40 continuous days (including Sundays). Great Lent ends on a Friday, and the next day is Lazarus Saturday. The Vespers which begins Lazarus Saturday officially brings Great Lent to a close, although the fast continues through the following week.\nThe Paschal Vigil begins with the Midnight Office, which is the last service of the Lenten Triodion and is timed so that it ends a little before midnight on Holy Saturday night. At the stroke of midnight the Paschal celebration itself begins, consisting of Paschal Matins, Paschal Hours, and Paschal Divine Liturgy.\nThe liturgical season from Easter to the Sunday of All Saints (the Sunday after Pentecost) is known as the Pentecostarion (the \"50 days\"). The week which begins on Easter Sunday is called Bright Week, during which there is no fasting, even on Wednesday and Friday. The Afterfeast of Easter lasts 39 days, with its Apodosis (leave-taking) on the day before the Feast of the Ascension. Pentecost Sunday is the 50th day from Easter (counted inclusively). In the Pentecostarion published by Apostoliki Diakonia of the Church of Greece, the Great Feast Pentecost is noted in the synaxarion portion of Matins to be the 8th Sunday of Pascha. However, the Paschal greeting of \"Christ is risen!\" is no longer exchanged among the faithful after the Apodosis of Pascha.\nLiturgical observance.\nWestern Christianity.\nThe Easter festival is kept in many different ways among Western Christians. The traditional, liturgical observation of Easter, as practised among Roman Catholics, Lutherans, and some Anglicans begins on the night of Holy Saturday with the Easter Vigil which follows an ancient liturgy involving symbols of light, candles and water and numerous readings from the Old and New Testament.\nServices continue on Easter Sunday and in a number of countries on Easter Monday. In parishes of the Moravian Church, as well as some other denominations such as the Methodist Churches, there is a tradition of Easter sunrise services, often starting in cemeteries in remembrance of the biblical narrative in the Gospels, or other places in the open where the sunrise is visible.\nIn some traditions, Easter services typically begin with the Paschal greeting: \"Christ is risen!\" The response is: \"He is risen indeed. Alleluia!\"\nEastern Christianity.\nEastern Orthodox, Eastern Catholics and Byzantine Rite Lutherans have a similar emphasis on Easter in their calendars, and many of their liturgical customs are very similar.\nPreparation for Easter begins with the season of Great Lent, which begins on Clean Monday. While the end of Lent is Lazarus Saturday, fasting does not end until Easter Sunday. The Orthodox service begins late Saturday evening, observing the Jewish tradition that evening is the start of liturgical holy days.\nThe church is darkened, then the priest lights a candle at midnight, representing the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Altar servers light additional candles, with a procession which moves three times around the church to represent the three days in the tomb. The service continues early into Sunday morning, with a feast to end the fasting. An additional service is held later that day on Easter Sunday.\nNon-observing Christian groups.\nMany Puritans saw traditional feasts of the established Anglican Church, such as All Saints' Day and Easter, as abominations because the Bible does not mention them. Conservative Reformed denominations such as the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland and the Reformed Presbyterian Church of North America likewise reject the celebration of Easter as a violation of the regulative principle of worship and what they see as its non-Scriptural origin.\nEaster is rejected by groups such as the Restored Church of God, who claim it originated as a pagan spring festival adopted by the Roman Catholic Church.\nJehovah's Witnesses maintain a similar view, observing a yearly commemorative service of the Last Supper and the subsequent execution of Christ on the evening of Nisan 14 (as they calculate the dates derived from the lunar Hebrew calendar). It is commonly referred to by many Witnesses as simply \"The Memorial\". Jehovah's Witnesses believe that such verses as and constitute a commandment to remember the death of Christ, though not the resurrection.\nMembers of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), as part of their historic \"testimony against times and seasons\", do not celebrate or observe Easter or any traditional feast days of the established Church, believing instead that \"every day is the Lord's Day\", and that elevation of one day above others suggests that it is acceptable to do un-Christian acts on other days. During the 17th and 18th centuries, Quakers were persecuted for this non-observance of Holy Days.\nEaster celebrations around the world.\nEaster traditions (also known as Paschal traditions) are customs and practices that are followed in various cultures and communities around the world to celebrate Easter, which is the central feast in Christianity, commemorating the resurrection of Jesus. The Easter season is seen as a time of celebration and feasting, in contrast to the antecedent season of Lent, which is a time of penitence and fasting.\nEaster traditions include sunrise services or late-night vigils, exclamations and exchanges of Paschal greetings, flowering the cross, the wearing of Easter bonnets by women, clipping the church, and the decoration and the communal breaking of Easter eggs (a symbol of the empty tomb). The Easter lily, a symbol of the resurrection in Christianity, traditionally decorates the chancel area of churches on this day and for the rest of Eastertide. There are also traditional Easter foods that vary by region and culture. Many traditional Easter games and customs developed, such as egg rolling, egg tapping, and cascarones or confetti eggs. Egg hunting, originating in the idea of searching for the empty tomb, is an activity that remains popular among children. Today Easter is commercially important, seeing wide sales of greeting cards and confectionery such as chocolate Easter eggs.\nIn countries where Christianity is a state religion, or those with large Christian populations, Easter is often a public holiday. As Easter always falls on a Sunday, many countries in the world also recognize Good Friday and Easter Monday as public holidays. Depending on the country, retail stores, shopping malls and restaurants may be closed on the Friday, Monday or Sunday.\nIn the Nordic countries, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, and Easter Monday are public holidays, and Good Friday and Easter Monday are bank holidays. In Denmark, Iceland and Norway, Maundy Thursday is also a public holiday; it is a holiday for most workers, except those operating some shopping malls which keep open for a half-day. Many businesses give their employees almost a week off, called Easter break. Schools are closed between Palm Sunday and Easter Monday. According to a 2014 poll, 6 of 10 Norwegians travel during Easter, often to a countryside cottage; 3 of 10 said their typical Easter included skiing.\nEaster in Italy is one of that country's major holidays. Easter in Italy enters Holy Week with Palm Sunday, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and Holy Saturday, concluding with Easter Day and Easter Monday. Each day has a special significance. In Italy, both Easter Sunday and Easter Monday are national holidays, which results in a first and a second Easter Sunday, after which the week continues to a Tuesday. Also in the Netherlands, both Easter Sunday and Easter Monday are national holidays, and like first and second Christmas Day, they are \"both\" considered Sundays, resulting in a first and a second Easter Sunday, after which the week continues to a Tuesday.\nGood Friday and Saturday as well as Easter Sunday and Monday are traditionally observed public holidays in Greece. It is customary for employees of the public sector to receive Easter bonuses as a gift from the state.\nIn Commonwealth nations, Easter Sunday is rarely a public holiday, as is the case for celebrations which fall on a Sunday. In the United Kingdom, Good Friday and Easter Monday are bank holidays, except in Scotland, where only Good Friday is a bank holiday. In Canada, Easter Monday is a statutory holiday for federal employees. In the Canadian province of Quebec, either Good Friday or Easter Monday are statutory holidays (although most companies give both). In Australia, Easter is associated with harvest time; Good Friday and Easter Monday are public holidays across all states and territories. The Saturday before Easter is a public holiday in every Australian state except Tasmania and Western Australia, while Easter Sunday itself is a public holiday only in New South Wales; Easter Tuesday is additionally a conditional public holiday in Tasmania, varying upon different industrial awards, and was also a public holiday in Victoria until 1994.\nIn New Zealand, Good Friday and Easter Monday are both state holidays.\nIn the United States, which is a secular country, Easter is not designated as a federal holiday. Easter parades are held in many American cities, though not sponsored by any government, involving festive strolling processions.\nEaster food.\nThe holiday of Easter is associated with various Easter customs and foodways (food traditions that vary regionally). Preparing, coloring, and decorating Easter eggs is one such popular tradition. Lamb is eaten in many countries, mirroring the Jewish Passover meal. Eating lamb at Easter has a religious meaning. The Paschal Lamb of the New Testament is in fact, for Christianity, the son of God Jesus Christ. The Paschal Lamb, in particular, represents the sacrifice of Jesus Christ for the sins of humanity. Eating lamb at Easter therefore commemorates the Death and Resurrection of Jesus.\nA hot cross bun is a spiced bun usually made with fruit, marked with a cross on the top, which has been traditionally eaten on Good Friday in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Canada, India, Pakistan, Malta, United States and the Commonwealth Caribbean. They are available all year round in some places, including the UK. The bun marks the end of the Christian season of Lent and different parts of the hot cross bun have a certain meaning, including the cross representing the crucifixion of Jesus, the spices inside signifying the spices used to embalm him at his burial and sometimes also orange peel to reflect the bitterness of his time on the cross. The Greeks in the 6th century AD may have marked cakes with a cross. In the Christian tradition, the making of buns with a cross on them and consuming them after breaking the fast on Good Friday, along with \"crying about 'Hot cross buns'\", is done in order to commemorate the crucifixion of Jesus. It is hypothesised that the contemporary hot cross bun of Christianity originates from St Albans Abbey in St Albans, England, where in 1361, Brother Thomas Rodcliffe, a 14th-century Christian monk, developed a similar recipe called an 'Alban Bun' and distributed the bun to the poor on Good Friday.\nFor lunch or dinner on Holy Saturday, families in Sweden and Denmark traditionally feast on a sm\u00f6rg\u00e5sbord of herring, salmon, potatoes, eggs, and other kinds of food. In Finland, it is common to eat roasted lamb with potatoes and other vegetables. In Finland, the Lutheran majority enjoys m\u00e4mmi as another traditional Easter treat, while the Orthodox minority's traditions include eating pasha (also spelled paskha) instead. In Greece, the traditional Easter meal is , a hearty stew of chopped lamb liver and wild greens seasoned with egg-and-lemon sauce. Traditionally, Easter eggs, hard-boiled eggs dyed bright red to symbolize the spilt Blood of Christ and the promise of eternal life, are cracked together to celebrate the opening of the Tomb of Christ. Greek foods of the Easter tradition are Flaouna, Lazarakia, Koulourakia, Magiritsa and Tsoureki.\nTraditional Italian dishes for the Easter period are abbacchio, cappello del prete, casatiello, Colomba di Pasqua, pastiera, penia, pizza di Pasqua and pizzelle. Abbacchio is an Italian preparation of lamb typical of the Roman cuisine. It is a product protected by the European Union with the PGI mark. In Italy at Easter, abbacchio is cooked in different ways, with recipes that vary from region to region. In Rome it is roasted, in Apulia in the oven, in Naples it is cooked with peas and eggs, in Sardinia it is cooked in the oven with potatoes, artichokes and myrtle and in Tuscany it is cooked in cacciatore style. Other local preparations include frying and stewing. Colomba di Pasqua (English: \"Easter Dove\") is an Italian traditional Easter bread, the Easter counterpart of the two well-known Italian Christmas desserts, panettone and pandoro.\nCapirotada or Capilotade, also known as Capirotada de vigilia, is a traditional Mexican food similar to a bread pudding that is usually eaten during the Lenten period. It is one of the dishes served on Good Friday. Despite originally being consumed before Lent, \"capirotada\" is now consumed \"during\" Lent, especially during Holy Week and on Good Friday. Recently, it has been given a spiritual meaning in relation to the passion of Christ and the Lenten season, thus, for many people, the bread represents the Body of Christ, the syrup is his blood, the cloves are the nails of the cross, and the whole cinnamon sticks are the wood of the cross. The melted cheese stands for the Holy Shroud.\nThe Easter mona is a Spanish kind of cake that is especially eaten on Easter Sunday or Easter Monday in the Spanish regions of Catalonia, Valencia and Murcia. In other Spanish regions, these Easter cakes are common with variations in the recipe and name. According to the writing of Joan Amades, mentions of the \"mona\" date back to the 15th century, though in the Joan Lacavalleria's 1696 dictionary, \"Gazophylacium Catalano-Latinum\", \"mona\" still has a purely zoological definition (meaning female monkey). The 1783 edition of the dictionary of the Royal Spanish Academy has the following definition: \"Catalonia, Valencia and Murcia. Cake baked with eggs in their shell at Easter, known in other parts of the Iberian Peninsula as Hornazo\".\nPaskha (also spelled \"pascha\", or \"pasha\") is a Slavic festive dish made in Eastern Orthodox countries which consists of food that is forbidden during the fast of Great Lent. It is made during Holy Week and then brought to Church on Great Saturday to be blessed after the Paschal Vigil. The name of the dish comes from Pascha, the Eastern Orthodox celebration of Easter. Besides Russia, Ukraine, etc. Pasha is also often served in Finland. Cheese paskha is a traditional Easter dish made from tvorog (like cottage cheese, ), which is white, symbolizing the purity of Christ, the Paschal Lamb, and the joy of the Resurrection. It is formed in a mold, traditionally in the shape of a truncated pyramid which symbolizes the first Passover in Egypt, a nod to Christianity's early Jewish beginnings and a reminder that the Last Supper of Jesus was a Passover Seder. Others believe the pyramid is a symbol of the Trinity, the Church, or the Tomb of Christ. It is usually served as an accompaniment to rich Easter breads called paska in Ukraine and kulich in Russia (where the \"paskha\" name is also used in the Southern regions). The Easter foods; bread and cheese paska are very rich and made of many dairy items given up during Great Lent. They are brought to church on Easter to be blessed by the priest.\nEaster eggs.\nTraditional customs.\nThe egg is an ancient symbol of new life and rebirth. In Christianity it became associated with Jesus's crucifixion and resurrection. The custom of the Easter egg originated in the early Christian community of Mesopotamia, who stained eggs red in memory of the blood of Christ, shed at his crucifixion. As such, for Christians, the Easter egg is a symbol of the empty tomb. The oldest tradition is to use dyed chicken eggs.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church Easter eggs are blessed by a priest both in families' baskets together with other foods forbidden during Great Lent and alone for distribution or in church or elsewhere.\nEaster eggs are a widely popular symbol of new life among the Eastern Orthodox but also in folk traditions in Slavic countries and elsewhere. A batik-like decorating process known as pisanka produces intricate, brilliantly colored eggs. The celebrated House of Faberg\u00e9 workshops created exquisite jewelled Easter eggs for the Russian Imperial family from 1885 to 1916.\nModern customs.\nA modern custom in the Western world is to substitute decorated chocolate, or plastic eggs filled with candy such as jellybeans; as many people give up candy (sweets) as their Lenten sacrifice, individuals indulge in them at Easter after having abstained during the preceding forty days of Lent.\nManufacturing their first Easter egg in 1875, British chocolate company Cadbury sponsors the annual egg hunt which takes place in over 250 National Trust locations in the United Kingdom. On Easter Monday, the President of the United States holds an annual Easter egg roll on the White House lawn for young children.\nEaster Bunny.\nIn some traditions, the children put out their empty baskets for the Easter Bunny to fill while they sleep. They wake to find their baskets filled with candy eggs and other treats. A custom originating in Germany, the Easter Bunny is a popular legendary anthropomorphic Easter gift-giving character analogous to Santa Claus in American culture. Many children around the world follow the tradition of coloring hard-boiled eggs and giving baskets of candy. Historically, foxes, cranes and storks were also sometimes named as the mystical creatures. Since the rabbit is a pest in Australia, the Easter Bilby is available as an alternative.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCalculating.\n! colspan=\"3\" style=\"border-top: 5px solid gold;\" | Sundays of the Easter cycle\n "}
{"id": "9328", "revid": "1368779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9328", "title": "Euphoria (disambiguation)", "text": "Euphoria is an emotional and mental state defined as a sense of great happiness and well-being.\nEuphoria may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "9330", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9330", "title": "EucliD", "text": ""}
{"id": "9331", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9331", "title": "Euclid", "text": "Ancient Greek mathematician (fl. 300 BC)\nEuclid (; ; fl.\u2009300 BC) was an ancient Greek mathematician active as a geometer and logician. Considered the \"father of geometry\", he is chiefly known for the \"Elements\" treatise, which established the foundations of geometry that largely dominated the field until the early 19th century. His system, now referred to as Euclidean geometry, involved innovations in combination with a synthesis of theories from earlier Greek mathematicians, including Eudoxus of Cnidus, Hippocrates of Chios, Thales and Theaetetus. With Archimedes and Apollonius of Perga, Euclid is generally considered among the greatest mathematicians of antiquity, and one of the most influential in the history of mathematics.\nVery little is known of Euclid's life, and most information comes from the scholars Proclus and Pappus of Alexandria many centuries later. Medieval Islamic mathematicians invented a fanciful biography, and medieval Byzantine and early Renaissance scholars mistook him for the earlier philosopher Euclid of Megara. It is now generally accepted that he spent his career in Alexandria and lived around 300 BC, after Plato's students and before Archimedes. There is some speculation that Euclid studied at the Platonic Academy and later taught at the Musaeum; he is regarded as bridging the earlier Platonic tradition in Athens with the later tradition of Alexandria.\nIn the \"Elements\", Euclid deduced the theorems from a small set of axioms. He also wrote works on perspective, conic sections, spherical geometry, number theory, and mathematical rigour. In addition to the \"Elements\", Euclid wrote a central early text in the optics field, \"Optics\", and lesser-known works including \"Data\" and \"Phaenomena\". Euclid's authorship of \"On Divisions of Figures\" and \"Catoptrics\" has been questioned. He is thought to have written many lost works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife.\nTraditional narrative.\nThe English name 'Euclid' is the anglicized version of the Ancient Greek name (). It is derived from \" (; 'well') and 'kl\u00eas' (; 'fame'), meaning \"renowned, glorious\". In English, by metonymy, 'Euclid' can mean his most well-known work, Euclid's \"Elements\", or a copy thereof, and is sometimes synonymous with 'geometry'.\nAs with many ancient Greek mathematicians, the details of Euclid's life are mostly unknown. He is accepted as the author of four mostly extant treatises\u2014the \"Elements\", \"Optics\", \"Data\", \"Phaenomena\"\u2014but besides this, there is nothing known for certain of him. The traditional narrative mainly follows the 5th century AD account by Proclus in his \"Commentary on the First Book of Euclid's Elements\", as well as a few anecdotes from Pappus of Alexandria in the early 4th century.\nAccording to Proclus, Euclid lived shortly after several of Plato's (d.\u2009347 BC) followers and before the mathematician Archimedes (c.\u2009287\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009212 BC); specifically, Proclus placed Euclid during the rule of Ptolemy I (r.\u2009305/304\u00a0\u2013\u00a0282 BC). Euclid's birthdate is unknown; some scholars estimate around 330 or 325 BC, but others refrain from speculating. It is presumed that he was of Greek descent, but his birthplace is unknown. Proclus (a Neoplatonist) held that Euclid followed the Platonic tradition, but there is no definitive confirmation for this. It is unlikely he was a contemporary of Plato, so it is often presumed that he was educated by Plato's disciples at the Platonic Academy in Athens. Historian Thomas Heath supported this theory, noting that most capable geometers lived in Athens, including many of those whose work Euclid built on; historian Michalis Sialaros considers this a mere conjecture. In any event, the contents of Euclid's work demonstrate familiarity with the Platonic geometry tradition.\nIn his \"Collection\", Pappus mentions that Apollonius studied with Euclid's students in Alexandria, and this has been taken to imply that Euclid worked and founded a mathematical tradition there. The city was founded by Alexander the Great in 331 BC, and the rule of Ptolemy I from 306 BC onwards gave it a stability which was relatively unique amid the chaotic wars over dividing Alexander's empire. Ptolemy began a process of hellenization and commissioned numerous constructions, building the massive Musaeum institution, which was a leading center of education. Euclid is speculated to have been among the Musaeum's first scholars. Euclid's date of death is unknown; it has been speculated that he died c.\u2009270 BC.\nIdentity and historicity.\nEuclid is often referred to as 'Euclid of Alexandria' to differentiate him from the earlier philosopher Euclid of Megara, a pupil of Socrates included in dialogues of Plato with whom he was historically conflated. Valerius Maximus, the 1st century AD Roman compiler of anecdotes, mistakenly substituted Euclid's name for Eudoxus (4th century BC) as the mathematician to whom Plato sent those asking how to double the cube. Perhaps on the basis of this mention of a mathematical Euclid roughly a century early, Euclid became mixed up with Euclid of Megara in medieval Byzantine sources (now lost), eventually leading Euclid the mathematician to be ascribed details of both men's biographies and described as (lit.\u2009'of Megara'). The Byzantine scholar Theodore Metochites (c.\u20091300) explicitly conflated the two Euclids, as did printer Erhard Ratdolt's 1482 of Campanus of Novara's Latin translation of the \"Elements\". After the mathematician Bartolomeo Zamberti appended most of the extant biographical fragments about either Euclid to the preface of his 1505 translation of the \"Elements\", subsequent publications passed on this identification. A further confusion, which gives the birthplace of Euclid as Gela, Sicily, arises from the fact that Euclid of Megara is sometimes said to have been born in Gela. Later Renaissance scholars, particularly Peter Ramus, reevaluated this claim, proving it false via issues in chronology and contradiction in early sources.\nMedieval Arabic sources give vast amounts of information concerning Euclid's life, but are completely unverifiable. Euclid, who was supposedly a Tyre-born Greek domiciled at Damascus, was claimed to have been the son of Naucrates. Most scholars consider them of dubious authenticity. Heath in particular contends that the fictionalization was done to strengthen the connection between a revered mathematician and the Arab world. There are also numerous anecdotal stories concerning to Euclid, all of uncertain historicity, which \"picture him as a kindly and gentle old man\". The best known of these is Proclus' story about Ptolemy asking Euclid if there was a quicker path to learning geometry than reading his \"Elements\", which Euclid replied with \"there is no royal road to geometry\". This anecdote is questionable since a very similar interaction between Menaechmus and Alexander the Great is recorded from Stobaeus. Both accounts were written in the 5th century AD, neither indicates its source, and neither appears in ancient Greek literature.\nAny firm dating of Euclid's activity c.\u2009300 BC is called into question by a lack of contemporary references. The earliest original reference to Euclid is in Apollonius' prefatory letter to the \"Conics\" (early 2nd century BC): \"The third book of the \"Conics\" contains many astonishing theorems that are useful for both the syntheses and the determinations of number of solutions of solid loci. Most of these, and the finest of them, are novel. And when we discovered them we realized that Euclid had not made the synthesis of the locus on three and four lines but only an accidental fragment of it, and even that was not felicitously done.\" The \"Elements\" is speculated to have been at least partly in circulation by the 3rd century BC, as Archimedes and Apollonius take several of its propositions for granted; however, Archimedes employs an older variant of the theory of proportions than the one found in the \"Elements\". The oldest physical copies of material included in the \"Elements\", dating from roughly 100 AD, can be found on papyrus fragments unearthed in an ancient rubbish heap from Oxyrhynchus, Roman Egypt. The oldest extant direct citations to the \"Elements\" in works whose dates are firmly known are not until the 2nd century AD, by Galen and Alexander of Aphrodisias; by this time it was a standard school text. Some ancient Greek mathematicians mention Euclid by name, but he is usually referred to as \"\u1f41 \u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9\u03c7\u03b5\u03b9\u03ce\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2\" (\"the author of \"Elements\"\"). In the Middle Ages, some scholars contended Euclid was not a historical personage and that his name arose from a corruption of Greek mathematical terms.\nWorks.\n\"Elements\".\nEuclid is best known for his thirteen-book treatise, the \"Elements\" (; ), considered his \"magnum opus\". Much of its content originates from earlier mathematicians, including Eudoxus, Hippocrates of Chios, Thales and Theaetetus, while other theorems are mentioned by Plato and Aristotle. It is difficult to differentiate the work of Euclid from that of his predecessors, especially because the \"Elements\" essentially superseded much earlier and now-lost Greek mathematics. The classicist Markus Asper concludes that \"apparently Euclid's achievement consists of assembling accepted mathematical knowledge into a cogent order and adding new proofs to fill in the gaps\" and the historian Serafina Cuomo described it as a \"reservoir of results\". Despite this, Sialaros furthers that \"the remarkably tight structure of the \"Elements\" reveals authorial control beyond the limits of a mere editor\".\nThe \"Elements\" does not exclusively discuss geometry as is sometimes believed. It is traditionally divided into three topics: plane geometry (books 1\u20136), basic number theory (books 7\u201310) and solid geometry (books 11\u201313)\u2014though book 5 (on proportions) and 10 (on irrational lines) do not exactly fit this scheme. The heart of the text is the theorems scattered throughout. Using Aristotle's terminology, these may be generally separated into two categories: \"first principles\" and \"second principles\". The first group includes statements labeled as a \"definition\" ( or ), \"postulate\" (), or a \"common notion\" (); only the first book includes postulates\u2014later known as axioms\u2014and common notions. The second group consists of propositions, presented alongside mathematical proofs and diagrams. It is unknown if Euclid intended the \"Elements\" as a textbook, but its method of presentation makes it a natural fit. As a whole, the authorial voice remains general and impersonal.\nContents.\nBook 1 of the \"Elements\" is foundational for the entire text. It begins with a series of 20 definitions for basic geometric concepts such as lines, angles and various regular polygons. Euclid then presents 10 assumptions (see table, right), grouped into five postulates (axioms) and five common notions. These assumptions are intended to provide the logical basis for every subsequent theorem, i.e. serve as an axiomatic system. The common notions exclusively concern the comparison of magnitudes. While postulates 1 through 4 are relatively straightforward, the 5th is known as the parallel postulate and particularly famous. Book 1 also includes 48 propositions, which can be loosely divided into those concerning basic theorems and constructions of plane geometry and triangle congruence (1\u201326); parallel lines (27\u201334); the area of triangles and parallelograms (35\u201345); and the Pythagorean theorem (46\u201348). The last of these includes the earliest surviving proof of the Pythagorean theorem, described by Sialaros as \"remarkably delicate\".\nBook 2 is traditionally understood as concerning \"geometric algebra\", though this interpretation has been heavily debated since the 1970s; critics describe the characterization as anachronistic, since the foundations of even nascent algebra occurred many centuries later. The second book has a more focused scope and mostly provides algebraic theorems to accompany various geometric shapes. It focuses on the area of rectangles and squares (see Quadrature), and leads up to a geometric precursor of the law of cosines. Book 3 focuses on circles, while the 4th discusses regular polygons, especially the pentagon. Book 5 is among the work's most important sections and presents what is usually termed as the \"general theory of proportion\". Book 6 utilizes the \"theory of ratios\" in the context of plane geometry. It is built almost entirely of its first proposition: \"Triangles and parallelograms which are under the same height are to one another as their bases\".\nFrom Book 7 onwards, the mathematician Benno Artmann notes that \"Euclid starts afresh. Nothing from the preceding books is used\". Number theory is covered by books 7 to 10, the former beginning with a set of 22 definitions for parity, prime numbers and other arithmetic-related concepts. Book 7 includes the Euclidean algorithm, a method for finding the greatest common divisor of two numbers. The 8th book discusses geometric progressions, while book 9 includes the proposition, now called Euclid's theorem, that there are infinitely many prime numbers. Of the \"Elements\", book 10 is by far the largest and most complex, dealing with irrational numbers in the context of magnitudes.\nThe final three books (11\u201313) primarily discuss solid geometry. By introducing a list of 37 definitions, Book 11 contextualizes the next two. Although its foundational character resembles Book 1, unlike the latter it features no axiomatic system or postulates. The three sections of Book 11 include content on solid geometry (1\u201319), solid angles (20\u201323) and parallelepipedal solids (24\u201337).\nOther works.\nIn addition to the \"Elements\", at least five works of Euclid have survived to the present day. They follow the same logical structure as \"Elements\", with definitions and proved propositions.\nLost works.\nFour other works are credibly attributed to Euclid, but have been lost.\nLegacy.\nEuclid is generally considered with Archimedes and Apollonius of Perga as among the greatest mathematicians of antiquity. Many commentators cite him as one of the most influential figures in the history of mathematics. The geometrical system established by the \"Elements\" long dominated the field; however, today that system is often referred to as 'Euclidean geometry' to distinguish it from other non-Euclidean geometries discovered in the early 19th century. Among Euclid's many namesakes are the European Space Agency's (ESA) Euclid spacecraft, the lunar crater Euclides, and the minor planet 4354 Euclides.\nThe \"Elements\" is often considered after the Bible as the most frequently translated, published, and studied book in the Western World's history. With Aristotle's \"Metaphysics\", the \"Elements\" is perhaps the most successful ancient Greek text, and was the dominant mathematical textbook in the Medieval Arab and Latin worlds.\nThe first English edition of the \"Elements\" was published in 1570 by Henry Billingsley and John Dee. The mathematician Oliver Byrne published a well-known version of the \"Elements\" in 1847 entitled \"The First Six Books of the Elements of Euclid in Which Coloured Diagrams and Symbols Are Used Instead of Letters for the Greater Ease of Learners\", which included colored diagrams intended to increase its pedagogical effect. David Hilbert authored a modern axiomatization of the \"Elements\". Edna St. Vincent Millay wrote that \"Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOnline\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9332", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9332", "title": "Errol Morris", "text": "American film director (born 1948)\nErrol Mark Morris (born February 5, 1948) is an American film director known for documentaries that interrogate the epistemology of their subjects, and the invention of the Interrotron. In 2003, his \"The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara\" won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. His film \"The Thin Blue Line\" placed fifth on a \"Sight &amp; Sound\" poll of the greatest documentaries ever made. Morris is known for making films about unusual subjects; \"Fast, Cheap &amp; Out of Control\" interweaves the stories of an animal trainer, a topiary gardener, a robot scientist, and a naked mole-rat specialist.\nEarly life and education.\nMorris was born on February 5, 1948, into a Jewish family in Hewlett, New York. His father died when he was two and he was raised by his mother, a piano teacher. He had one older brother, Noel, who was a computer programmer. After being treated for strabismus in childhood, Morris refused to wear an eye patch. As a consequence, he has limited sight in one eye and lacks normal stereoscopic vision.\nIn the 10th grade, Morris attended The Putney School, a boarding school in Vermont. He began playing the cello, spending a summer in France studying music under the acclaimed Nadia Boulanger, who also taught Morris's future collaborator Philip Glass. Describing Morris as a teenager, Mark Singer wrote that he \"read with a passion the 14-odd \"Oz\" books, watched a lot of television, and on a regular basis went with a doting but not quite right maiden aunt ('I guess you'd have to say that Aunt Roz was somewhat demented') to Saturday matin\u00e9es, where he saw such films as \"This Island Earth\" and \"Creature from the Black Lagoon\"\u2014horror movies that, viewed again 30 years later, still seem scary to him.\"\nCollege.\nMorris attended the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, graduating in 1969 with a Bachelor of Arts in history. For a brief time, Morris held small jobs, first as a cable-television salesman, and then as a term-paper writer. His unorthodox approach to applying for graduate school included \"trying to get accepted at different graduate schools just by showing up on their doorstep.\" Having unsuccessfully approached both the University of Oxford and Harvard University, Morris was able to talk his way into Princeton University, where he began studying the history of science, a topic in which he had \"absolutely no background.\" His concentration was in the history of physics, and he was bored and unsuccessful in the prerequisite physics classes he had to take. This, together with his antagonistic relationship with his advisor Thomas Kuhn ('You won't even look through my telescope.' And his response was 'Errol, it's not a telescope, it's a kaleidoscope.') ensured that his stay at Princeton would be short.\nMorris left Princeton in 1972, enrolling at Berkeley as a doctoral student in philosophy. At Berkeley, he once again found that he was not well-suited to his subject. \"Berkeley was just a world of pedants. It was truly shocking. I spent two or three years in the philosophy program. I have very bad feelings about it\", he later said.\nCareer.\nAfter leaving UC Berkeley, he became a regular at the Pacific Film Archive. As Tom Luddy, the director of the archive at the time, later remembered: \"He was a film noir nut. He claimed we weren't showing the real film noir. So I challenged him to write the program notes. Then, there was his habit of sneaking into the films and denying that he was sneaking in. I told him if he was sneaking in he should at least admit he was doing it.\"\nUnfinished project on Ed Gein.\nInspired by Hitchcock's \"Psycho\", Morris visited Plainfield, Wisconsin in 1975, where he conducted multiple interviews with Ed Gein, the infamous body snatcher who resided at Mendota State Hospital in Madison. He later made plans with German film director Werner Herzog, whom Tom Luddy had introduced to Morris, to return in the summer of 1975 to secretly open the grave of Gein's mother to test their theory that Gein himself had already dug her up. Herzog arrived on schedule, but Morris had second thoughts and was not there. Herzog did not open the grave. Morris later returned to Plainfield, this time staying for almost a year, conducting hundreds of hours of interviews. Despite this, his plans to either write a book or make a film (which he would call \"Digging up the Past\") were left unfinished at the time. In an October 2023 interview with Letterboxd, Morris mentioned that he has since returned to the project, saying \"I started rewatching \"Psycho\", because I'm making a movie about Ed Gein.\"\nIn the fall of 1976, Herzog visited Plainfield again, this time to shoot part of his film \"Stroszek\".\nFirst films.\nMorris accepted $2,000 from Herzog and used it to take a trip to Vernon, Florida. Vernon was nicknamed \"Nub City\" because its residents supposedly participated in a particularly gruesome form of insurance fraud in which they deliberately amputated a limb to collect the insurance money. Morris's second documentary was about the town and bore its name, although it made no mention of Vernon as \"Nub City\", but instead explored other idiosyncrasies of the town's residents. Morris made this omission because he received death threats while doing research; the town's residents were afraid that Morris would reveal their secret.\nAfter spending two weeks in Vernon, Morris returned to Berkeley and began working on a script for a work of fiction that he called \"Nub City.\" After a few unproductive months, he happened upon a headline in the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" that read, \"450 Dead Pets Going to Napa Valley.\" Morris left for Napa Valley and began working on the film that would become his first feature, \"Gates of Heaven\", which premiered in 1978. Herzog had said he would eat his shoe if Morris completed the documentary. After the film premiered, Herzog publicly followed through on the bet by cooking and eating his shoe, which was documented in the short film \"Werner Herzog Eats His Shoe\" by Les Blank.\n\"Gates of Heaven\" was given a limited release in the spring of 1981. Roger Ebert was a champion of the film, including it on his ballot in the 1992 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" critics' poll. Morris returned to Vernon in 1979 and again in 1980, renting a house in town and conducting interviews with the town's citizens. \"Vernon, Florida\" premiered at the 1981 New York Film Festival. \"Newsweek\" called it, \"a film as odd and mysterious as its subjects, and quite unforgettable.\" The film, like \"Gates of Heaven\", suffered from poor distribution. It was released on video in 1987, and DVD in 2005.\nAfter finishing \"Vernon, Florida\", Morris tried to get funding for a variety of projects. The \"Road\" story was about an interstate highway in Minnesota; one project was about Robert Golka, the creator of laser-induced fireballs in Utah; and another story was about Centralia, Pennsylvania, the coal town in which an inextinguishable subterranean fire ignited in 1962. He eventually got funding in 1983 to write a script about John and Jim Pardue, Missouri bank robbers who had killed their father and grandmother and robbed five banks. Morris's pitch went, \"The great bank-robbery sprees always take place at a time when something is going wrong in the country. Bonnie and Clyde were apolitical, but it's impossible to imagine them without the Depression as a backdrop. The Pardue brothers were apolitical, but it's impossible to imagine them without Vietnam.\" Morris wanted Tom Waits and Mickey Rourke to play the brothers, and he wrote the script, but the project eventually failed. Morris worked on writing scripts for various other projects, including a pair of ill-fated Stephen King adaptations.\nIn 1984, Morris married Julia Sheehan, whom he had met in Wisconsin while researching Ed Gein and other serial killers. He would later recall an early conversation with Julia: \"I was talking to a mass murderer but I was thinking of you,\" he said, and instantly regretted it, afraid that it might not have sounded as affectionate as he had wished. But Julia was actually flattered: \"I thought, really, that was one of the nicest things anyone ever said to me. It was hard to go out with other guys after that.\"\n\"The Thin Blue Line\".\nIn 1985, Morris became interested in Dr. James Grigson, a psychiatrist in Dallas. Under Texas law, the death penalty can only be issued if the jury is convinced that the defendant is not only guilty, but will commit further violent crimes in the future if he is not put to death. Grigson had spent 15 years testifying for such cases, and he almost invariably gave the same damning testimony, often saying that it is \"one hundred per cent certain\" that the defendant would kill again. This led to Grigson being nicknamed \"Dr. Death.\" Through Grigson, Morris met the subject of his next film, 36-year-old Randall Dale Adams.\nAdams was serving a life sentence that had been commuted from a death sentence on a legal technicality for the 1976 murder of Robert Wood, a Dallas police officer. Adams told Morris that he had been framed, and that David Harris, who was present at the time of the murder and was the principal witness for the prosecution, had in fact killed Wood. Morris began researching the case because it related to Dr. Grigson. He was at first unconvinced of Adams's innocence. After reading the transcripts of the trial and meeting David Harris at a bar, however, Morris was no longer so sure.\nAt the time, Morris had been making a living as a private investigator for a well-known private detective agency that specialized in Wall Street cases. Bringing together his talents as an investigator and his obsessions with murder, narration, and epistemology, Morris went to work on the case in earnest. Unedited interviews in which the prosecution's witnesses systematically contradicted themselves were used as testimony in Adams's 1986 \"habeas corpus\" hearing to determine if he would receive a new trial. David Harris famously confessed, in a roundabout manner, to killing Wood.\nAlthough Adams was finally found innocent after years of being processed by the legal system, the judge in the \"habeas corpus\" hearing officially stated that, \"much could be said about those videotape interviews, but nothing that would have any bearing on the matter before this court.\" Regardless, \"The Thin Blue Line\", as Morris's film would be called, was popularly accepted as the main force behind getting its subject, Randall Adams, out of prison. As Morris said of the film, \"\"The Thin Blue Line\" is two movies grafted together. On one simple level is the question, Did he do it, or didn't he? And on another level, \"The Thin Blue Line\", properly considered, is an essay on false history. A whole group of people, literally everyone, believed a version of the world that was entirely wrong, and my accidental investigation of the story provided a different version of what happened.\"\n\"The Thin Blue Line\" ranks among the most critically acclaimed documentaries ever made. According to a survey by \"The Washington Post\", the film made dozens of critics' top ten lists for 1988, more than any other film that year. It won the documentary of the year award from both the New York Film Critics Circle and the National Society of Film Critics. Despite its widespread acclaim, it was not nominated for an Oscar, which created a small scandal regarding the nomination practices of the academy. The academy cited the film's genre of \"non-fiction\", arguing that it was not actually a documentary. It was the first of Morris's films to be scored by Philip Glass.\n\"A Brief History of Time\" and \"Fast, Cheap &amp; Out of Control\".\nMorris wanted to make a film about Albert Einstein's brain and approached Amblin Entertainment about it. Gordon Freedman had acquired the rights to Stephen Hawking's bestseller \"A Brief History of Time\" and Steven Spielberg suggested Morris direct it. After reading Hawking's book, Morris agreed to direct a documentary adaptation of it, having studied the philosophy of science at Princeton. Morris's film \"A Brief History of Time\" is less an adaptation of Hawking's book than a portrait of the scientist. It combines interviews with Hawking, his colleagues and his family with computer animations and clips from movies like Disney's \"The Black Hole\". Morris said he was \"very moved by Hawking as a man\", calling him \"immensely likable, perverse, funny...and yes, he's a genius.\"\nMorris's \"Fast, Cheap &amp; Out of Control\" interweaves interviews with a wild animal trainer, a topiary gardener, a robot scientist and a naked mole rat specialist with stock footage, cartoons and clips from film serials. Roger Ebert said of it, \"If I had to describe it, I'd say it's about people who are trying to control things - to take upon themselves the mantle of God.\" Morris agreed there was a \"Frankenstein element\", adding \"They're all involved in some very odd inquiry about life. It sounds horribly pretentious laid out that way, but there's something mysterious in each of the stories, something melancholy as well as funny. And there's an edge of mortality. For the end of the movie I showed the gardener clipping the top of his camel, clipping in a heavenly light, and then walking away in the rain. You know that this garden is not going to last much longer than the gardener's lifetime.\" The film was scored by Caleb Sampson of the Alloy Orchestra and photographed by Robert Richardson. Morris dedicated the film to his mother and stepfather, who had recently died. It was named by several critics as one of the best films of 1997.\nIn 2002, Morris was commissioned to make a short film for the 75th Academy Awards. He was hired based on his advertising resume, not his career as a director of feature-length documentaries. Those interviewed ranged from Laura Bush to Iggy Pop to Kenneth Arrow to Morris's 15-year-old son Hamilton. Morris was nominated for an Emmy for this short film. He considered editing this footage into a feature-length film, focusing on Donald Trump discussing \"Citizen Kane\" (this segment was later released on the second issue of \"Wholphin\"). Morris went on to make a second short for the 79th Academy Awards in 2007, this time interviewing the various nominees and asking them about their Oscar experiences.\n\"The Fog of War\" and later films.\nIn 2003, Morris won the Oscar for Best Documentary for \"The Fog of War\", a film about the career of Robert S. McNamara, the Secretary of Defense during the Vietnam War under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. In the haunting opening about McNamara's relationship with U.S. General Curtis LeMay during World War II, Morris brings out complexities in the character of McNamara, which shaped McNamara's positions in the Cuban Missile Crisis and the Vietnam War. Like his earlier documentary, \"The Thin Blue Line,\" \"The Fog of War\" included extensive use of re-enactments, a technique which many had believed was inappropriate for documentaries prior to his Oscar win.\nIn early 2010, a new Morris documentary was submitted to several film festivals, including Toronto International Film Festival, Cannes Film Festival, and Telluride Film Festival. The film, \"Tabloid\", features interviews with Joyce McKinney, a former Miss Wyoming, who was convicted \"in absentia\" for the kidnap and indecent assault of a Mormon missionary in England during 1977.\nSubsequently, Morris has made documentaries such as \"The Unknown Known\" (2013), \"American Dharma\" (2018), and \"The Pigeon Tunnel\" (2023), revolving around interviews conducted with Donald Rumsfeld, Steve Bannon, and John le Carr\u00e9, respectively.\nCommercials.\nAlthough Morris has achieved fame as a documentary filmmaker, he is also an accomplished director of television commercials. In 2002, Morris directed a series of television ads for Apple Computer as part of a popular \"Switch\" campaign. The commercials featured ex-Windows users discussing their various bad experiences that motivated their own personal switches to Macintosh. One commercial in the series, starring Ellen Feiss, a high-schooler friend of his son Hamilton Morris, became an Internet meme. Morris has directed hundreds of commercials for various companies and products, including Adidas, AIG, Cisco Systems, Citibank, Kimberly-Clark's Depend brand, Levi's, Miller High Life, Nike, PBS, The Quaker Oats Company, Southern Comfort, EA Sports, Toyota and Volkswagen. Many of these commercials are available on his website.\nIn July 2004, Morris directed another series of commercials in the style of the \"Switch\" ads. This campaign featured Republicans who voted for Bush in the 2000 election giving their personal reasons for voting for Kerry in 2004. Upon completing more than 50 commercials, Morris had difficulty getting them on the air. Eventually, the liberal advocacy group MoveOn PAC paid to air a few of the commercials. Morris also wrote an editorial for \"The New York Times\" discussing the commercials and Kerry's losing campaign.\nIn late 2004, Morris directed a series of noteworthy commercials for Sharp Electronics. The commercials enigmatically depicted various scenes from what appeared to be a short narrative that climaxed with a car crashing into a swimming pool. Each commercial showed a slightly different perspective on the events, and each ended with a cryptic weblink. The weblink was to a fake webpage advertising a prize offered to anyone who could discover the secret location of some valuable urns. It was in fact an alternate reality game. The original commercials can be found on Morris's website.\nMorris directed a series of commercials for Reebok that featured six prominent National Football League (NFL) players. The 30-second promotional videos were aired during the 2006 NFL season.\nIn 2013, Morris stated that he has made around 1,000 commercials during his career. Since then he has continued in the field, including a 2019 campaign for Chipotle.\nIn 2015, Morris made commercials for medical technology firm Theranos, and interviewed its founder, Elizabeth Holmes. After the company fell in disgrace, Morris was criticized by \"The Telegraph\" for seeming \"captivated\" by Holmes, and for contributing to Holmes' mythical persona as a visionary. In a 2019 \"New Yorker\" interview, Morris reflected, \"To me, what really is interesting about Elizabeth [Holmes]\u00a0... did she really see herself as a fraud? Was it calculation? I have a hard time squaring that with my own experience. Could I have been self-deceived, delusional? You betcha. I'm no different than the next guy. I'd like to think I'm a little different. But I'm still fascinated by her.\"\nWritings and documentary shorts.\nMorris has also written long-form journalism, exploring different areas of interest and published on \"The New York Times\" website. A collection of these essays, titled \"Believing is Seeing: Observations on the Mysteries of Photography,\" was published by Penguin Press on September 1, 2011. In November 2011, Morris premiered a documentary short titled \"The Umbrella Man\"\u2014featuring Josiah \"Tink\" Thompson\u2014about the Kennedy assassination on \"The New York Times\" website.\nIn 2012, Morris published his second book, \"A Wilderness of Error: The Trials of Jeffrey MacDonald\", about Jeffrey MacDonald, the Green Beret physician convicted of killing his wife and two daughters on February 17, 1970. Morris first became interested in the case in the early 1990s and believes that MacDonald is not guilty after undertaking extensive research. Morris explained in a July 2013 interview, prior to the reopening of the case: \"What happened here is wrong. It's wrong to convict a man under these circumstances. And if I can help correct that, I will be a happy camper.\" He now states that he does not believe that Macdonald is guilty, but thinks it possible that Macdonald is guilty.\nStyle and legacy.\nTo conduct interviews, Morris invented a machine, called the Interrotron, which allows the interviewer and his subject to make eye-contact with each other while both staring through the camera lens itself. He explains the device as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Teleprompters are used to project an image on a two-way mirror. Politicians and newscasters use them so that they can read text and look into the lens of the camera at the same time. What interests me is that nobody thought of using them for anything other than to display text: read a speech or read the news and look into the lens of the camera. I changed that. I put my face on the Teleprompter or, strictly speaking, my live video image. For the first time, I could be talking to someone, and they could be talking to me and at the same time looking directly into the lens of the camera. Now, there was no looking off slightly to the side. No more faux first person. This was the true first person.\nAuthor Marsha McCreadie, in her book \"Documentary Superstars: How Today's Filmmakers Are Reinventing the Form\", had paired Morris with Werner Herzog as practitioners and visionaries in their approach in documentary filmmaking.\nMorris uses narrative elements within his films. These include but are not limited to: stylized lighting, musical score, and re-enactment. The use of these elements is rejected by many documentary filmmakers who followed the cinema v\u00e9rit\u00e9 style of the previous generations. Cinema v\u00e9rit\u00e9 is characterized by its rejection of artistic additions to documentary film. While Morris faced backlash from many of the older-era filmmakers, his style has been embraced by the younger generations of filmmakers, as the use of re-enactment is present in many contemporary documentary films.\nMorris advocates the reflexive style of documentary filmmaking. In Bill Nichols's book \"Introduction to Documentary\" he states that reflexive documentary \"[speaks] not only about the historical world but about the problems and issues of representing it as well.\" Morris uses his films not only to portray social issues and non-fiction events but also to comment on the reliability of documentary making itself.\nHis style has been spoofed in the mockumentary series \"Documentary Now\".\nEven when interviewing controversial figures, Morris does not generally believe in adversarial interviews:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't really believe in adversarial interviews. I don't think you learn very much. You create a theater, a gladiatorial theater, which may be satisfying to an audience, but if the goal is to learn something that you don't know, that's not the way to go about doing it. In fact, it's the way to destroy the possibility of ever hearing anything interesting or new.\u00a0... the most interesting and most revealing comments have come not as a result of a question at all, but having set up a situation where people actually want to talk to you, and want to reveal something to you.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9333", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9333", "title": "Ethan Allen", "text": "American farmer, military officer and politician (1738\u20131789)\nEthan Allen (January 21, 1738\u00a0[O.S. January 10, 1737] \u2013 February 12, 1789) was an American farmer, writer, military officer, and politician. He is best known as one of the founders of Vermont and for the capture of Fort Ticonderoga during the American Revolutionary War, and was also the brother of Ira Allen and the father of Fanny Allen.\nAllen was born in rural Connecticut and had a frontier upbringing, but he also received an education that included some philosophical teachings. In the late 1760s, he became interested in the New Hampshire Grants, buying land there and becoming embroiled in the legal disputes surrounding the territory. Legal setbacks led to the formation of the Green Mountain Boys, whom Allen led in a campaign of intimidation and property destruction to drive New York settlers from the Grants. He and the Patriot-aligned Green Mountain Boys seized the initiative early in the Revolutionary War and captured Fort Ticonderoga in May 1775. In September 1775, Allen led a failed attempt on Montreal which resulted in his capture by the British. He was imprisoned aboard ships of the Royal Navy, then paroled in New York City, and finally released in a prisoner exchange in 1778.\nUpon his release, Allen returned to the New Hampshire Grants which had declared independence in 1777, and he resumed political activity in the territory, continuing resistance to New York's attempts to assert control over the territory. Allen lobbied Congress for Vermont's official state recognition, and he participated in controversial negotiations with the British over the possibility of Vermont becoming a separate British province.\nAllen wrote accounts of his exploits in the war that were widely read in the 19th century, as well as philosophical treatises and documents relating to the politics of Vermont's formation. His business dealings included successful farming operations, one of Connecticut's early iron works, and land speculation in the Vermont territory. Allen and his brothers purchased tracts of land that became Burlington, Vermont. He was married twice, fathering eight children.\nEarly life.\nAllen was born in Litchfield, Connecticut Colony, the first child of Joseph and Mary Baker Allen, both descended from English Puritans. The family moved to the town of Cornwall shortly after his birth due to his father's quest for freedom of religion during the Great Awakening. As a boy, Allen already excelled at quoting the Bible and was known for disputing the meaning of passages. He had five brothers (Heman, Heber, Levi, Zimri, and Ira) and two sisters (Lydia and Lucy). His brothers Ira and Heman were also prominent figures in the early history of Vermont.\nThe town of Cornwall was frontier territory in the 1740s, but it began to resemble a town by the time that Allen was a teenager, with wood-frame houses beginning to replace the rough cabins of the early settlers. Joseph Allen was one of the wealthier landowners in the area by the time of his death in 1755. He ran a successful farm and had served as town selectman. Allen began studies under a minister in the nearby town of Salisbury with the goal of gaining admission to Yale College.\nFirst marriage and early adulthood.\nAllen was forced to end his studies upon his father's death. He volunteered for militia service in 1757 in response to the French siege of Fort William Henry, but his unit received word that the fort had fallen while they were en route, and they turned back. The French and Indian War continued over the next several years, but Allen did not participate in any further military activities and is presumed to have tended his farm. In 1762, he became part owner of an iron furnace in Salisbury. He also married Mary Brownson from Roxbury in July 1762, who was five years his senior. They first settled in Cornwall, but moved the following year to Salisbury with their infant daughter Loraine. They bought a small farm and proceeded to develop the iron works. The expansion of the iron works was apparently costly to Allen; he was forced to sell off portions of the Cornwall property to raise funds, and eventually sold half of his interest in the works to his brother Heman. The Allen brothers sold their interest in the iron works in October 1765.\nBy most accounts, Allen's first marriage was unhappy. His wife was rigidly religious, prone to criticizing him, and barely able to read and write. In contrast, his behavior was sometimes quite flamboyant, and he maintained an interest in learning. Nevertheless, they remained together until Mary's death in 1783. They had five children together, only two of whom reached adulthood.\nAllen and his brother Heman went to the farm of a neighbor whose pigs had escaped onto their land, and they seized the pigs. The neighbor sued to have the animals returned to him; Allen pleaded his own case and lost. Allen and Heman were fined ten shillings, and the neighbor was awarded another five shillings in damages. He was also called to court in Salisbury for inoculating himself against smallpox, a procedure that required the sanction of the town selectmen.\nWhen he moved to Salisbury, Allen met Thomas Young, a doctor living and practicing just across the provincial boundary in New York. Young taught him a great deal about philosophy and political theory, while Allen shared his appreciation of nature and life on the frontier with Young. They eventually decided to collaborate on a book intended as an attack on organized religion, as Young had convinced Allen to become a Deist. They worked on the manuscript until 1764, when Young moved away from the area taking the manuscript with him. Allen recovered the manuscript many years later, after Young's death. He expanded and reworked the material, and eventually published it as \"Reason: the Only Oracle of Man\".\nHeman remained in Salisbury where he ran a general store until his death in 1778, but Allen's movements are poorly documented over the next few years. He lived in Northampton, Massachusetts, in the spring of 1766, where his son Joseph was born and where he invested in a lead mine. The authorities asked him to leave Northampton in July 1767, though no official reason is known. Biographer Michael Bellesiles suggests that religious differences and Allen's tendency to be disruptive may have played a role in his departure. Allen briefly returned to Salisbury before settling in Sheffield, Massachusetts, with his younger brother Zimri. It is likely that his first visits to the New Hampshire Grants occurred during these years. Sheffield was the family home for ten years, although Allen was often absent for extended periods.\nNew Hampshire Grants.\nNew Hampshire Governor Benning Wentworth was selling land grants west of the Connecticut River as early as 1749, an area to which New Hampshire had always laid claim. Many of these grants were sold at relatively low prices to land speculators, with Wentworth also reserving for himself a share of each grant. In 1764, King George III issued an order resolving the competing claims of New York and New Hampshire in favor of New York. New York had issued land grants that overlapped some of those sold by Wentworth, and authorities there insisted that holders of the Wentworth grants pay a fee to New York to have their grants validated. This fee approached the original purchase price, and many of the holders were land-rich and cash-poor, so there was a great deal of resistance to the demand. By 1769, the situation had deteriorated to the point that surveyors and other figures of New York authority were being physically threatened and driven from the area.\nA few of the holders of Wentworth grants were from northwestern Connecticut, and some of them were related to Allen, including Remember Baker and Seth Warner. In 1770, a group of them asked him to defend their case before New York's Supreme Court. Allen hired Jared Ingersoll to represent the grant-holder interest in the trial, which began in July 1770 and pitted Allen against politically powerful New York grant-holders, including New York's Lieutenant Governor Colden, James Duane who was prosecuting the case, and Robert Livingston, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who was presiding over the case. The trial was brief and the outcome unsurprising, as the court refused to allow the introduction of Wentworth's grants as evidence, citing their fraudulently issued nature. Duane visited Allen and offered him payments \"for going among the people to quiet them\". Allen denied taking any money and claimed that Duane was outraged and left with veiled threats, indicating that attempts to enforce the judgment would be met with resistance.\nMany historians believe that Allen took these actions because he already held Wentworth grants of his own, although there is no evidence that he was issued any such grants until after he had been asked to take up the defense at the trial. He acquired grants from Wentworth to about in Poultney and Castleton prior to the trial.\nGreen Mountain Boys.\nOn Allen's return to Bennington, the settlers met at the Catamount Tavern to discuss their options. These discussions resulted in the formation of the Green Mountain Boys in 1770, with local militia companies in each of the surrounding towns. Allen was named their Colonel Commandant, and cousins Seth Warner and Remember Baker were captains of two of the companies. Further meetings resulted in creating committees of safety; they also laid down rules to resist New York's attempts to establish its authority. These included not allowing New York's surveyors to survey \"any\" land in the Grants, not just land owned through the Wentworth grants. Allen participated in some of the actions to drive away surveyors, and he also spent much time exploring the territory. He sold some of his Connecticut properties and began buying land farther north in the territory, which he sold at a profit as the southern settlements grew and people began to move farther north.\nFriction increased with the provincial government in October 1771, when Allen and a company of Green Mountain Boys drove off a group of Scottish settlers near Rupert. Allen detained two of the settlers and forced them to watch them burn their newly constructed cabins. Allen then ordered them to \"go your way now, and complain to that damned scoundrel your Governor, God damn your Governor, Laws, King, Council, and Assembly\". The settlers protested his language but Allen continued the tirade, threatening to send any troops from New York to Hell. In response, New York Governor William Tryon issued warrants for the arrests of those responsible, and eventually put a price of \u00a320 (around \u00a33.3k today, or $4.4k) on the heads of six participants, including Allen. Allen and his comrades countered by issuing offers of their own.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a325 REWARD\u2014Whereas James Duane and John Kempe, of New York, have by their menaces and threats greatly disturbed the public peace and repose of the honest peasants of Bennington and the settlements to the northward, which are now and ever have been in the peace of God and the King, and are patriotic and liege subjects of Geo. the 3rd. Any person that will apprehend these common disturbers, viz: James Duane and John Kempe, and bring them to Landlord Fay's at Bennington shall have \u00a315 reward James Duane and \u00a310 reward for John Kempe, paid by\nThe situation deteriorated further over the next few years. Governor Tryon and the Green Mountain Boys exchanged threats, truce offers, and other writings, frequently written by Allen in florid and didactic language while the Green Mountain Boys continued to drive away surveyors and incoming tenants. Most of these incidents did not involve bloodshed, although individuals were at times manhandled, and the Green Mountain Boys sometimes did extensive property damage when driving tenants out. By March 1774, the harsh treatment of settlers and their property prompted Tryon to increase some of the rewards to \u00a3100.\nOnion River Company.\nAllen joined his cousin Remember Baker and his brothers Ira, Heman, and Zimri to form the Onion River Company in 1772, a land-speculation organization devoted to purchasing land around the Winooski River, which was known then as the Onion River. The success of this business depended on the defense of the Wentworth grants. Early purchases included about from Edward Burling and his partners; they sold land at a profit to Thomas Chittenden, among others, and their land became the city of Burlington.\nThe outrage of the Wentworth proprietors was renewed in 1774 when Governor Tryon passed a law containing harsh provisions clearly targeted at the actions of the \"Bennington Mob\". Vermont historian Samuel Williams called it \"an act which for its savage barbarity is probably without parallel in the legislation of any civilized country\". Its provisions included the death penalty for interfering with a magistrate, and outlawing meetings of more than three people \"for unlawful purposes\" in the Grants. The Green Mountain Boys countered with rules of their own, forbidding anyone in the Grants from holding \"any office of honor or profit under the colony of N. York\".\nAllen spent much of the summer of 1774 writing \"A Brief Narrative of the Proceedings of the Government of New York Relative to Their Obtaining the Jurisdiction of that Large District of Land to the Westward of the Connecticut River\", a 200-page polemic arguing the position of the Wentworth proprietors. He had it printed in Connecticut and began selling and giving away copies in early 1775. Historian Charles Jellison describes it as \"rebellion in print\".\nWestminster Massacre.\nAllen traveled into the northern parts of the Grants early in 1775 for solitude and to hunt for game and land opportunities. A few days after his return, news came that blood had finally been shed over the land disputes. Most of the resistance activity had taken place on the west side of the Green Mountains until then, but a small riot broke out in Westminster on March 13 and led to the deaths of two men. Allen and a troop of Green Mountain Boys traveled to Westminster where the town's convention adopted a resolution to draft a plea to the King to remove them \"out of so oppressive a jurisdiction\". It was assigned to a committee which included Allen. The American Revolutionary War began less than a week after the Westminster convention ended, while Allen and the committee worked on their petition.\nRevolutionary War.\nCapture of Fort Ticonderoga.\nAllen received a message from members of an irregular Connecticut militia in late April, following the battles of Lexington and Concord, that they were planning to capture Fort Ticonderoga and requesting his assistance in the effort. Allen agreed to help and began rounding up the Green Mountain Boys, and 60 men from Massachusetts and Connecticut met with Allen in Bennington on May 2, 1775, where they discussed the logistics of the expedition. By May 7, these men joined Allen and 130 Green Mountain Boys at Castleton. They elected Allen to lead the expedition, and they planned a dawn raid for May 10. Two small companies were detached to procure boats, and Allen took the main contingent north to Hand's Cove in Shoreham to prepare for the crossing.\nOn the afternoon of May 9, Benedict Arnold unexpectedly arrived, flourishing a commission from the Massachusetts Committee of Safety. He asserted his right to command the expedition, but the men refused to acknowledge his authority and insisted that they would follow only Allen's lead. Allen and Arnold reached an accommodation privately, the essence of which was that Arnold and Allen would both be at the front of the troops when they attacked the fort.\nThe troops procured a few boats around 2 a.m. for the crossing, but only 83 men made it to the other side of the lake before Allen and Arnold decided to attack, concerned that dawn was approaching. The small force marched on the fort in the early dawn, surprising the lone sentry, and Allen went directly to the fort commander's quarters, seeking to force his surrender. Lieutenant Jocelyn Feltham was awakened by the noise, and called to wake the fort's commander Captain William Delaplace. He demanded to know by what authority the fort was being entered, and Allen said, \"In the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress!\" Delaplace finally emerged from his chambers and surrendered his sword, and the rest of the fort's garrison surrendered without firing a shot. The only casualty had been a British soldier who became concussed when Allen hit him with a cutlass, hitting the man's hair comb and saving his life.\nRaids on St. John.\nOn the following day, a detachment of the Boys under Seth Warner's command went to nearby Fort Crown Point and captured the small garrison there. On May 14, following the arrival of 100 men recruited by Arnold's captains, and the arrival of a schooner and some bateaux that had been taken at Skenesboro, Arnold and 50 of his men sailed north to raid Fort St. John, on the Richelieu River downstream from the lake, where a small British warship was reported by the prisoners to be anchored. Arnold's raid was a success; he seized the sloop , supplies, and a number of bateaux.\nAllen, shortly after Arnold's departure on the raid, decided, after his successes at the southern end of the lake, to take and hold Fort St. John himself. To that end, he and about 100 Boys climbed into four bateaux, and began rowing north. After two days without significant food (which they had forgotten to provision in the boats), Allen's small fleet met Arnold's on its way back to Ticonderoga near the foot of the lake. Arnold generously opened his stores to Allen's hungry men, and tried to dissuade Allen from his objective, noting that it was likely the alarm had been raised and troops were on their way to St. John. Allen, likely both stubborn in his determination, and envious of Arnold, persisted.\nWhen Allen and his men landed above St. John and scouted the situation, they learned that a column of 200 or more regulars was approaching. Rather than attempt an ambush on those troops, which significantly outnumbered his tired company, Allen withdrew to the other side of the river, where the men collapsed with exhaustion and slept without sentries through the night. They were awakened when British sentries discovered them and began firing grapeshot at them from across the river. The Boys, in a panic, piled into their bateaux and rowed with all speed upriver. When the expedition returned to Ticonderoga two days later, some of the men were greatly disappointed that they felt they had nothing to show for the effort and risks they took, but the capture of Fort Ticonderoga and Crown Point proved to be important in the Revolutionary War because it secured protection from the British to the North and provided vital cannon for the colonial army.\nPromoting an invasion.\nFollowing Allen's failed attempt on St. John, many of his men drifted away, presumably drawn by the needs of home and farm. Arnold then began asserting his authority over Allen for control of Ticonderoga and Crown Point. Allen publicly announced that he was stepping down as commander, but remained hopeful that the Second Continental Congress was going to name \"a commander for this department ... Undoubtedly, we shall be rewarded according to our merit\". Congress, for its part, at first not really wanting any part of the affair, effectively voted to strip and then abandon the forts. Both Allen and Arnold protested these measures, pointing out that doing so would leave the northern border wide open. They both also made proposals to Congress and other provincial bodies for carrying out an invasion of Quebec. Allen, in one instance, wrote that \"I will lay my life on it, that with fifteen hundred men, and a proper artillery, I will take Montreal\". Allen also attempted correspondence with the people of Quebec and with the Indians living there in an attempt to sway their opinion toward the revolutionary cause.\nOn June 22, Allen and Seth Warner appeared before Congress in Philadelphia, where they argued for the inclusion of the Green Mountain Boys in the Continental Army. After deliberation, Congress directed General Philip Schuyler, who had been appointed to lead the Army's Northern Department, to work with New York's provincial government to establish (and pay for) a regiment consisting of the Boys, and that they be paid Army rates for their service at Ticonderoga. On July 4, Allen and Warner made their case to New York's Provincial Congress, which, despite the fact that the Royal Governor had placed a price on their heads, agreed to the formation of a regiment. Following a brief visit to their families, they returned to Bennington to spread the news. Allen went to Ticonderoga to join Schuyler, while Warner and others raised the regiment.\nAllen loses command of the Boys.\nWhen the regimental companies in the Grants had been raised, they held a vote in Dorset to determine who would command the regiment. By a wide margin, Seth Warner was elected to lead the regiment. Brothers Ira and Heman were also given command positions, but Allen was not given any position at all in the regiment. The thorough rejection stung; Allen wrote to Connecticut Governor Jonathan Trumbull, \"How the old men came to reject me I cannot conceive inasmuch as I saved them from the incroachments of New York.\"\nThe rejection likely had several causes. The people of the Grants were tired of the disputes with New York, and they were tired of Allen's posturing and egotistic behavior, which the success at Ticonderoga had enhanced. Finally, the failure of the attempt on St. John's was widely seen as reckless and ill-advised, attributes they did not appreciate in a regimental leader. Warner was viewed as a more stable and quieter choice, and was someone who also commanded respect. The history of Warner's later actions in the revolution (notably at Hubbardton and Bennington) may be seen as a confirmation of the choice made by the Dorset meeting. In the end, Allen took the rejection in stride, and managed to convince Schuyler and Warner to permit him to accompany the regiment as a civilian scout.\nCapture.\nThe American invasion of Quebec departed from Ticonderoga on August 28. On September 4, the army had occupied the \u00cele aux Noix in the Richelieu River, a few miles above Fort St. John, which they then prepared to besiege. On September 8, Schuyler sent Allen and Massachusetts Major John Brown, who had also been involved in the capture of Ticonderoga, into the countryside between St. John and Montreal to spread the word of their arrival to the habitants and the Indians. They were successful enough in gaining support from the inhabitants that Quebec's governor, General Guy Carleton, reported that \"they have injured us very much\".\nWhen he returned from that expedition eight days later, Brigadier General Richard Montgomery had assumed command of the invasion due to Schuyler's illness. Montgomery, likely not wanting the troublemaker in his camp, again sent Allen out, this time to raise a regiment of French-speaking Canadiens. Accompanied by a small number of Americans, he again set out, traveling through the countryside to Sorel, before turning to follow the Saint Lawrence River up toward Montreal, recruiting upwards of 200 men.\nOn September 24, he and Brown, whose company was guarding the road between St. John's and Montreal, met at Longueuil, and, according to Allen's account of the events, came up with a plan in which both he and Brown would lead their forces to attack Montreal. Allen and about 100 men crossed the Saint Lawrence that night, but Brown and his men, who were to cross the river at La Prairie, did not. General Carleton, alerted to Allen's presence, mustered every man he could, and, in the Battle of Longue-Pointe, scattered most of Allen's force, and captured him and about 30 men. His capture ended his participation in the revolution until 1778, as he was imprisoned by the British. General Schuyler, upon learning of Allen's capture, wrote, \"I am very apprehensive of disagreeable consequences arising from Mr. Allen's imprudence. I always dreaded his impatience and imprudence.\"\nImprisonment.\nMuch of what is known of Allen's captivity is known only from his own account of the time; where contemporary records are available, they tend to confirm those aspects of his story. Allen was first placed aboard , a brig anchored at Montreal. He was kept in solitary confinement and chains, and General Richard Prescott had, according to Allen, ordered him to be treated \"with much severity\". In October 1775, \"Gasp\u00e9e\" went downriver, and her prisoners were transferred to the merchant vessel \"Adamant\", which then sailed for England. Allen wrote of the voyage that he \"was put under the power of an English Merchant from London, whose name was Brook Watson: a man of malicious and cruel disposition\".\nOn arrival at Falmouth, England, after a crossing under filthy conditions, Allen and the other prisoners were imprisoned in Pendennis Castle, Cornwall. At first his treatment was poor, but Allen wrote a letter, ostensibly to the Continental Congress, describing his conditions and suggesting that Congress treat the prisoners it held the same way. Unknown to Allen, British prisoners now included General Prescott, captured trying to escape from Montreal, and the letter came into the hands of the British cabinet. Also faced with opposition within the British establishment to the treatment of captives taken in North America, King George decreed that the men should be sent back to America and treated as prisoners of war.\nIn January 1776, Allen and his men were put on board HMS \"Soledad\", which sailed for Cork, Ireland. The people of Cork, when they learned that the famous Ethan Allen was in port, took up a collection to provide him and his men with clothing and other supplies. Much of the following year was spent on prison ships off the American coast. At one point, while aboard HMS \"Mercury\", she anchored off New York, where, among other visitors, the captain entertained William Tryon; Allen reports that Tryon glanced at him without any sign of recognition, although it is likely the New York governor knew who he was. In August 1776, Allen and other prisoners were temporarily put ashore in Halifax, owing to extremely poor conditions aboard ship; due to food scarcity, both crew and prisoners were on short rations, and scurvy was rampant. By the end of October, Allen was again off New York, where the British, having secured the city, moved the prisoners on-shore, and, as he was considered an officer, gave Allen limited parole. With the financial assistance of his brother Ira, he lived comfortably, if out of action, until August 1777. Allen then learned of the death of his young son Joseph due to smallpox.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis fortitude and firmness seem to have placed him out of reach of misfortune. There is an original something in him that commands admiration; and his long captivity and sufferings have only served to increase, if possible, his enthusiastic zeal\nGeorge Washington's impression of Allen\nAccording to another prisoner's account, Allen wandered off after learning of his son's death. He was arrested for violating his parole, and placed in solitary confinement. There Allen remained while Vermont declared independence, and John Burgoyne's campaign for the Hudson River met a stumbling block near Bennington in August 1777. On May 3, 1778, he was transferred to Staten Island. Allen was admitted to General John Campbell's quarters, where he was invited to eat and drink with the general and several other British field officers. He stayed there for two days and was treated politely. On the third day Allen was exchanged for Colonel Archibald Campbell, who was conducted to the exchange by Colonel Elias Boudinot, the American commissary general of prisoners appointed by General George Washington. Following the exchange, Allen reported to Washington at Valley Forge. On May 14, he was breveted a colonel in the Continental Army in \"reward of his fortitude, firmness and zeal in the cause of his country, manifested during his long and cruel captivity, as well as on former occasions,\" and given military pay of $75 per month. The brevet rank, however, meant that there was no active role, until called, for Allen. Allen's services were never requested, and eventually the payments stopped.\nVermont Republic.\nReturn home.\nFollowing his visit to Valley Forge, Allen traveled to Salisbury, arriving on May 25, 1778. There he learned that his brother Heman had died just the previous week and that his brother Zimri, who had been caring for Allen's family and farm, had died in the spring following his capture. The death of Heman, with whom Allen had been quite close, hit him quite hard.\nAllen then set out for Bennington, where news of his impending return preceded him, and he was met with all of the honor due to a military war hero. There he learned that the Vermont Republic had declared independence in 1777, that a constitution had been drawn up, and that elections had been held. Allen wrote of this homecoming that \"we passed the flowing bowl, and rural felicity, sweetened with friendship, glowed in every countenance\". The next day he went to Arlington to see his family and his brother Ira, whose prominence in Vermont politics had risen considerably during Allen's captivity.\nPolitics.\nAllen spent the next several years involved in Vermont's political and military matters. While his family remained in Arlington, he spent most of his time either in Bennington or on the road, where he could avoid his wife's nagging. Shortly after his arrival, Vermont's Assembly passed the Banishment Act, a sweeping measure allowing for the confiscation and auction by the republic of property owned by known Tories. Allen was appointed to be one of the judges responsible for deciding whose property was subject to seizure under the law. (This law was so successful at collecting revenue that Vermont did not impose any taxes until 1781.) Allen personally escorted some of those convicted under the law to Albany, where he turned them over to General John Stark for transportation to the British lines. Some of these supposed Tories protested to New York Governor George Clinton that they were actually dispossessed Yorkers. Clinton, who considered Vermont to still be a part of New York, did not want to honor the actions of the Vermont tribunals; Stark, who had custody of the men, disagreed with Clinton. Eventually the dispute made its way to George Washington, who essentially agreed with Stark since he desperately needed the general's services. The prisoners were eventually transported to West Point, where they remained in \"easy imprisonment\".\nWhile Allen's service as a judge in Vermont was brief, he continued to ferret out Tories and report them to local Boards of Confiscation for action. He was so zealous in these efforts that they also included naming his own brother Levi, who was apparently trying to swindle Allen and Ira out of land at the time. This action was somewhat surprising, as Levi had not only attempted to purchase Allen's release while he was in Halifax, but he had also traveled to New York while Allen was on parole there and furnished him with goods and money. Allen and Levi engaged in a war of words, many of which were printed in the \"Connecticut Courant\", even after Levi crossed British lines. They would eventually reconcile in 1783.\nEarly in 1779, Governor Clinton issued a proclamation stating that the state of New York would honor the Wentworth grants, if the settlers would recognize New York's political jurisdiction over the Vermont territory. Allen wrote another pamphlet in response, entitled \"An Animadversory [\"sic\"] Address to the Inhabitants of the State of Vermont; with Remarks on a Proclamation under the Hand of his Excellency George Clinton, Esq; Governor of the State of New York\". In typical style, Allen castigated the governor for issuing \"romantic proclamations ... calculated to deceive woods people\", and for his \"folly and stupidity\". Clinton's response, once he recovered his temper, was to issue another proclamation little different from the first. Allen's pamphlet circulated widely, including among members of Congress, and was successful in casting the Vermonters' case in a positive light.\nIn a dispatch to Clinton from Westminster, two prisoners from New York sentenced after Allen's intervention pleaded with the governor to free them from being at \"the disposal of Ethan Allin [\"sic\"] which is more to be dreaded than Death with all its Terrors.\"\nIn 1779, Allen published the account of his time in captivity, \"A Narrative of Colonel Ethan Allen's Captivity ... Containing His Voyages and Travels, With the most remarkable Occurrences respecting him and many other Continental Prisoners of Observations. Written by Himself and now published for the Information of the Curious in all Nations\". First published as a serial by the \"Pennsylvania Packet\", the book was an instant best-seller; it is still available today. While largely accurate, it notably omits Benedict Arnold from the capture of Ticonderoga, and Seth Warner as the leader of the Green Mountain Boys.\nNegotiations with the British.\nAllen appeared before the Continental Congress as early as September 1778 on behalf of Vermont, seeking recognition as an independent state. He reported that due to Vermont's expansion to include border towns from New Hampshire, Congress was reluctant to grant independent statehood to Vermont. Between 1780 and 1783, Allen participated, along with his brother Ira, Vermont Governor Thomas Chittenden, and others, in negotiations with Frederick Haldimand, the governor of Quebec, that were ostensibly about prisoner exchanges, but were really about establishing Vermont as a new British province and gaining military protection for its residents. The negotiations, once details of them were published, were often described by opponents of Vermont statehood as treasonous, but no such formal charges were ever laid against anyone involved.\nLater years.\nAs the war had ended with the 1783 Treaty of Paris, and the United States, operating under the Articles of Confederation, resisted any significant action with respect to Vermont, Allen's historic role as an agitator became less important, and his public role in Vermont's affairs declined. Vermont's government had also become more than a clique dominated by the Allen and Chittenden families due to the territory's rapid population growth.\nIn 1782, Allen's brother Heber died at the relatively young age of 38. Allen's wife Mary died in June 1783 of consumption, to be followed several months later by their first-born daughter Loraine. While they had not always been close, and Allen's marriage had often been strained, Allen felt these losses deeply. A poem he wrote memorializing Mary was published in the \"Bennington Gazette\".\nPublication of \"Reason\".\nIn these years, Allen recovered from Thomas Young's widow, who was living in Albany, the manuscript that he and Young had worked on in his youth and began to develop it into the work that was published in 1785 as \"Reason: the Only Oracle of Man\". The work was a typical Allen polemic, but its target was religious, not political. Specifically targeted against Christianity, it was an unbridled attack against the Bible, established churches, and the powers of the priesthood. As a replacement for organized religion, he espoused a mixture of deism, Spinoza's naturalist views, and precursors of Transcendentalism, with man acting as a free agent within the natural world. While historians disagree over the exact authorship of the work, the writing contains clear indications of Allen's style.\nThe book was a complete financial and critical failure. Allen's publisher had forced him to pay the publication costs up front, and only 200 of the 1,500 volumes printed were sold. (The rest were eventually destroyed by a fire at the publisher's house.) The theologically conservative future president of Yale, Timothy Dwight, opined that \"the style was crude and vulgar, and the sentiments were coarser than the style. The arguments were flimsy and unmeaning, and the conclusions were fastened upon the premises by mere force.\" Allen took the financial loss and the criticism in stride, observing that most of the critics were clergymen, whose livelihood he was attacking.\nSecond marriage.\nAllen met his second wife, a young widow named Frances \"Fanny\" Montresor Brush Buchanan, early in 1784; and after a brief courtship, they wed on February 16, 1784. Fanny came from a notably Loyalist background (including Crean Brush, notorious for acts during the Siege of Boston, from whom she inherited land in Vermont), but they were both smitten, and the marriage was a happy one. They had three children: Fanny (1784\u20131819), Hannibal Montresor (1786\u20131813), and Ethan Alphonso (1789\u20131855). Fanny had a settling effect on Allen; for the remainder of his years he did not embark on many great adventures.\nThe notable exception to this was when land was claimed by the Connecticut-based owners of the Susquehanna Company, who had been granted titles to land claimed by Connecticut in the Wyoming Valley, in an area that is now Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. The area was also claimed by Pennsylvania, which refused to recognize the Connecticut titles. Allen, after being promised land, traveled to the area and began stirring up not just Pennsylvania authorities but also his long-time nemesis, Governor Clinton of New York, by proposing that a new state be carved out of the disputed area and several counties of New York. The entire affair was more bluster than anything else, and was resolved amicably when Pennsylvania agreed to honor the Connecticut titles.\nAllen was also approached by Daniel Shays in 1786 for support in what became the Shays's Rebellion in western Massachusetts. He was unsupportive of the cause, in spite of Shays's offer to crown him \"king of Massachusetts\"; he felt that Shays was just trying to erase unpayable debts.\nIn his later years, independent Vermont continued to experience rapid population growth, and Allen sold a great deal of his land, but also reinvested much the proceeds in more land. A lack of cash, complicated by Vermont's currency problems, placed a strain on Fanny's relatively free hand on spending, which was further exacerbated by the cost of publishing \"Reason\", and of the construction of a new home near the mouth of the Onion River. He was threatened with debtors' prison on at least one occasion, and was at times reduced to borrowing money and calling in old debts to make ends meet.\nAllen and his family moved to Burlington in 1787, which was no longer a small frontier settlement but a small town, and much more to Allen's liking than the larger community that Bennington had become. He frequented the tavern there, and began work on \"An Essay on the Universal Plenitude of Being\", which he characterized as an appendix to \"Reason\". This essay was less polemic than many of his earlier writings. Allen affirmed the perfection of God and His creation, and credited intuition as well as reason as a way to bring Man closer to the universe. The work was not published until long after his death, and is primarily of interest to students of Transcendentalism, a movement the work foreshadows.\nDeath.\nOn February 11, 1789, Allen traveled to South Hero, Vermont with one of his workers to visit his cousin, Ebenezer Allen, and to collect a load of hay. After an evening spent with friends and acquaintances, he spent the night there and set out the next morning for home. While accounts of the return journey are not entirely consistent, Allen apparently suffered an apoplectic fit en route and was unconscious by the time they returned home. Allen died at home several hours later, without ever regaining consciousness. He was buried four days later in the Green Mount Cemetery in Burlington. The funeral was attended by dignitaries from the Vermont government and by large numbers of common folk who turned out to pay respects to a man many considered their champion.\nAllen's death made nationwide headlines. The \"Bennington Gazette\" wrote of the local hero, \"the patriotism and strong attachment which ever appeared uniform in the breast of this \"Great Man\", was worth of his exalted character; the public have to lament the loss of a man who has rendered them great service\". Although most obituaries were positive, a number of clergymen expressed different sentiments. \"Allen was an ignorant and profane Deist, who died with a mind replete with horror and despair\" was the opinion of Newark, New Jersey's Reverend Uzal Ogden. Yale's Timothy Dwight expressed satisfaction that the world no longer had to deal with a man of \"peremptoriness and effrontery, rudeness and ribaldry\". It is not recorded what New York Governor Clinton's reaction was to the news.\nFamily.\nAllen's widow Fanny gave birth to a son, Ethan Alphonso, on October 24, 1789. She eventually remarried. Allen's two youngest sons went on to graduate from West Point and serve in the United States Army. H. M. Allen was the seventh graduate, a member of the Class of 1804, and served until 1813. E. A. Allen was the 22nd graduate, a member of the Class of 1806, and served until 1821. His daughter Fanny achieved notice when she converted to Catholicism and entered a convent. Two of his grandsons were Henry Hitchcock, Attorney General of Alabama, and Ethan Allen Hitchcock, who served as a Union Army general in the American Civil War. Two of Henry Hitchcock's sons were Henry Hitchcock and Ethan Allan Hitchcock.\nDisappearance of his grave marker.\nSometime in the early 1850s, the original plaque marking Allen's grave disappeared; its original text was preserved by early war historian Benson Lossing in the 1840s. The inscription read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1858, the Vermont Legislature authorized the placement of a 42-foot (13 m) column of Vermont granite in the cemetery, with the following inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVermont to Ethan Allen Born in Litchfield Ct 10th Jan AD 1737Died in Burlington Vt 12th Feb AD 1789and buried near the site of this monument\nThe exact location within the cemetery of his remains is unknown. While there is a vault beneath the 1858 cenotaph, it contains a time capsule from the time of the monument's erection. According to the official 1858 report on the Ethan Allen monument, the funeral of Ethan Allen had taken place within Green Mount Cemetery; however the reason his remains had not been found at his memorial plaque {tablet} was because \"...\u00a0by the fact that some twenty years since, the dead of the Allen family had been arranged in a square enclosed by stone posts and chains, by Herman Allen, the nephew of Ethan Allen, and this tablet, then \"lying upon a dilapidated wall of brick work\", was \"reconstructed with cut stone work\", and it is presumed that, as a matter of convenience in giving a regular form to the enclosure, was \"removed some feet from its original position\"\u00a0...\" It was thus apparent it was actually a cenotaph tomb reconstruction that Benson Lossing sketched and presumed to be the actual tomb of Ethan Allen in his 1850 \"The Pictorial Field-book of the Revolution\".\nLikenesses.\nNo likenesses of Allen made from life have been found, in spite of numerous attempts to locate them. Efforts by members of the Vermont Historical Society and other historical groups through the years have followed up on rumored likenesses, only to come up empty. Photographs of Allen's grandson, General Ethan Allen Hitchcock, are extant, and, Hitchcock's mother said that he bore a strong resemblance to her father. The nearest potential images included one claimed to be by noted Revolutionary War era engraver Pierre Eugene du Simitiere that turned out to be a forgery, and a reference to a portrait possibly by Ralph Earl that has not been found (as of Stewart Holbrook's writing in 1940). Alexander Graydon, with whom Allen was paroled during his captivity in New York, described him like this:\nHis figure was that of a robust, large-framed man, worn down by confinement and hard fare; but he was now recovering his flesh and spirits; and a suit of blue clothes, with a gold laced hat that had been presented to him by the gentlement of Cork, enabled him to make a very passable appearance for a rebel colonel\u00a0... I have seldom met with a man, possessing, in my opinion, a stronger mind, or whose mode of expression was more vehement and oratorical. Notwithstanding that Allen might have had something of the insubordinate, lawless frontier spirit in his composition\u00a0... he appeared to me to be a man of generosity and honor.\nMemorials.\nAllen's final home, on the Onion River (now called the Winooski River), is a part of the Ethan Allen Homestead and Museum. Situated in Burlington, Allen's homestead is open for viewing via guided tours.\nTwo ships of the United States Navy were named USS \"Ethan Allen\" in his honor, as were two 19th-century fortifications: a Civil War fort in Arlington County, Virginia and a cavalry outpost in Colchester and Essex, Vermont. The Vermont Army National Guard's facility in Jericho, Vermont is called the Camp Ethan Allen Training Site. A statue of Allen represents Vermont in National Statuary Hall of the United States Capitol. A city park in the Montreal borough of Mercier\u2013Hochelaga-Maisonneuve commemorating his capture bears his name.\nThe \"Spirit of Ethan Allen III\" is a tour boat operating on Lake Champlain. Allen's name is the trademark of the furniture and housewares manufacturer, Ethan Allen Inc., which was founded in 1932 in Beecher Falls, Vermont. The \"Ethan Allen Express\", an Amtrak train running from New York City to Burlington, Vermont, is also named after him.\nThe Ethan Allen School was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1988.\nPublications.\nAllen is known to have written the following publications:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9334", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9334", "title": "Ecuador", "text": "Country in South America\nEcuador, officially the Republic of Ecuador, is a country in northwestern South America, bordered by Colombia on the north, Peru on the east and south, and the Pacific Ocean on the west. It also includes the Gal\u00e1pagos Province which contains the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands in the Pacific, about west of the mainland. The country's capital is Quito and its largest city is Guayaquil.\nThe land that comprises modern-day Ecuador was once home to several groups of indigenous peoples that were gradually incorporated into the Inca Empire during the 15th century. The territory was colonized by the Spanish Empire during the 16th century, achieving independence in 1820 as part of Gran Colombia, from which it emerged as a sovereign state in 1830. The legacy of both empires is reflected in Ecuador's ethnically diverse population, with most of its million people being mestizos, followed by large minorities of Europeans, Native American, African, and Asian descendants. Spanish is the official language spoken by a majority of the population, although 13 native languages are also recognized, including Quechua and Shuar.\nEcuador is a representative democratic presidential republic and a developing country whose economy is highly dependent on exports of commodities, primarily petroleum and agricultural products. The country is a founding member of the United Nations, Organization of American States, Mercosur, PROSUR, and the Non-Aligned Movement. According to the Center for Economic and Policy Research, between 2006 and 2016, poverty decreased from 36.7% to 22.5% and annual per capita GDP growth was 1.5 percent (as compared to 0.6 percent over the prior two decades). At the same time, the country's Gini index of economic inequality improved from 0.55 to 0.47.\nOne of 17 megadiverse countries in the world, Ecuador hosts many endemic plants and animals, such as those of the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands. In recognition of its unique ecological heritage, the new constitution of 2008 is the first in the world to recognize legally enforceable rights of nature.\nIn the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Ecuador ranks 58th out of 127 countries with a score of 11.6, which indicates a moderate level of hunger.\nEtymology.\nThe country's name means literally \"Equator\" in the Spanish language, truncated from the Spanish official name, \"Rep\u00fablica del Ecuador\" (lit. \"Republic of the Equator\"), derived from the former Ecuador Department of Gran Colombia established in 1824 as a division of the former territory of the Royal Audience of Quito. Quito, which remained the capital of the department and republic, is located only about , &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444 of a degree, south of the equator.\nHistory.\nPre-Inca era.\nVarious peoples had settled in the area of future Ecuador before the arrival of the Incas. The archeological evidence suggests that the Paleo-Indians' first dispersal into the Americas occurred near the end of the last glacial period, around 16,500\u201313,000 years ago. The first people who reached Ecuador may have journeyed by land from North and Central America or by boat down the Pacific Ocean coastline.\nEven though their languages were unrelated, these groups developed similar groups of cultures, each based in different environments. The people of the coast combined agriculture with fishing, hunting, and gathering; the people of the highland Andes developed a sedentary agricultural way of life; and peoples of the Amazon basin relied on hunting and gathering; in some cases, this is combined with agriculture and arboriculture.\nMany civilizations arose in Ecuador, such as the Valdivia Culture and Machalilla Culture on the coast, the Quitus (near present-day Quito), and the Ca\u00f1ari (near present-day Cuenca).\nIn the highland Andes mountains, where life was more sedentary, groups of tribes cooperated and formed villages; thus the first nations based on agricultural resources and the domestication of animals formed. Eventually, through wars and marriage alliances of their leaders, groups of nations formed confederations.\nWhen the Incas arrived, they found that these confederations were so developed that it took the Incas two generations of rulers\u2014Topa Inca Yupanqui and Huayna Capac\u2014to absorb them into the Inca Empire. People belonging to the confederations that gave them the most problems were deported to distant areas of Peru, Bolivia, and north Argentina. Similarly, a number of loyal Inca subjects from Peru and Bolivia were brought to Ecuador to prevent rebellion. Thus, the region of highland Ecuador became part of the Inca Empire in 1463 sharing the same language.\nIn contrast, when the Incas made incursions into coastal Ecuador and the eastern Amazon jungles of Ecuador, they found both the environment and indigenous people more hostile. Moreover, when the Incas tried to subdue them, these indigenous people withdrew to the interior and resorted to guerrilla tactics. As a result, Inca expansion into the Amazon Basin and the Pacific coast of Ecuador was hampered. The indigenous people of the Amazon jungle and coastal Ecuador remained relatively autonomous until the Spanish soldiers and missionaries arrived in force. The Amazonian people and the Cayapas of Coastal Ecuador were the only groups to resist both Inca and Spanish domination, maintaining their languages and cultures well into the 21st century.\nBefore the arrival of the Spaniards, the Inca Empire was involved in a civil war. The untimely death of both the heir Ninan Cuyochi and the Emperor Huayna Capac, from a European disease that spread into Ecuador, created a power vacuum between two factions and led to a civil war. The army stationed north headed by Atahualpa marched south to Cuzco and massacred the royal family associated with his brother. In 1532, a small band of Spaniards headed by Francisco Pizarro reached Cajamarca and lured Atahualpa into a trap (battle of Cajamarca). Pizarro promised to release Atahualpa if he made good his promise of filling a room full of gold. But, after a mock trial, the Spaniards executed Atahualpa by strangulation.\nSpanish colonization.\nNew infectious diseases such as smallpox, endemic to the Europeans, caused high fatalities among the Amerindian population during the first decades of Spanish rule, as they had no immunity. At the same time, the natives were forced into the \"encomienda\" labor system for the Spanish. In 1563, Quito became the seat of a real audiencia (administrative district) of Spain and part of the Viceroyalty of Peru and later the Viceroyalty of New Granada.\nThe 1797 Riobamba earthquake, which caused up to 40,000 casualties, was studied by Alexander von Humboldt, when he visited the area in 1801\u20131802.\nAfter nearly 300 years of Spanish rule, Quito still remained small with a population of 10,000 people. On 10 August 1809, the city's \"criollos\" called for independence from Spain (first among the peoples of Latin America). They were led by Juan P\u00edo Mont\u00fafar, Quiroga, Salinas, and Bishop Cuero y Caicedo. Quito's nickname, \"Luz de Am\u00e9rica\" (\"Light of America\"), is based on its leading role in trying to secure an independent, local government. Although the new government lasted no more than two months, it had important repercussions and was an inspiration for the independence movement of the rest of Spanish America. Today, 10 August is celebrated as Independence Day, a national holiday.\nIndependence.\nOn 9 October 1820, the Department of Guayaquil became the first territory in Ecuador to gain its independence from Spain, and it spawned most of the Ecuadorian coastal provinces, establishing itself as an independent state. Its inhabitants celebrated what is now Ecuador's official Independence Day on 24 May 1822. The rest of Ecuador gained its independence after Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre defeated the Spanish Royalist forces at the Battle of Pichincha, near Quito. Following the battle, Ecuador joined Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar's Republic of Gran Colombia, also including modern-day Colombia, Venezuela, and Panama. In 1830, Ecuador separated from Gran Colombia and became an independent republic. Two years later, it annexed the Galapagos Islands.\nThe 19th century was marked by instability for Ecuador with a rapid succession of rulers. The first president of Ecuador was the Venezuelan-born Juan Jos\u00e9 Flores, who was ultimately deposed. Leaders who followed him included Vicente Rocafuerte; Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn de Olmedo; Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Urbina; Diego Noboa; Pedro Jos\u00e9 de Arteta; Manuel de Asc\u00e1subi; and Flores's own son, Antonio Flores Jij\u00f3n, among others. The conservative Gabriel Garc\u00eda Moreno unified the country in the 1860s with the support of the Roman Catholic Church. In the late 19th century, world demand for cocoa tied the economy to commodity exports and led to migrations from the highlands to the agricultural frontier on the coast.\nEcuador abolished slavery in 1851. The descendants of enslaved Ecuadorians are among today's Afro-Ecuadorian population. Also abolished during this time was indigenous tribute in 1857. Upon this, the indigenous were now equal under the law compared to everyone else. They were now registered as contributors to the nation, and became roles such as property holders, taxpayers, and potential military recruits just as everyone else.\nLiberal Revolution.\nThe Liberal Revolution of 1895 under Eloy Alfaro reduced the power of the clergy and the conservative land owners. This liberal wing retained power until the military \"Julian Revolution\" of 1925. The 1930s and 1940s were marked by instability and emergence of populist politicians, such as five-time President Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Velasco Ibarra.\nLoss of claimed territories since 1830.\nAfter Ecuador's separation from Colombia on 13 May 1830, its first President, General Juan Jos\u00e9 Flores, laid claim to the territory that had belonged to the Real Audiencia of Quito, also referred to as the Presidencia of Quito. He supported his claims with Spanish Royal decrees, or \"real cedulas\", that delineated the borders of Spain's former overseas colonies. In the case of Ecuador, Flores based Ecuador's \"de jure\" claims on the Real Cedulas of 1563, 1739, and 1740; with modifications in the Amazon Basin and Andes Mountains that were introduced through the Treaty of Guayaquil (1829) which Peru reluctantly signed, after the overwhelmingly outnumbered Gran Colombian force led by Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre defeated President and General La Mar's Peruvian invasion force in the Battle of Tarqui. In addition, Ecuador's eastern border with the Portuguese colony of Brazil in the Amazon Basin was modified before the Wars of Independence by the First Treaty of San Ildefonso (1777) between the Spanish Empire and the Portuguese Empire. Moreover, to add legitimacy to his claims, on 16 February 1840, Flores signed a treaty with Spain, whereby Flores convinced Spain to officially recognize Ecuadorian independence and its sole rights to colonial titles over Spain's former colonial territory known anciently to Spain as the Kingdom and Presidency of Quito.\nEcuador during its long and turbulent history has lost most of its contested territories to each of its more powerful neighbors, such as Colombia in 1832 and 1916, Brazil in 1904 through a series of peace treaties, and Peru after a short war in which the Protocol of Rio de Janeiro was signed in 1942.\nStruggle for independence.\nDuring the struggle for independence, before Peru or Ecuador became independent, areas of the former Vice Royalty of New Granada declared themselves independent from Spain. A few months later, a part of the Peruvian liberation army of San Mart\u00edn decided to occupy the independent cities of Tumbez and Ja\u00e9n, with the intention of using them as springboards to occupy the independent city of Guayaquil and then liberate the rest of the Audiencia de Quito (Ecuador). It was common knowledge among officers of the liberation army from the south that their leader San Mart\u00edn wished to liberate present-day Ecuador and add it to the future republic of Peru, since it had been part of the Inca Empire before the Spaniards conquered it. However, Bol\u00edvar's intention was to form a new republic known as the Gran Colombia, out of the liberated Spanish territory of New Granada which consisted of Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador. San Mart\u00edn's plans were thwarted when Bol\u00edvar, descended from the Andes mountains and occupied Guayaquil; they also annexed the newly liberated Audiencia de Quito to the Republic of Gran Colombia.\nIn the south, Ecuador had claims to a small piece of land beside the Pacific Ocean known as Tumbes. In Ecuador's southern Andes Mountain region where the Mara\u00f1on cuts across, Ecuador had claims to an area it called Ja\u00e9n de Bracamoros. These areas were included as part of the territory of Gran Colombia by Bolivar on 17 December 1819, during the Congress of Angostura when the Republic of Gran Colombia was created. Tumbes declared itself independent from Spain on 17 January 1821, and Ja\u00e9n de Bracamoros on 17 June 1821, without any outside help from revolutionary armies. However, that same year, Peruvian forces participating in the Trujillo revolution occupied both Ja\u00e9n and Tumbes. Peruvian generals, without any legal titles backing them up and with Ecuador still federated with the Gran Colombia, had the desire to annex Ecuador to the Republic of Peru at the expense of the Gran Colombia, feeling that Ecuador was once part of the Inca Empire.\nOn 28 July 1821, Peruvian independence was proclaimed in Lima by San Mart\u00edn, and Tumbes and Ja\u00e9n, which were included as part of the revolution of Trujillo by the Peruvian occupying force, had the whole region swear allegiance to the new Peruvian flag and incorporated itself into Peru. Gran Colombia had always protested Peru for the return of Ja\u00e9n and Tumbes for almost a decade, then finally Bolivar after long and futile discussion over the return of Ja\u00e9n, Tumbes, and part of Mainas, declared war. President and General Jos\u00e9 de La Mar, who was born in Ecuador, believing his opportunity had come to annex the District of Ecuador to Peru, personally, with a Peruvian force, invaded and occupied Guayaquil and a few cities in the Loja region of southern Ecuador on 28 November 1828.\nThe war ended when an outnumbered southern Gran Colombian army at Battle of Tarqui on 27 February 1829, led by Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre, defeated the Peruvian invasion force led by President La Mar. This defeat led to the signing of the Treaty of Guayaquil in September 1829, whereby Peru and its Congress recognized Gran Colombian rights over Tumbes, Ja\u00e9n, and Maynas. Through meetings between Peru and Gran Colombia, the border was set as Tumbes river in the west, and in the east, the Maranon and Amazon rivers were to be followed toward Brazil as the most natural borders between them. According to the peace negotiations Peru agreed to return Guayaquil, Tumbez, and Ja\u00e9n; despite this, Peru returned Guayaquil, but failed to return Tumbes and Ja\u00e9n, alleging that it was not obligated to follow the agreements, since the Gran Colombia ceased to exist when it divided itself into three different nations \u2013 Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela.\nThe Central District of the Gran Colombia, known as Cundinamarca or New Granada (modern Colombia) with its capital in Bogota, did not recognize the separation of the Southern District of the Gran Colombia, with its capital in Quito, from the Gran Colombian federation on 13 May 1830. After Ecuador's separation, the Department of Cauca voluntarily decided to unite itself with Ecuador due to instability in the central government of Bogota. The Venezuelan born President of Ecuador, the general Juan Jos\u00e9 Flores, with the approval of the Ecuadorian congress annexed the Department of Cauca on 20 December 1830, since the government of Cauca had called for union with the District of the South as far back as April 1830. Moreover, the Cauca region, throughout its long history, had very strong economic and cultural ties with the people of Ecuador. Also, the Cauca region, which included such cities as Pasto, Popay\u00e1n, and Buenaventura, had always been dependent on the Presidencia or Audiencia of Quito.\nFruitless negotiations continued between the governments of Bogot\u00e1 and Quito, where the government of Bogot\u00e1 did not recognize the separation of Ecuador or that of Cauca from the Gran Colombia until war broke out in May 1832. In five months, New Granada defeated Ecuador due to the fact that the majority of the Ecuadorian Armed Forces were composed of rebellious angry unpaid veterans from Venezuela and Colombia that did not want to fight against their fellow countrymen. Seeing that his officers were rebelling, mutinying, and changing sides, President Flores had no option but to reluctantly make peace with New Granada. The Treaty of Pasto of 1832 was signed by which the Department of Cauca was turned over to New Granada (modern Colombia), the government of Bogot\u00e1 recognized Ecuador as an independent country and the border was to follow the Ley de Divisi\u00f3n Territorial de la Rep\u00fablica de Colombia (Law of the Division of Territory of the Gran Colombia) passed on 25 June 1824. This law set the border at the river Carchi and the eastern border that stretched to Brazil at the Caquet\u00e1 river. Later, Ecuador contended that the Republic of Colombia, while reorganizing its government, unlawfully made its eastern border provisional and that Colombia extended its claims south to the Napo River because it said that the Government of Popay\u00e1n extended its control all the way to the Napo River.\nStruggle for possession of the Amazon Basin.\nWhen Ecuador seceded from the Gran Colombia, Peru contested Ecuador's claims with the newly discovered \"Real Cedula\" of 1802, by which Peru claims the King of Spain had transferred these lands from the Viceroyalty of New Granada to the Viceroyalty of Peru. During colonial times this was to halt the ever-expanding Portuguese settlements into Spanish domains, which were left vacant and in disorder after the expulsion of Jesuit missionaries from their bases along the Amazon Basin. Ecuador countered by labeling the Cedula of 1802 an ecclesiastical instrument, which had nothing to do with political borders. Peru began its de facto occupation of disputed Amazonian territories, after it signed a secret 1851 peace treaty in favor of Brazil. This treaty disregarded Spanish rights that were confirmed during colonial times by a Spanish-Portuguese treaty over the Amazon regarding territories held by illegal Portuguese settlers.\nPeru began occupying the missionary villages in the Mainas or Maynas region, which it began calling Loreto, with its capital in Iquitos. During its negotiations with Brazil, Peru claimed Amazonian Basin territories up to Caqueta River in the north and toward the Andes Mountain range. Colombia protested stating that its claims extended south toward the Napo and Amazon Rivers. Ecuador protested that it claimed the Amazon Basin between the Caqueta river and the Mara\u00f1on-Amazon river. Peru ignored these protests and created the Department of Loreto in 1853 with its capital in Iquitos. Peru briefly occupied Guayaquil again in 1860, since Peru thought that Ecuador was selling some of the disputed land for development to British bond holders, but returned Guayaquil after a few months. The border dispute was then submitted to Spain for arbitration from 1880 to 1910, but to no avail.\nIn the early part of the 20th century, Ecuador made an effort to peacefully define its eastern Amazonian borders with its neighbors through negotiation. On 6 May 1904, Ecuador signed the Tobar-Rio Branco Treaty recognizing Brazil's claims to the Amazon in recognition of Ecuador's claim to be an Amazonian country to counter Peru's earlier Treaty with Brazil back on 23 October 1851. Then after a few meetings with the Colombian government's representatives an agreement was reached and the Mu\u00f1oz Vernaza-Suarez Treaty was signed 15 July 1916, in which Colombian rights to the Putumayo river were recognized as well as Ecuador's rights to the Napo river and the new border was a line that ran midpoint between those two rivers. In this way, Ecuador gave up the claims it had to the Amazonian territories between the Caquet\u00e1 River and Napo River to Colombia, thus cutting itself off from Brazil. Later, a brief war erupted between Colombia and Peru, over Peru's claims to the Caquet\u00e1 region, which ended with Peru reluctantly signing the Salomon-Lozano Treaty on 24 March 1922. Ecuador protested this secret treaty, since Colombia gave away Ecuadorian claimed land to Peru that Ecuador had given to Colombia in 1916.\nOn 21 July 1924, the Ponce-Castro Oyanguren Protocol was signed between Ecuador and Peru where both agreed to hold direct negotiations and to resolve the dispute in an equitable manner and to submit the differing points of the dispute to the United States for arbitration. Negotiations between the Ecuadorian and Peruvian representatives began in Washington on 30 September 1935. The negotiations turned into arguments during the next 7 months and finally on 29 September 1937, the Peruvian representatives decided to break off the negotiations.\nIn 1941, amid fast-growing tensions within disputed territories around the Zarumilla River, war broke out with Peru. Peru claimed that Ecuador's military presence in Peruvian-claimed territory was an invasion; Ecuador, for its part, claimed that Peru had recently invaded Ecuador around the Zarumilla River and that Peru since Ecuador's independence from Spain has systematically occupied Tumbez, Ja\u00e9n, and most of the disputed territories in the Amazonian Basin between the Putomayo and Mara\u00f1on Rivers. In July 1941, troops were mobilized in both countries. Peru had an army of 11,681 troops who faced a poorly supplied and inadequately armed Ecuadorian force of 2,300, of which only 1,300 were deployed in the southern provinces. Hostilities erupted on 5 July 1941, when Peruvian forces crossed the Zarumilla river at several locations, testing the strength and resolve of the Ecuadorian border troops. Finally, on 23 July 1941, the Peruvians launched a major invasion, crossing the Zarumilla river in force and advancing into the Ecuadorian province of El Oro.\nDuring the course of the Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War, Peru gained control over part of the disputed territory and some parts of the province of El Oro, and some parts of the province of Loja, demanding that the Ecuadorian government give up its territorial claims. The Peruvian Navy blocked the port of Guayaquil, almost cutting all supplies to the Ecuadorian troops. After a few weeks of war and under pressure by the United States and several Latin American nations, all fighting came to a stop. Ecuador and Peru came to an accord formalized in the Rio Protocol, signed on 29 January 1942, in favor of hemispheric unity against the Axis powers in World War II favoring Peru with the territory they occupied at the time the war came to an end.\nThe 1944 Glorious May Revolution followed a military-civilian rebellion and a subsequent civic strike which successfully removed Carlos Arroyo del R\u00edo as a dictator from Ecuador's government. However, a post-Second World War recession and popular unrest led to a return to populist politics and domestic military interventions in the 1960s, while foreign companies developed oil resources in the Ecuadorian Amazon. In 1972, construction of the Andean pipeline was completed. The pipeline brought oil from the east side of the Andes to the coast, making Ecuador South America's second largest oil exporter.\nThe Rio Protocol failed to precisely resolve the border along a little river in the remote \"Cordillera del C\u00f3ndor\" region in southern Ecuador. This caused a long-simmering dispute between Ecuador and Peru, which ultimately led to fighting between the two countries; first a border skirmish in January\u2013February 1981 known as the Paquisha Incident, and ultimately full-scale warfare in January 1995 where the Ecuadorian military shot down Peruvian aircraft and helicopters and Peruvian infantry marched into southern Ecuador. Each country blamed the other for the onset of hostilities, known as the Cenepa War. Sixto Dur\u00e1n Ball\u00e9n, the Ecuadorian president, famously declared that he would not give up a single centimeter of Ecuador. Popular sentiment in Ecuador became strongly nationalistic against Peru: graffiti could be seen on the walls of Quito referring to Peru as the \"Cain de Latinoam\u00e9rica\", a reference to the murder of Abel by his brother Cain in the Book of Genesis.\nEcuador and Peru signed the Brasilia Presidential Act peace agreement on 26 October 1998, which ended hostilities, and effectively put an end to the Western Hemisphere's longest running territorial dispute. The Guarantors of the Rio Protocol (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States of America) ruled that the border of the undelineated zone was to be set at the line of the \"Cordillera del C\u00f3ndor\". While Ecuador had to give up its decades-old territorial claims to the eastern slopes of the Cordillera, as well as to the entire western area of Cenepa headwaters, Peru was compelled to give to Ecuador, in perpetual lease but without sovereignty, of its territory, in the area where the Ecuadorian base of Tiwinza \u2013 focal point of the war \u2013 had been located within Peruvian soil and which the Ecuadorian Army held during the conflict. The final border demarcation came into effect on 13 May 1999, and the multi-national MOMEP (Military Observer Mission for Ecuador and Peru) troop deployment withdrew on 17 June 1999.\nMilitary governments (1972\u201379).\nIn 1972, a \"revolutionary and nationalist\" military junta overthrew the government of Velasco Ibarra. The coup d'\u00e9tat was led by General Guillermo Rodr\u00edguez and executed by navy commander Jorge Queirolo G. The new president exiled Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Velasco to Argentina. He remained in power until 1976, when he was removed by another military government. That military junta was led by Admiral Alfredo Poveda, who was declared chairman of the Supreme Council. The Supreme Council included two other members: General Guillermo Dur\u00e1n Arcentales and General Luis Pintado. The civil society more and more insistently called for democratic elections. Colonel Richelieu Levoyer, Government Minister, proposed and implemented a Plan to return to the constitutional system through universal elections. This plan enabled the new democratically elected president to assume the duties of the executive office.\nReturn to democracy (1979\u2013present).\nElections were held on 29 April 1979, under a new constitution. Jaime Rold\u00f3s Aguilera was elected president, garnering over one million votes, the most in Ecuadorian history. He took office on 10 August as the first constitutionally elected president, after nearly a decade of civilian and military dictatorships. In 1980, he founded the \"Partido Pueblo, Cambio y Democracia\" (People, Change, and Democracy Party) after withdrawing from the \"Concentraci\u00f3n de Fuerzas Populares\" (Popular Forces Concentration). He governed until 24 May 1981, when he died, along with his wife and the minister of defense Marco Subia Martinez, when his Air Force plane crashed in heavy rain near the Peruvian border. Many people believe that he was assassinated by the CIA, given the multiple death threats against him because of his reformist agenda, the deaths in automobile crashes of two key witnesses before they could testify during the investigation, and the sometimes contradictory accounts of the incident. Roldos was immediately succeeded by Vice President Osvaldo Hurtado.\nIn 1984, Le\u00f3n Febres Cordero from the Social Christian Party was elected president. Rodrigo Borja Cevallos of the Democratic Left (Izquierda Democr\u00e1tica, or ID) party won the presidency in 1988, winning the runoff election against Abdal\u00e1 Bucaram (brother in law of Jaime Roldos and founder of the Ecuadorian Roldosist Party). His government was committed to improving human rights protection and carried out some reforms, notably an opening of Ecuador to foreign trade. The Borja government negotiated the disbanding of the small terrorist group, \"\u00a1Alfaro Vive, Carajo!\" (\"Alfaro Lives, Dammit!\"), named after Eloy Alfaro. However, continuing economic problems undermined the popularity of the ID party, and opposition parties gained control of Congress in 1999.\nA notable event was the Cenepa War fought between Ecuador and Peru in 1995.\nEcuador won its first Olympic medal in the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta when Jefferson P\u00e9rez won gold in the 20 km walk.\nEcuador adopted the U.S. dollar on 13 April 2000 as its national currency and on 11 September, the country eliminated the Ecuadorian sucre, in order to stabilize the country's economy. The U.S. Dollar has been the only official currency of Ecuador since then.\nThe emergence of the Amerindian population as an active constituency has added to the democratic volatility of the country in recent years. The population has been motivated by government failures to deliver on promises of land reform, lower unemployment and provision of social services, and the historical exploitation by the land-holding elite. Their movement, along with the continuing destabilizing efforts by both the elite and leftist movements, has led to a deterioration of the executive office. The populace and the other branches of government give the president very little political capital, as illustrated by the most recent removal of President Lucio Guti\u00e9rrez from office by Congress in April 2005. Vice President Alfredo Palacio took his place\nIn the election of 2006, Rafael Correa gained the presidency. In January 2007, several left-wing political leaders of Latin America, his future allies, attended his swearing-in ceremony. Endorsed in a 2008 referendum, a new constitution implemented leftist reforms. In December 2008, Correa declared Ecuador's national debt illegitimate, based on the argument that it was odious debt contracted by prior corrupt and despotic regimes. He announced that the country would default on over $3 billion worth of bonds, and he succeeded in reducing the price of outstanding bonds by more than 60% by fighting creditors in international courts. He brought Ecuador into the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas in June 2009. Correa's administration reduced the high levels of poverty and unemployment in Ecuador.\nCorrea's three consecutive terms (from 2007 to 2017) were followed by his former Vice President Len\u00edn Moreno's four years as president (2017\u201321). After being elected in 2017, President Moreno's government adopted economically liberal policies, such as reduction of public spending, trade liberalization, and flexibility of the labor code. Ecuador also left the left-wing Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (Alba) in August 2018. The Productive Development Act introduced an austerity policy, and reduced the previous development and redistribution policies. Regarding taxes, the authorities aimed to \"encourage the return of investors\" by granting amnesty to fraudsters and proposing measures to reduce tax rates for large companies. In addition, the government waived the right to tax increases in raw material prices and foreign exchange repatriations. In October 2018, Moreno cut diplomatic relations with the Maduro administration of Venezuela, a close ally of Correa. The relations with the United States improved significantly under Moreno. In June 2019, Ecuador agreed to allow U.S. military planes to operate from an airport on the Galapagos Islands. In February 2020, his visit to Washington was the first meeting between an Ecuadorian and U.S. president in 17 years.\nA series of protests began on 3 October 2019 against the end of fuel subsidies and austerity measures adopted by Moreno. On 10 October, protesters overran Quito, the capital, causing the Government of Ecuador to relocate temporarily to Guayaquil. The government eventually returned to Quito in 2019. On 14 October 2019, the government restored fuel subsidies and withdrew an austerity package, which ended nearly two weeks of protests.\nIn the 11 April 2021 election, conservative former banker Guillermo Lasso took 52.4% of the vote, compared to 47.6% for left-wing economist Andr\u00e9s Ar\u00e1uz, who was supported by exiled former president Correa. Lasso had finished second in the 2013 and 2017 presidential elections. On 24 May 2021, Lasso was sworn in, becoming the country's first right-wing leader in 14 years. Lasso's party Creating Opportunities (CREO Movement), and its ally the Social Christian Party (PSC) won only 31 parliamentary seats out of 137, while Ar\u00e1uz's Union for Hope (UNES) won 49 seats, which meant Lasso needed support from the Izquierda Democr\u00e1tica and the indigenist Pachakutik parties to push through his legislative agenda.\nIn October 2021, Lasso declared a 60-day state of emergency to combat crime and drug-related violence, including the numerous bloody clashes between rival groups in the state prisons. Lasso proposed a series of constitutional changes to enhance his government's ability to respond to crime. In a referendum in February 2023, voters overwhelmingly rejected his proposed changes, which weakened Lasso's political standing.\nOn 15 October 2023, centrist candidate Daniel Noboa won the premature presidential election with 52.3% of the vote against leftist candidate Luisa Gonz\u00e1lez. On 23 November 2023, Noboa was sworn in.\nIn January 2024, Noboa declared an \"internal armed conflict\" against organized crime in response to the escape of the imprisoned leader of the Los Choneros cartel and terrorist group, Jos\u00e9 Adolfo Mac\u00edas Villamar (also known as \"Fito\"), and an armed attack at a public television channel. In April 2025, President Daniel Noboa won the run-off round of Ecuador's presidential election, meaning he will now serve a full four-year term. In June 2025, Fito was recaptured and extradited to the United States to face charges of international cocaine distribution conspiracy, use of firearms in furtherance of drug trafficking and straw purchasing of firearms conspiracy. Fito pled not guilty to all charges and is currently awaiting conviction. In October 2025, five people were arrested following an alleged assassination attempt on President Daniel Noboa.\nGeography.\nAccording to the \"CIA World Factbook\", Ecuador has a total area of , including the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands. Of this, is land and water. The total area, according to the Ecuadorian government's foreign ministry, is . The Gal\u00e1pagos Islands are sometimes considered part of Oceania, which would thus make Ecuador a transcontinental country under certain definitions. Ecuador is bigger than the South America countries Uruguay, Suriname, Guyana and French Guiana.\nEcuador lies between latitudes 2\u00b0N and 5\u00b0S,\nbounded on the west by the Pacific Ocean, and has of coastline. It has of land boundaries, with Colombia in the north (with a border) and Peru in the east and south (with a border). It is the westernmost country that lies on the equator.\nThe country has four main geographic regions:\nEcuador's capital and second largest city is Quito, which is in the province of Pichincha in the Sierra region. It is the second-highest capital city with an elevation of 2,850 meters. Ecuador's largest city is Guayaquil, in the Guayas Province. Cotopaxi, just south of Quito, is one of the world's highest active volcanoes. The top of Mount Chimborazo (6,268\u00a0m, or 20,560\u00a0ft, above sea level), Ecuador's tallest mountain, is the most distant point from the center of the Earth on the Earth's surface because of the ellipsoid shape of the planet.\nThe Andes is the watershed divisor between the Amazon watershed, which runs to the east, and the Pacific, including the north\u2013south rivers Mataje, Santiago, Esmeraldas, Chone, Guayas, Jubones, and Puyango-Tumbes.\nClimate.\nThere is great variety in the climate, largely determined by altitude. It is mild year-round in the mountain valleys, with a humid subtropical climate in coastal areas and rainforest in lowlands. The Pacific coastal area has a tropical climate with a severe rainy season. The climate in the Andean highlands is temperate and relatively dry, and the Amazon basin on the eastern side of the mountains shares the climate of other rainforest zones.\nBecause of its location at the equator, Ecuador experiences little variation in daylight hours during the course of a year. Both sunrise and sunset occur each day at the two six o'clock hours.\nThe country has seen its seven glaciers lose 54.4% of their surface in forty years. Research predicts their disappearance by 2100. The cause is climate change, which threatens both the fauna and flora and the population.\nBiodiversity.\nEcuador is one of seventeen megadiverse countries in the world according to Conservation International, and it has the most biodiversity per square kilometer of any nation.\nEcuador has 1,600 bird species (15% of the world's known bird species) in the continental area and 38 more endemic in the Gal\u00e1pagos. In addition to more than 16,000 species of plants, the country has 106 endemic reptiles, 138 endemic amphibians, and 6,000 species of butterfly. The Gal\u00e1pagos Islands are well known as a region of distinct fauna, as the famous place of birth to Darwin's theory of evolution, and as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nEcuador was the first country to recognize the rights of nature in its constitution. The protection of the nation's biodiversity is an explicit national priority as stated in the National Plan of \"Buen Vivir\", or good living, Objective 4, \"Guarantee the rights of nature\", Policy 1: \"Sustainably conserve and manage the natural heritage, including its land and marine biodiversity, which is considered a strategic sector\".\nAs of the writing of the plan in 2008, 19% of Ecuador's land area was protected; however, the plan also states that 32% of the land must be protected in order to truly preserve the nation's biodiversity. Current protected areas include 11 national parks, 10 wildlife refuges, 9 ecological reserves, and other areas. A program begun in 2008, Sociobosque, is preserving another 2.3% of total land area (6,295\u00a0km2, or 629,500\u00a0ha) by paying private landowners or community landowners (such as Amerindian tribes) incentives to maintain their land as native ecosystems such as native forests or grasslands. Eligibility and subsidy rates for this program are determined based on the poverty in the region, the number of hectares that will be protected, and the type of ecosystem of the land to be protected, among other factors. Ecuador had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.66/10, ranking it 35th globally out of 172 countries.\nDespite being on the UNESCO list, the Gal\u00e1pagos are endangered by a range of negative environmental effects, threatening the existence of this exotic ecosystem. Additionally, oil exploitation of the Amazon rainforest has led to the release of billions of gallons of untreated wastes, gas, and crude oil into the environment, contaminating ecosystems and causing detrimental health effects to Amerindian peoples. One of the best known examples is the Texaco-Chevron case. This American oil company operated in the Ecuadorian Amazon region between 1964 and 1992. During this period, Texaco drilled 339 wells in 15 petroleum fields and abandoned 627 toxic wastewater pits. It is now known that these highly polluting and now obsolete technologies were used as a way to reduce expenses. The case has also been documented in Crude, a documentary.\nIn 2022, the supreme court of Ecuador decided that \"under no circumstances can a project be carried out that generates excessive sacrifices to the collective rights of communities and nature.\" It also required the government to respect the opinion of Indigenous peoples about industrial projects on their land.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Ecuadorian State consists of five branches of government: the \"Executive Branch\", the \"Legislative Branch\", the \"Judicial Branch\", the \"Electoral Branch\", and \"Transparency and Social Control\".\nEcuador is governed by a democratically elected president for a four-year term. The president of Ecuador exercises power from the presidential Palacio de Carondelet in Quito. The current constitution was written by the Ecuadorian Constituent Assembly elected in 2007, and was approved by referendum in 2008. Since 1936, voting is compulsory for all literate persons aged 18\u201365, optional for all other citizens over the age of 16.\nThe executive branch includes 23 ministries. Provincial governors and councilors (mayors, aldermen, and parish boards) are directly elected. The National Assembly of Ecuador meets throughout the year except for recesses in July and December. There are thirteen permanent committees. Members of the National Court of Justice are appointed by the National Judicial Council for nine-year terms.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Ecuador performs in the mid-range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in freedom of religion, inclusive suffrage, and electoral participation.\nExecutive branch.\nThe executive branch is led by the president. The president is accompanied by the vice-president, elected for four years (with the ability to be re-elected only once). As head of state and chief government official, the president is responsible for public administration including the appointing of national coordinators, ministers, ministers of State and public servants. The executive branch defines foreign policy, appoints the Chancellor of the Republic, as well as ambassadors and consuls, being the ultimate authority over the Armed Forces of Ecuador, National Police of Ecuador, and appointing authorities. The acting president's wife receives the title of First Lady of Ecuador.\nLegislative branch.\nThe legislative branch is embodied by the National Assembly, which is headquartered in the city of Quito in the Legislative Palace, and consists of 137 assemblymen, divided into ten committees and elected for a four-year term. Fifteen national constituency elected assembly, two Assembly members elected from each province and one for every 100,000 inhabitants or fraction exceeding 150,000, according to the latest national population census. In addition, statute determines the election of assembly of regions and metropolitan districts.\nJudicial branch.\nEcuador's judiciary has as its main body the Judicial Council, and also includes the National Court of Justice, provincial courts, and lower courts. Legal representation is made by the Judicial Council.\nThe National Court of Justice is composed of 21 judges elected for a term of nine years. Judges are renewed by thirds every three years pursuant to the Judicial Code. These are elected by the Judicial Council on the basis of opposition proceedings and merits.\nThe justice system is buttressed by the independent offices of public prosecutor and the public defender. Auxiliary organs are as follows: notaries, court auctioneers, and court receivers. Also there is a special legal regime for Amerindians.\nElectoral branch.\nThe electoral system functions by authorities which enter only every four years or when elections or referendums occur. Its main functions are to organize, control elections, and punish the infringement of electoral rules. Its main body is the National Electoral Council, which is based in the city of Quito, and consists of seven members of the political parties most voted, enjoying complete financial and administrative autonomy. This body, along with the electoral court, forms the \"Electoral Branch\" which is one of Ecuador's five branches of government.\nTransparency and social control branch.\nThe Transparency and Social Control consists of the Council for Citizen Participation and Social Control, an ombudsman, the Comptroller General of the State, and the superintendents. Branch members hold office for five years. This branch is responsible for promoting transparency and control plans publicly, as well as plans to design mechanisms to combat corruption, as also designate certain authorities, and be the regulatory mechanism of accountability in the country.\nAdministrative divisions.\nEcuador is divided into 24 provinces (), each with its own administrative capital:\nRegions and planning areas.\nRegionalization, or zoning, is the union of two or more adjoining provinces in order to decentralize the administrative functions of the capital, Quito.\nIn Ecuador, there are seven regions, or zones, each shaped by the following provinces:\nQuito and Guayaquil are Metropolitan Districts. Gal\u00e1pagos, despite being included within Region 5, is also under a special unit.\nForeign relations.\nEcuador joined the OPEC in 1973 and suspended its membership in 1992. Under President Rafael Correa, the country returned to OPEC before leaving again in 2020 under the instruction of President Moreno, citing its desire to increase crude oil exportation to gain more revenue.\nEcuador has maintained a research station in Antarctica for peaceful scientific study as a member nation of the Antarctica Treaty. Ecuador has often placed great emphasis on multilateral approaches to international issues. Ecuador is a member of the United Nations (and most of its specialized agencies) and a member of many regional groups, including the Rio Group, the Latin American Economic System, the Latin American Energy Organization, the Latin American Integration Association, the Andean Community of Nations, and the Bank of the South (Spanish: \"Banco del Sur\" or \"BancoSur\").\nIn 2017, the Ecuadorian parliament adopted a \"law on human mobility\".\nThe International Organization for Migration lauded Ecuador as the first state to have established the promotion of the concept of universal citizenship in its constitution, aiming to promote the universal recognition and protection of the human rights of migrants. In March 2019, Ecuador withdrew from the Union of South American Nations.\nMilitary.\nThe Ecuadorian Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas de la Republica de Ecuador), consists of the Army, Air Force, and Navy and have the stated responsibility for the preservation of the integrity and national sovereignty of the national territory.\nDue to the continuous border disputes with Peru, finally settled in the early 2000s, and due to the ongoing problem with the Colombian guerrilla insurgency infiltrating Amazonian provinces, the Ecuadorian Armed Forces has gone through a series of changes. In 2009, the new administration at the Defense Ministry launched a deep restructuring within the forces, increasing spending budget to $1,691,776,803, an increase of 25%.\nThe Military Academy General Eloy Alfaro (c. 1838) located in Quito is in charge of graduating army officers. The Ecuadorian Navy Academy (c. 1837), located in Salinas graduates navy officers. The Air Academy Cosme Rennella (c. 1920), also located in Salinas, graduates air force officers.\nHuman rights.\nA 2003 Amnesty International report was critical that there were scarce few prosecutions for human rights violations committed by security forces, and those only in police courts, which are not considered impartial or independent. There are allegations that the security forces routinely torture prisoners. There are reports of prisoners having died while in police custody. Sometimes the legal process can be delayed until the suspect can be released after the time limit for detention without trial is exceeded. Prisons are overcrowded and conditions in detention centers are \"abominable\".\nUN's Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic Review has treated the restrictions on freedom of expression and efforts to control NGOs and recommended that Ecuador should stop the criminal sanctions for the expression of opinions, and delay in implementing judicial reforms. Ecuador rejected the recommendation on decriminalization of libel.\nAccording to Human Rights Watch (HRW) former president Correa intimidated journalists and subjected them to \"public denunciation and retaliatory litigation\". The sentences to journalists were years of imprisonment and millions of dollars of compensation, even though defendants had been pardoned. Correa stated he was only seeking a retraction for slanderous statements.\nAccording to HRW, Correa's government weakened the freedom of press and independence of the judicial system. In Ecuador's current judicial system, judges are selected in a contest of merits, rather than government appointments. However, the process of selection has been criticized as biased and subjective. In particular, the final interview is said to be given \"excessive weighing\". Judges and prosecutors that made decisions in favor of Correa in his lawsuits had received permanent posts, while others with better assessment grades had been rejected.\nThe laws also forbid articles and media messages that could favor or disfavor some political message or candidate. In the first half of 2012, twenty private TV or radio stations were closed down. People engaging in public protests against environmental and other issues are prosecuted for \"terrorism and sabotage\", which may lead to an eight-year prison sentence.\nAccording to Freedom House, restrictions on the media and civil society have decreased since 2017. In October 2022, the United Nations expressed concerns about the dire situation in various detention centers and prisons, and the human rights of those deprived of liberty in Ecuador.\nEconomy.\nEcuador has a developing economy that is highly dependent on commodities, namely petroleum and agricultural products. The country is classified as an upper-middle-income country. Ecuador's economy is the eighth largest in Latin America and experienced an average growth of 4.6% between 2000 and 2006. From 2007 to 2012, Ecuador's GDP grew at an annual average of 4.3 percent, above the average for Latin America and the Caribbean, which was 3.5%, according to the United Nations' Economic Commission for Latin American and the Caribbean (ECLAC). Ecuador was able to maintain relatively superior growth during the 2008 financial crisis. In January 2009, the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) put the 2010 growth forecast at 6.88%. In 2011, its GDP grew at 8% and ranked third highest in Latin America, behind Argentina (2nd) and Panama (1st). Between 1999 and 2007, GDP doubled, reaching $65,490 million according to BCE.\nThe inflation rate until January 2008, was about 1.14%, the highest in the past year, according to the government. The monthly unemployment rate remained at about 6 and 8 percent from December 2007 until September 2008; however, it went up to about 9 percent in October and dropped again in November 2008 to 8 percent. Unemployment mean annual rate for 2009 in Ecuador was 8.5% because the global economic crisis continued to affect the Latin American economies. From this point, unemployment rates started a downward trend: 7.6% in 2010, 6.0% in 2011, and 4.8% in 2012.\nThe extreme poverty rate declined significantly between 1999 and 2010. In 2001, it was estimated at 40% of the population, while by 2011 the figure dropped to 17.4% of the total population. This is explained to an extent by emigration and the economic stability achieved after adopting the U.S. dollar as official means of transaction (before 2000, the Ecuadorian \"sucre\" was prone to rampant inflation). However, starting in 2008, with the bad economic performance of the nations where most Ecuadorian emigrants work, the reduction of poverty has been realized through social spending, mainly in education and health.\nOil accounts for 40% of exports and contributes to maintaining a positive trade balance. Since the late 1960s, the exploitation of oil increased production, and proven reserves are estimated at 6.51 billion barrels as of 2011[ [update]]. In late 2021, Ecuador had to declare a force majeure for oil exports due to erosion near key pipelines (privately owned OCP pipeline and state-owned SOTE pipeline) in the Amazon. It lasted about three weeks, totalling just over $500 million economic losses, before their production returned to its normal level of in early 2022.\nThe overall trade balance for August 2012 was a surplus of almost $390 million for the first six months of 2012, a huge figure compared with that of 2007, which reached only $5.7 million; the surplus had risen by about $425 million compared to 2006. The oil trade balance positive had revenues of $3.295 million in 2008, while non-oil was negative, amounting to $2.842 million. The trade balance with the United States, Chile, the European Union, Bolivia, Peru, Brazil, and Mexico is positive. The trade balance with Argentina, Colombia, and Asia is negative.\nIn the agricultural sector, Ecuador is a major exporter of bananas (first place worldwide in export), flowers, and the seventh largest producer of cocoa. Ecuador also produces coffee, rice, potatoes, cassava (manioc, tapioca), plantains and sugarcane; cattle, sheep, pigs, beef, pork and dairy products; fish, and shrimp; and balsa wood. The country's vast resources include large amounts of timber across the country, like eucalyptus and mangroves. Pines and cedars are planted in the region of La Sierra and walnuts, rosemary, and balsa wood in the Guayas River Basin.\nThe industry is concentrated mainly in Guayaquil, the largest industrial center, and in Quito, where in recent years the industry has grown considerably. This city is also the largest business center of the country. Industrial production is directed primarily to the domestic market. Despite this, there is limited export of products produced or processed industrially. These include canned foods, liquor, jewelry, furniture, and more. A minor industrial activity is also concentrated in Cuenca. Incomes from tourism has been increasing during the last few years due to promotion programs from Government, highlighting the variety of climates and the biodiversity of Ecuador.\nEcuador has negotiated bilateral treaties with other countries, besides belonging to the Andean Community of Nations, and an associate member of Mercosur. It also serves on the World Trade Organization (WTO), in addition to the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), CAF \u2013 Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean and other multilateral agencies. In April 2007, Ecuador paid off its debt to the IMF.\nThe public finance of Ecuador consists of the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE), the National Development Bank (BNF), the State Bank.\nSciences and research.\nEcuador was placed in 96th position of innovation in technology in a 2013 World Economic Forum study. Ecuador was ranked 113rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2025. The most notable icons in Ecuadorian sciences are the mathematician and cartographer Pedro Vicente Maldonado, born in Riobamba in 1707, and the printer, independence precursor, and medical pioneer Eugenio Espejo, born in 1747 in Quito. Among other notable Ecuadorian scientists and engineers are Lieutenant Jose Rodriguez Labandera, a pioneer who built the first submarine in Latin America in 1837; , a botanist and biologist of Andean flora; and , a chemist and inventor of a method of textile serigraphy.\nThe major areas of scientific research in Ecuador have been in the medical fields, tropical and infectious diseases treatments, agricultural engineering, pharmaceutical research, and bioengineering. Being a small country and a consumer of foreign technology, Ecuador has favored research supported by entrepreneurship in information technology. The antivirus program \"Checkprogram\", banking protection system \"MdLock\", and Core Banking Software \"Cobis\" are products of Ecuadorian development.\nTourism.\nEcuador is a country with vast natural wealth. The diversity of its four regions has given rise to thousands of species of flora and fauna. It has approximately 1,640 kinds of birds. The species of butterflies border 4,500, the reptiles 345, the amphibians 358, and the mammals 258, among others. Ecuador is considered one of the 17 countries where the planet's highest biodiversity is concentrated, being also the largest country with diversity per km2 in the world. Most of its fauna and flora live in 26 protected areas by the state.\nThe country has two cities with UNESCO World Heritage Sites: Quito and Cuenca, as well as two natural UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the Galapagos Islands and Sangay National Park, in addition to one World Biosphere Reserve, such as the Cajas Massif. Culturally, the toquilla straw hat and the culture of the Zapara indigenous people are recognized. The most popular sites for national and foreign tourists have different nuances due to the various tourist activities offered by the country.\nAmong the main tourist destinations are:\nTransport.\nThe rehabilitation and reopening of the Ecuadorian railroad and use of it as a tourist attraction is one of the recent developments in transportation matters.\nThe roads of Ecuador in recent years have undergone important improvement. The major routes are Pan American (under enhancement from four to six lanes from Rumichaca to Ambato, the conclusion of four lanes on the entire stretch of Ambato and Riobamba and running via Riobamba to Loja). In the absence of the section between Loja and the border with Peru, there are the Route Espondilus or Ruta del Sol (oriented to travel along the Ecuadorian coastline) and the Amazon backbone (which crosses from north to south along the Ecuadorian Amazon, linking most and more major cities of it).\nAnother major project is developing the road Manta \u2013 Tena, the highway Guayaquil \u2013 Salinas Highway Aloag Santo Domingo, Riobamba \u2013 Macas (which crosses Sangay National Park). Other new developments include the National Unity bridge complex in Guayaquil, the bridge over the Napo river in Francisco de Orellana, the Esmeraldas River Bridge in the city of the same name, and, perhaps the most remarkable of all, the Bahia \u2013 San Vincente Bridge, being the largest on the Latin American Pacific coast.\nCuenca's tramway is the largest public transport system in the city and the first modern tramway in Ecuador. It was inaugurated on 8 March 2019. It has and 27 stations. It will transport 120,000 passengers daily. Its route starts in the south of Cuenca and ends in the north at the Parque Industrial neighborhood.\nThe Mariscal Sucre International Airport in Quito and the Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn de Olmedo International Airport in Guayaquil have experienced a high increase in demand and have required modernization. In the case of Guayaquil it involved a new air terminal, once considered the best in South America and the best in Latin America and in Quito where an entire new airport has been built in Tababela and was inaugurated in February 2013, with Canadian assistance. However, the main road leading from Quito city center to the new airport will only be finished in late 2014, making current travelling from the airport to downtown Quito as long as two hours during rush hour. Quito's old city-center airport is being turned into parkland, with some light industrial use.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEcuador's population is ethnically diverse and the estimates put Ecuador's population at . The largest ethnic group (as of 2010[ [update]]) is the \"Mestizos\", who are mixed race people of Amerindian and European descent, typically from Spanish colonists, and constitute about 71% of the population (although including the Montubio, a term used for coastal Mestizo population, brings this up to about 79%).\nThe White Ecuadorians are a minority, accounting for 6.1% of the population of Ecuador, and can be found throughout all of Ecuador, primarily around the urban areas. Even though Ecuador's white population during its colonial era were mainly descendants from Spain, today Ecuador's white population is a result of a mixture of European immigrants, predominantly from Spain with people from Italy, Germany, France, and Switzerland who have settled in the early 20th century. In addition, there is a small European Jewish (Ecuadorian Jews) population, who live mainly in Quito and to a lesser extent in Guayaquil. 5,000 Romani people live in Ecuador.\nEcuador also has a small population of Asian origins, mainly those from West Asia, like the economically well off descendants of Lebanese and Palestinian immigrants, who are either Christian or Muslim (see Islam in Ecuador), and an East Asian community mainly consisting of those of Japanese and Chinese descent, whose ancestors arrived as miners, farmhands and fishermen in the late 19th century.\nAmerindians account for 7% of the current population. The mostly rural Montubio population of the coastal provinces of Ecuador, who might be classified as Pardo account for 7.4% of the population.\nThe Afro-Ecuadorians are a minority population (7%) in Ecuador, that includes the Mulattos and \"zambos\", and are largely based in the Esmeraldas province and to a lesser degree in the predominantly Mestizo provinces of Coastal Ecuador \u2013 Guayas and Manabi. In the Highland Andes where a predominantly Mestizo, white and Amerindian population exist, the African presence is almost non-existent except for a small community in the province of Imbabura called Chota Valley.\nLargest cities.\nThe five largest cities in the country are Quito (2.78 million inhabitants), Guayaquil (2.72 million inhabitants), Cuenca (636,996 inhabitants), Santo Domingo (458,580 inhabitants), and Ambato (387,309 inhabitants). The most populated metropolitan areas of the country are those of Guayaquil, Quito, Cuenca, Manab\u00ed Centro (Portoviejo-Manta) and Ambato.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nImmigration and emigration.\nEcuador houses a small East Asian community mainly consisting of those of Japanese and Chinese descent, whose ancestors arrived as miners, farmhands and fishermen in the late 19th century.\nIn the early years of World War II, Ecuador still admitted a certain number of immigrants, and in 1939, when several South American countries refused to accept 165 Jewish refugees from Germany aboard the ship \"Koenigstein\", Ecuador granted them entry permits.\nMigration from Lebanon to Ecuador started as early as 1875. Early impoverished migrants tended to work as independent sidewalk vendors, rather than as wage workers in agriculture or others' businesses. Though they emigrated to escape Ottoman Turkish religious oppression, they were called \"Turks\" by Ecuadorians because they carried Ottoman passports. There were further waves of immigration in the first half of the 20th century; by 1930, there were 577 Lebanese immigrants and 489 of their descendants residing in the country. A 1986 estimate from Lebanon's Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated 100,000 Lebanese descendants. They reside mostly in Quito and Guayaquil. They are predominantly Roman Catholics.\nIn the early 1900s, there was immigration from Italians, Germans, Portuguese, French, Britons, Irish and Greeks. The town of Anc\u00f3n experienced of wave of immigration from the UK starting in 1911, when the Government of Ecuador conceded 98 mines, occupying an area of 38,842 hectares, to the British oil company Anglo Ecuadorian Oilfields. Today, the Anglo American Oilfields or Anglo American plc is the world's largest producer of platinum, with around 40% of world output, as well as being a major producer of diamonds, copper, nickel, iron ore and steelmaking coal. Alberto Spencer is one famed Briton that hailed from Ancon. The town has now become an attraction due to the austere British homes in \"El Barrio Ingles\" situated in a contrasting tropical setting.\nIn the 1950s, the Italians were the third largest national group in terms of numbers of immigrants. It can be noted that, after World War I, people from Liguria, still constituted the majority of the flow, even though they then represented only one third of the total number of immigrants in Ecuador. This situation came from the improvement of the economic situation in Liguria. The classic paradigm of the Italian immigrant today was not that of the small trader from Liguria as it had been before; those who emigrated to Ecuador were professionals and technicians, employees and religious people from South-Central Italy. It must be remembered that many immigrants, a remarkable number of Italians among them, moved to the Ecuadorian port from Peru to escape from the Peruvian war with Chile. The Italian government came to be more interested in the emigration phenomenon in Ecuador because of the necessity of finding an outlet for the large number of immigrants who traditionally went to the United States but who could no longer enter this country because of the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 that restricted immigration of Southern and Eastern Europeans as well as other \"undesirables\".\nMost of these communities and their descendants are located in the Guayas region of the country.\nThroughout the 20th century, immigration also came from other Latin American countries due to civil wars, economic crises, and dictatorships. The most notable are those coming from Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay. Starting from 2002, there has been an exponential and significant growth in Colombian and Venezuelan refugees. Colombians have historically found refuge in its neighboring country during times of civil unrest. Recently, Venezuelans have become a notable presence in Ecuadorian cities as many flee the economic and political Venezuelan crisis. Authorities argue that an estimated 350,000 to 400,000 Colombians live in Ecuador, porous borders and lack of formal registration disallow concrete numbers.\nFrom 2007, the Ecuador government created multiple initiatives to attract Ecuadorians abroad mostly from the United States, Italy, and Spain to return after many left during the 90s economic crisis or La Decada Perdida. These policies resulted in the rapid and significant rise in the flow of returning nationals, most notably during the 2008 economic crisis that affected Europe and North America.\nIn recent years, Ecuador has grown in popularity among North American expatriates.\nLanguage.\nSpanish is the official language in Ecuador. It is spoken as a first (93%) or second language (6%) by the vast majority of its population. In 1991 Northern Kichwa (Quechua) and other pre-colonial American languages were spoken by 2,500,000. Ethnologues estimate that the country has about 24 living indigenous languages. Among the 24 are Awapit (spoken by the Aw\u00e1), A'ingae (spoken by the Cofan), Shuar Chicham (spoken by the Shuar), Achuar-Shiwiar (spoken by the Achuar and the Shiwiar), Cha'palaachi (spoken by the Chachi), Tsa'fiki (spoken by the Ts\u00e1chila), Paicoca (spoken by the Siona and Secoya), and Wao Tededeo (spoken by the Waorani). Use of these Amerindian languages is gradually diminishing and being replaced by Spanish.\nMost Ecuadorians speak Spanish as their first language, with its ubiquity permeating and dominating most of the country. Despite its small size, the country has a marked diversity in Spanish accents that vary widely among regions. Ecuadorian Spanish idiosyncrasies reflect the ethnic and racial populations that originated and settled the distinct areas of the country.\nThe three main regional variants are:\nReligion.\nAccording to the Ecuadorian National Institute of Statistics and Census, 91.95% of the country's population have a religion, 7.94% are atheists and 0.11% are agnostics. Among the people who have a religion, 80.44% are Catholic, 11.30% are Evangelical Protestants, 1.29% are Jehovah's Witnesses and 6.97% other (mainly Jewish, Buddhists and Latter-day Saints).\nIn the rural parts of Ecuador, Amerindian beliefs and Catholicism are sometimes syncretized into a local form of folk Catholicism. Most festivals and annual parades are based on religious celebrations, many incorporating a mixture of rites and icons.\nThere is a small number of Eastern Orthodox Christians, Amerindian religions, Muslims (see Islam in Ecuador), Buddhists and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed. According to their estimates, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accounts for about 1.4% of the population, or 211,165 members at the end of 2012. According to their sources there were 92,752 Jehovah's Witnesses in the country in 2017.\nThe History of the Jews in Ecuador goes back to the 16th and 17th centuries. Until the 20th century, the majority were Sephardic with many Anusim (Crypto-Jews) among them. Ashkenazi Jews arrived mostly as refugees after the ascendance of National Socialism in Germany in 1933, with 3,000 Jews in Ecuador in 1940. At its peak, in 1950, the Jewish population of Ecuador was estimated at 4,000, but then diminished to some 290 around 2020, forming one of the smallest Jewish communities in South America. Nevertheless, this number is declining because young people leave the country for the United States or Israel. Today, the Jewish Community of Ecuador (Comunidad Jud\u00eda del Ecuador) has its seat in Quito. There are very small communities in Cuenca. The \"Comunidad de Culto Israelita\" is the organization that represents the Jews of Guayaquil. This community works independently from the \"Jewish Community of Ecuador\" and is composed of only 30 people.\nHealth.\nThe current structure of the Ecuadorian public health care system dates back to 1967. The Ministry of the Public Health (Ministerio de Salud P\u00fablica del Ecuador) is the responsible entity of the regulation and creation of the public health policies and health care plans. The Minister of Public Health is appointed directly by the President of the Republic.\nThe philosophy of the Ministry of Public Health is the social support and service to the most vulnerable population, and its main plan of action lies around communitarian health and preventive medicine. Many American medical groups often conduct medical missions away from the big cities to provide medical health to poor communities.\nThe public healthcare system allows patients to be treated without an appointment in public general hospitals by general practitioners and specialists in the outpatient clinic (\"Consulta Externa\") at no cost. This is done in the four basic specialties of pediatric, gynecology, clinic medicine, and surgery. There are also public hospitals specialized to treat chronic diseases, target a particular group of the population, or provide better treatment in some medical specialties.\nAlthough well-equipped general hospitals are found in the major cities or capitals of provinces, there are basic hospitals in the smaller towns and canton cities for family care consultation and treatments in pediatrics, gynecology, clinical medicine, and surgery.\nCommunity health care centers (Centros de Salud) are found inside metropolitan areas of cities and in rural areas. These are day hospitals that provide treatment to patients whose hospitalization is under 24 hours.\nThe doctors assigned to rural communities, where the Amerindian population can be substantial, have small clinics under their responsibility for the treatment of patients in the same fashion as the day hospitals in the major cities. The treatment in this case respects the culture of the community.\nThe public healthcare system should not be confused with the Ecuadorian Social Security healthcare service, which is dedicated to individuals with formal employment and who are affiliated obligatorily through their employers. Citizens with no formal employment may still contribute to the social security system voluntarily and have access to the medical services rendered by the social security system. The Ecuadorian Institute of Social Security (IESS) has several major hospitals and medical sub-centers under its administration across the nation.\nEcuador currently ranks 20, in most efficient health care countries, compared to 111 back in the year 2000. Ecuadorians have a life expectancy of 77.1 years. The infant mortality rate is 13 per 1,000 live births, a major improvement from approximately 76 in the early 1980s and 140 in 1950. Almost a quarter, or 23%, of children under five are chronically malnourished. Population in some rural areas have no access to potable water, and its supply is provided by mean of water tankers. There are 686 malaria cases per 100,000 people. Basic health care, including doctor's visits, basic surgeries, and basic medications, has been provided free since 2008. However, some public hospitals are in poor condition and often lack necessary supplies to attend the high demand of patients. Private hospitals and clinics are well equipped but still expensive for the majority of the population.\nBetween 2008 and 2016, new public hospitals have been built. In 2008, the government introduced universal and compulsory social security coverage. In 2015, corruption remains a problem. Overbilling is recorded in 20% of public establishments and in 80% of private establishments.\nEducation.\nThe Ecuadorian Constitution requires that all children attend school until they achieve a \"basic level of education\", which is estimated at nine school years. In 1996, the net primary enrollment rate was 96.9%, and 71.8% of children stayed in school until the fifth grade/age 10. The cost of primary and secondary education is borne by the government, but families often face significant additional expenses such as fees and transportation costs.\nProvision of public schools falls far below the levels needed, and class sizes are often very large, and families of limited means often find it necessary to pay for education. In rural areas, only 10% of the children go on to high school. In a 2015 report, The Ministry of Education states that in 2014 the mean number of school years completed in rural areas is 7.39 as compared to 10.86 in urban areas.\nCulture.\nEcuador's dominant culture is defined by its \"mestizo\" majority and, like its ancestry, is traditionally of Spanish heritage, influenced in different degrees by Amerindian traditions and in some cases by Spanish elements non-Europeans and Africans. The first and most substantial wave of modern immigration to Ecuador consisted of Spanish colonist, following the arrival of Europeans in 1499. A lower number of other Europeans and North Americans migrated to the country in the late 19th and early 20th centuries and in smaller numbers, Poles, Lithuanians, English, Irish, Croatians and some cases from Asia during and after the Second World War.\nEcuador's Amerindian communities are integrated into the mainstream culture to varying degrees, but some may also practice their own native cultures, particularly the more remote Amerindian communities of the Amazon basin. Spanish is spoken as the first language by more than 90% of the population and as a first or second language by more than 98%. Part of Ecuador's population can speak Amerindian languages; in some cases, they are used as a second language. Two percent of the population speak only Amerindian languages.\nArt.\nThe best known art styles from Ecuador belonged to the \"Escuela Quite\u00f1a\" (Quito School), which developed from the 16th to 18th centuries, examples of which are on display in various old churches in Quito. Ecuadorian painters include Eduardo Kingman, Oswaldo Guayasam\u00edn, and Camilo Egas from the Indiginist Movement; Manuel Rend\u00f3n, Jaime Zapata, Enrique T\u00e1bara, An\u00edbal Villac\u00eds, Theo Constant\u00e9, Luis Molinari, Araceli Gilbert, Judith Guti\u00e9rrez, F\u00e9lix Ar\u00e1uz, and Estuardo Maldonado from the Informalist Movement; Teddy Cobe\u00f1a from expressionism and figurative style and Luis Burgos Flor with his abstract, futuristic style. The Amerindian people of Tigua, Ecuador, are also world-renowned for their traditional paintings.\nLiterature.\nEarly literature in colonial Ecuador, as in the rest of Spanish America, was influenced by the Spanish Golden Age. One of the earliest examples is Jacinto Collahuazo, an Amerindian chief of a northern village in today's Ibarra, born in the late 1600s. Despite the early repression and discrimination of the native people by the Spanish, Collahuazo learned to read and write in Castilian, but his work was written in Quechua. The use of Quipu was banned by the Spanish, and in order to preserve their work, many Inca poets had to resort to the use of the Latin alphabet to write in their native Quechua language. The history behind the Inca drama \"Ollantay\", the oldest literary piece in existence for any Amerindian language in America, shares some similarities with the work of Collahuazo. Collahuazo was imprisoned and all of his work burned. The existence of his literary work came to light many centuries later, when a crew of masons was restoring the walls of a colonial church in Quito and found a hidden manuscript. The salvaged fragment is a Spanish translation from Quechua of the \"Elegy to the Dead of Atahualpa\", a poem written by Collahuazo, which describes the sadness and impotence of the Inca people of having lost their king Atahualpa.\nOther early Ecuadorian writers include the Jesuits Juan Bautista Aguirre, born in Daule in 1725, and Father Juan de Velasco, born in Riobamba in 1727. Famous authors from the late colonial and early republic period include Eugenio Espejo, a printer and main author of the first newspaper in Ecuadorian colonial times; Jose Joaquin de Olmedo (born in Guayaquil), famous for his ode to Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar titled \"Victoria de Junin\"; Juan Montalvo, a prominent essayist and novelist; Juan Leon Mera, famous for his work \"Cumanda\" or \"Tragedy among Savages\" and the Ecuadorian National Anthem; Juan A. Martinez with \"A la Costa\"; Dolores Veintimilla; and others.\nContemporary Ecuadorian writers include the novelist Jorge Enrique Adoum; the poet Jorge Carrera Andrade; the essayist Benjam\u00edn Carri\u00f3n; the poets Medardo Angel Silva, Jorge Carrera Andrade, Emanuel Xavier and Luis Alberto Costales; the novelist Enrique Gil Gilbert; the novelist Jorge Icaza (author of the novel \"Huasipungo\", translated to many languages); the short story author Pablo Palacio; and the novelist Alicia Yanez Cossio.\nMusic.\nThe music of Ecuador has a long history. Pasillo is a genre of indigenous Latin music. In Ecuador it is the \"national genre of music\". Through the years, many cultures have brought their influences together to create new types of music. There are also different kinds of traditional music like albazo, pasacalle, fox incaico, tonada, capishca, Bomba (highly established in Afro-Ecuadorian societies), and so on. Tecnocumbia and Rockola are clear examples of the influence of foreign cultures. One of the most traditional forms of dancing in Ecuador is Sanjuanito. It is originally from northern Ecuador (Otavalo-Imbabura). Sanjuanito is a type of dance music played during festivities by the mestizo and Amerindian communities. According to the Ecuadorian musicologist Segundo Luis Moreno, Sanjuanito was danced by Amerindian people during San Juan Bautista's birthday. This important date was established by the Spaniards on 24 June, coincidentally the same date when Amerindian people celebrated their rituals of Inti Raymi.\nCuisine.\nEcuadorian cuisine is diverse, varying with the altitude, associated agricultural conditions, and ethnic/racial communities. Most regions in Ecuador follow the traditional three-course meal of soup, a course that includes rice and a protein, and then dessert and coffee to finish.\nIn the coastal region, seafood is very popular, with fish, shrimp, and \"ceviche\" being an integral part of the diet. Beef is also notably consumed in the coastal region, traditional dishes are churrasco and arroz con menestra y carne asada (rice with beans and grilled beef) served with fried plantain. The latter is an emblematic dish of the city of Guayaquil. Meat based dishes have their origins in the cattle ranching culture of the Montubio people.\nCeviche is an indispensable coastal dish with pre-incan origins. It is often served with fried plantain (chifles or patacones), popcorn, or tostado. Plantain- and peanut-based dishes are quite frequent in the coastal region reflecting the West African roots of many of its citizens. Encocados (dishes that contain a coconut sauce) are also very popular in the northern coast centering around the city of Esmeraldas. The coast is also a leading producer of bananas, cocoa beans (to make chocolate), shrimp, tilapia, mango, and passion fruit, among other products.\nPan de yuca, analogous with the Brazilian p\u00e3o de queijo, is served with \"yogur persa\" and is often eaten as a snack in many coastal cities. Its origin comes from the Persian and Middle Eastern populations that settled the coast.\nIn the highland region, various dishes of pork, chicken, and \"cuy\" (guinea pig) are popular and are served with a variety of grains (especially rice and mote) or potatoes. The consumption of \"Cuy\" or Guinea Pig, de rigueur in mostly indigenous communities, reflects the predominantly native character of the highlands. Considered a delicacy it is often characterized as having a mild pork flavor.\nIn the Amazon region, a dietary staple is the \"yuca\", elsewhere called cassava. Many fruits are available in this region, including bananas, tree grapes, and peach palms.\nSports.\nThe most popular sport in Ecuador, as in most South American countries, is football. Its best known professional teams include; Emelec from Guayaquil, Liga De Quito from Quito; Barcelona S.C. from Guayaquil, Independiente del Valle from Sangolqui, the most popular team in Ecuador, also the team with most local championships; Deportivo Quito, and El Nacional from Quito; Olmedo from Riobamba; and Deportivo Cuenca from Cuenca. Currently the most successful football team in Ecuador is LDU Quito, and it is the only Ecuadorian team that has won the \"Copa Libertadores\"; they were also runners-up in the 2008 FIFA Club World Cup. The Estadio Monumental Isidro Romero Carbo is the tenth largest football stadium in South America. The Ecuador national football team has appeared at four FIFA World Cups.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9335", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9335", "title": "History of Ecuador", "text": " \nThe History of Ecuador covers human habitation in the region reaching back 8,000 years\nDuring that period a diversity of cultures have influenced the people and the land that today make up the contemporary Republic of Ecuador. Indigenous tribes inhabited the area for millennia before being invaded and absorbed into the Inca Empire in the early fifteenth century.\nThe Incas themselves were conquered shortly afterwards by the Spanish led by Francisco Pizarro in the early 16th century. The region fell under the Viceroyalty of Peru although it was granted certain autonomy through the Quito Audencia established in 1563. In 1720, it was joined to the Viceroyalty of New Granada.\nA rebellion in 1812 against the Quito Audencia was crushed early in the Spanish American wars of independence, but the struggle was revived in 1820 by a new rebellion originating in Guayaquil. The city was also the site of the Guayaquil Conference between Simon Bolivar and San Martin. Ecuador became independent initially as part of the Republic of Gran Colombia, before finally breaking away in 1830.\nEcuador would endure a period of civil war until the mid nineteenth century after which it would be dominated by caudillos, alternatively conservative and liberal. In the twentieth and twenty first centuries Ecuador would continue to struggle in achieving both economic and political stability.\nPre-Columbian Ecuador.\nDuring the pre-Inca period, people lived in clans, which formed great tribes, some allied with each other to form powerful confederations, such as the Confederation of Quito. But none of these confederations could resist the formidable momentum of the Tawantinsuyu. The invasion of the Incas in the 16th century was very painful and bloody. However, once occupied by the Quito hosts of Huayna Capac (1523\u20131525), the Incas developed an extensive administration and began the colonization of the region. The Pre-Columbian era can be divided up into four eras: the Pre-ceramic Period, the Formative Period, the Period of Regional Development and the Period of Integration and the Arrival of the Incas.\nThe Pre-ceramic period begins with the end of the first ice-age and continued until 4200 BCE. The Las Vegas culture and The Inga Cultures dominated this period. The Las Vegas culture lived on the Santa Elena Peninsula on the coast of Ecuador between 9,000 and 6,000 BC. The earliest people were hunters-gatherers and fishermen. Around 6,000 BC cultures in the region were among the first to begin farming. The Ingas lived in the Sierra near present-day Quito between 9000 and 8000 BC along an ancient trade route.\nPeople of the region moved from hunter-gathering and simple farming into a more developed society, with permanent developments, an increase in agriculture and the use of ceramics. New cultures included the Machalilla culture, Valdivia culture, and the Chorrera culture in the coast; Cotocollao and the Chimba in the sierra; and Pastaza and Chiguaza in the eastern region. The Valdivia culture is the first culture where significant remains have been discovered. Their civilization dates back as early as 3500 B.C. Living in the area near the Santa Elena Peninsula, they were one of the first Americans to use pottery. They navigated the seas and established a trade network with tribes in the Andes and the Amazon.\nSucceeding the Valdivia, the Machalilla culture was a farming culture that thrived along the coast of Ecuador between the 2nd and 1st millennia BC. These appear to be the earliest people to cultivate maize in this part of South America. Existing in the late formative period the Chorrera culture lived in the Andes and Coastal Regions of Ecuador between 1000 and 300 BC.\nPeriod of Regional Development.\nThe period of Regional Development is identified by the emergence of regional differences in territorial or political and social organization. Among the main cultures of this period were the Jambel\u00ed, Guangala, Bahia, Tejar-Daule, La Tolita, Jama Coaque on the coast, Cerro Narr\u00edo Alaus\u00ed in the sierras, and Tayos in the Ecuadorian Amazon jungle.\nLa Chimba, north of Quito, is the site of the earliest ceramics found in the northern Andes and is representative of the Formative Period in its final stage. Its inhabitants were in contact with villages on the coast and the mountains, in close proximity to the Cotocollao culture located on the plateau of Quito and its surrounding valleys. The Bahia culture occupied the area that stretches from the foothills of the Andes to the Pacific Ocean, and from Bah\u00eda de Car\u00e1quez to the south of Manabi. The Jama-Coaque culture inhabited areas between Cabo San Francisco in Esmeraldas and Bah\u00eda de Car\u00e1quez in Manabi, in an area of wooded hills and vast beaches which facilitated the gathering of resources from both the jungle and the ocean.\nThe La Tolita developed in the coastal region of Southern Colombia and Northern Ecuador between 600 BCE and 200 AD. A Number of archaeological sites have been discovered and show the highly artistic nature of this culture. Artifacts are characterized by gold jewelry, beautiful anthropomorphous masks and figurines that reflect a hierarchical society with complex ceremonies.\nPeriod of Integration and the arrival of the Inca.\nTribes throughout Ecuador integrated during this period. They created better housing that allowed them to improve their living conditions and no longer be subject to the climate. In the mountains Cosangua-P\u00edllaro, the Capul\u00ed and Piartal-Tuza cultures arose, in the eastern region was the Yasun\u00ed Phase while the Milagro, Mante\u00f1a and Huancavilca cultures developed on the coast.\nThe Mante\u00f1os.\nThe Mante\u00f1os were the last of the pre-Columbian cultures in the coastal region existing between 600 and 1534. They were the first to witness the arrival of Spanish ships sailing in the surrounding Pacific Ocean. According to archaeological evidence and Spanish chronicles the civilization existed from Bah\u00eda de Car\u00e1quez to Cerro de Hojas in the south. \nThey were excellent weavers, produced textiles, articles of gold, silver spondylus shells and mother of pearl. The mante\u00f1os mastered the seas and created an extensive trade routes as far as Chile to the south and Western Mexico to the north. The center of the culture was in the area of Manta which was named in their honor.\nThe Huancavilcas.\nThe Huancavilcas constitute the most important pre-Columbian culture of Guayas. These warriors were noted for their appearance. Huancavilca of culture is the legend of Guayas and Quiles, which gives its name to the city of Guayaquil.\nThe Incas.\nThe Inca civilization expansion northward from modern-day Peru during the late 15th century met with fierce resistance by several Ecuadorian tribes, particularly the Ca\u00f1ari in the region around modern-day Cuenca along with the Quitu, occupants of the site of the modern capital; and the Cara in the Sierra north of Quito. The conquest of Ecuador began in 1463 under the leadership of the ninth Inca, the great warrior Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui. In that year, his son Tupa took over command of the army and began his march northward through the Sierra.\nBy 1500 Tupa's son, Huayna Capac, overcame the resistance of these populations and that of the Cara, and thus incorporated most of modern-day Ecuador into Tawantinsuyu, or the Inca empire. The influence of these conquerors based in Cuzco (modern-day Peru) was limited to about a half century, or less in some parts of Ecuador. During that period, some aspects of life remained unchanged. Traditional religious beliefs, for example, persisted throughout the period of Inca rule. In other areas, however, such as agriculture, land tenure, and social organization, Inca rule had a profound effect despite its relatively short duration.\nEmperor Huayna Capac became fond of Quito, making it a secondary capital of Tawantinsuyu and living out his elder years there before his death in about 1527. He willed that his heart be buried in Quito, his favorite city, and the rest of his body be buried with his ancestors in Cuzco. Huayna Capac's sudden death and the death days later of the Incan heir apparent from a strange disease, described by one source as smallpox, precipitated a bitter power struggle between Hu\u00e1scar, whose mother was Coya (Empress) Mama Rahua Occillo, and Atahualpa, whose mother was according to most sources of the panaka of Pachacuti, and who was his father's favorite. Huascar was chosen as emperor by the Inca nobles, but Atahualpa was very popular with the Inca armies stationed in the north. Huayna Capac had named another one of his sons, Ninan Cuyochi, as his heir. But Ninan Cuyochi died shortly after his father from smallpox. Hu\u00e1scar ordered Atahualpa to attend their father's burial in Cuzco and pay homage to him as the new Inca ruler. Atahualpa, with a large number of his father's veteran soldiers, decided to ignore Hu\u00e1scar, and a civil war ensued. A number of bloody battles took place until finally Hu\u00e1scar was captured. Atahualpa marched south to Cuzco and massacred the royal family associated with his brother.\nThis struggle raged during the half-decade before the arrival of Francisco Pizarro's conquering expedition in 1532. The key battle of this civil war was fought on Ecuadorian soil, near Riobamba, where Hu\u00e1scar's northbound troops were met and defeated by Atahualpa's southbound troops. Atahualpa's final victory over Hu\u00e1scar in the days just before the Spanish conquerors arrived resulted in large part from the loyalty of two of Huayna Capac's best generals, who were based in Quito along with Atahualpa. The victory remains a source of national pride to Ecuadorians as a rare case when \"Ecuador\" bested a \"neighboring country\" by force.\nSpanish discovery and conquest.\nAs the Inca Civil War raged, in 1530 the Spanish landed in Ecuador. Led by Francisco Pizarro, the conquistadors learned that the conflict and disease were destroying the empire. After receiving reinforcements in September 1532, Pizarro set out to the newly victorious Atahualpa.\nArriving at Cajamarca, Pizarro sent an embassy, led by Hernando de Soto, with 15 horsemen and an interpreter; shortly thereafter he sent 20 more horsemen led by his brother Hernando Pizarro as reinforcements in case of an Inca attack. The Incan emperor and his subjects alike were all captivated by the conquistadors' appearance and demeanour, specially due to their bearded faces, which recalled the legend of the Viracocha. In town Pizarro set a trap for the Inca and the Battle of Cajamarca began. The Inca forces greatly outnumbered the Spanish; however, the Spanish superiority of weapons and tactics and the fact that the most trusted Inca generals were in Cusco led to an easy defeat and the capture of the Incan Emperor.\nDuring the next year Pizarro held Atahualpa for ransom. The Incas filled the Ransom Room with gold and silver awaiting a release that would never happen. On August 29, 1533, Atahualpa was garroted. The Spanish then set out to conquer the rest of Tawantinsuyu, capturing Cuzco in November 1533.\nBenalc\u00e1zar, Pizarro's lieutenant and fellow Extremaduran, had already departed from San Miguel with 140-foot soldiers and a few horses on his conquering mission to Ecuador. At the foot of Mount Chimborazo, near the modern city of Riobamba (Ecuador), he met and defeated the forces of the great Inca warrior Rumi\u00f1ahui with the aid of Ca\u00f1ari tribesmen who served as guides and allies to the conquering Spaniards. Rumi\u00f1ahui fell back to Quito, and, while in pursuit of the Inca army, Benalc\u00e1zar encountered another, quite sizable, conquering party led by Guatemalan Governor Pedro de Alvarado. Bored with administering Central America, Alvarado had set sail for the south without the crown's authorization, landed on the Ecuadorian coast, and marched inland to the Sierra. Most of Alvarado's men joined Benalc\u00e1zar for the siege of Quito. In 1533, Rumi\u00f1ahui burned the city to prevent the Spanish from taking it, destroying the ancient pre-Hispanic city.\nIn 1534 Sebasti\u00e1n de Belalc\u00e1zar along with Diego de Almagro established the city of San Francisco de Quito on top of the ruins of the secondary Inca capital, naming it in honor of Pizarro. It was not until December 1540 that Quito received its first captain-general in the person of Francisco Pizarro's brother, Gonzalo Pizarro.\nBenalc\u00e1zar had also founded the city of Guayaquil in 1533, but it had subsequently been retaken by the local Huancavilca tribesmen. Francisco de Orellana, yet another lieutenant of Francisco Pizarro from the Spanish city of Trujillo, put down the native rebellion and in 1537 reestablished this city, which a century later would become one of Spain's principal ports in South America.\nSpanish colonial era.\nBetween 1544 and 1563, Ecuador was a part of Spain's colonies in the New World under the Viceroyalty of Peru, having no administrative status independent of Lima. It remained a part of the Viceroyalty of Peru until 1720, when it joined the newly created Viceroyalty of New Granada; within the viceroyalty, however, Ecuador was awarded its own audiencia in 1563, allowing it to deal directly with Madrid on certain matters. The Quito Audiencia, which was both a court of justice and an advisory body to the viceroy, consisted of a president and several judges (oidores).\nThe most common form in which the Spanish occupied the land was the encomienda. By the early 17th century, there were some 500 encomiendas in Ecuador. Although many consisted of quite sizable haciendas, they were generally much smaller than the estates commonly found elsewhere in South America. A multitude of reforms and regulations did not prevent the encomienda from becoming a system of virtual slavery of the Native Ecuadorians, estimated at one-half the total Ecuadorian population, who lived on them. In 1589 the president of the audiencia recognized that many Spaniards were accepting grants only to sell them and undertake urban occupations, and he stopped distributing new lands to Spaniards; however, the institution of the encomienda persisted until nearly the end of the colonial period.\nThe coastal lowlands north of Manta were conquered, not by the Spanish, but by blacks from the Guinean coast who, as slaves, were shipwrecked en route from Panama to Peru in 1570. The blacks killed or enslaved the native males and married the females, and within a generation they constituted a population of zambos that resisted Spanish authority until the end of the century and afterwards managed to retain a great deal of political and cultural independence.\nThe coastal economy revolved around shipping and trade. Guayaquil, despite being destroyed on several occasions by fire and incessantly plagued by either yellow fever or malaria, was a center of vigorous trade among the colonies, a trade that was technically illegal under the mercantilist philosophy of the contemporary Spanish rulers. Guayaquil also became the largest shipbuilding center on the west coast of South America before the end of the colonial period.\nThe Ecuadorian economy, like that in the mother country, suffered a severe depression throughout most of the 18th century. Textile production dropped an estimated 50 to 75 percent between 1700 and 1800. Ecuador's cities gradually fell into ruins, and by 1790 the elite was reduced to poverty, selling haciendas and jewelry in order to subsist. The Native Ecuadorian population, in contrast, probably experienced an overall improvement in its situation, as the closing of the obrajes commonly led Native Ecuadorians to work under less arduous conditions on either haciendas or traditional communal lands. Ecuador's economic woes were, no doubt, compounded by the expulsion of the Jesuits in 1767 by King Charles III of Spain. Missions in the Oriente were abandoned, and many of the best schools and the most efficient haciendas and obrajes lost the key that made them outstanding institutions in colonial Ecuador.\nJesuits of Quito during the Colonial era.\nFather Rafael Ferrer was the first Jesuita de Quito (Jesuit of Quito) to explore and found missions in the upper Amazon regions of South America from 1602 to 1610, which at that period belonged to the Audiencia of Quito, that was a part of the Viceroyalty of Peru until the Audiencia of Quito was transferred to the newly created Viceroyalty of New Granada in 1717. In 1602, Father Rafael Ferrer began to explore the Aguarico, Napo, and Mara\u00f1on rivers (Sucumbios region in what is today Ecuador and Peru), and set up, between 1604 and 1605, missions among the Cofan people. Father Rafael Ferrer was martyred in 1610.\nIn 1637, the Jesuits of Quito, Gaspar Cugia and Lucas de la Cueva began establishing missions in Mainas (or Maynas). These missions are now known as the Mainas missions after the Maina people, many of whom lived on the banks of the Mara\u00f1\u00f3n river, around the Pongo de Manseriche region, in close proximity to the Spanish settlement of Borja.\nIn 1639, the Audiencia of Quito organized an expedition to renew its exploration of the Amazon river and the Quito Jesuit (Jesuita Quite\u00f1o) Father Cristobal de Acu\u00f1a was a part of this expedition. The expedition disembarked from the Napo river February 16, 1639, and arrived in what is today Par\u00e1 Brazil, on the banks of the Amazon river on December 12, 1639. In 1641, Father Cristobal de Acu\u00f1a published in Madrid a memoire of his expedition to the Amazon river. The title of the memoire is called Nuevo Descubrimiento del gran rio de las Amazonas, and it was used by academics as a fundamental reference pertaining to the Amazon region.\nBetween 1637 and 1652, there were 14 missions established along the Mara\u00f1on river and its southern tributaries \u2013 the Huallaga and the Ucayali rivers. Jesuit Fathers de la Cueva and Raimundo de Santacruz opened up 2 new routes of communication with Quito, through the Pastaza and Napo rivers.\nBetween 1637 and 1715, Samuel Fritz founded 38 missions along the length of the Amazon river, between the Napo and Negro rivers, that were called the Omagua Missions. These missions were continually attacked by the Brazilian Bandeirantes beginning in the year 1705. In 1768, the only Omagua mission that was left was San Joaquin de Omaguas, since it had been moved to a new location on the Napo river away from the Bandeirantes.\nIn the immense territory of Mainas, also referred to as Maynas, the Jesuitas of Quito, made contact with a number of indigenous tribes which spoke 40 different languages, and founded a total of 173 Jesuit missions with a total population of 150,000 inhabitants. Because of the constant plague of epidemics (smallpox and measles) and warfare with other tribes and the Bandeirantes, the total number of Jesuit Missions were reduced to 40 by 1744. At the time when the Jesuits were expelled from Spanish America in 1767, the Jesuits of Quito registered 36 missions run by 25 Jesuits of Quito in the Audiencia of Quito \u2013 6 Jesuits of Quito in the Napo Missions and Aguarico Missions, and 19 Jesuits of Quito in the Pastaza Missions and Iquitos Missions of Maynas with a total population of 20,000 inhabitants.\nStruggle for independence and birth of the republic.\nQuito Revolution (1809\u20131812).\nThe struggle for independence in the Quito Audiencia was part of a movement throughout Spanish America led by Criollos. The Criollos' resentment of the privileges enjoyed by the Peninsulares was the fuel of revolution against colonial rule. The spark was Napoleon's invasion of Spain, after which he deposed King Ferdinand VII and, in July 1808, placed his brother Joseph Bonaparte on the Spanish throne.\nShortly afterward, Spanish citizens, unhappy at the usurpation of the throne by the French, began organizing local juntas loyal to Ferdinand. A group of Quito's leading citizens followed suit, and on August 10, 1809, they seized power in the name of Ferdinand from the local representatives, whom they accused of preparing to recognize Joseph Bonaparte. Thus, this early revolt against colonial rule (one of the first in Spanish America) was, paradoxically, an expression of loyalty to the Spanish king.\nIt quickly became apparent that Quito's Criollo rebels lacked the anticipated popular support for their cause. As loyalist troops approached Quito, they peacefully turned power back to the crown authorities. Despite assurances against reprisals, the returning Spanish authorities proved to be merciless with the rebels and, in the process of ferreting out participants in the Quito revolt, jailed and abused many innocent citizens. Their actions, in turn, bred popular resentment among Quite\u00f1os, who, after several days of street fighting in August 1810, won an agreement to be governed by a junta composed with a majority of Criollos, although with the Peninsular president of the Royal Audience of Quito acting as its head.\nIn spite of strong opposition from the Quito Audiencia, the Junta called for a congress in December 1811 and declared the entire area of the audiencia to be independent of any government currently in Spain. Two months later, the Junta approved a constitution for the state of Quito that provided for democratic governing institutions but also granted recognition to the authority of Ferdinand should he return to the Spanish throne. Shortly thereafter, the Junta elected to launch a military offensive against loyalist regions to the south in Peru, but the poorly trained and badly equipped troops were no match for those of the Viceroy of Peru, which finally crushed the Quite\u00f1o rebellion in December 1812.\nEcuadorian War of Independence (1820\u20131822).\nThe second chapter in Ecuador's struggle for emancipation from Spanish colonial rule began in Guayaquil, where independence was proclaimed in October 1820 by a local patriotic junta under the leadership of the poet Jos\u00e9 Joaqu\u00edn de Olmedo. By this time, the forces of independence had grown continental in scope and were organized into two principal armies, one under the Venezuelan Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar in the north and the other under the Argentine Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn in the south. Unlike the hapless Quito junta of a decade earlier, the Guayaquil patriots were able to appeal to foreign allies, Argentina and Gran Colombia, each of whom soon responded by sending sizable contingents to Ecuador. Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre, the brilliant young lieutenant of Bol\u00edvar who arrived in Guayaquil in May 1821, was to become the key figure in the ensuing military struggle against the royalist forces.\nAfter a number of initial successes, Sucre's army was defeated at Ambato in the central Sierra and he appealed for assistance from San Mart\u00edn, whose army was by now in Peru. With the arrival from the south of 1,400 fresh soldiers under the command of Andr\u00e9s de Santa Cruz Calahumana, the fortunes of the patriotic army were again reversed. A string of victories culminated in the decisive Battle of Pichincha.\nTwo months later Bol\u00edvar, the liberator of northern South America, entered Quito to a hero's welcome. Later that July, he met San Mart\u00edn at the Guayaquil conference and convinced the Argentine general, who wanted the port to return to Peruvian jurisdiction, and the local Criollo elite in both major cities of the advantage of having the former Quito Audiencia join with the liberated lands to the north. As a result, Ecuador became the District of the South within the Republic of Gran Colombia, which also included present-day Venezuela and Colombia and had Bogot\u00e1 as its capital. This status was maintained for eight tumultuous years.\nGran Colombia (1822\u20131830).\nThese were years in which warfare dominated the affairs of Ecuador. First, the country found itself on the front lines of Gran Colombia's efforts to liberate Peru from Spanish rule between 1822 and 1825; afterward, in 1828 and 1829, Ecuador was in the middle of an armed struggle between Peru and Gran Colombia over the location of their common border. After a campaign that included the near destruction of Guayaquil, the forces of Gran Colombia, under the leadership of Sucre and Venezuelan General Juan Jos\u00e9 Flores, proved victorious. The Treaty of 1829 fixed the border on the line that had divided the Quito audiencia and the Viceroyalty of Peru before independence.\nThe population of Ecuador was divided during these years among three segments: those favoring the status quo, those supporting union with Peru, and those advocating independence for the former audiencia. The latter group was to prevail following Venezuela's withdrawal from Gran Colombia at the very moment that an 1830 constitutional congress had been called in an ultimately futile effort to stem the growing separatist tendencies throughout the country.&lt;br&gt; \nIn May of that year, a group of Quito notables met to dissolve the union with Gran Colombia, and in August, a constituent assembly drew up a constitution for the State of Ecuador, so named for its geographic proximity to the equator, and placed General Flores in charge of political and military affairs. He remained the dominant political figure during Ecuador's first 15 years of independence.\nLiberal and conservative elites in an agrarian republic.\nThe early republic.\nBefore the year 1830 drew to a close, both Marshal Sucre and Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar would be dead, the former murdered (on orders from a jealous General Flores, according to some historians) and the latter from tuberculosis.\nJuan Jos\u00e9 Flores, known as the founder of the republic, was of the foreign military variety. Born in Venezuela, he had fought in the wars for independence with Bol\u00edvar, who had appointed him governor of Ecuador during its association with Gran Colombia. As a leader, however, he appeared primarily interested in maintaining his power. Military expenditures, from the independence wars and from an unsuccessful campaign to wrest Cauca Province from Colombia in 1832, kept the state treasury empty while other matters were left unattended. That same year, Ecuador annexed the Galapagos Islands.\nDiscontent had become nationwide by 1845, when an insurrection in Guayaquil forced Flores from the country. Because their movement triumphed in March (\"marzo\"), the anti-Flores coalition members became known as \"marcistas\". They were an extremely heterogeneous lot that included liberal intellectuals, conservative clergymen, and representatives from Guayaquil's successful business community.\nThe next fifteen years constituted one of the most turbulent periods in Ecuador's two centuries as a nation. The marcistas fought among themselves almost ceaselessly and also had to struggle against Flores's repeated attempts from exile to overthrow the government. The most significant figure of the era, however, was General Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Urbina, who first came to power in 1851 through a coup d'\u00e9tat, remained in the presidency until 1856, and then continued to dominate the political scene until 1860. During this decade and the one that followed, Urbina and his archrival, Garc\u00eda Moreno, would define the dichotomy \u2014 between Liberals from Guayaquil and Conservatives from Quito \u2014 that remained the major sphere of political struggle in Ecuador until the 1980s.\nBy 1859 \u2014 known by Ecuadorian historians as \"the Terrible Year\" \u2014 the nation was on the brink of anarchy. Local caudillos had declared several regions autonomous of the central government, known as \"Jefaturas Supremas\". One of these caudillos, Guayaquil's Guillermo Franco, signed the , ceding the southern provinces of Ecuador to an occupying Peruvian army led by General Ram\u00f3n Castilla. This action was outrageous enough to unite some previously disparate elements. Garc\u00eda Moreno, putting aside both his project to place Ecuador under a French protectorate and his differences with General Flores, got together with the former dictator to put down the various local rebellions and force out the Peruvians. The final push of this effort was the defeat of Franco's Peruvian-backed forces at the Battle of Guayaquil, which led to the overturning of the Treaty of Mapasingue. This opened the last chapter of Flores's long career and marked the entrance to the power of Garc\u00eda Moreno.\nThe era of conservatism (1860\u20131895).\nGabriel Garc\u00eda Moreno was a leading figure of Ecuadorian conservatism. Shortly after the onset of his third presidential term in 1875, Garc\u00eda Moreno was attacked with a machete on the steps of the presidential palace by Faustino Lemos Rayo, a Colombian. As he was dying, Garc\u00eda Moreno took out his gun and shot Faustino Lemos, while he said \"Dios no muere\" (\"God doesn't die\"). The dictator's most outstanding critic was the liberal journalist, Juan Montalvo, who exclaimed, \"My pen killed him!\"\nBetween 1852 and 1890, Ecuador's exports grew in value from slightly more than US$1 million to nearly US$10 million. Production of cacao, the most important export product in the late 19th century, grew from during the same period. The agricultural export interests, centered in the coastal region near Guayaquil, became closely associated with the Liberals, whose political power also grew steadily during the interval. After the death of Garc\u00eda Moreno, it took the Liberals twenty years to consolidate their strength sufficiently to assume control of the government in Quito.\nThe liberal era (1895\u20131925).\nThe new era brought in liberalism. Eloy Alfaro, under whose direction the government headed out to aid those in the rural sectors of the coast, is credited for finishing the construction of the railroad connecting Guayaquil and Quito, the separation of church and state, establishment of many public schools, implementing civil rights (such as freedom of speech), and the legalization of civil marriages and divorce.\nAlfaro was also confronted by a dissident tendency inside his own party, directed by its General Leonidas Plaza and constituted by the upper middle class of Guayaquil. His death was followed by economic liberalism (1912\u201325), when banks were allowed to acquire almost complete control of the country. During the 1920s, Ecuador's key export, cacao beans, were devastated by disease at the same time that its cacao producers faced increased competition from West Africa. The loss of export earnings seriously damaged the economy.\nPopular unrest, together with the ongoing economic crisis and a sickly president, laid the background for a bloodless coup d'\u00e9tat in July 1925. Unlike all previous forays by the military into Ecuadorian politics, the coup of 1925 was made in the name of a collective grouping rather than a particular caudillo. The members of the League of Young Officers came to power with an agenda, which included a wide variety of social reforms, such as dealing with the failing economy, establishing the Central Bank as the unique authorized bank to distribute currency, and creating a new system of budget and customs.\nEarly 20th century.\nMuch of the 20th century was dominated by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Velasco Ibarra, whose five presidential terms began with a mandate in 1934 and final presidency ending in 1972. However, the only term he actually completed was his third from 1952 to 1956.\nMuch of the century was also dominated by the territorial dispute between Peru and Ecuador. In 1941 Ecuador invaded Peruvian territory, and the Peruvians counterattacked and forced them to retreat into their own territory. At that time Ecuador was immersed in internal political fights and was not well equipped to win its offensive war.\nWith the world at war, Ecuador attempted to settle the matter by means of a third-party settlement. In Brazil the two countries' negotiations were overseen by four \"Guarantor\" states (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the United States \u2014 four of the most powerful countries in the region). The resulting treaty is known as the Rio Protocol. The protocol became the focus of a surge of Ecuadorian national pride and concomitant opposition, which resulted in an uprising and overthrow of the government.\nThe postwar era (1944\u20131948).\nThe Quite\u00f1o multitudes stood in the pouring rain on May 31, 1944, to hear Velasco promise a \"national resurrection\", with social justice and due punishment for the \"corrupt Liberal oligarchy\" that had been responsible for \"staining the national honor\", believed that they were witnessing the birth of a popular revolution. Liberal partisans were promptly jailed or sent into exile, while Velasco verbally baited the business community and the rest of the political right. The leftist elements within Velasco's Democratic Alliance, which dominated the constituent assembly that was convened to write a new constitution, were nonetheless destined to be disappointed.\nIn May 1945, after a year of growing hostility between the president and the assembly, which was vainly awaiting deeds to substantiate Velasco's rhetorical advocacy of social justice, the mercurial chief executive condemned and then repudiated the newly completed constitution. After dismissing the assembly, Velasco held elections for a new assembly, which in 1946 drafted a far more conservative constitution that met with the president's approval. For this brief period, Conservatives replaced the left as Velasco's base of support.\nRather than attending to the nation's economic problems, however, Velasco aggravated them by financing the dubious schemes of his associates. Inflation continued unabated, as did its negative impact on the national standard of living, and by 1947 foreign exchange reserves had fallen to dangerously low levels. In August, when Velasco was ousted by his minister of defense, nobody rose to defend the man who, only three years earlier, had been hailed as the nation's savior. During the following year, three different men briefly held executive power before Galo Plaza Lasso, running under a coalition of independent Liberals and socialists, narrowly defeated his Conservative opponent in presidential elections. His inauguration in September 1948 initiated what was to become the longest period of constitutional rule since the 1912\u201324 heyday of the Liberal plutocracy.\nConstitutional rule (1947\u20131960).\nGalo Plaza differed from previous Ecuadorian presidents by bringing a developmentalist and technocratic emphasis to Ecuadorian government. No doubt Galo Plaza's most important contribution to Ecuadorian political culture was his commitment to the principles and practices of democracy. As president he promoted agricultural exports of Ecuador, such as bananas, creating economic stability. During his presidency, an earthquake near Ambato severely damaged the city and surrounding areas and killed approximately 8,000 people. Unable to succeed himself, he left his office in 1952 as the first president in 28 years to complete his term in office.\nA proof of the politically stabilizing effect of the banana boom of the 1950s is that even Velasco, who in 1952 was elected president for the third time, managed to serve out a full four-year term. Velasco's fourth term in the presidency initiated a renewal of crisis, instability, and military domination and ended conjecture that the political system had matured or developed in a democratic mold.\nThe modern republic develops.\nInstability and military governments (1960\u20131979).\nIn 1963, the army overthrew President Carlos Julio Arosemena Monroy, falsely accusing him of \"sympathizing with communism\". According to former CIA agent Philip Agee, who served several years in Ecuador, the United States incited this coup d'\u00e9tat to eliminate a government that refused to break with Cuba.\nIn 1976 the military triumvirate, pressured by internal and external public consensus, began a process of return to the constitutional system. The moment was seen by the ruling classes and sectors as the ideal moment to legitimize their power by restoring the traditional procedures of control of power. However, divisions among the Armed Forces, whose leaders included Colonel Richelieu Levoyer, Ren\u00e9 Vargas, and others, led to the drafting of alternative proposed constitutions. Through a referendum, a new Constitution was approved in January (1978). It increased representation for groups traditionally excluded from power, such as indigenous people, trade unions, and leftist political parties. In the elections of 1978-79 the progressive candidate, Jaime Rold\u00f3s Aguilera, triumphed against the conservative Sixto Dur\u00e1n Ball\u00e9n, who had the implicit backing of military leaders.\nReturn to democratic rule (1979\u20131990).\nJaime Rold\u00f3s Aguilera, democratically elected in 1979, presided over a nation that had undergone profound changes during the seventeen years of military rule. There were impressive indicators of economic growth between 1972 and 1979: The government budget expanded some 540 percent, whereas exports as well as per capita income increased a full 500 percent. Industrial development had also progressed, stimulated by the new oil wealth as well as Ecuador's preferential treatment under the provisions of the Andean Common Market (AnCoM, also known as the Andean Pact).\nRold\u00f3s was killed, along with his wife and the minister of defense, in an airplane crash in the southern province of Loja on May 24, 1981. The death of Rold\u00f3s generated intense popular speculation. Some Ecuadorian nationalists attributed it to the Peruvian government because the crash took place near the border where the two nations had participated in the Paquisha War in their perpetual border dispute. Many of the nation's leftists, pointing to a similar crash that had killed Panamanian President Omar Torrijos Herrera less than three months later, blamed the United States government.\nRold\u00f3s's constitutional successor, Osvaldo Hurtado, immediately faced an economic crisis brought on by the sudden end of the petroleum boom. Massive foreign borrowing, initiated during the years of the second military regime and continued under Rold\u00f3s, resulted in a foreign debt that by 1983 was nearly US$7 billion. The nation's petroleum reserves declined sharply during the early 1980s because of exploration failures and rapidly increasing domestic consumption. The economic crisis was aggravated in 1982 and 1983 by drastic climatic changes, bringing severe drought as well as flooding, precipitated by the appearance of the unusually warm ocean current known as \"El Ni\u00f1o\". Analysts estimated damage to the nation's infrastructure at US$640 million, with balance-of-payments losses of some US$300 million. Real gross domestic product growth fell to 2% in 1982 and to \u22123.3% in 1983. The rate of inflation in 1983, 52.5%, was the highest ever recorded in the nation's history.\nOutside observers noted that, however unpopular, Hurtado deserved credit for keeping Ecuador in good standing with the international financial community and for consolidating Ecuador's democratic political system under extremely difficult conditions. As Le\u00f3n Febres Cordero entered office on August 10, there was no end in sight to the economic crisis nor to the intense struggle that characterized the political process in Ecuador.\nDuring the first years of his administration, Febres Cordero introduced free-market economic policies, took a strong stand against drug trafficking and terrorism, and pursued close relations with the United States. His tenure was marred by bitter wrangling with other branches of government and his own brief kidnapping by elements of the military. A devastating earthquake in March 1987 interrupted oil exports and worsened the country's economic problems.\nRodrigo Borja Cevallos of the Democratic Left (ID) party won the presidency in 1988, running in the runoff election against Abdal\u00e1 Bucaram of the PRE. His government was committed to improving human rights protection and carried out some reforms, notably an opening of Ecuador to foreign trade. The Borja government concluded an accord leading to the disbanding of the small terrorist group \"\u00a1Alfaro Vive, Carajo!\" (\"Alfaro Lives, Dammit!\"), named after Eloy Alfaro. However, continuing economic problems undermined the popularity of the ID, and opposition parties gained control of Congress in 1990.\nEconomic crisis (1990\u20132000).\nIn 1992, Sixto Dur\u00e1n Ball\u00e9n won his third run for the presidency. His tough macroeconomic adjustment measures were unpopular, but he succeeded in pushing a limited number of modernization initiatives through Congress. Dur\u00e1n Ball\u00e9n's vice president, Alberto Dahik, was the architect of the administration's economic policies, but in 1995, Dahik fled the country to avoid prosecution on corruption charges following a heated political battle with the opposition. A war with Peru (named the Cenepa War, after a river located in the area) erupted in January\u2013February 1995 in a small, remote region, where the boundary prescribed by the 1942 Rio Protocol was in dispute. The Dur\u00e1n Ball\u00e9n administration can be credited with beginning the negotiations that would end in a final settlement of the territorial dispute.\nIn 1996, Abdal\u00e1 Bucaram, from the populist Ecuadorian Roldosista Party, won the presidency on a platform that promised populist economic and social reforms. Almost from the start, Bucaram's administration languished amidst widespread allegations of corruption. Empowered by the president's unpopularity with organized labor, business, and professional organizations alike, Congress unseated Bucaram in February 1997 on grounds of mental incompetence. The Congress replaced Bucaram with Interim President Fabi\u00e1n Alarc\u00f3n.\nIn May 1997, following the demonstrations that led to the ousting of Bucaram and appointment of Alarc\u00f3n, the people of Ecuador called for a National Assembly to reform the Constitution and the country's political structure. After a little more than a year, the National Assembly produced a new Constitution.\nCongressional and first-round presidential elections were held on May 31, 1998. No presidential candidate obtained a majority, so a run-off election between the top two candidates \u2013 Quito Mayor Jamil Mahuad of the DP and Social Christian \u00c1lvaro Noboa Pont\u00f3n \u2013 was held on July 12, 1998. Mahuad won by a narrow margin. He took office on August 10, 1998. On the same day, Ecuador's new constitution came into effect.\nMahuad faced a difficult economic situation, linked in particular to the Asian financial crisis. The currency was devalued by 15%, fuel and electricity prices increased fivefold, and public transport prices increased by 40%. The government was preparing to privatize several key sectors of the economy: oil, electricity, telecommunications, ports, airports, railways, and the post office. The repression of a first general strike caused three deaths. The social situation was critical: more than half of the population was unemployed, 60% lived below the extreme poverty line, and public employees had not been paid for three months. A further increase in VAT, combined with the abolition of subsidies for domestic gas, electricity and diesel, triggered a new social movement. In the provinces of Latacunga, the army shot the indigenous people who blocked the Pan-American Highway, injuring 17 people with bullets.\nThe coup de gr\u00e2ce for Mahuad's administration was Mahuad's decision to make the local currency, the sucre (named after Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre), obsolete and replace it with the US dollar (a policy called dollarization). This caused massive unrest as the lower classes struggled to convert their now useless sucres to US dollars and lost wealth, while the upper classes (whose members already had their wealth invested in US dollars) gained wealth in turn. Under Mahuad's recession-plagued term, the economy shrank significantly, and inflation reached levels of up to 60 percent.\nIn addition, corruption scandals were a source of public concern. Former Vice President Alberto Dahik, architect of the neoliberal economic program, fled abroad after being indicted for \"questionable use of reserved funds\". Former President Fabi\u00e1n Alarc\u00f3n was arrested on charges of paying salaries for more than a thousand fictitious jobs. President Mahuad was accused of receiving money from drug trafficking during his election campaign. Several major bankers were also cited in cases. Mahuad concluded a well-received peace with Peru on October 26, 1998.\nInstability (2000\u20132007).\nOn January 21, 2000, during demonstrations in Quito by indigenous groups, the military and police refused to enforce public order, beginning what became known as the 2000 Ecuadorean coup d'\u00e9tat. Demonstrators entered the National Assembly building and declared, in a move that resembled the coups d'\u00e9tat endemic to Ecuadorean history, a three-person junta in charge of the country. Field-grade military officers declared their support for the concept. During a night of confusion and failed negotiations, President Mahuad was forced to flee the presidential palace for his own safety. Vice President Gustavo Noboa took charge by vice-presidential decree; Mahuad went on national television in the morning to endorse Noboa as his successor. The military triumvirate that was effectively running the country also endorsed Noboa. The Ecuadorean Congress then met in an emergency session in Guayaquil on the same day, January 22, and ratified Noboa as President of the Republic in constitutional succession to Mahuad.\nThe US dollar became the only official currency of Ecuador in 2000. Although Ecuador began to improve economically in the following months, the government of Noboa came under heavy fire for the continuation of the dollarization policy, its disregard for social problems, and other important issues in Ecuadorean politics.\nRetired Colonel Lucio Guti\u00e9rrez, a member of the military junta that overthrew Mahuad, was elected president in 2002 and assumed the presidency on January 15, 2003. Gutierrez's Patriotic Society Party had a small fraction of the seats in Congress and therefore depended on the support of other parties in Congress to pass legislation.\nIn December 2004, Guti\u00e9rrez unconstitutionally dissolved the Supreme Court and appointed new judges to it. This move was generally seen as a kickback to deposed ex-President Abdal\u00e1 Bucaram, whose political party had sided with Guti\u00e9rrez and helped derail attempts to impeach him in late 2004. The new Supreme Court dropped charges of corruption pending against the exiled Bucaram, who soon returned to the politically unstable country. The corruption evident in these maneuvers finally led Quito's middle classes to seek the ousting of Guti\u00e9rrez in early 2005. In April 2005, the Ecuadorian Armed Forces declared that it was withdrawing its support for the President. After weeks of public protests, Guti\u00e9rrez was overthrown in April. Vice President Alfredo Palacio assumed the presidency and vowed to complete the term of office and hold elections in 2006.\nRafael Correa (2007-2017).\nOn January 15, 2007, the social democrat Rafael Correa succeeded Palacio as President of Ecuador, with the promise of summoning a constituent assembly and focusing on poverty. The 2007-8 Ecuadorian Constituent Assembly drafted the 2008 Constitution of Ecuador, approved via the Ecuadorian constitutional referendum, 2008. The new socialist constitution implemented leftist reforms.\nIn November 2009, Ecuador faced an energy crisis that led to power rationing across the country.\nBetween 2006 and 2016, poverty decreased from 36.7% to 22.5% and annual per capita GDP growth was 1.5 percent (as compared to 0.6 percent over the prior two decades). At the same time, inequalities, as measured by the Gini index, decreased from 0.55 to 0.47.\nBeginning in 2007, President Rafael Correa established The Citizens' Revolution, a movement following left-wing policies, which some sources describe as populist. Correa was able to utilize the 2000s commodities boom to fund his policies, utilizing China's need for raw materials. Through China, Correa accepted loans that had few requirements, as opposed to firm limits set by other lenders. With this funding, Ecuador was able to invest in social welfare programs, reduce poverty and increase the average standard of living in Ecuador, while at the same time growing Ecuador's economy. Such policies resulted in a popular base of support for Correa, who was re-elected to the presidency three times between 2007 and 2013. Media coverage in the United States viewed Correa's strong popular support and efforts to re-found the Ecuadorian state as an entrenchment of power.\nAs the Ecuadorian economy began to decline in 2014, Correa decided not to run for a fourth term and by 2015, protests occurred against Correa following the introduction of austerity measures and an increase of inheritance taxes. Instead, Len\u00edn Moreno, who was at the time a staunch Correa loyalist and had served as his vice-president for over six years, was expected to continue with Correa's legacy and the implementation of 21st century socialism in the country, running on a broadly left-wing platform with significant similarities to Correa's.\nA shift to the right and social conflict (2017\u2013present).\nMoreno's presidency (2017\u20132021).\nRafael Correa's three consecutive terms (from 2007 to 2017) were followed by his former Vice President Len\u00edn Moreno's four years as president (2017\u201321). In the weeks after his election, Moreno distanced himself from Correa's policies and shifted the left-wing PAIS Alliance's away from the left-wing politics and towards the neoliberal governance. Despite these policy shifts, Moreno continued to identify himself as social democrat. Moreno then led the 2018 Ecuadorian referendum, which reinstated presidential term limits that were removed by Correa, barring Correa from running for a fourth presidential term in the future. At his election, Moreno enjoyed an approval rating of 79 percent. Moreno's distancing from his predecessor's policies and his electoral campaign's platform, however, alienated both former President Correa and a large percentage of his own party's supporters. In July 2018, a warrant for Correa's arrest was issued after facing 29 charges for alleged acts of corruption while he was in office.\nDue to increased borrowing by Correa's administration, which he had used to fund social welfare projects, as well as the 2010s oil glut, public debt tripled in a five-year period, with Ecuador eventually coming to use of the Central Bank of Ecuador's reserves for funds. In total, Ecuador was left $64 billion in debt and was losing $10 billion annually. On 21 August 2018, Moreno announced economic austerity measures to reduce public spending and the deficit. Moreno stated that the measures aimed to save $1 billion and included a reduction of fuel subsidies, eliminating subsidies for gasoline and diesel, and the removal or merging of several public entities, a move denounced by the groups representing the nation's indigenous groups and trade unions.\nAt the same time, Len\u00edn Moreno moved away from his predecessor's left-leaning foreign policy. In August 2018, Ecuador withdrew from Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (Alba), a regional bloc of leftwing governments led by Venezuela. In October 2018, the government of President Lenin Moreno cut diplomatic relations with the Nicol\u00e1s Maduro regime of Venezuela, a close ally of Rafael Correa. In March 2019, Ecuador withdrew from Union of South American Nations. Ecuador was an original member of the block, founded by left-wing governments in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2008. Ecuador also asked UNASUR to return the headquarters building of the organization, based in its capital city, Quito. In June 2019, Ecuador agreed to allow US military planes to operate from an airport on the Galapagos Islands.\nIn October 2019, Len\u00edn Moreno announced a package of economic measures as part of a deal with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to obtain US$ in credit. These measures became known as \"el paquetazo\" and they included the end of fuel subsidies, removal of some import tariffs and cuts in public worker benefits and wages. This caused mass protests which began on 3 October 2019. On 8 October, President Moreno relocated his government to the coastal city of Guayaquil after anti-government protesters had overrun Quito, including the Carondelet Palace. On the same day, Moreno accused his predecessor Rafael Correa of orchestrating a coup against the government with the aid of Venezuela's Nicol\u00e1s Maduro, a charge which Correa denied. Later that day, the authorities shut down oil production at the Sacha oil field, which produces 10% of the nation's oil, after it was occupied by protesters. Two more oil fields were captured by protesters shortly thereafter. Demonstrators also captured repeater antennas, forcing state TV and radio offline in parts of the country. Indigenous protesters, organized by the CONAIE confederation, blocked most of Ecuador's main roads, completely cutting the transport routes to the city of Cuenca. On 9 October, protesters managed to briefly burst into and occupy the National Assembly, before being driven out by police using tear gas. Violent clashes erupted between demonstrators and police forces as the protests spread further. During the late-night hours of 13 October, the Ecuadorian government and CONAIE reached an agreement during a televised negotiation. Both parties agreed to collaborate on new economic measures to combat overspending and debt. The government agreed to end the austerity measures at the center of the controversy, and the protesters in turn agreed to end the two-week-long series of demonstrations. President Moreno agreed to withdraw Decree 883, an IMF-backed plan that caused a significant rise in fuel costs.\nRelations with the United States improved significantly during the presidency of Lenin Moreno. In February 2020, his visit to Washington was the first meeting between an Ecuadorian and US president in 17 years.\nLasso's (2021\u20132023) and Noboa's (since 2023) presidencies.\nThe April 2021 election run-off vote ended in a win for conservative former banker, Guillermo Lasso, who took 52.4% of the vote compared to 47.6% for left-wing economist Andr\u00e9s Arauz, supported by the exiled former president, Rafael Correa. Previously, President-elect Lasso had finished second in the 2013 and 2017 presidential elections. On 24 May 2021, Guillermo Lasso was sworn in as the new President of Ecuador, becoming the country's first right-wing leader in 14 years.\nIn October 2021, President Lasso declared a 60-day state of emergency aiming to combat crime and drug-related violence. In October 2022, a bloody riot among inmates at a prison in central Ecuador caused 16 deaths, among whom was the drug crime boss Leonardo Norero, alias \u201cEl Patron.\u201d In Ecuador's state prisons there were numerous bloody clashes between rival groups of prisoners.\nA series of protests against the economic policies of Ecuadorian president Guillermo Lasso, triggered by increasing fuel and food prices, took place in June 2022. Initiated by and primarily attended by Indigenous activists, in particular CONAIE, the protests were later joined by students and workers who were also affected by the price increases. Lasso condemned the protests and labelled them as an attempted \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" against his government.\nAs a result of the protests, Lasso declared a state of emergency. When the protests blocked roads and ports in Quito and Guayaquil, there were food and fuel shortages across the country as a result. Lasso was criticized for allowing violent and deadly responses towards protestors. The President narrowly escaped impeachment in a vote in Congress. At the end of June, protesters agreed to end their protests and blockades in return for an agreement by the government to discuss and try to address their demands.\nLasso proposed a series of constitutional changes to enhance his government's ability to respond to rising, largely drug-related crime. In a referendum in February 2023, voters overwhelmingly rejected his proposed changes. This result weakened Lasso's political standing. Meanwhile, Lasso's government faced accusations of corruption. Citing those accusations and claiming that the government had failed to meet its demands from June 2022, CONAIE called on Lasso to resign and declared itself in a state of \"permanent mobilization\", threatening additional protests.\nIn a bid to avoid impeachment after the opposition-controlled national assembly accused him of impeachment, Lasso triggered a provision in the Ecuadorian constitution, called \"Muertaza Cruzada\", which triggered both presidential and parliamentary elections. He moved to rule by decree and promised to hold fresh elections within six months. Military leadership of the country promised to back him. Lasso's move was condemned by opposition figures, including ex-president Rafael Correa and Leonidas Iza It was initially thought that Lasso would be a contender in the elections, but he later informed that he was not going to be a candidate.\nOn 15 October 2023, center-right candidate Daniel Noboa won the run-off of the premature presidential election with 52.3% of the vote against leftist candidate Luisa Gonz\u00e1lez. On 23 November 2023, Daniel Noboa was sworn in as Ecuador's new president.\nOn 7 January 2024, Los Choneros leader Jos\u00e9 Adolfo Mac\u00edas Villamar, alias \"Fito\", escaped from prison in the city of Guayaquil, on the day of his scheduled transfer to a maximum-security prison. The events were reported the next day by authorities, with charges being filed against two prison guards. Following the escape, Noboa declared a state of emergency, to last for 60 days, giving authorities the power to suspend people's rights and allowing the military to be mobilized inside prisons. Riots ensued in multiple prisons across Ecuador. Two days later, mass armed attacks occurred throughout the country, including armed groups storming a television broadcasting station mid-air. On 23 March 2024, Ecuador's youngest mayor, 27-year-old Brigitte Garc\u00eda, mayor of San Vicente for the opposition The Citizens' Revolution, was shot dead. In April 2025, President Daniel Noboa won the run-off round of Ecuador's presidential election, meaning he will now serve a full four-year term.\nIn June 2025, the powerful Ecuadorean gang leader \"Fito\" was recaptured and he was extradited to the US to face charges of drug and arms trafficking. In October 2025, five people were arrested following an alleged assassination attempt on President Daniel Noboa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "9336", "revid": "41936370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9336", "title": "Geography of Ecuador", "text": "Ecuador is a country in western South America, bordering the Pacific Ocean at the Equator, for which the country is named. Ecuador encompasses a wide range of natural formations and climates, from the desert-like southern coast to the snowcapped peaks of the Andes mountain range to the plains of the Amazon Basin. Cotopaxi in Ecuador is one of the world's highest active volcanos. It also has a large series of rivers that follow the southern border and spill into the northwest area of Peru.\nArea and borders.\nEcuador is located on the west by the Pacific Ocean, and has 2,237\u00a0km of coastline. It has 2237\u00a0km of land boundaries, with Colombia in the north (708\u00a0km border) and Peru in the east and south (1,529\u00a0km border). is land and water. Ecuador is one of the smallest countries in South America, but bigger than Uruguay, Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana. It has the 29th largest exclusive economic zone of which includes the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands.\nGeographical regions.\nEcuador is divided into three continental regions\u2014the Costa (coast), Sierra (mountains), and Oriente (east)\u2014and one insular region, the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands (officially Archipi\u00e9lago de Col\u00f3n). The continental regions extend the length of the country from north to south and are separated by the Andes Mountains.\nGal\u00e1pagos Islands.\nThe Gal\u00e1pagos are located west of the Ecuadorian coast. They are noted for their association with Charles Darwin, whose observation of animals here during the voyage of the \"Beagle\" led to his formation of the theory of natural selection as a means of evolution. The islands have witnessed a large number of tourists and travelers over recent years. Special species that could be found here include blue footed boobies, iguanas and many more. Internal flight services from Ecuador to Gal\u00e1pagos are also available for tourists making it more convenient for guests from outside.\nLa Costa.\nThe western coastal area of Ecuador borders the Pacific Ocean to the west, encompasses a broad coastal plain, and then rises to the foothills of the Andes Mountains to the east. It is estimated that 98% of the native forest of coastal Ecuador has been eliminated in favor of cattle ranching and other agricultural production, including banana, cacao and coffee plantations. The forest fragments that still survive are primarily found along the coastal mountain ranges of Mache-Chindul, Jama-Coaque, and Chongon-Colonche, and include tropical dry forest, tropical wet forest, tropical moist evergreen forest, premontane cloud forest, and mangrove forest. Collectively known as the Pacific Equatorial Forest, these forest remnants are considered the most endangered tropical forest in the world, and are part of the Tumbes-Choco-Magdalena biodiversity hotspot. Guayaquil, located on the southern part of the coast is the biggest city in the country. On the north coast of Ecuador the port of Balao in Esmeraldas is used for oil export and the port of Manta was formerly used by the United States Air Force as a control point for narcotics traffic control until 2009.\nA recent remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 635\u00a0km2 of tidal flats in Ecuador, making it the 41st ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nLa Sierra.\nThe central belt of Ecuador that includes the Andes Mountains, with volcanoes and mountain peaks that sport year-round snow on the equator. Many areas of the Sierra are deforested to make way for agriculture and a number of cut-flower growing operations. At a certain altitude, cloud forests may be found.\nThe northern Ecuadorian Andes are divided into three parallel cordilleras which run in what is similar to an S-shape from north to south: the western, central (Cordillerra Real) and eastern (Cordillera Occidental) cordilleras. The cordilleras were formed earlier in the Cenozoic era (the current geological era), as the Nazca Plate has subducted underneath the South American Plate and has raised the mountain range. In the south, the cordilleras are not well defined.\nQuito, the capital city, is located in a high mountain valley on the foothills of the Pichincha (volcano). The town of Ba\u00f1os de Agua Santa features hot springs swimming pools on the foothills of the Tungurahua in the Central Cordillera. The road from Ba\u00f1os to Puyo has long been known for its narrowness, curves and sheer drops (only one lane in some places, on one area, actually cut into the side of a cliff so that the cliff roofs over it). The most important east\u2013west road across the Andes is the road from Quito to Lago Agrio, which is paved for most of its length yet is heavily by tractor-trailers\u2014and the Trans-Ecuadorian Oil Pipeline serves as the guardrail for long stretches of this road.\nNotable mountains and Volcanoes.\nPartial, incomplete table of volcanoes in the north of the Ecuadorian Andes, from north to south:\nEl Oriente (the East) Amazon Basin.\nMuch of the Oriente is tropical moist broadleaf forest (Spanish: \"la selva\"), on the east slopes of the Andes Mountains and descending into the Amazon Basin, with strikingly different upland rainforest with steep, rugged ridges and cascading streams (can be seen around Puyo) and lowland rainforest. The oil fields are located in the Amazon basin, headquartered at Lago Agrio; some of the rainforest has been seriously damaged in this region and environmental degradation is severe, with catastrophic oil pollution in some areas. Some 38% of Ecuador's land is forested, and despite a 1.5% annual deforestation rate remains one of the most biodiverse locations on the planet. The Oriente is also home to a large number of Ecuador's indigenous groups, notably the lowland Quechua, Siona, Secoya, Huaorani, and Cof\u00e1n.\nDrainage.\nAlmost all of the rivers in Ecuador rise in the Sierra region and flow east toward the Amazon River or west toward the Pacific Ocean. The rivers rise from snowmelt at the edges of the snowcapped peaks or from the abundant precipitation that falls at higher elevations. In the Sierra region, the streams and rivers are narrow and flow rapidly over precipitous slopes. Rivers may slow and widen as they cross the hoyas yet become rapid again as they flow from the heights of the Andes to the lower elevations of the other regions. The highland rivers broaden as they enter the more level areas of the Costa and the Oriente.\nIn the Costa region, the Costa Externa has mostly intermittent rivers that are fed by constant rains from December through May and become empty riverbeds during the dry season. The few exceptions are the longer, perennial rivers that flow throughout the Costa Externa from the Costa Internal and the Sierra on their way to the Pacific Ocean. The Costa Internal, by contrast, is crossed by perennial rivers that may flood during the rainy season, sometimes forming swamps.\nThe Guayas River system, which flows southward to the Gulf of Guayaquil, constitutes the most important of the drainage systems in the Costa Internal. The Guayas River Basin, including land drained by its tributaries, is 40,000 square kilometers in area. The sixty-kilometer-long Guayas River forms just north of Guayaquil out of the confluence of the Babahoyo and Daule rivers. Briefly constricted at Guayaquil by hills, the Guayas widens south of the city and flows through a deltaic network of small islands and channels. At its mouth, the river forms a broad estuary with two channels around Pun\u00e1 Island, the deeper of which is used for navigation.\nThe second major Costa river system, the Esmeraldas, rises in the Hoya de Quito in the Sierra as the Guayllabamba River and flows westward to empty into the Pacific Ocean near the city of Esmeraldas. The Esmeraldas River is 320 kilometers long and has a 20,000-square-kilometer drainage basin.\nMajor rivers in the Oriente include the Pastaza, Napo, and Putumayo. The Pastaza is formed by the confluence of the Chambo and the Patate rivers, both of which rise in the Sierra. The Pastaza includes the Agoyan waterfall, which at is the highest waterfall in Ecuador. The Napo rises near Mount Cotopaxi and is the major river used for transport in the eastern lowlands. The Napo ranges in width from . In its upper reaches, the Napo flows rapidly until the confluence with one of its major tributaries, the Coca River, where it slows and levels off. The Putumayo forms part of the border with Colombia. All of these rivers flow into the Amazon River. The Gal\u00e1pagos Islands have no significant rivers. Several of the larger islands, however, have freshwater springs, although they are surrounded by the Pacific Ocean.\nClimate.\nEach region has different factors that affect its climate. The Costa is influenced primarily by proximity to warm or cool ocean currents. By contrast, climate in the Sierra varies more as a function of altitude. The Oriente has a fairly uniform climate that varies only slightly between the two subregions. Climate in the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands is both moderated by the ocean currents and affected by altitude. Throughout Ecuador variation in rainfall primarily determines seasons. Temperature is determined by altitude. With each ascent of in altitude, temperature drops . This phenomenon is particularly significant in the Sierra.\nThe Sierra.\nTemperatures in the Sierra do not vary greatly on a seasonal basis; the hottest month averages and the coolest month, in the upper elevations. Diurnal temperatures, however, vary dramatically, from cold mornings to hot afternoons. The almost vertical sun and the rarefied air in the higher Sierra region allow the land to warm quickly during the day and lose heat quickly at night. Mornings typically are bright and sunny, whereas afternoons often are cloudy and rainy. In general, rainfall amounts are highest on exposed locations at lower altitudes. Rain can also vary on a local basis. Sheltered valleys normally receive per year, whereas annual rainfall is in Quito and can reach on exposed slopes that catch rain-bearing winds. On a seasonal basis, the driest months are June through September.\nThe climate in the Sierra is divided into levels based on altitude. The tropical level () has temperatures ranging from and heavy precipitation. The subtropical level () has temperatures from and moderate precipitation. The temperate level () has a year-round temperature in the range of and an annual rainfall of . The temperate level experiences rainstorms, hailstorms, and fog. Winter, or the rainy season, lasts from January through June, and the dry season or summer from July through December. Most rain falls in April. There also is a short rainy period in early October caused by moisture penetrating the Sierra from the Oriente. Quito and most other populated areas in the Sierra are located at this temperate level. The cold level extends from the temperate zone to . Here, average temperatures are , and the precipitation often appears in the form of rain, hail, and thick fog. Above is the frozen level, where peaks are constantly capped with snow and ice, and temperatures range from below . Precipitation frequently is in the form of snow, fog, and rain.\nThe Oriente/Amazon.\nThe eastern lowlands in the Oriente experience abundant rainfall, especially in the Andean Piedmont, sometimes exceeding per year. Temperatures average in the western parts of this region. The jungle-covered plains of the Eastern lowlands register high levels of rainfall and temperatures surpassing .\nBeing located on the equator, the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands would have an equatorial climate were it not for the modifying effects of the Peruvian Current. Instead, climate on the islands follows a pattern more like that of the Sierra than the Costa. At sea level, the land is desertlike with temperatures of . The eight summer months experience no precipitation, whereas the winter months of January through April have some fog and drizzle. Above sea level to an altitude of , the islands have a mixture of tropical, subtropical, and temperate climates. In general, temperatures are around . There is constant fog and drizzle in the summer and rain in the winter. The cold level above has temperatures below . It is cool along the tropical coast.\nNatural resources.\nEcuador has land which is rich in petroleum. Main fishing products include herring and mackerel. Other natural resources include timber and hydropower.\nLand use.\nIrrigated land.\n8,534\u00a0km2 (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources.\n424.4\u00a0km3 (2011)\nNatural hazards.\nNatural hazards in Ecuador include frequent earthquakes, landslides, volcanic activity; periodic droughts and floods. \nExtreme points.\nmouth of Mataje River, Esmeraldas Province\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9337", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9337", "title": "Demographics of Ecuador", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Ecuador include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nEcuador experienced rapid population growth like most countries, but four decades of economic instability pushed millions of Ecuadorians out of the country. However, a rebound economy in the 2000s in urban centres improved the situation of living standards for Ecuadorians in a traditional class stratified economy.\nAccording to the 2022 census, 77.5% of the population identified as \"Mestizos\"\u2014a category denoting mixed Spanish and Indigenous American ancestry\u2014 reflecting an increase from 71.9% recorded in 2000 census. Conversely, the proportion of individuals identifying as \"White\" declined significantly, from 6.1% in 2010 to 2.2% in 2022. Amerindians account for 7.7% of the population and 4.8% of the population consists of Afro-Ecuadorians. \nOther estimations put the Mestizo population at 55% to 65% and the indigenous population at 25%. Genetic research indicates that the ancestry of Ecuadorian Mestizos is predominantly Indigenous.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Ecuadorian census is conducted by the governmental institution known as \"INEC\", \"Instituto Nacional de Estadisticas y Censos\" (National Institute of Statistics and Census). The census in Ecuador is conducted every ten years, and its objective is to obtain the number of people residing within its borders. The current census now includes household information.\nIndex of growth:\nUN estimates.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 3,470,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2015 was 29.0%, 63.4% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 6.7% was 65 years or older.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2013) (Excludes nomadic Indian tribes. Data refer to projections based on the 2010 Population Census.):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Excludes nomadic Indian tribes.):\nGeography.\nDue to the prevalence of malaria and yellow fever in the coastal region until the end of the 19th century, the Ecuadorian population was most heavily concentrated in the highlands and valleys of the \"Sierra\" region. In today's population approximately 50% of the population resides in the Coastal (Costa) region, while another 45% lives in the Andean Highland (Sierra) region. This means that roughly 95% of Ecuador's population is concentrated in these two regions, which together comprise only about half of the country's landmass. In contrast, the Amazonian (Oriente) region, which accounts for approximately half of Ecuador's total land area, is home to a 3-4% of the population. The smallest region, the Insular (Galapagos) region, has less than 0.2% of the total population.\nThe \"Oriente\" region, consisting of Amazonian lowlands to the east of the Andes and covering about half the country's land area, remains sparsely populated and contains only about 3% of the country's population, that for the most are indigenous peoples who maintain a wary distance from the recent Mestizo and white settlers. The territories of the \"Oriente\" are home to as many as nine indigenous groups: Quichua, Shuar, Achuar, Waorani, Siona, Secoya, Shiwiar, and Cofan, all represented politically by the Confederation of Indigenous Nationalities of the Ecuadorian Amazon, CONFENIAE.\nAs a result of the oil exploration and the development of the infrastructure required for the exploitation of the oil fields in the eastern jungles during the seventies and early eighties, there was a wave of settlement in the region. The Majority of these wave of internal immigration came from the southern province of Loja as a result of a drought that lasted three years and affected the southern provinces of the country. This boom of the petroleum industry has led to a mushrooming of the town of Lago Agrio (Nueva Loja) as well as substantial deforestation and pollution of wetlands and lakes.\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events is in Ecuador not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nBirths and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n(c) = Census results.\nEthnicity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Ecuadorian constitution recognizes the pluri-nationality of those who want to exercise their affiliation with their native ethnic groups. There are five major ethnic groups in Ecuador: Mestizo, European, Afroecuadorian, Amerindian, and Montubio. Mestizos constitute more than 85% of the population.\nEcuador's population descends from Spanish immigrants and South American Amerindians, admixed with descendants of black slaves who arrived to work on coastal plantations in the sixteenth century. The mix of these groups is described as Mestizo.\nA geography of ethnicity remained well-defined until the surge in migration that began in the 1950s. Whites resided primarily in larger cities. Mestizos lived in small towns scattered throughout the countryside. Indians formed the bulk of the Sierra rural populace, although Mestizos filled this role in the areas with few Indians. Most blacks lived in Esmeraldas Province, with small enclaves found in the Carchi and Imbabura provinces. Pressure on Sierra land resources and the dissolution of the traditional hacienda, however, increased the numbers of Indians migrating to the Costa, the Oriente, and the cities.\nMestizos.\nEcuador's population is predominantly mestizo, accounting for approximately 86% of the total. This group, however, is broadly categorized and includes several distinct regional subgroups that live both on the Andes and the Coast, where the bulk of the Ecuadorian population is concentrated.\nMontubios.\nAlso written Montuvio is the term used for the coastal farmers of Ecuador. Some believe the name originates from their horsemanship, positioning them as the archetypal cowboys of Ecuador's Pacific coast\u2014similar to the \"chagra\" who is the cowboy of the Ecuadorian Andes, or the \"llaneros\" of Colombia and Venezuela. Their attire typically includes a wide-brimmed hat, a light shirt, cloth trousers, boots, a machete, a hook, and a horse for transportation. According to the 2022 Ecuadorian census, Montuvios constitute 7.7% of Ecuador's population, meaning over 1,304,994 Ecuadorians identified as Montuvios in that year. The census also revealed that the majority of Montuvios reside in the provinces of Guayas, Manab\u00ed, and Los R\u00edos.\nCholos.\nCholo fishermen are a Mestizo group inhabiting the coasts of Guayas, Santa Elena, and Manab\u00ed. They represent a blend of indigenous-Mestizo and indigenous-Afro heritage, with a greater indigenous contribution than the Montuvios. The distinction between Cholos, Mestizos, and Montuvios is often blurred, and economic activity is frequently used as a differentiator. Thus, coastal Cholos are primarily associated with fishing, generally artisanal. With the economic development of this region, fishing industrialized around the city of Manta, leading many Cholos to migrate there to continue their economic activity. They are also involved in shrimp farming, another industrialization of this profession, which is currently one of Ecuador's main export products. Despite their significant presence in the coastal population of these three provinces, there are no exact statistics on their numbers.\nConversely, in southern Ecuador, the word \"Cholo\" refers to the farmers of Azuay, specifically the \"chola cuencana\". This figure is characterized by a traditional costume that evolved in the 18th century and has adapted to the present day. This term is analogous to the \"chazos\" of Loja and the \"chagras\" of Quito, both referring to the farmers of the Ecuadorian highlands. Beyond her traditional attire, the \"chola cuencana\" is known for her dedication to agriculture and participation in the \"Pase del Ni\u00f1o,\" a traditional parade in the city of Loja.\nChazos.\nChazos are the traditional farmers of southern Ecuador, concentrated in the province of Loja. They are an integral part of the country's folklore and have a traditional costume similar to the farmers of Colombia's coffee region. This similarity stems from their shared economic activity, as agriculture, particularly coffee cultivation, has flourished in this region. Consequently, the Chazo is often depicted with a coffee harvesting bag. Like the Cholos, there are no exact statistics on their numbers, yet they represent a significant portion of southern Ecuador's population. Currently, Chazos, along with Cholos and Chagras, are not formally represented in the census. The only traditional peasant group in Ecuador that has achieved this recognition are the Montuvios of the coast, who, due to their substantial numbers concentrated around the Gulf of Guayaquil and the Guayas River basin, have gained official visibility.\nChagras.\nIn Ecuador, Chagras are the farmers of the Ecuadorian Andes known for their cattle ranching activities, considered muleteers or drovers. They are the primary cowboys of the Ecuadorian highlands and should not be confused with the Montuvios, who are the main group of coastal farmers whose economic activity also involves cattle ranching. Their current attire includes a shirt, poncho, felt hat, sheep's wool scarf, and \"zamarro\" (leather chaps). Their history revolves around \"haciendas\", as both religious orders and landowners owned large productive properties where this tradition developed from the 17th century. This fostered the culture surrounding the Chagra, who is responsible for caring for the livestock. They are typically Mestizos, either hired by landowners or themselves small to medium-sized proprietors of land and cattle. Currently, events like the \"Paseo del Chagra de Machachi\" in July, the \"Fiestas Parroquiales de Conocoto\" in June, and the \"Fiestas del Ma\u00edz y del Turismo de Sangolqu\u00ed\" in September celebrate this culture.\nPupos.\nPupo is the name given to the farmers of northern Ecuador, especially in the province of Carchi. The word \"Pupo\" is etymologically derived from the Chaima language, meaning \"head.\" Its use began as a metaphor, implying that the people of Carchi are the \"heads\" of these regions or even the \"head\" of the national territory. It is closely linked to Colombian history following the conservative revolution, when some Colombian generals invaded Ecuador. However, an Ecuadorian leader named Rafael Arellano organized liberal troops and thwarted the invasion, defeating the Colombian conservatives. In retaliation, Mercedes Land\u00e1zuri, a conservative leader, insulted the Ecuadorian troops by calling them \"pupos\" because the soldiers' uniforms were too small, exposing their navels. This word was reappropriated and is now used to commemorate this triumph and defense of Ecuadorian sovereignty.\nOther ethnicities.\nAfro-Ecuadorian.\nAfro-Ecuadorians are an ethnic group in Ecuador who are descendants of black African slaves brought by the Spanish during their conquest of Ecuador. They make up from 3% to 5% of Ecuador's population.\nA large part of their population has historically been distributed in the province of Esmeraldas and the Chota Valley; more recently, there is a significant population across all provinces of the country. They originally settled in Esmeraldas, Imbabura, Carchi; subsequently, in the 1960s, due to immigration, their population inhabits the provinces of Guayas, Pichincha, El Oro, Los R\u00edos, Manab\u00ed, and the Ecuadorian East. Afro-Ecuadorians settled in the Chota Valley and the basin of the Mira River, geographically in the provinces of Imbabura and Carchi, whose settlement is linked to colonial haciendas that concentrated enslaved population. A large part of Ecuadorian Black people descend from survivors of slave ships that ran aground on the northern coast of Ecuador and the southern coast of Colombia between the 17th and 18th centuries. These individuals organized their own communities outside the influence of indigenous peoples and Spanish colonizers, being self-liberated. They settled in the Esmeraldas area and its surroundings and have subsequently experienced a process of migration to other areas. Another percentage comes from slaves who arrived in the 18th century from haciendas in Colombia, the coast, and the highlands, who gained their freedom after the 1860s. Both groups, the freed people of Esmeraldas and the slaves in the rest of the country, typically came from the peoples of West Africa, and have Spanish surnames derived from their former masters or genuinely African but Hispanized surnames. Later arrivals of Black people to Ecuador occurred in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, during the construction of the Dur\u00e1n-Quito railway under the government of Eloy Alfaro, who massively contracted them as construction workers from Jamaica, causing a small immigration. Many of them stayed in the country and formed families. Chronologically, they were the first people organized under the ideologies of the working-class labor movement in Ecuador, especially anarchism. However, they did not engage in proselytizing work outside of the Jamaican migrant workers due to language, cultural, and racial differences with Ecuadorians. They are characterized by their Anglo-Saxon surnames and are currently completely assimilated into the cities.\nEcuador has a population of about 1,120,000 descendants from African people. The Afro-Ecuadorian culture is found primarily in the country's northwest coastal region. Africans form a majority (70%) in the province of Esmeraldas and also have an important concentration in the Valle del Chota in the Imbabura Province. They can be also found in important numbers in Quito and Guayaquil.\nWhite.\nAccording to the 2022 national census 2.21% of the population self-identified as white. The proportion fell from 6.1% in 2010 and 10.5% in 2000.\nIndigenous.\nThe Sierra Indigenous had an estimated population of 1.5 to 2 million in the early 1980s and live in the intermontane valleys of the Andes. Prolonged contact with Hispanic culture, which dates back to the conquest, has had a homogenizing effect, reducing the variation among the indigenous Sierra tribes.\nThe Indigenous people of the Sierra are separated from whites and Mestizos by a caste-like gulf. They are marked as a disadvantaged group; to be an Indigenous person in Ecuador is to be stigmatized. Poverty rates are higher and literacy rates are lower among Indigenous than the general population. They enjoy limited participation in national institutions and are often excluded from social and economic opportunities available to more privileged groups. However, some groups of Indigenous, such as the Otavalo people, have increased their socioeconomic status to extent that they enjoy a higher standard of living than many other Indigenous groups in Ecuador and many Mestizos of their area.\nVisible markers of ethnic affiliation, especially hairstyle, dress, and language, separate Indigenous from the rest of the populace. Indigenous wore more manufactured items by the late 1970s than previously; their clothing, nonetheless, was distinct from that of other rural inhabitants. Indigenous in communities relying extensively on wage labor sometimes assumed Western-style dress while still maintaining their Indigenous identity. Indigenous speak Spanish and, Quichua\u2014a Quechua dialect\u2014although most are bilingual, speaking Spanish as a second language with varying degrees of facility. By the late 1980s, some younger Indigenous no longer learned Quichua.\nOn the other hand, the oriente indigenous people first came into contact with Europeans in the 16th century, the encounters were more sporadic than those of most of the country's indigenous population. Until the 19th century, most non-Amerindians entering the region were either traders or missionaries. Beginning in the 1950s, however, the government built roads and encouraged settlers from the Sierra to colonize the Amazon River Basin. Virtually all remaining Indians were brought into increasing contact with national society. The interaction between Indians and outsiders had a profound impact on the indigenous way of life.\nIn the late 1970s, roughly 30,000 Quichua speakers and 15,000 J\u00edvaros lived in Oriente Indigenous communities. Quichua speakers (sometimes referred to as the Yumbos) grew out of the detribalization of members of many different groups after the Spanish conquest. Subject to the influence of Quichua-speaking missionaries and traders, various elements of the Yumbos adopted the tongue as a lingua franca and gradually lost their previous languages and tribal origins. Yumbos were scattered throughout the Oriente, whereas the J\u00edvaros\u2014subdivided into the Shuar and the Achuar\u2014were concentrated in southeastern Ecuador. Some also lived in northeastern Peru. Traditionally, both groups relied on migration to resolve intracommunity conflict and to limit the ecological damage to the tropical forest caused by slash-and-burn agriculture.\nBoth the Yumbos and the J\u00edvaros depended on agriculture as their primary means of subsistence. Manioc, the main staple, was grown in conjunction with a wide variety of other fruits and vegetables. Yumbo men also resorted to wage labor to obtain cash for the few purchases deemed necessary. By the mid-1970s, increasing numbers of Quichua speakers settled around some of the towns and missions of the Oriente. Indians themselves had begun to make a distinction between Christian and jungle Indians. The former engaged in trade with townspeople. The J\u00edvaros, in contrast to the Christian Quichua speakers, lived in more remote areas. Their mode of horticulture was similar to that of the non-Christian Yumbos, although they supplemented crop production with hunting and some livestock raising.\nShamans (curanderos) played a pivotal role in social relations in both groups. As the main leaders and the focus of local conflicts, shamans were believed to both cure and kill through magical means. In the 1980s group conflicts between rival shamans still erupted into full-scale feuds with loss of life.\nThe Oriente Indigenous population dropped precipitously during the initial period of intensive contact with outsiders. The destruction of their crops by Mestizos laying claim to indigenous lands, the rapid exposure to diseases to which Indians lacked immunity, and the extreme social disorganization all contributed to increased mortality and decreased birth rates. One study of the Shuar in the 1950s found that the group between ten and nineteen years of age was smaller than expected. This was the group that had been youngest and most vulnerable during the initial contact with national society. Normal population growth rates began to reestablish themselves after approximately the first decade of such contact.\nAncestry.\nOver the past few years, several studies have been conducted on the genetic composition of Ecuadorians. These studies have helped determine the genetic origin of mestizaje (mixed-ancestry) in Ecuador. Various international universities and independent research teams, such as Cornell University and the University of Brasilia, have carried out these studies, with their findings published in scientific journals like \"DNA Tribes\", \"Science Direct\", \"PLoS Genetics\", \"Research Gate\", \"American Journal of Biology\", and \"Nature\", among others. Based on an average of the recent studies since 2008, the genetic composition of Ecuadorians is approximately:\nThe studies based on Y-STRs and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) offer complementary views into Ecuadorian ancestry due to their distinct inheritance patterns: Y-STRs, found on the Y-chromosome, are passed exclusively from father to son, making them ideal for tracing the direct paternal line. Conversely, mtDNA, located in cellular mitochondria, is inherited solely from mother to all her children, allowing for the direct tracing of the maternal line. To better understand the mestizaje in Ecuador, a study analyzing Y-STRs in 415 Ecuadorian men across the Amazon, Andes, and Pacific coast revealed that the majority of ancestry is European is located in the coast and the south of Ecuador. The concentration of Amerindian ancestry was located in the northern andes and the Amazon Region, while the African component concentrated in the northwest part of the country. The list of the most relevant studies is the following:\nCulture.\nEcuador's diverse cultural landscape is shaped by its varied geography and rich history. The Sierra Centro-Norte (Region 1), with its volcanic terrain, was a crucial center for early indigenous settlements and later became known for its hacienda culture and the renowned Quito School of art. This region also played a significant role in scientific advancements, such as the French Geodesic Mission, which ultimately lent its name to the country.\nMeanwhile, the coastal R\u00edo Guayas and Golfo de Guayaquil (Region 2), with its extensive river network, fostered a distinct \"montuvia\" and \"porte\u00f1a\" culture, deeply connected to agriculture and maritime activities. This area developed a unique abstract art style and is celebrated for its influential literary \"Grupo de Guayaquil\" and its contributions to the national \"pasillo\" music.\nFurther south, the Sierra Sur and Cordillera del C\u00f3ndor (Region 3), historically more isolated, witnessed a faster process of mestizaje and an economy focused on quinine trade. It's also recognized for early musical forms like the \"Tono del ni\u00f1o\" and its significant literary output of the cities of Loja and Cuenca. This region historically was characterized by the \"communities of mute individuals\" a term coined by Dr. Haim Avni, which are believed to have been founded in the Loja province of Ecuador. This communities were conformed by Jewish refugees fleeing the Inquisition during the colonial era. These groups, settling along the Chira and Catamayo rivers, formed small, insular, and often endogamous communities. Their clandestine nature extended to activities like mining in Zaruma, where they resisted official inquiries.\nMoving to the northern coast, R\u00edo Portoviejo and R\u00edo Chone (Region 4), primarily Manab\u00ed province, boasts a strong montuvio identity. Despite its historical isolation, it thrives on fishing and agriculture. The pre-Columbian Mante\u00f1o culture, known for its maritime skills, laid the foundation for Manab\u00ed's rich gastronomy, which is now recognized as Intangible Cultural Heritage. The region's vibrant cultural expressions include the chigualo celebration and the traditional \"amorfinos.\"\nAdjacent to this, the R\u00edo Esmeraldas and R\u00edo Cayapas (Region 5), often called the \"green province,\" is a vital part of the Choc\u00f3 biogeographic area. This region is the heart of Afro-Ecuadorian culture, shaped by the descendants of cimarrones. Their heritage is vividly expressed through rich mythology, the distinctive marimba esmeralde\u00f1a music (a UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage), and a syncretic literary tradition. The discovery of oil in the Amazon, leading to a refinery in Esmeraldas, profoundly transformed the national economy and spurred development in this coastal area.\nEcuador's Amazon\u00eda (Region 6), a sprawling plain around the Napo and Pastaza river basins, holds immense cultural and political significance, especially in debates surrounding resource exploitation and historical territorial claims. It's home to indigenous communities like the Waorani, Kichwa, and Shuar, whose languages are vital to intercultural relations. Scientific exploration, notably by Manuel Villavicencio, has been crucial in mapping and understanding this biodiverse region. The discovery of oil here in the late 1960s dramatically altered Ecuador's economic landscape, turning it into a major oil exporter.\nOff the coast, the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands (Region 7) are a globally celebrated ecological wonder, designated a UNESCO World Heritage site and the planet's second-largest marine reserve. Known for its unique biodiversity and active volcanic landscape, the islands are a major tourist destination and have inspired numerous literary works.\nLanguage.\nMost Ecuadorians speak Spanish. According to the last Census of 2022, of the 7.7% of the population that identifies as indigenous, 3.2% speak an indigenous language. That means that from a total indigenous population of 1'302.057 people, 50,4% of them do not speak an indigenous language. In absolute numbers, that 3.2% of the population amounts to 645.821 people that speak an indigenous language. The distribution is the following:\nThe other amerindian languages spoken in Ecuador include Awapit (spoken by the Aw\u00e1), A'ingae (spoken by the Cofan), Achuar Chicham (spoken by the Achuar), Shiwiar (spoken by the Shiwiar), Cha'palaachi (spoken by the Chachi), Tsa'fiki (spoken by the Ts\u00e1chila), Paicoca (spoken by the Siona and Secoya), and Wao Tededeo (spoken by the Waorani). Though most features of Ecuadorian Spanish are those universal to the Spanish-speaking world, there are several idiosyncrasies.\nReligion.\nAccording to the Ecuadorian National Institute of Statistics and Census, 91.95% of the country's population have a religion, 7.94% are atheists and 0.11% are agnostics. Among those with a religion, 80.44% are Roman Catholic, 11.30% are Protestants, and 8.26% other (mainly Jewish, Buddhists and Latter-day Saints).\nIn the rural parts of Ecuador, indigenous beliefs and Catholicism are sometimes syncretized. Most festivals and annual parades are based on religious celebrations, many incorporating a mixture of rites and icons.\nThere is a small number of Eastern Orthodox Christians, indigenous religions, Muslims (see Islam in Ecuador), Buddhists and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. There are about 185,000 members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), and over 80,000 Jehovah's Witnesses in the country.\nThe \"Jewish Community of Ecuador\" (Comunidad Jud\u00eda del Ecuador) has its seat in Quito and has approximately 300 members. Nevertheless, this number is declining because young people leave the country towards the United States of America or Israel. The Community has a Jewish Center with a synagogue, a country club and a cemetery. It supports the \"Albert Einstein School\", where Jewish history, religion and Hebrew classes are offered. Since 2004, there has also been a Chabad house in Quito.\nThere are very small communities in Cuenca and Ambato. The \"Comunidad de Culto Israelita\" reunites the Jews of Guayaquil. This community works independently from the \"Jewish Community of Ecuador\". Jewish visitors to Ecuador can also take advantage of Jewish resources as they travel and keep kosher there, even in the Amazon rainforest. The city has also synagogue of Messianic Judaism.\nMigration trends.\nIn recent decades, there has been a high rate of emigration due to the economic crisis that seriously affected the economy of the country in the 1990s, over 400,000 Ecuadorians left for Spain and Italy, and around 100,000 for the United Kingdom while several hundred thousand Ecuadorians live in the US, (500,000 by some estimates) mostly in the cities of the Northeastern corridor. Many other Ecuadorians have emigrated across Latin America, thousands have gone to Japan and Australia. One famous American of Ecuadorian descent is pop music vocalist Christina Aguilera.\nIn Ecuador there are about 100,000 Americans and over 30,000 European Union expatriates. They move to Ecuador for business opportunities and as cheaper place for retirement.\nAs a result of the political conflict in Colombia and of the criminal gangs that had appeared in the areas of power vacuum a constant flow of refugees and asylum seekers as well as economic migrants of Colombian origin had moved into Ecuadorian territory. Over the last decade at least 45,000 displaced people are now residents in Ecuador, the Ecuadorian government and international organizations are assisting them. According to the UNHCR 2009 report as many as 167,189 refugees and asylum seekers are temporary residents in Ecuador.\nFollowing the migratory trend to Europe many of the jobs that those that left held in the country had been taken over by Peruvian economic migrants. Those jobs are mostly in agriculture and unskilled labor. There are no official statistics but some press reports estimate their number into the tens of thousands.\nThere is a diverse community of Middle Eastern Ecuadorians, numbering in the tens of thousands, mostly from Lebanese, Syrian and Palestinian descent; prominent in commerce and industry, and concentrated in the coastal cities of Guayaquil, Quevedo and Machala. They are well assimilated into the local culture and are referred commonly as \"turcos\" since the early migrants of these communities arrived with passports issued by the Ottoman Empire in the beginning of the century.\nEcuador is also home to communities of Spaniards, Italians, Germans, Portuguese, French, Britons and Greek-Ecuadorians. Ecuadorian Jews, who number around 450 are mostly of German or Italian descent. There are 225,000 English speakers and 112,000 German speakers in Ecuador of which the great majority reside in Quito, mainly all descendants of immigrants who arrived in the late 19th century and of retired emigrees that returned to their terroir. Most of the descendants of European immigrants strive for the preservation of their heritage. Therefore, some groups even have their own schools (e.g. German School Guayaquil and German School Quito), Lice\u00e9 La Condamine (French Heritage), Alberto Einstein (Jewish Heritage) and The British School of Quito (Anglo-British), cultural and social organizations, churches and country clubs. Their contribution for the social, political and economical development of the country is immense, specially in relation to their percentage in the total population. Most of the families of European heritage belong to the Ecuadorian upper class and had married into the wealthiest families of the country.\nThere is also a small Asian-Ecuadorian (see Asian Latino) community estimated in a range from 2,500 to 25,000, mainly consists of those having any amount of Chinese Han descent, and possibly 10,000 being Japanese whose ancestors arrived as miners, farm hands and fishermen in the late 19th century. Guayaquil has an East Asian community, mostly Chinese including Taiwanese, and Japanese, as well as a Southeast Asian community, mostly Filipinos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9338", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9338", "title": "Politics of Ecuador", "text": " \nThe politics of Ecuador are multi-party. The central government polity is a quadrennially elected presidential, unicameral representative democracy. The President of Ecuador is head of state and head of the army on a multi-party system, and leads a cabinet with further executive power. Legislative power is not limited to the National Assembly, as it may to a lesser degree be exercised by the executive which consists of the President convening an appointed executive cabinet. Subsequent acts of the National Assembly are supreme over Executive Orders where sufficient votes have been cast by the legislators. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Ecuador is also considered a constitutional republic.\nThe Constitution of Ecuador provides for a four-year term of office for the President, Vice-President, and members of the National Assembly with concurrent elections. Presidents and legislators may be re-elected immediately. Citizens must be at least 16 years of age to vote: suffrage is universal and compulsory for literate persons aged 18 to 65 and optional for 16 and 17 years of age and other eligible voters.\nThe Economist Intelligence Unit rated Ecuador a \"hybrid regime\" in .\nPolitical conditions.\nEcuador's political parties have historically been small, loose organizations that depended more on populist, often charismatic, leaders to retain support than on programs or ideology. Frequent internal splits have produced extreme factionalism. However, a pattern has emerged in which administrations from the center-left alternate with those from the center-right. Although Ecuador's political elite is highly factionalized along regional, ideological, and personal lines, a strong desire for consensus on major issues often leads to compromise. Opposition forces in Congress are loosely organized, but historically they often unite to block the administration's initiatives and to remove cabinet ministers.\nConstitutional changes enacted by a specially elected National Constitutional Assembly in 1998 took effect on 10 August 1998. The new constitution strengthens the executive branch by eliminating mid-term congressional elections and by circumscribing Congress' power to challenge cabinet ministers. Party discipline is traditionally weak, and routinely many deputies switch allegiance during each Congress. However, after the new Constitution took effect, the Congress passed a Code of Ethics which imposes penalties on members who defy their party leadership on key votes.\nBeginning with the 1996 election, the more indigenous, less Spanish-rooted, ethnic groups abandoned their traditional policy of shunning the official political system and participated actively. The indigenous population has established itself as a significant force in Ecuadorian politics, as shown by the selection of indigenous representative Nina Pacari, who led the indigenous political party, Pachakutik, as Second Vice-President of the 1998 Congress.\nJudicial branch.\nThe former Supreme Court of Ecuador.\nNew justices of the Supreme Court of Ecuador were elected by the sitting members of the court. A bare majority of Congress, acting in a special session called by former President Lucio Guti\u00e9rrez in December 2004, ousted 27 of the 31 justices and replaced them with new members chosen by Congress; notwithstanding, the lack of any provisions permitting impeachment of Supreme Court justices by Congress and the specific provisions giving the Court the power to select new members. Earlier, in November 2004, Congress replaced the majority of judges on the country's Electoral Court and Constitutional Court by a similar process.\nReorganization of Court (2008).\nAfter the adoption of a new Constitution in 2008, the judicial branch of the country was completely renewed to provide a cooperative leadership by having a judicial and an administrative head. As such, the bodies of Ecuador's judicial branch now consisted of the National Court of Justice, provincial courts (created by the National Court), tribunals and judges, National Council of the Judicature, Public Defendants' Office, and State Attorneys' Office. The 2008 Constitution also led to the creation of the Constitutional Court of Ecuador.\nNational Court of Justice.\nThe National Court of Justice seats 21 judges elected for a period of 9 years. They are elected by the Judiciary Council based on a merits contest held by that office. They are the final stage of any judicial process serving as a Court of Cassation and create binding precedent based on Triple Reiterative Rulings from the Chambers of the Court. The President of the Court is elected among the members of the Court for a Period of three years, representing the Judicial Branch before the State.\nJudiciary Council.\nThe administrative branch of the judicial power consists of the Judiciary Council. The Council is formed by 9 Vocals who are elected by the Branch of Transparency and Social Control, which is formed by the Control Authorities of the State. The Vocals are elected also by a merits contest and it shall be formed by six experts in law and 3 experts in management, economics and other related areas. However, after the National Referendum that took place on 5 May 2011 led to the passing of a proposition impulsed by the government, the Judiciary Council changed its formation by making a constitutional amendment. Currently, a Tri-Party Commission is serving as a Transitional Council with delegates from the Legislative, Executive and Transparency Branch, in order to reform the broken judicial system of the country.\nConstitutional Court of Ecuador.\nThe Constitutional Court of Ecuador does not exercise legal revision, but rather constitutional control of situations where constitutional rights are violated. Also they are the sole body in the State to interpret what the Constitution says.\nList of presidents.\nAs of 2025, the court has the following members:\nExecutive branch.\nStructure.\nThe executive branch includes 28 ministries. Provincial governors and councilors, like mayors, aldermen and parish boards, are directly elected. Congress meets throughout the year except for recess in July and December. There are 20 seven-member congressional committees.\nPresidency.\nThe President and Vice-President are elected on the same ticket by popular vote for a four-year term.\nControversy surrounding Lucio Guti\u00e9rrez.\nOn 20 April 2005, by an act of Congress, Lucio Guti\u00e9rrez was dramatically removed from office. The last election was held on 20 October 2002 and a runoff election on 24 November 2002 (with the next one to be held in 2006 per the four-year term limits).\nFormer Vice-President Alfredo Palacio assumed the presidency on 20 April 2005 after Congress removed Lucio Guti\u00e9rrez amid escalating street protests precipitated by growing criticism of Guti\u00e9rrez's Supreme Court appointments.\nPresidency of Rafael Correa.\nA presidential election was held on 15 October and 26 November 2006. Rafael Correa defeated \u00c1lvaro Noboa in a run-off election, or second and final round. Correa won with 56.8% of the vote. There was an attempted coup against President Rafael Correa in 2010. \"The Economist\" described Correa as \"a left-wing populist\", while \"The Washington Post\" has characterized Correa's ideological approach as being \"economically populist, socially conservative, [and] quasi-authoritarian\".\nRafael Correa's three consecutive terms (from 2007 to 2017) were followed by Len\u00edn Moreno's four years as president (2017\u201321).\nCurrent officeholders.\nThe 11 April 2021 election run-off vote ended in a win for conservative former banker, Guillermo Lasso, taking 52.4% of the vote compared to 47.6% of left-wing economist Andr\u00e9s Arauz, supported by exiled former president, Rafael Correa. Previously, President-elect Lasso finished second in the 2013 and 2017 presidential elections. On 24 May 2021, Guillermo Lasso was sworn in as the new President of Ecuador, becoming the country's first right-wing leader in 14 years.\nOn 15 October 2023, center-right candidate Daniel Noboa won the run-off of the premature presidential election with 52.3% of the vote against leftist candidate Luisa Gonz\u00e1lez. On 23 November 2023, Daniel Noboa was sworn in as Ecuador\u2019s new president. In April 2025, President Daniel Noboa won the run-off round of Ecuador's presidential election, with Maria Jose Pinto as vice president, meaning he will now serve a full four-year term.\nLegislative branch.\nEcuador has a unicameral National Assembly (\"Asamblea Nacional\" in Spanish), and it has 137 primary (seat-holding) members (all of whom are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms). It is based on provincial constituencies, but it also has members coming from a national list and it has members representing the emigrant community.\nHistory.\nOn 29 November 2007, the Ecuadorian Constituent Assembly dismissed Congress on charges of corruption and then assumed legislative powers for itself. The Constituent Assembly then proposed a new National Assembly, which is the current institution.\nAdministrative divisions.\nEcuador is divided into 24 provinces: Azuay, Bol\u00edvar, Ca\u00f1ar, Carchi, Chimborazo, Cotopaxi, El Oro, Esmeraldas, Gal\u00e1pagos Islands, Guayas, Imbabura, Loja, Los R\u00edos, Manab\u00ed, Morona-Santiago, Napo, Orellana, Pastaza, Pichincha, Santa Elena, Santo Domingo de los Ts\u00e1chilas, Sucumb\u00edos, Tungurahua, Zamora-Chinchipe\nSanta Elena Province.\nLegal system.\nEcuador's legal system is based on the civil law system. Ecuador recently accepted compulsory International Court of Justice jurisdiction.\nFemale representation in the Assembly.\nIn 1979, there was no female representation. By 1984, there was only 4.2% of female representation with three deputies. In 1986, the number was reduced to one female parliamentarian.\nBetween 1988 and 1996, the average percentage of female representation was around of 5%. The following trends occurred:\nIn 2017, the leadership was led by three women: Gabriela Rivadeneira (President), Rosana Alvarado (First Vice-President) and Marcela Agui\u00f1aga (Second Vice-President).\nInternational organization participation.\nEcuador or Ecuadorian organizations participate in the following international organizations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9339", "revid": "50742187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9339", "title": "Economy of Ecuador", "text": "The economy of Ecuador is the eighth largest in Latin America and the 69th largest in the world by total GDP. Ecuador's economy is based on the export of oil, bananas, shrimp, gold, other primary agricultural products and money transfers from Ecuadorian emigrants employed abroad. In 2017, remittances constituted 2.7% of Ecuador's GDP. The total trade amounted to 42% of Ecuador's GDP in 2017.\nThe country is substantially dependent on its petroleum resources. In 2017, oil accounted for about one-third of public-sector revenue and 32% of export earnings. When Ecuador was part of OPEC, it was one of the smallest members and produced about 531,300 barrels per day of petroleum in 2017. It is the world's largest exporter of bananas ($3.38 billion in 2017) and a major exporter of shrimp ($3.06 billion in 2017). Exports of non-traditional products such as cut flowers ($846 million in 2017) and canned fish ($1.18 billion in 2017) have grown in recent years.\nIn the past, Ecuador's economy depended largely on primary industries like agriculture, petroleum, and aquaculture. As a result of shifts in global market trends and development of technology, the country has experienced economic development in other sectors, such as textiles, processed food, metallurgy and the service sectors. Between 2006 and 2014, GDP growth averaged 4.3%, driven by high oil prices and external financing. From 2015 until 2018, GDP growth averaged just 0.6%. Ecuador's ex-president, Len\u00edn Moreno, launched a radical transformation of Ecuador's economy after taking office in May 2017. The aim was to increase the private sector's weight, in particular the oil industry.\nAgriculture.\nEcuador is one of the 10 largest producers in the world of banana, cocoa and palm oil.\nIn 2018, the country produced 7.5 million tons of sugarcane, 6.5 million tons of banana (6th largest producer in the world), 2.7 million tons of palm oil (6th largest producer in the world), 1.3 million tons of maize, 1.3 million tons of rice, 269 thousand tons of potato, 235 thousand tons of cocoa (7th largest producer in the world), 149 thousand tons of pineapple, 103 thousand tons of orange, in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products. In more recent years, https:// has increased to around 7 million tons annually (https:// produced in 2023). \nMining.\nIn 2019, the country had an annual production of about 1 ton of antimony (14th largest producer in the world).\nIn 2006, Ecuador had an annual production of about 5.3 tonnes of gold, being the 34th largest producer in the world at the time. Ecuador produced 8.6 tons of gold in 2013, which was the absolute record between 2006 and 2017. In 2017, production was 7.3 tons.\nIn terms of silver production, Ecuador produced 1 ton in 2017, which is the country's usual average.\nIn 2019, in the north of Ecuador, a large deposit of gold, silver and copper was discovered.\nIndustries.\nOil accounts for 40% of exports and contributes to maintaining a positive trade balance. Since the late '60s, the exploitation of oil increased production and reserves are estimated at 4.036 million barrels\nIn the agricultural sector, Ecuador is a major exporter of bananas (the largest exporter of bananas in the world), cut flowers, cacao, coffee, shrimp, wood, and fish. It is also significant in shrimp production, sugar cane, rice, cotton, corn, palm and coffee. The country's vast resources include large amounts of timber across the country, like eucalyptus and mangroves. Pines and cedars are planted in the region of the Sierra, walnuts and rosemary, and balsa wood, on Guayas River Basin.\nEcuador's tobacco is prized in the cigar industry due to the prolonged cloud cover and rich volcanic soil creating ideal growing conditions, especially for shade tobacco and Ecuadorian Sumatra Tobacco cigar wrapper leaves; exports topped $70M in 2018.\nOil Industry in Ecuador\nEcuador's oil industry is a cornerstone of its economy, contributing significantly to export earnings and government revenues. As of 2023, the country holds approximately 8.3 billion barrels of proven crude oil reserves . In 2022, crude oil accounted for about 27% of Ecuador's total export value, with major export destinations including Latin America, North America, and Asia.\nThe state-owned company Petroecuador plays a pivotal role in the oil sector, often operating in partnership with private and foreign corporations . Recent initiatives aim to boost oil production through foreign investments, with plans to attract approximately $42 billion in the oil sector by 2029 .\nHowever, oil extraction has raised environmental and social concerns, particularly in the Amazon region. In 2023, a national referendum led to the cessation of oil drilling in Block 43 within Yasuni National Park, a biodiverse area home to Indigenous communities.\nAgricultural Sector in Ecuador\nAgriculture remains a vital component of Ecuador's economy, accounting for a significant portion of exports. The country is the world's largest exporter of bananas, with exports valued at approximately $2 billion . Other major agricultural exports include shrimp, cacao, coffee, and cut flowers. In 2020, agricultural products represented about 41.1% of Ecuador's total export.\nEcuador's diverse climate and fertile soil enable the cultivation of various crops, including rice, sugar cane, cotton, corn, and palm. The country's forestry resources, such as eucalyptus, mangroves, pine, cedar, and balsa wood, also contribute to its export economy.\nThe industry is concentrated mainly in Guayaquil, the largest industrial center, and in Quito, where in recent years the industry has grown considerably. This city is also the largest business center of the country. Industrial production is directed primarily to the domestic market. Despite this, there is limited export of products produced or processed industrially. These include canned foods, liquor, jewelry, furniture, and more. Minor industrial activity is also concentrated in Cuenca.\nThe dairy industry is represented by companies such as Tonicorp, which is owned by the Coca Cola Company.\nElectricity.\nAs of December 2022, the generation and transmission infrastructure of Ecuador included:\nDistribution is provided through distribution companies with total billing of 2 billion US dollars and electricity losses of 13.25%. As of December 2022, they managed:\nThe peak demand on the SNI grid occurs in April (4,388 MW in 2022). The total generation in 2022 was 33 terawatt-hours (TWh) with 87% delivered by SNI and the rest by provider unincorporated into the grid. The breakdown by the power source at the SNI was as follows:\nThe amount of reported unavailable generation capacity varied between 1,170 and 1,610 GW in 2019-2022, approximately evenly split between hydro and thermal power stations. The plan of r2023-2032 called for major expansion of the generation capacity, primarily renewable energy (additional 6,300 MW), but with 700 MW of \"firm\" (thermal) capacity scheduled to come on-line in 2024-2025. This \"firm\" generation was intended for the electric grid security and \"quality of supply\".\nDuring the 2023-2024 Ecuador electricity crisis, in the fall of 2024, the amount of thermal generation was significantly lower than the numbers above would suggest. For example, according to Miguel Calahorrano, an ex-minister of electricity and renewable energy, only Trinitaria (125 MW), Machala Gas (125 MW), G. Zevallos (146 MW) and Jaramij\u00f3 (140 MW) were operating at high power until October 15, 2024.\nSciences and research.\nEcuador was placed in 96th position of innovation in technology in a 2013 World Economic Forum study. Ecuador was ranked 91st in the Global Innovation Index in 2021 up from 99th in 2020. The most notable icons in Ecuadorian sciences are the mathematician and cartographer Pedro Vicente Maldonado, born in Riobamba in 1707, and the printer, independence pioneer, and medical pioneer Eugenio Espejo, born in 1747 in Quito. Among other notable Ecuadorian scientists and engineers are Lieutenant Jose Rodriguez Labandera, who built the first submarine in Latin America in 1837; (1898\u20131950), a botanist and biologist of Andean flora; and (1880\u20131961), a chemist and inventor of a method of textile serigraphy, reputed to have many wives.\nThe major areas of scientific research in Ecuador have been in the medical fields, tropical and infectious diseases treatments, agricultural engineering, pharmaceutical research, and bioengineering. Being a small country and a consumer of foreign technology, Ecuador has favored research supported by entrepreneurship in information technology. The antivirus program \"Checkprogram\", banking protection system \"MdLock\", and Core Banking Software \"Cobis\" are products of Ecuadorian development.\nThe scientific production in hard sciences has been limited due to lack of funding but focused around physics, statistics, and partial differential equations in mathematics. In the case of engineering fields, the majority of scientific production comes from the top three polytechnic institutions: Escuela Superior Polit\u00e9cnica del Litoral \u2013 \"ESPOL\", Universidad de Las Fuerzas Armadas \u2013 \"ESPE\", and Escuela Polit\u00e9cnica Nacional \"EPN\". The Center for Research and Technology Development in Ecuador is an autonomous center for research and technology development funded by Senecyt.\nHowever, according to \"Nature\", the multidisciplinary scientific journal, the top 10 institutions that carry the most outstanding scientific contributions are: Yachay Tech University (\"Yachay Tech\"), Escuela Polit\u00e9cnica Nacional (\"EPN)\", and Universidad San Francisco de Quito \"(USFQ)\".\nTrade.\nThe overall trade balance for August 2012 was a surplus of almost 390 million dollars for the first six months of 2012, a huge figure compared with that of 2007, which reached only $5.7 million; the surplus had risen by about 425 million compared to 2006. This circumstance was due to the fact that imports grew faster than exports. The oil trade balance positive had revenues of $3.295 million in 2008, while non-oil was negative amounting to 2.842 million dollars.. The trade balance was positive in 2019 and 2020 with 2.05 billion dollars and 6.4 billion dollars. In 2016, the trade balance was positive (608 million dollars) but negative in 2017 (-723 million dollars) and 2018 (1.41 billion dollars). The trade balance with Argentina, Colombia and Asia is negative.\nEcuador has negotiated bilateral treaties with other countries, besides belonging to the Andean Community of Nations, and an associate member of Mercosur. It also belongs to the World Trade Organization (WTO), in addition to the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean (CAF) and other multilateral agencies. In April 2007, Ecuador paid off its debt to the IMF thus ending an era of interventionism of the Agency in the country. The public finance of Ecuador consists of the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE), the National Development Bank (BNF), the State Bank, the National Finance Corporation, the Ecuadorian Housing Bank (BEV) and the Ecuadorian Educational Loans and Grants.\nEconomic history.\nDeteriorating economic performance in 1997\u201398 culminated in a severe financial crisis in 1999. The crisis was precipitated by a number of external shocks, including the El Ni\u00f1o weather phenomenon in 1997, a sharp drop in global oil prices in 1997\u201398, and international emerging market instability in 1997\u201398. These factors highlighted the Government of Ecuador's unsustainable economic policy mix of large fiscal deficits and expansionary money policy and resulted in a 7.3% contraction of GDP, annual year-on-year inflation of 52.2%, and a 65% devaluation of the national currency in 1999.\nOn January 9, 2000, the administration of President Jamil Mahuad announced its intention to adopt the U.S. dollar as the official currency of Ecuador to address the ongoing economic crisis. Subsequent protest led to the 2000 Ecuadorean coup d'\u00e9tat which saw Mahuad's removal from office and the elevation of Vice President Gustavo Noboa to the presidency.\nUS Dollar has been the only official currency of Ecuador since the year 2000.\nThe Noboa government confirmed its commitment to convert to the dollar as the centerpiece of its economic recovery strategy, successfully completing the transition from sucres to dollars in 2001. Following the completion of a one-year stand-by program with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in December 2001, Ecuador successfully negotiated a new $205 million stand-by agreement with the IMF in March 2003.\nBuoyed by higher oil prices, the Ecuadorian economy experienced a modest recovery in 2000\u201301, with GDP rising 2.3% in 2000 and 5.4% in 2001. GDP growth leveled off to 2.7% in 2002. Inflation fell from an annual rate of 96.1% in 2000 to an annual rate of 37.7% in 2001; 12.6% for 2002.\nThe completion of the second Transandean Oil Pipeline (OCP in Spanish) in 2003 enabled Ecuador to expand oil exports. The OCP will double Ecuador's oil transport capacity.\nEcuador's economy is the eighth largest in Latin America and experienced an average growth of 4.6% per year between 2000 and 2006. In January 2009, the Central Bank of Ecuador (BCE) put the 2010 growth forecast at 6.88%. GDP doubled between 1999 and 2007, reaching 65,490 million dollars according to BCE.\nInflation rate up to January 2008 was located about 1.14%, the highest recorded in the last year, according to Government. The monthly unemployment rate remained at about 6 and 8 percent from December 2007 until September 2008, however, it went up to about 9 percent in October and dropped again in November 2008 to 8 percent.\nBetween 2006 and 2009, the government increased spending on social welfare and education from 2.6% to 5.2% of its GDP. Starting in 2007, when its economy was surpassed by the economic crisis, Ecuador was subject to a number of economic policy reforms by the government that have helped steer the Ecuadorian economy to a sustained, substantial, and focused achievement of financial stability and consistent social policy. Such policies were expansionary fiscal policies, of access to housing finance, stimulus packs, and limiting the amount of money reserves banks could keep abroad. The Ecuadorian government has made huge investments in education and infrastructure throughout the nation, which have improved the lives of the poor.\nOn December 12, 2008, President Rafael Correa announced that Ecuador would not pay $30.6m in interest to lenders of a $510m loan, claiming that they were monsters. In addition it claimed that $3.8bn in foreign debt negotiated by previous administrations was illegitimate because it was authorized without executive decree. At the time of the announcement, the country had $5.65bn in cash reserves.\nIn 2009, economic growth declined to 0.6% during the global recession, accompanied by falling oil prices and a decline in remittances provided by Ecuadorians living and working abroad (a major source of external revenues). Showing signs of recovery in 2010, the economy rebounded and grew by 2.8%. After growth of 7.4% in 2011, Ecuador's growth averaged 4.5% from 2012 to 2014.\nSome observers have attributed the high growth to a public investment boom that was fueled by high oil prices and lending from China. According to the U.S. Energy Information Administration, Ecuador was the third largest source of foreign oil to the western United States in 2014. However, in the middle of 2014 after the price of oil declined significantly, Ecuador's oil earnings fell. As a consequence, the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) forecast that Ecuador's economy would contract slightly in 2015, although the economy ultimately grew by less than half a percent. President Correa's plans to begin extracting crude oil from the Ishpingo, Tambochoa, and Tiputini field in Yasun\u00ed National Park in the Amazon to provide an economic boost did not salvage the economy from going into recession. In 2016, Ecuador's gross domestic product contracted by 1.6%.\nEcuador's economic slowdown in 2016 and the country's need for external finance were exacerbated by a deadly April 2016 earthquake. Ecuador's estimated $3 billion costs for reconstruction and humanitarian assistance for 720,000 people in the affected region remain a burden that the government and private sector have sought to address. In response, the U.S. Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance provided more than $3 million in assistance, including provisions airlifted in for 50,000 people in the earthquake-prone region and assistance with water and sanitation systems in affected areas. A U.N. appeal by the Office of Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance sought to raise $73 million. However, as of July 2016, only one-fifth of this amount had been received from donor countries, including the United States.\nThe Correa government increased a value-added tax and implemented a plan to further cut government expenditures after cutting capital expenditures by 30%. Despite President Correa's reluctance to ask for assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the IMF approved a request for $364 million in financial support under its Rapid Financing Instrument in early July 2016 for Ecuador. Additional loans from China and the World Bank to help ease the government's balance-of-payments needs were considered.\nEcuador's access to global financial markets also had been limited by its 2008 default on $3.2 billion in debt to global lenders. Consequently, the Correa government turned to nontraditional allies, such as China, for external finance. From 2005 to 2014, Chinese banks provided almost $11 billion of financing to Ecuador. The Correa government also asked China for an additional $7.5 billion in financing in early 2015 as crude oil prices\u2014the nation's biggest export\u2014weakened further. China agreed to the financing request and began to disburse funding, including nearly $1 billion in May and June 2015. Ecuador successfully returned to the international capital market in June 2014 with a $2 billion bond issue followed by additional smaller bond issues in 2015. President Moreno later discovered loans made by China over the years currently require that Ecuador pay China back with almost 500 barrels of crude oil\u2014or roughly three years of the country's oil production. According to press reports, some private sector analysts question whether Ecuador will be able to meet its debt obligations given two strains on the country's public finances: the slump in oil income due to the commodity's low price and the strong U.S. dollar, which, as a result of Ecuador's dollarized economy, makes the country's exports less globally competitive.\nEcuador withdrew from efforts to develop a regional free trade agreement (FTA) between the United States and Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru in 2006. The United States subsequently signed bilateral FTAs with Peru and Colombia, but Ecuador showed no interest in pursuing an FTA with the United States. Following Venezuela's acceptance in 2012 to full membership in the South American customs union, Mercosur (Mercado Com\u00fan del Sur or Common Market of the South), the leftist governments in Bolivia and Ecuador applied to move from observer status to full membership in the trade bloc originally composed of Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay. According to some observers, out of a concern for Ecuador's struggling non-oil exporters, Correa embraced a trade agreement with the European Union (EU) as part of the EU-Andean Community Association agreement that went into effect in January 2017.\nThe International Monetary Fund approved an agreement with Ecuador in March 2019. This arrangement would provide support ($10 billion) for the Ecuadorian government's economic policies over three years (2018\u20132021 Prosperity Plan).\nPoverty and inequality.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], an estimated 9 million Ecuadorians have an economic occupation and about 1.01 million inhabitants are in unemployment condition.\nIn 1998, 10% of the richest population had 42.5% of income, while 10% of the poor had only 0.6% of income. The rates of poverty were higher for populations of indigenous, afro-descendents, and rural sectors. During the same year, 7.6% of health spending went to the 20% of the poor, while 20% of the rich population received 38.1% of this expenditure. The extreme poverty rate has declined significantly between 1999 and 2010. In 2001 it was estimated at 40% of the population, while by 2011 the figure dropped to 17.4% of the total population. This is explained largely by emigration and economic stability achieved after adopting the U.S. dollar as official means of transaction . Poverty rates were higher for indigenous peoples, Afro-descendants and rural areas, reaching 44% of the Native ancestry population.\nInfrastructure development.\nThe industrial sector has had enormous difficulty to emerge significantly. The industrial sector's main problem is the deficit of energy, which the current government has tackled with the improvement of performance on existing hydro plants, and the creation of new ones. Such projects included negotiation of the Coca-Codo hydroplant. Incentives of financing, tributary incentives, tariffs, and others will be implemented, that is intended to benefit areas of tourism, food processing, renewable and alternative energy sources, bioenergies, pharmaceutical and chemical products, biochemical and environmental biomedicine, services, automotive metallurgical industry, footwear, and automotive parts and pieces, among others. A 500 kV transmission line increases national grid strength and electricity trade with Peru and Colombia.\nStatistics.\nMain economic indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132019 (with IMF staff stimtates in 2020\u20132025). Inflation below 5% is in green.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9340", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9340", "title": "Telecommunications in Ecuador", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Ecuador include telephone, radio, television, and the Internet.\nEcuador's state regulatory agency is the National Telecommunications Council (CONATEL), which is part of the Telecommunications Ministry (MINTEL).\nTelephones.\nThere are three cell phone providers in Ecuador: Claro (Telcel), Movistar, and CNT. Mobile networks are diverse and include GSM 850\u00a0MHz (largest) as well as CDMA (Bell South's old network before being acquired by Telef\u00f3nica Spain which rebranded Movistar), TDMA63. CNT is the state owned firm and uses CDMA.\nRadio and television.\nEcuador has multiple TV networks and many local channels, as well as more than 300 radio stations. Many TV and radio stations are privately owned. The government owns or controls 5 national TV stations and multiple radio stations. Radio and television broadcasters are required by law to give the government free air time to broadcast programs produced by the state (2007).\nInternet.\nThe government has an ongoing campaign to increase Internet access across the country, with a goal of extending Internet connectivity to 50 percent of households by 2015. Public Internet access centers, known as Infocentros, have been installed in 377 (48 percent) of Ecuador's 810 rural parishes, with a projection of 100 percent by 2014. Internet cafes are also becoming increasingly common. During the February 2013 elections for president and National Assembly, the Internet provided a real-time forum for candidates to launch proposals, solicit votes, discuss issues, and increase the scope of their publicity campaigns.\nBroadband (commonly used in urban zones) and satellite connections (often used in rural areas) are increasingly popular, eclipsing dial-up plans. According to industry estimates, between 33 and 66 percent of Internet users have broadband speeds between 2 and 3\u00a0Mbit/s, at a cost of $20 to $25 per month. In May 2012, the Superintendent of Telecommunications indicated that the overall average speed of an Internet connection in Ecuador is 128\u00a0kbit/s, although speeds are lower in rural areas.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere is no widespread blocking or filtering of websites in Ecuador and access to blogs and social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube is generally free and open. Diverse sources of national and international information are available via the Internet. Anonymous communication, encrypted communications, and the use of security tools is not prohibited.\nThere were no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitored e-mail or Internet chat rooms. However, on 11 July 2012 the government passed a new telecommunications regulation, requiring that Internet service providers fulfill all information requests from the superintendent of telecommunications, allowing access to client addresses and information without a judicial order.\nStandard defamation laws apply to content posted online. Attempts to censor statements made in times of heightened political sensitivity have been reported, as have alleged instances of censorship via the overly broad application of copyright to content critical of the government. Lawsuits have been filed against digital news sites for comments critical of the government. To use the services provided by cybercafes, the national secretary of telecommunications, SENATEL, requires that users register with the following information: full name, phone number, passport number, voting certificate number, email address, and home address.\nSelf-censorship of comments critical of the government is encouraged. In January 2013, for example, President Correa called for the National Secretary of Intelligence (SENAIN) to investigate two Twitter users who had published disparaging comments about him, an announcement which sent a warning to others not to post comments critical of the president. After receiving criticism from the government, news site La Hora indefinitely suspended the reader comments section on its website. At the president's request, the comments section was shut down completely. Print and digital news outlet El Comercio faced similar pressure related to its readers' comments and the comments section was ultimately disabled after President Correa sent a letter of complaint. While there are no official constraints on organizing protests over the Internet, warnings from the president stating that the act of protesting will be interpreted as \"an attempt to destabilize the government\" have undoubtedly discouraged some from organizing and participating in protests.\nEcuador's new \"Organic Law on Communications\" was passed in June 2013. The law recognizes a right to communication. Media companies are required to collect and store user information. \"Media lynching\", which appears to extend to any accusation of corruption or investigation of a public official\u2014even those that are supported with evidence, is prohibited. Websites bear \"ultimate responsibility\" for all content they host, including content authored by third parties. The law creates a new media regulator to prohibit the dissemination of \"unbalanced\" information and bans non-degreed journalists from publishing, effectively outlawing much investigative reporting and citizen journalism. Human rights organizations fear that the new law will stifle critical voices in the media, due to its vague wording, arbitrary sanctions, and the threat of civil and criminal penalties.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9341", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9341", "title": "Transport in Ecuador", "text": "Transport infrastructure networks in Ecuador \nTransportation in Ecuador is the transport infrastructure networks in Ecuador and those connecting the country with other countries. Transportation in Ecuador include aviation, highways, pipelines, ports and harbors, railways and waterways. Apart from transporting passengers, the country is a relatively small exporter of fruits and vegetables such as banana, papayas and pineapples.\nAviation.\nAirports.\n345 (2025)\n\"total:\" 261\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"33\n\"under 914 m:\"228\nHeliports.\n28 (2025)\nHighways.\nThe Sierra Region still plays an important role in transportation throughout the country. The Pan-American Highway crosses it from north to south. Ecuador has managed to update some roads into four-lane freeways:\nBus transport.\nEcuador has a variety of bus services.\nThe general types of service include:\nIn the capital, Quito, boarding platforms are used to put passengers at the same level as the entrance to the bus.\nPorts and harbors.\nEcuador has:\nRailways.\n\"Total:\"\n812\u00a0km (single track)\n&lt;br&gt;\"Narrow gauge:\"\n812\u00a0km of gauge.\nAll services ceased in 2020.\nProposals.\nThere is a proposed rail connection with Colombia. On 5 July 2008, a meeting took place between Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador regarding a railway for freight and passengers to link the three countries, and linking the Pacific with the Atlantic also. There is no railway service to Peru.\nMetro services.\nIn 2020, the Cuenca Tramway (Tranv\u00eda Cuenca), the first modern rail transit line in Ecuador, opened for service.\nThe Quito Metro initiated its commercial operations on 1 December 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9342", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9342", "title": "Armed Forces of Ecuador", "text": "Military forces of the Republic of Ecuador\nThe Ecuadorian Armed Forces () is the national military force of Ecuador. The commander-in-chief is the President of Ecuador. The military is generally under civilian control, specifically the Ministry of National Defence. The military of Ecuador has been involved in border disputes with Peru (Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War (1857\u20131860), Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War, Paquisha War, Cenepa War), and has provided military observers and troops to the United Nations since 1948.\nSince 2024, the Ecuadorian Armed Forces have been involved in the war on organized crime, carrying out control activities in prisons and on highways, as well as missions to confront groups declared as terrorists in Ecuador.\nMission.\nThe armed forces are part of the public forces and have the stated mission of the preservation of the integrity and national sovereignty of the national territory. It also involves participation in the social and economic development of the country and the provision of assistance in the maintenance of internal order. Tasks include fighting organised crime, anti-narcotic operations and illegal immigration. One social development programme applies the provision of teachers for rural schools through an accord with the Ministry of Education. Environmental protection is also a priority, several programmes were implemented: National Forestation and Ornamentation, Lonely Tree, Green Surveillance, Fire Plan, Ecuador Forest, and Arenillas Military Reserve. The Ecuadorian territory is divided into five Joint Task Force Zones or \"Fuerzas de Tarea Conjunta\", four on mainland Ecuador, the fifth being the Naval Zone (including the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands). Overseas territories include also the Pedro Vicente Maldonado Naval Biological Research Station in the Antarctic.\nGeopolitical situation.\nEcuador shares a border with Peru. Although marked by many conflicts, relations have improved since the signing of a renewed Peace Treaty in 1998. However, along the -long border with its neighbour Colombia, relations have been strained mainly due to a cross-border raid by Colombian forces on FARC guerrillas. The Armed Forces had logistical shortcomings and were caught off-guard. Their radar did not work, aviation was virtually non-existent, and communications were not fully operational. A diplomatic crisis followed in 2008 which some attribute partially to the need for better equipment as well as a new national defence doctrine.\nThe new administration at the Defence Ministry launched a deep restructuring program under the name of PATRIA I. It involves the modernisation of military equipment, improvement of planning, and operations within the Ecuadorian territory. PATRIA I was planned to be completed by 2011. In 2009, the spending budget was increased by 25% and totaled $920 million.\nHistory.\nEcuador's military history dates far back to its first attempt to secure freedom from Spain in 1811. In 1822 Ecuadorian troops, alongside other rebel forces, scored a decisive victory over the Spanish royalist army at the Battle of Pichincha. Although assisted by Peruvian troops, it would fight these only a few years later in 1828, as a member of the Confederation of Gran Colombia. The troops of Gran Colombia (Less than half of its troops were Ecuadorians), is defeated in the Battle of Punta Malpelo and the combat of crosses, where the Peruvian navy blocks Guayaquil. Then the great Colombians in the land field defeat a division of Peruvian outpost, in the battle of Tarqui. This battle does not define war after the signing of the Giron agreement where it is indicated that it remains in a status quo before bellum. Eventually, Civil War would plunge the country and the army into disorder. In 1941 the Ecuadorian Military found itself weak and disorganized; the by now long-lasting territorial dispute with Peru escalated into a major conflict, the Ecuadorian\u2013Peruvian War of 1941. A much larger and better equipped Peruvian force quickly overwhelmed the Ecuadorian forces, driving them back and invading the Ecuadorian territory. Ecuador had no choice but to accept Peru's territorial claims and signed Peace treaty in 1942. However, the treaty of 1942 failed to settle the border dispute and occasional clashes occurred in a then still non-demarcated border area between the nations. These clashes flared into another outbreak of serious fighting in January 1981 called the Paquisha War where Ecuadorian troops infiltrated into Peruvian territory are expelled by the Peruvian army; similar incidents occurred in 1983 and again in 1984. The last military conflict with Peru occurred in 1995, during the Cenepa War, in which both sides claimed to be fighting inside their own territory until the signing of a ceasefire and the eventual separation of forces. The longest-running source of armed international conflict in the Western Hemisphere had ended.\nUN peacekeeping operations.\nThe Ecuadorian Armed Forces has provided military observers and troops to the United Nations since 1948. In November 2003, an Ecuadorian United Nations Training Centre was established under the name of: (\"La Unidad Escuela de Misiones de Paz \"Ecuador\"\"). In 2009, Ecuador was deploying over 90 peacekeepers around the globe.\nOrganization.\nThe armed forces of Ecuador are under the authority of the President of the Republic through the Ministry of Defence, coordinated by the Joint Command of the Armed Forces.\nBranches.\nJoint Command.\nThe command is in charge of the administration and coordination of the three military branches. The objectives of the command are to integrate the military branches with joint capabilities and interoperability, to address changes and new scenarios, which guarantee the peace, security, and well-being of the nation.\nThrough military strategic guidelines and guidelines, in the innovation, updating, development and implementation of the generation of military technology, through strategic study in the development of military capabilities, verification of the optimal installed military capacity, implementation of military technological development, in order to promote military operational growth to be the effective and efficient decisive force.\nArmy.\nThe Ecuadorian Army (\"Ej\u00e9rcito Ecuatoriano\") is the land component of the Armed Forces. Its \n25,650 soldiers are deployed in relation to its military doctrine. The contemporary Ecuadorian Army has a large component of jungle and special forces infantry units implemented within its structure. It operates around 236 tanks, 780 IFVs and 68 aircraft; their standard rifle is the Heckler &amp; Koch HK33. Recently acquired material include:\nAir Force.\nThe present day Ecuadorian Air Force (\"Fuerza A\u00e9rea Ecuatoriana\") saw combat action several times in 1981 and 1995 when it gained valuable experiences against the Peruvian Air Force. The FAE has a personnel strength of 6,200 and focuses mainly on border control but also focuses on the war on drugs, guerrilla insurgencies, and humanitarian missions. Since 2009 the FAE has been undergoing major changes and modernisation plans are ongoing whilst new projects are considered to bolster the country's defence capacities. Recent and ongoing orders include:\nNavy.\nThe present-day Ecuadorian Navy or (\"Armada del Ecuador\") is a compact, efficient, and well-balanced force. However, limited funds hinder any major acquisitions and the chances of maintaining a strong force within the Pacific Ocean. Since the end of 2009, the Navy's structure became simplified. The Ecuadorian Naval Zone became one and measures, of the Pacific Coast and of the Pacific Ocean, (including the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands). Most sea-going assets are based at Guayaquil. The Navy focuses mainly on border control and illegal immigration. The Navy operates around 20 major vessels (including two submarines) and 25 aircraft. It has a personnel strength of 9,400. To increase its operational capabilities it recently acquired:\nCyber-Defense Operations Command.\nIt is a body responsible for the planning and execution of actions related to cyberdefense in networks and information and telecommunications systems or others that it may have entrusted to, as well as contributing to the appropriate response in cyberspace to threats or aggressions that may affect National Defense, guaranteeing and providing security to strategic entities that are managed by computer systems.\nHe is prepared to counter cyberattacks, cyberwarfare and espionage to \"critical entities\" that could be attacked \"from anywhere in the world.\"\nEducation.\nThe training of army, navy and air force officers is the function of the , the Rafael Mor\u00e1n Valverde Naval Higher School and the Cosme Rennella Barbatto Military Higher School, respectively.\nEquipment sources.\nHistorically, Ecuador depended on a wide variety of foreign suppliers for virtually all of its equipment needs. Only in the 1980s did it begin to develop a modest domestic arms industry as the Directorate of Army Industries manufactured rifle ammunition, uniforms, boots, and other items.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, France became a leading supplier and delivered AMX-13 tanks and various aircraft. Ecuador also purchased Type 209 submarines and L\u00fcrssen-Seawolf TNC 45 patrol boats from West Germany. Various types of infantry weapons were acquired from Belgium.\nEcuador became a substantial customer for Israeli arms in the 1970s, purchasing Arava aircraft, Gabriel missiles for naval patrol craft, and Uzi submachine guns. Under technical assistance contracts, Israel serviced Israeli planes in the Ecuadorian Air Force inventory as well as Boeing civilian aircraft flown by TAME and \"Ecuatoriana Airlines\". Ecuador also reportedly employed Israeli security specialists as consultants in the fight against terrorism. In 1976 Ecuador became the first foreign country to order the Kfir, an advanced jet fighter equipped with the General Electric J-79 engine produced in Israel under license. The transaction, which required United States government approval because of the engine technology, was rejected by the administration of President Jimmy Carter in order to discourage the proliferation of sophisticated military equipment in the Third World. The action caused an uproar in Israel where the sale was regarded as an important breakthrough in Israel's efforts to develop international markets for the Kfir. In 1981, after the inauguration of President Ronald Reagan, Washington removed its objection to the sale. Although the contract called for the purchase of 12 Kfirs and an option to purchase an additional 12, Ecuador acquired only the original group, at a price estimated at US$196 million.\nEcuador became a relatively heavy importer of arms in the late 1970s and early 1980s, averaging US$150 million annually and reaching a peak of US$280 million in 1982. These imports declined sharply to an average of US$50 million annually between 1985 and 1987, presumably as a result of a dramatic reduction in oil revenues and the precipitous drop in the value of the sucre, which made imported arms extremely expensive. Between 1983 and 1987, Ecuador imported an estimated US$460 million of arms, primarily from Italy, France, the United States, and Britain. In 1995, during the Cenepa War against Peru, Argentina gave to Ecuador 6,500 tons of rifles, cannons, anti-tank rockets, and ammunition in a controversial move.\nRecent times saw changes in Ecuador's foreign policy, as it decided to look for alternative weapon suppliers. These included its long-term allies Chile, which since 2008 has provided Leopard 1 tanks and s. Israel delivered its unmanned aerial vehicles in 2009, and Brazil supplied additional military vehicles and Super Tucano combat aircraft. Countries like Russia and China have delivered small quantities of military equipment in the past, but have gained importance in recent years. Since then, Chinese radars, anti-aircraft systems, and infantry weapons have been purchased. In 2009 two additional Mil Mi-17 helicopters have been ordered from Russia with further deals planned. India has delivered HAL Dhruv helicopters and South Africa is about to deliver 12 Atlas Cheetah supersonic aircraft. Ecuador's political ally, Venezuela, has donated military equipment including six Mirage 50 aircraft.\nIn 2010, the U.S. embassy in Ecuador announced that it had delivered $1.2 million of donated military equipment to the Ecuadorian military. The donations were intended to support operations countering drug smuggling and guerilla activity along the Colombian border. Although the U.S. has refused to renew their lease on the Manta military airbase, deliveries included trucks, patrol boats, GPS, night vision, and M4 carbine rifles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9343", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9343", "title": "Foreign relations of Ecuador", "text": " \nThis article describes the diplomatic affairs, foreign policy and international relations of Ecuador\nEcuador is a founding member of the UN and a member of many of its specialized agencies; it is also a member of the Organization of American States (OAS), as well as many regional groups, including the Rio Group, the Latin American Economic System, the Latin American Energy Organization, the Latin American Integration Association, and the Andean Pact.\nEcuador's principal foreign-policy objectives have traditionally included defense of its territory from both external aggression and internal subversion as well as support for the objectives of the UN and the OAS. Although Ecuador's foreign relations were traditionally centered on the United States, Ecuador's membership in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in the 1970s and 1980s allowed Ecuadorian leaders to exercise somewhat greater foreign policy autonomy. Ecuador's foreign policy goals under the Borja government in the late 1980s were more diversified than those of the Febres Cordero administration, which closely identified with the United States. For example, Ecuador was more active in its relations with the Third World, multilateral organizations, Western Europe, and socialist countries.\nEcuador has offered humanitarianian aid to many countries, is a supporter of the United Nations, and currently contributes troops to the UN mission in Haiti. Ecuador has also been an elective member of the UN Security Council.\nIn Antarctica, Ecuador has maintained a peaceful research station for scientific study in the British-claimed territory and is a member nation of the Antarctica Treaty.\nDomestic politics.\nThe presidency of Rafael Correa in the early 21st century saw a radical change in the country's foreign policy. Traditional ties with the United States grew more acrimonious and there were increased ties with the governments of Russia and Iran. The relations with the United States, however, improved significantly during the presidency of his successor Lenin Moreno since 2017.\nList.\nList of countries which Ecuador maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9347", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9347", "title": "Egypt/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "9348", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9348", "title": "Geography of Egypt", "text": "The geography of Egypt relates to two regions: North Africa and West Asia.\nEgypt has coastlines on the Mediterranean Sea, the River Nile, and the Red Sea. Egypt borders Libya to the west, Palestine and Israel to the east and Sudan to the south (with a current dispute over the Halaib triangle). Egypt has an area of .\nThe longest straight-line distance in Egypt from north to south is , while that from east to west measures . Egypt has more than of coastline on the Mediterranean Sea, the Gulf of Suez, and the Gulf of Aqaba. It has an Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nGovernorates.\nEgypt is divided into 27 governorates. There are nine governorates of Lower Egypt in the Nile Delta region, ten of Upper Egypt along the Nile river south from Cairo to Aswan, and five frontier governorates covering Sinai and the deserts that lie west and east of the Nile river.\nNatural regions.\nEgypt is predominantly desert. 35,000\u00a0km2 \u2013 3.5% \u2013 of the total land area is cultivated and permanently settled. Most of the country lies within the wide band of desert that stretches eastwards from Africa's Atlantic Coast across the continent and into southwest Asia. Historically relevant here is \"https://\" (1911) by W. F. Hume\nEgypt's geological history has produced four major physical regions:\nDespite covering only about 5% of the total area of Egypt; the Nile Valley and Nile Delta are the most important regions, being the country's only cultivable regions and supporting about 99% of the population. The Nile valley extends approximately 800\u00a0 km from Aswan to the outskirts of Cairo. The Nile Valley is known as Upper Egypt, while the Nile Delta region is known as Lower Egypt. Steep rocky cliffs rise along the banks of the Nile in some stretches, while other areas along the Nile are flat, with space for agricultural production. In the past, flooding of the Nile during the summer provided silt and water to make agriculture possible on land that is otherwise very dry. Since the construction of the Aswan Dam, agriculture in the Nile valley depends on irrigation. The Nile delta consists of flat, low-lying areas. Some parts of the delta are marshy and water-logged, and thus not suitable for agriculture. Other areas of the delta are used for agriculture.\nNile Valley and Delta.\nThe Nile Valley and Delta, the most extensive oasis on earth, was created by the world's longest river and its seemingly inexhaustible sources. Without the topographic channel that permits the Nile to flow across the Sahara, Egypt would be entirely desert. The length within Egypt of the River Nile in its northwards course from three central African sources \u2013 the White Nile, the Blue Nile, and the Atbara \u2013 totals some 1,600\u00a0 km.\nThe White Nile, which begins at Lake Victoria in Uganda, supplies about 28% of the Nile's Egyptian waters. In its course from Lake Victoria to Juba in South Sudan, the White Nile's channel drops more than 600 m. In its 1,600-km course from Juba to Khartoum, Sudan's capital, the river descends just 75 m. In South Sudan, the White Nile passes through the Sudd, a wide, flat plain covered with swamp vegetation and slows almost to the point of stagnation.\nThe Blue Nile, which originates at Lake Tana in Ethiopia, provides on average some 58% of the Nile's Egyptian waters. This river has a steeper gradient and therefore flows more swiftly than the White Nile, which it joins at Khartoum. Unlike the White Nile, the Blue Nile carries a considerable amount of sediment. For several kilometers north of Khartoum, water closer to the eastern bank of the river, coming from the Blue Nile, is visibly muddy, while that closer to the western bank, and coming from the White Nile, is clearer.\nThe much shorter Atbarah River, which also originates in Ethiopia, joins the main Nile north of Khartoum between the fifth and sixth cataracts (areas of steep rapids) and provides about 14% of the Nile's waters in Egypt. During the low-water season, which runs from January to June, the Atbarah shrinks to a number of pools. But, in late summer, when torrential rains fall on the Ethiopian Highlands, the Atbarah provides 22% of the Nile's flow.\nThe Blue Nile has a similar pattern. It contributes 17% of the Nile's waters in the low-water season and 68% during the high-water season. In contrast, the White Nile provides only 10% of the Nile's waters during the high-water season but contributes more than 80% during the low-water period. Thus, before the Aswan High Dam was completed in 1971, the White Nile watered the Egyptian stretch of the river throughout the year, whereas the Blue Nile, carrying seasonal rain from Ethiopia, caused the Nile to overflow its banks and deposit a layer of fertile mud over adjacent fields. The great flood of the main Nile usually occurred in Egypt during August, September, and October, but it sometimes began as early as June at Aswan and often did not completely wane until January.\nThe Nile enters Egypt a few kilometers north of Wadi Halfa, a Sudanese town that was completely rebuilt on high ground when its original site was submerged in the reservoir created by the Aswan High Dam. As a result of the dam's construction, the Nile actually begins its flow into Egypt as Lake Nasser, which extends southwards from the dam for 320\u00a0 km to the border and for an additional 158\u00a0 km within Sudan. Lake Nasser's waters fill the area through Lower Nubia (Upper Egypt and northern Sudan) within the narrow canyon between the cliffs of sandstone and granite created by the flow of the river over many centuries.\nBelow Aswan, the cultivated floodplain strip widens to as much as twenty km. North of Isna (160\u00a0 km north of Aswan), the plateau on both sides of the valley rises to as much as 550 m above sea level; at Qina (some 90\u00a0 km north of Isna) the 300-m limestone cliffs force the Nile to change course towards the southwest for about 60\u00a0 km before it turns northwest for about 160\u00a0 km to Asyut. Northward from Asyut, the escarpments on both sides diminish, and the valley widens to a maximum of 22\u00a0 km.\nAt Cairo, the Nile spreads out over what was once a broad estuary, subsequently filled by silt deposits to form what is now a fertile, fan-shaped delta some 250\u00a0 km wide at its seaward extremity and extending about 160\u00a0km from north to south. The Nile Delta covers approximately 22,000\u00a0km2 (roughly equivalent in area to that of Massachusetts). According to historical accounts from the first century AD, seven branches of the Nile once ran through the delta. According to later accounts, the Nile had, by around the twelfth century, just six branches.\nSince then, nature and man have closed all but two main outlets: the east branch, Damietta (also known as Dumyat; 240\u00a0 km long), and the west branch, Rosetta (235\u00a0 km long). Both outlets are named after the ports located at their respective mouths. A network of drainage and irrigation canals supplements these remaining outlets. In the north, near the coast, the Nile delta embraces a series of salt marshes and lakes, the most notable among which are Idku, Al Burullus, and Manzilah.\nThe fertility and productivity of the land adjacent to the Nile depend largely on the silt deposited by floodwaters. Archaeological research indicates that people once lived at a much higher elevation along the river than they do today, probably because the river was higher or the floods more severe. The timing and amount of annual flow were always unpredictable. Measurements of annual flows as low as 1.2 billion m3 and as high as 4.25 billion m3 have been recorded. For centuries Egyptians attempted to predict and take advantage of these flows and thereby moderate the severity of floods.\nThe construction of dams on the Nile, particularly the Aswan High Dam, transformed the mighty river into a large and predictable irrigation ditch. Lake Nasser, the world's largest artificial lake, has enabled planned use of the Nile regardless of the amount of rainfall in Central Africa and East Africa. The dams have also affected the Nile Valley's fertility, which was dependent for centuries not only on the water brought to the arable land but also on the materials left by the water.\nResearchers have estimated that beneficial silt deposits in the valley began about 10,000 years ago. The average annual deposit of arable soil through the course of the river valley amounted to some nine metres. Analysis of the flow revealed that 10.7 million tons of solid matter passed Cairo each year.\nToday the Aswan High Dam obstructs most of this sediment, now retained in Lake Nasser. The reduction in annual silt deposits has contributed to rising water tables and increasing soil salinity in the Delta, the erosion of the river's banks in Upper Egypt, and the erosion of the alluvial fan along the shore of the Mediterranean Sea.\nWestern Desert.\nThe Western Desert covers an area of some 700,000\u00a0 km2, thereby accounting for around two-thirds of Egypt's total land area. This immense desert to the west of the Nile spans the area from the Mediterranean Sea southwards to the Sudanese border. The desert's Jilf al Kabir Plateau, at a mean altitude of some 1000 m, constitutes an exception to the uninterrupted territory of basement rocks covered by layers of horizontally bedded sediments forming a massive plain or low plateau. The Great Sand Sea lies within the desert's plain and extends from the Siwa Oasis to Jilf al Kabir. Escarpments (ridges) and deep depressions (basins) exist in several parts of the Western Desert, and no rivers or streams drain into or out of the area.\nThe government has considered the Western Desert a frontier region and has divided it into two governorates at about the twenty-eighth parallel: Matruh to the north and New Valley (Al Wadi al Jadid) to the south. There are seven important depressions in the Western Desert, and all are considered oases except the largest, Qattara, the water of which is salty. The Qattara Depression, which includes the country's lowest point, encompasses , which is similar to the size of Lake Ontario. It is largely below sea level and is below sea level at the lowest. Badlands, salt marshes and salt lakes cover the sparsely inhabited Qattara Depression.\nLimited agricultural production, the presence of some natural resources, and permanent settlements are found in the other six depressions, all of which have fresh water provided by the Nile or by local groundwater. The Siwah Oasis, close to the Libyan border and west of Qattara, is isolated from the rest of Egypt but has sustained life since ancient times. The Siwa's cliff-hung Temple of Amun was renowned for its oracles for more than 1,000 years. Herodotus and Alexander the Great were among the many illustrious people who visited the temple in the pre-Christian era.\nThe other major oases form a topographic chain of basins extending from the Faiyum Oasis (sometimes called the Fayyum Depression) which lies southwest of Cairo, south to the Bahariya, Farafirah, and Dakhilah oases before reaching the country's largest oasis, Kharijah. A brackish lake, Birket Qarun, at the northern reaches of Al Fayyum Oasis, drained into the Nile in ancient times. For centuries sweet water artesian wells in the Fayyum Oasis have permitted extensive cultivation in an irrigated area that extends over .\nEastern Desert.\nThe topographic features of the desert region east of the Nile differ from those to the west of the Nile. The Eastern Desert is relatively mountainous. The elevation rises abruptly from the Nile, and a downward-sloping plateau of sand gives way within 100\u00a0 km to arid, defoliated, rocky hills running north and south between the Sudan border and the Delta. The hills reach elevations of more than 1,900 m.\nThe region's most prominent feature is the easterly chain of rugged mountains, the Red Sea Hills, which extend from the Nile Valley eastward to the Gulf of Suez and the Red Sea. This elevated region has a natural drainage pattern that rarely functions because of insufficient rainfall. It also has a complex of irregular, sharply cut wadis that extend westward toward the Nile. The desert environment extends all the way to the Red Sea coast.\nSinai Peninsula.\nThe Sinai Peninsula is a triangular-shaped peninsula, about 61,100\u00a0km2 in area slightly smaller than Latvia (64 573\u00a0km2). Similar to the desert, the peninsula contains mountains in its southern sector that are a geological extension of the Red Sea Hills, the low range along the Red Sea coast that includes Mount Catherine (Jabal Katrinah), the country's highest point, at 2,642 m above sea-level. The Red Sea may have been named after these mountains, which are red.\nThe southern side of the peninsula has a sharp escarpment that subsides after a narrow coastal shelf that slopes into the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aqaba. The elevation of Sinai's southern rim is about 1,000 m. Moving northward, the elevation of this limestone plateau decreases. The northern third of Sinai is a flat, sandy coastal plain, which extends from the Suez Canal into the Gaza Strip and Israel.\nBefore the Israeli military occupied Sinai during the June 1967 War (Arab-Israeli war, also known as the Six-Day War), a single Egyptian governorate administered the whole peninsula. By 1982 after all of Sinai was returned to Egypt, the central government divided the peninsula into two governorates. North Sinai has its capital at Al Arish and the South Sinai has its capital in El Tor.\nThe abundance of life in the Sinai Peninsula may not be immediately apparent. This again has its roots in the way in which the animals of the desert have adapted to life here. Many species, mammals especially, but also reptiles and even birds such as owls, are nocturnal. They spend the daylight hours in the relative cool of burrows, under boulders or in crevices and cracks in the rock. Many of these creatures will only be apparent from their tracks and trails or from a fleeting glimpse of a diminutive gerbil, or zig-zigging hare, in the car headlights at night. Even those animals that do brave the heat of the day are normally only active in the early morning or evening.\nUrban and rural areas.\nIn the 1971 census, 57 percent of Egypt's population was counted as rural, including those residing in agricultural areas in the Nile Valley and Delta, as well as the much smaller number of persons living in desert areas. Rural areas differ from the urban in terms of poverty, fertility rates, and other social factors. Agriculture is a key component of the economy in rural areas, though some people are employed in the tourist industry or other non-farm occupations. In 1992, the percentage of Egypt's population employed in agriculture was 33 percent. The agricultural industry is dependent on irrigation from the Nile river.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Egypt, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\n\\* \"Ras Hadarba lies within the Hala'ib triangle which is claimed by Sudan but administered by Egypt. If it is excluded, then Egypt's easternmost point is the Ras Banas peninsula on the mainland or, including islands, Mukawwa Island\"\n\\** \"Jabal Bartazuga lies in the Bir Tawil region, a terra nullius that is often included as part of Egypt but is not claimed by it. If this area is excluded then Egypt has no southernmost point, its southern border being formed by the 22nd parallel north.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9349", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9349", "title": "Demographics of Egypt", "text": "Egypt is the most populous country in the Middle East, and the third-most populous on the African continent, after Nigeria and Ethiopia. About 95% of the country's 107 million people (May 2025) live along the banks of the Nile and in the Nile Delta, which fans out north of Cairo; and along the Suez Canal. These regions are among the world's most densely populated, containing an average of over 1,540 people per km2, as compared to 96 persons per km2 for the country as a whole.\nSmall communities spread throughout the desert regions of Egypt are clustered around historic trade and transportation routes. The government has tried with mixed success to encourage migration to newly irrigated land reclaimed from the desert. However, the proportion of the population living in rural areas has continued to decrease as people move to the megacities in search of employment and a higher standard of living.\nAccording to the Peterson Institute for International Economics and other proponents of demographic structural approach (cliodynamics), the basic problem Egypt has is an unemployment rate driven by a demographic youth bulge: with the number of new people entering the job force at about 4% a year, unemployment in Egypt is almost 10 times as high for college graduates as it is for people who have gone through elementary school, particularly educated urban youth, who comprised most of the people that were seen out in the streets during the Egyptian revolution of 2011. An estimated 51.2% of Egyptians are under the age of 25, with just 4.3% over the age of 65, making it one of the most youthful populations in the world.\nPopulation size and distribution.\nEgypt has a population of 116,538,000 (2024 UN estimate). According to the OECD/World Bank statistics population growth in Egypt from 1990 to 2008 was 23.7 million and 41%.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAge distribution.\nData taken from Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Percentage distribution of population in censuses (1976,1986,1996,2006) by age group\nPercentage distribution of population in censuses by age group\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2010)\nPopulation estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2010):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2012)\nPopulation estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2012):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (1 January 2013)\nPopulation estimates by sex and age group (1 January 2013):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2013)\nPopulation estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2013):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2014)\nPopulation estimates by sex and age group (1 July 2014) in thousands:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Household population by age and sex (DHS 2014)\nHousehold population by age and sex (DHS 2014).\nTotal population in thousands: 114 428 (Males 56 926, Females 57 501)\nPopulation estimates by sex and age group (1 January 2015):\nHistorical and present population distribution:\nUrban and rural population.\nFigures from CAPMAS:\nPopulation projections.\nThe Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS) had released high/medium/low population projections for 2011\u20132031 based on Final Results of 2006 Population Census. The 2020 high variant was 92.6 million, the medium \u2013 91.0 million, the low \u2013 90.0 million. The 2030 high variant is 104.4 million, the medium \u2013 101.7 million, the low \u2013 99.8 million. However the information could be misleading as the 2013 population figure of 84.6 million is higher than the projected high of 83 million. In fact, due to an unexpected rise in the fertility rate (from 3.0 to 3.5), the population already surpassed 91 million on 5 June 2016 while reaching 92 million on 30 November, average population age remaining stable despite a rising life expectancy. Furthermore, as of 2022, the population of Egypt reached 111 million, which is a figure even higher than what is projected for 2030.\nVital statistics.\nDemographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2022.\nVital statistics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nFertility rate (TFR) (wanted fertility rate) and CBR (crude birth rate):\nLife expectancy at birth.\nAverage life expectancy at age 0 of the total population.\nDemographics by Governorate.\nMatruh\n2\n3\n4 \n5 \n6 \n9 \n12 \n10 \n11 \n16\nGiza\n7 \n13 \nSuez \nNorth&lt;br&gt;Sinai\nSouth&lt;br&gt;Sinai\nFaiyum\nBeni Suef\nMinya\nAsyut\nSohag\nQena\nLuxor\nAswan\nRed Sea\nNew Valley\nUrban and Rural Population of Governorates.\nData taken from CAPMAS:\nPopulation density by governorate.\nAs of 1 July 2014; data taken from CAPMAS: Information for population is in thousands, pop density \u2013 persons/km2 and area is in km2.\nEthnic groups.\nThe CIA World Factbook lists Egyptians as 99.7%, and \"other\" as 0.3% (2006 census). \"Other\" refers to people who are not citizens of Egypt, who come to Egypt to work for international companies, diplomats, etc.\nThe vast majority of the population of Egypt consists of Egyptians including Copts, the native Egyptians make up 95% of the population. The vast majority of Egyptians are speakers of the Egyptian Arabic dialect.\nMinorities in Egypt include the Berber-speaking community of the Siwa Oasis (Siwis) and the Nubian people clustered along the Nile in the southernmost part of Egypt. There are also sizable minorities of Beja and Dom.\nThe country was also host to many different communities during the European occupation period, including Greeks, Italians, and also from war-torn areas; the Lebanese, Syro-Lebanese, and other minority groups like Jews, Armenians, Turks and Albanians, though most either left or were compelled to leave after political developments in the 1950s. The country still hosts some 90,000 refugees and asylum seekers, mostly Palestinians and Sudanese.\nOther sources give more detailed statistics, including the Beja (ca. 88,000), the Nubians (ca. 300,000 in 1996), Dom (ca. 230,000 in 1996), Berbers (Siwis) (ca. 5,000).\nEgypt hosts a migrant population of over 9 million, constituting 8.7% of the country\u2019s total population, according to the International Organization for Migration as of 2022. These migrants originate from 133 countries, with the largest groups being Sudanese (4 million), Syrians (1.5 million), Libyans (1 million) and Yemenis (700 thousand) collectively making up 80% of all international migrants in Egypt.\nIn 2023, EU's Josep Borrell, then the High Representative/Vice-President, estimated that refugees in Egypt make up 10% of the total population of the country.\nLanguages.\nArabic is the official language of Egypt, with the vast majority of Egyptians speaking Egyptian Arabic. In The Upper Nile valley regions, Sa'idi Arabic is prevalent. The Coptic language is still used in the Coptic church for the majority of prayers, hymns, masses, and meditations. English is widely understood. Siwa language is used in ethnic Berber tribal areas in the western desert (Siwa), and Nubian language is widely used among the ethnic Nubians in the southern areas.\nReligions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the CIA World Factbook, 90% of the population is Muslim and 10% is Christian (majority Coptic Orthodox, other Christians include Armenian Apostolic, Catholic, Maronite, Orthodox, and Anglican).\nEgyptians abroad.\nEgyptians have a long history of mobility, primarily across the Arab world, but emigration became much more popular once it was recognised as a right in the 1971 Constitution. According to the International Organization for Migration, an estimated 2.7 million Egyptians live abroad and contribute actively to the development of their country through remittances (US$7.8 billion in 2009), circulation of human and social capital, as well as investment. Approximately 70% of Egyptian migrants live in Arab countries (923,600 in Saudi Arabia, 332,600 in Libya, 226,850 in Jordan, 190,550 in Kuwait with the rest elsewhere in the region) and the remaining 30% are living mostly North America (318,000 in the United States, 110,000 in Canada) and Europe (90,000 in Italy).\nGenetics.\nAutosomal DNA.\nAlmarri, Mohamed A et al. (2021) analyzed present-day Middle-Eastern groups. They modelled the components of a sample from Egypt as being made up of four ancient populations: 50% Natufian, 31% Iran Neolithic, 12% Mota, and 7% Eastern Hunter Gatherer.\nmtDNA.\nSaunier, Jessica et al. (2009) sequenced mitogenomes from 277 unrelated Egyptian individuals. The results showed that 20.6% of the Egyptian mtDNA chromosomes were of Sub-Saharan African origin, while 79.4% were of West Eurasian.\nY-DNA.\nListed here are some of the human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups in Egypt, according to Bekada, Asmahan et al. (2013).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9350", "revid": "39257804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9350", "title": "Politics of Egypt", "text": "Political system of Egypt\nThe politics of Egypt takes place within the framework of a republican semi-presidential system of government. The current political system was established following the 2013 Egyptian military coup d'\u00e9tat, and the takeover of President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. In the current system, the President is elected for a six-year term. Furthermore, the President has the power to dissolve Parliament through Article 137.\nThe Parliament of Egypt is the oldest legislative chamber in Africa and the Middle East. The unicameral Parliament has the ability to impeach the President through Article 161. With 2020 elections to the new Senate, the chamber became bicameral.\nPresidency.\nThe position was created after the Egyptian Revolution of 1952; Mohammed Naguib was the first to hold the position. Before 2005, the Parliament chose a candidate for the presidency and the people voted, in a referendum, whether or not they approved the proposed candidate for president. After the Egyptian Revolution of 2011, a new presidential election was held 2012, it was the first free and fair elections in Egypt's political history. The Muslim Brotherhood declared early 18 June 2012, that its candidate, Mohamed Morsi, won the election. After a wave of public discontent with autocratic excesses of the Muslim Brotherhood government of President Mohamed Morsi; the beginning of July 2013 marked the onset of the 2013 Egyptian coup d'\u00e9tat, following the decision of General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, to remove Morsi from office and suspend the constitution of 2012. El-Sisi was then elected head of state in the 2014 presidential election. On 8 June 2014, Abdel Fatah el-Sisi was officially sworn in as Egypt's new president.\nArticle 133 of Egypt's constitution of 2012 determines a 4-year period of presidential mandate, to which the candidate can only be re-elected once. According to the document, to be eligible the candidate \u201cmust be Egyptian born to Egyptian parents, must have carried no other citizenship, must have civil and political right, cannot be married to a non-Egyptian,\u201d and not be younger than 40 Gregorian years.\nArticle 146 declares the president to be the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces. However, to declare war or to send armed forces outside state territory, the president must consult the National Defense Council and have the approval of the majority of the MPs.\nIn April 2019, Egypt's parliament extended presidential terms from four to six years.\nA constitutional referendum was held in Egypt from 20 to 22 April 2019, with overseas voting taking place between 19 and 21 April. The proposed changes allowed President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi to remain in power until 2030; under the previous version of the constitution, he would have been barred from contesting the next elections, set to take place in 2022. The changes were approved by 88.83% of voters who voted, with a 44% turnout.\nLegislative branch.\nParliament meets for one eight-month session each year; under special circumstances the President of the Republic can call an additional session. Even though the powers of the Parliament have increased since the 1980 Amendments of the Constitution, the Parliament continues to lack the powers to balance the extensive powers of the President.\nThe House of Representatives (Maglis El Nowwab).\nThe House of Representatives is the principal legislative body. It consists of a maximum 596 representatives with 448 are directly elected through FPTP and another 120 elected through proportional representation in 4 nationwide districts while the President can appoint up to 28. The House sits for a five-year term but can be dissolved earlier by the President.\nThe Constitution reserves fifty per cent of the House may force the resignation of the executive cabinet by voting a motion of censure. For this reason, the Prime Minister and his cabinet are necessarily from the dominant party or coalition in the assembly. In the case of a president and house from opposing parties, this leads to the situation known as cohabitation.\nThe recent elections were held in 2015 and most recently in 2020.\nSenate (Magles El Shiyoukh).\nThe Senate was the 264-member upper house of Parliament created in 1980. In the Senate, 176 members were directly elected and 88 members were appointed by the President of the Republic for six-year terms. One half of the Senate was renewed every three years.\nThe Senate legislative powers were limited. On most matters of legislation, the People's Assembly retained the last word in the event of a disagreement between the two houses.\nIt was called Shura Council which was abolished in the 2014 constitution.\nParliamentary Elections.\nPolitical parties in Egypt are numerous and exceeds 100 parties. The formation of political parties based on religion, race or gender is prohibited by the Constitution. Before the revolution in 2011, power was concentrated in the hands of the President of the Republic and the National Democratic Party which retained a super-majority in the People's Assembly.\nMany new political parties that mostly were fragile formed in anticipation of running candidates in the 2011\u201312 Egyptian parliamentary election that was considered the first free one since the 1952 revolution. However the elected Parliament was dissolved by the constitutional court and new elections were held in 2015.\nBelow the national level, authority is exercised by and through governors and mayors appointed by the central government and by popularly elected local councils.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nAccording to the Egyptian Constitution, political parties are allowed to exist. Religious political parties are not allowed as it would not respect the principle of non-interference of religion in politics and that religion has to remain in the private sphere to respect all beliefs. Also forbidden are political parties supporting militia formations or having an agenda that is contradictory to the constitution and its principles, or threatening the country's stability such as national unity between Muslim Egyptians and Christian Egyptians.\nAs of 2015, there are more than 100 registered political parties in Egypt. The largest were the Free Egyptians Party, New Wafd Party, Conference Party, and the Egyptian Social Democratic Party.\nIn December 2020, final results of the parliamentary election confirmed a clear majority of the seats for Egypt's Mostaqbal Watn (Nation's Future) Party, which strongly supports president El-Sisi. The party even increased its majority, partly because of new electoral rules.\nCivil society.\nEgyptians had lived under emergency law from 1967 until 31 May 2012 (with one 18-month break starting in 1980). Emergency laws have been extended every three years since 1981. These laws sharply circumscribed any non-governmental political activity: street demonstrations, non-approved political organizations, and unregistered financial donations were formally banned. However, since 2000, these restrictions have been violated in practice. In 2003, the agenda shifted heavily towards local democratic reforms, opposition to the succession of Gamal Mubarak as president, and rejection of violence by state security forces. Groups involved in the latest wave include PCSPI, the Egyptian Movement for Change (Kefaya), and the Association for Egyptian Mothers.\nSubstantial peasant activism exists on a variety of issues, especially related to land rights and land reform. A major turning point was the 1997 repeal of Nasser-era land reform policies under pressure for structural adjustment. A pole for this activity is the Land Center for Human Rights.\nThe Egyptian Revolution of 2011, inspired by the recent revolution in Tunisia, forced the resignation of President Mubarak and the Military Junta that succeeded him abrogated the Constitution and promised free and fair elections under a new one. On August 15, 2015, President al-Sisi enacted a new Counter-Terrorism Law, which Human Rights Watch claims \"mimics\" language \"already contained in Egypt's decades-old Emergency Law\". In Article 2, one of many references include terrorism as \"any use of intimidation for the purpose of disturbing public order; harms national unity, social peace, or national security\". Following to Section 2, the President \"may issue a decree to take appropriate measures to maintain security and public order\", addressed in Article 53. This includes \"the power to order six-month curfews or evacuations in defined areas, subject to a majority vote in parliament within seven days, or cabinet approval if parliament is not in session.\"\nPolitical pressure.\nBefore the revolution, Mubarak tolerated limited political activity by the Brotherhood for his first two terms, then moved more aggressively to block its influence. Trade unions and professional associations are officially sanctioned. In 2014, in Upper Egypt, several newspapers reported that the region of Upper Egypt wants to secede from Egypt to try to improve living standards.\nForeign relations.\nThe permanent headquarters for the League of Arab States (The Arab League) is located in Cairo. The Secretary-General of the League has traditionally been an Egyptian. Former Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Abu El Ghet is the present Secretary-General of the Arab League. The Arab League moved out of Egypt to Tunis in 1978 as a protest at the peace treaty with Israel but returned in 1989.\nEgypt was the first Arab state to establish diplomatic relations with the state of Israel, after the signing of the Egypt\u2013Israel peace treaty at the Camp David Accords. Egypt has a major influence amongst other Arab states, and has historically played an important role as a mediator in resolving disputes between various Arab nations, and in the Israeli\u2013Palestinian dispute. Most Arab nations still give credence to Egypt playing that role, though its effects are often limited.\nFormer Egyptian Deputy Prime Minister Boutros Boutros-Ghali served as Secretary General of the United Nations from 1991 to 1996.\nA territorial dispute with Sudan over an area known as the Hala'ib Triangle has meant that diplomatic relations between the two remain strained.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral government sites"}
{"id": "9351", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9351", "title": "Economy of Egypt", "text": "The economy of Egypt is a developing, mixed economy, combining private enterprise with centralized economic planning and government regulation. It is the second-largest economy in Africa, and 45th in worldwide ranking as of 2025. Egypt is a major emerging market economy and a member of the African Union, BRICS, and a signatory to the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA).\nSince the 2000s, structural reforms including fiscal and monetary policies, tax adjustments, privatization, and new business legislation have helped Egypt move towards a more market-oriented economy and increased foreign investment. The reforms and policies strengthened macroeconomic annual growth results and helped to address the country's serious unemployment and poverty rates.\nEgypt is undergoing a period of economic recovery after facing serious financial challenges. The economy has been bolstered by a series of reforms under its sustainable development strategy Egypt Vision 2030, including a dramatic currency flotation in 2024 that led to a 38% depreciation of Egyptian pound against the dollar after securing over $50 billion in international financing. These actions, alongside strategic agreements with global partners such as the IMF, World Bank, the European Union, and the Gulf States, have contributed to an improved credit outlook.\nDespite facing significant challenges, especially external shocks such as the global economic impacts of the Ukraine conflict and regional instability, Egypt's economy remains resilient. The government's efforts to engage with international financial markets and stabilize the economy have paved the way for continued growth and further economic integration within the broader African and global markets. The country benefits from political stability; its proximity to Europe, and increased exports.\nHistory.\nAncient Egypt.\nThe economy in ancient Egypt was deeply embedded in its centralized state structure, with the pharaoh exercising theoretical control over all land and resources. Wealth was managed and redistributed through a network of temples and granaries overseen by appointed officials, particularly the vizier, who supervised land surveys, tax collection, and resource allocation. While coinage was not used until the Late Period, Egyptians relied on a barter-based economy, where standardized values, such as sacks of grain and copper deben, were used for wages and trade. Laborers received monthly grain rations, and a fixed price system regulated commerce throughout the kingdom.\nAgriculture formed the foundation of the economy, sustained by the annual flooding of the Nile, which deposited nutrient-rich silt on the fields. The state taxed agricultural production according to the land owned, and farmers were obligated to provide both goods and labor through a corv\u00e9e system. Emmer and barley were the primary staples, used to make bread and beer, while flax provided linen for clothing. Papyrus was harvested for writing material, and vegetables such as leeks, garlic, melons, and pulses were cultivated alongside fruits like grapes and dates. Additional goods included textiles, beer, wine, honey, and leather, many of which were produced in temple workshops. Livestock, such as cattle, poultry, donkeys, and bees, played vital economic and ritual roles, while natural resources like copper, gold, alabaster, and granite were extracted through state-controlled expeditions.\nGreco-Roman period.\nPtolemaic Egypt blended traditional agrarian systems with new fiscal and administrative reforms. The economy produced wheat, flax, wine, and textiles, with state control over beer, oil, and salt. Agriculture, organized around the Nile\u2019s flood cycle, remained central. The early Ptolemies implemented extensive land reclamation where immigrant Greeks and military settlers were granted privileged access to land, while native Egyptians were pushed into subordinate roles with limited protections. Greeks also dominated Hellenic urban centers and viticulture, while the administrative spread of the Greek language displaced Demotic, restricting Egyptian access to legal and bureaucratic institutions.\nThe state developed a complex and unequal tax system on land, produce, labor, and individuals, collected via granaries and banks. Taxation favored Greeks through exemptions and privileges, while Egyptians faced heavier burdens. Temples retained economic significance but lost autonomy under centralized administration. Early Ptolemaic Egypt experienced a notable degree of prosperity, driven by land reclamation, urban expansion, and the growth of fiscal and agricultural systems, though this development was ultimately constrained by institutional rigidity and entrenched social inequality, contributing to later unrest.\nDuring the Greco-Roman and Byzantine periods, Egypt, particularly Upper Egypt, became renowned for its textile production. Workshops across the country produced what came to be known as \"Coptic textiles\", characterized by intricate designs, vivid colors, and techniques such as tapestry weaving. These textiles preserved elements of Pharaonic craftsmanship while integrating Greco-Roman stylistic influences. In the Byzantine period, linen and woolen textiles featuring geometric, vegetal, and figural motifs flourished, forming the artistic and technical foundation for Egypt\u2019s later Islamic textile industry, which adopted and adapted many of these decorative traditions.\nMiddle Ages.\nBeginning in the early Islamic period, Egypt\u2019s countryside was incorporated into a broader administrative and fiscal structure that facilitated the movement of goods and surplus to urban centers. By the 11th and 12th centuries, this integration had developed into a dynamic economic relationship between rural producers and commercial networks. Villages produced grain, flax, indigo, sugar, and linen textiles, much of which was sent to Fustat, the primary urban hub for redistribution. Documents from the Cairo Geniza reveal that rural merchants and producers were involved in long-distance trade linking Egypt to the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean.\nThe textile industry was a foundational component of Egypt\u2019s economy during the Middle Ages, integrating agriculture, manufacturing, and commerce. Flax was widely cultivated, and its transformation into linen textiles constituted a major branch of productive activity. Textile production involved both privately organized enterprise and operations connected to government institutions. In addition to being a leading export commodity, textiles also circulated within the domestic economy as a means of exchange and a store of value. Egypt\u2019s prosperity during this period depended not only on its role in international trade but also on the internal scale and organization of its textile production.\nPatterns of saving and investment during this period reflected a high degree of economic organization. Wealth was accumulated through land, textiles, and monetary holdings, and often reinvested into productive activities such as textile manufacture, agriculture, and trade. The integration of these practices into everyday economic life highlights the structured financial environment that characterized medieval Egypt.\nIn the fifteenth century, Egypt experienced a series of economic and financial crises under the Mamluk regime, marked by inflation, currency instability, and fiscal disorder. Contemporary scholars such as al-Maqrizi and al-Asadi offered detailed assessments of the causes and proposed reforms. Al-Maqrizi identified the debasement of the currency and the overreliance on copper coinage as central problems, advocating a return to the use of gold and silver standards. Al-Asadi presented a broader analysis, attributing the crisis to both monetary mismanagement and deeper structural inequalities, including the concentration of wealth and administrative corruption.\nEarly modern period.\nEgypt\u2019s earliest industrial efforts began under Muhammad Ali (r. 1805\u20131849), whose state-led program focused on military goods, agricultural processing, and textiles. By the 1830s, 30 cotton mills employed around 30,000 workers, but the experiment collapsed due to poor management, fuel shortages, and reliance on forced corv\u00e9e labor. Though short-lived, this phase weakened traditional artisan guilds and introduced wage labor. A later wave under Isma'il Pasha (r. 1863\u20131879), sparked by the American Civil War cotton boom, saw attempts at diversification with sugar refineries and textile plants. These too struggled against European competition, but they helped expand Egypt\u2019s wage labor force and laid foundations for a modern working class.\nBetween 1869 and 1876, Ismail launched British-led military campaigns against Sudanese slave raiders, as part of broader efforts to reassert Egyptian authority in Sudan. The process culminated in the signing of the Anglo-Egyptian Slave Trade Convention in 1877, which formally ended the practice of slavery and slave trade in Egypt. Ismail\u2019s increasing political subordination to Britain, particularly after Egypt's default on its international debt in 1876, likely facilitated the agreement.\nBy the late 19th century, a clearer working class began to emerge. This was shaped by Egypt\u2019s integration into the global capitalist economy under foreign control, especially following the British occupation in 1882. European capital, attracted to Egypt\u2019s export sector, invested heavily in transport and utilities, prompting the development of urban infrastructure but neglecting broader industrialization. Employment in these sectors, especially railways, ports, and public utilities, formed the nucleus of the new working class.\nLegal reforms under Muhammad Ali and his successors enabled land privatization, displacing a third of the peasantry by the late 19th century. Many had migrated to cities, joining an expanding pool of wage laborers. Meanwhile, the rise of foreign capital eroded Egypt\u2019s artisan guilds, particularly after the 1890 Professional Permits Duty. Guilds fractured, with guild heads becoming labor contractors and members reduced to common laborers, leading to tensions culminating in early labor unrest such as the 1882 Port Said coal loaders' strike.\nBy the early 20th century, guild-based trades had collapsed, leading to a notable increase in wage labor. Foreign skilled workers, mainly Greeks, Armenians, and Italians, introduced European labor ideologies and led early strikes in sectors like cigarettes, tailoring, and printing. However, wage disparities and employer manipulation often hindered unity with Egyptian workers. Strikes in the tram and railway sectors fostered unionization and greater class awareness, especially during the 1908 and 1911 Cairo tram strikes, which drew harsh repression and led to martial law in 1914.\nDespite several waves of industrial experimentation, early attempts at industrialization struggled due to factors like tariff restrictions imposed by Britain through the 1838 commercial treaty. In the beginning of the 20th century, little industrial development occurred, and Egypt's land-owning elite invested mainly in land rather than industry. Foreign competition stunted domestic ventures, with only a few enterprises, such as sugar and cotton processing, surviving under foreign ownership. In the following years, over one million Egyptians would be conscripted to the Egyptian Labour Corps and Egyptian Camel Transport Corps to support British efforts in World War I, often through coercion. Simultaneously, wartime shortages fostered growth in domestic industries such as textiles and food processing, prompting the establishment of the Commission of Commerce and Industry in 1916. \nBy the 1920s, Egypt\u2019s urban labor force had grown significantly, supported by a limited but increasing domestic industrialization under a wave of economic nationalism pioneered in large part by Talaat Harb, an Egyptian financier. In 1920, Harb founded Banque Misr, the country\u2019s first national bank funded entirely with Egyptian capital, with an initial start-up capital of EGP 80,000 (approximately USD 5,000). Harb envisioned a financial institution that would channel national savings into industrial and economic development. His efforts marked a turning point in Egypt\u2019s economic history, enabling Egyptians to exert greater control over their country\u2019s financial resources and laying the foundation for national industrialization.\nBeyond banking, Harb spearheaded the establishment of multiple industrial and service ventures across textiles, insurance, shipping, real estate, and media. He founded Studio Misr in 1935, which became Egypt\u2019s leading film production hub for over three decades, as well as EgyptAir in 1932, the first airline in the Middle East and the seventh in the world. Through Banque Misr, he also launched companies in cotton ginning, paper manufacturing, and printing, helping to create a vertically integrated national economy. These initiatives were critical in asserting Egypt\u2019s economic independence and identity during and after the colonial period.\nThe Great Depression helped catalyze industrialization, shifting Egypt toward import-substitution industries. In 1930, the expiration of commercial treaties allowed Egypt to control its tariff policies, fostering local industry. On February 16, 1930, Egypt enacted tariff reforms aimed at protecting local industries. The government imposed high duties on imports and reduced taxes on raw materials, encouraging local manufacturing. The changes led to a decline in imports of finished goods and an increase in raw materials and machinery by 1938.\nWorld War II provided a boost to industrialization, with increased demand from Allied forces and local consumers. Many industries diversified, while new enterprises emerged. The war also trained workers, helping to establish a foundation for local industries that expanded in the post-war period. By 1947, the government enacted laws and established an industrial bank to support industrial growth.\nEarly Republican period.\nIn July 1952, the Egyptian monarchy was overthrown in a coup led by the Free Officers movement, a group of army officers founded by Gamal Abdel Nasser and formally headed by General Muhammad Naguib. The officers held King Farouk responsible for Egypt\u2019s military defeat in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War and the country's persistent socioeconomic problems, including widespread poverty, illiteracy, and underdevelopment. These conditions were underscored by the stagnation of per capita gross national product (GNP), which averaged E\u00a3 in 1954 prices between the end of World War I and the 1952 Revolution. \nUnder Gamal Abdel Nasser, Egypt's economy saw substantial growth driven by agrarian reforms, import substitution, key nationalisation efforts like the Suez Canal Company, and major infrastructure projects, including the Helwan steel works and the Aswan High Dam. This period marked an unprecedented rise in living standards, offering Egyptians access to housing, education, healthcare, and employment.\nThe land reforms of 1952 aimed to weaken the old landowning class and promote industrialization, with Nasser\u2019s government supporting urban workers through labor reforms. The nationalization of key industries occurred between 1957 and 1961, alongside increased public sector control. While the initial economic results were positive, a crisis emerged by the mid-1960s due to the unsustainable combination of rising consumption and investment.\nBy necessity if not by design, the revolutionary regime gave considerably greater priority to economic development than did the monarchy, and the economy has been a central government concern since then. While the economy grew steadily, it sometimes exhibited sharp fluctuations. Analysis of economic growth is further complicated by the difficulty in obtaining reliable statistics. Growth figures are often disputed, and economists contend that growth estimates may be grossly inaccurate because of the informal economy and workers' remittances, which may contribute as much as one-fourth of GNP. According to one estimate, the gross domestic product (GDP), at 1965 constant prices, grew at an annual compound rate of about 4.2 percent between 1955 and 1975. This was about 1.7 times larger than the annual population growth rate of 2.5 percent in the same period. The period between 1967 and 1974, the final years of Gamal Abdul Nasser's presidency and the early part of Anwar Sadat's, however, were lean years, with growth rates of only about 3.3 percent. The slowdown was caused by many factors, including agricultural and industrial stagnation and the costs of the 1967 war. Investments, which were a crucial factor for the preceding growth, also nose-dived and recovered only in 1975 after the dramatic 1973 increase in oil prices.\nAnwar Sadat\u2019s Infitah, or \"Open Door Policy\", introduced in 1974, marked a stark departure from Nasser's approach, shifting Egypt toward closer ties with the Western capitalist market. This policy led to the emergence of a new ruling coalition, consisting of technocrats, former landowners, and private-sector entrepreneurs, further solidifying the role of market forces in Egypt's economy. The changes introduced under Sadat's era effectively marked a shift towards capitalist development, contrary to the socialist trajectory some had hoped for following Nasser\u2019s reforms.\nLike most countries in the Middle East, Egypt partook of the oil boom and suffered the subsequent slump. Available figures suggest that between 1975 and 1980 the GDP (at 1980 prices) grew at an annual rate of more than 11 percent. This impressive achievement resulted, not from the contribution of manufacturing or agriculture, but from oil exports, remittances, foreign aid, and grants. From the mid-1980s, GDP growth slowed as a result of the 1985-86 crash in oil prices. In the two succeeding years, the GDP grew at no more than an annual rate of 2.9 percent. Of concern for the future was the decline of the fixed investment ratio from around 30 percent during most of the 1975-85 decade to 22 percent in 1987.\nReform era.\nEgypt began implementing structural adjustment reforms in the early 1990s to address a worsening macroeconomic situation marked by low growth, double-digit inflation, unsustainable fiscal and current account deficits, and heavy reliance on import restrictions to protect inefficient, state-led industries. These reforms aimed to reduce the country\u2019s rentier-state characteristics by shifting economic control from the public to the private sector.\nA major shift occurred in 2004 with the appointment of Ahmed Nazif as prime minister. His cabinet introduced a new round of reforms, including the restructuring of the banking sector, increasing the private sector share, and widespread privatization of state-owned enterprises. Efforts to reduce the public debt included cutting subsidies and shrinking the government workforce.\nIn this period Egypt experienced fluctuating economic growth accompanied by shifting patterns of poverty, inequality, and middle-class formation. The government undertook major policy reforms, with significant changes in income distribution, and debates over whether economic growth was inclusive or \"pro-poor\".\nDespite economic growth, poverty persisted. The proportion of Egyptians living under the national poverty line declined from 24.2% in 1991 to a low of 16.7% in 2000, before rising again to 22% in 2008. Similarly, the share of the population living on less than $2 per day (PPP) fell from 28% in 1990 to 15% by 2008. Absolute extreme poverty, defined as living on less than $1.25 per day, remained relatively low at around 2% from 2000 onward.\nThe Gini index, a measure of income inequality, remained moderate, fluctuating between 30 and 33.8 over the period. The Palma ratio, which captures the income share of the richest 10% compared to the poorest 40%, declined slightly, indicating marginal improvement in distribution.\nThe middle class, however, exhibited a more complex trajectory. Using absolute income thresholds, the middle class appeared to constitute over 80% of the population by 2008. Yet, when defined using relative or median-based thresholds, its size appeared far smaller, approximately 40% by some estimates, and even declined during periods of high economic growth. This paradox reflected the vulnerability of those just above the poverty line, often labeled as \u201cnew strugglers\u201d, who were susceptible to falling back into poverty.\nTo stimulate investment and trade, the corporate tax rate was lowered from 40 to 20 percent, and tax collection mechanisms were strengthened. Tariff barriers were drastically reduced, and Egypt entered into preferential trade agreements with the United States, the European Union, several Arab and African neighbors, as well as neighboring states. These changes contributed to an improved business climate and growing investor confidence. Between 2003 and 2008, exports of goods and services tripled, tourism surged by over 60 percent, and foreign direct investment rose by 50 percent in 2007 alone. As a result, Egypt\u2019s external debt declined to less than 20 percent of GDP by 2009.\nAlthough the 2000s were marked by robust macroeconomic growth, the benefits were not evenly distributed. Consumption gains were concentrated among the top decile, while lower quintiles saw marginal improvements. Consequently, while poverty indicators improved, public dissatisfaction remained widespread, as large segments of the population perceived limited social mobility or security. The disconnect between growth and equitable distribution contributed to mounting discontent in the years leading to the 2011 revolution.\n2008 financial crisis.\nThe 2008 financial crisis followed closely by the global food crisis presented Egypt with significant economic challenges, but it also prompted more integrated policy reforms. Policymakers responded quickly to mitigate the impacts of these shocks, notably adjusting monetary and fiscal policies as well as regulatory frameworks. A moderate Financial crisis took hold, partly fueled by fear of widespread panic selling, leading to declines in stock and bond markets and increases in nominal interest rates.\nEgypt\u2019s population, concentrated within a narrow strip along the Nile River, primarily worked in the services, agriculture, and industrial sectors, with about one-third directly involved in farming. The unemployment rate increased from 10.3% in FY2004 to 11.2% in 2005, exacerbated by the privatization efforts that led to job losses in public enterprises. Private sector employment grew at a faster pace than the public sector.\nIn response to rising food prices, the Egyptian government, led by President Mubarak, implemented a pay rise of up to 30% for government and public sector workers in 2008. This was part of an effort to strengthen food security for low-income citizens and to balance wages with prices. The decision to double the originally proposed 15%-20% pay rise came as widespread discontent over inflation could lead to social unrest.\nThe consumer price index (CPI) inflation rate reached 15.8% in March 2008, with food price inflation much higher at 23.7%. These high inflation figures particularly impacted Egypt's poor and low-income citizens, who spent a large portion of their income on food. By April 2008, food inflation reached 22%, making it clear that inflation as measured by the headline CPI did not capture the struggles of the majority of the population, who were enrolled in food ration programs.\nAmid these economic pressures, in April 2009, Egypt was concerned about the return of 500,000 Egyptian laborers from Gulf states, which would have further complicated its economic recovery efforts.\nPost-revolution.\nFollowing the 2011 revolution, Egypt's economy plunged into a severe downturn, facing significant challenges in restoring growth and investor confidence. Foreign exchange reserves fell from US$36 billion in December 2010 to just US$16.3 billion by January 2012. Concerns over social unrest and financial instability led to repeated downgrades by credit rating agencies. In 2016, Egypt floated its currency and initiated a reform program with a US$12 billion IMF loan to restore macroeconomic stability. The sharp devaluation that followed improved Egypt's external balance but also led to inflationary pressures.\nDespite claims by the Central Bank of Egypt that the currency remained free-floating, reports indicated that by 2018 the central bank was actively using state-owned banks to manage the pound\u2019s value, effectively returning to a controlled exchange rate. Inflation had eased by May 2019, indicating signs of economic stabilization. \nDespite efforts, Egypt\u2019s economy was hit by the global COVID-19 crisis, with real growth declining from 5.6% in FY2018/19 to 3.6% in FY2019/20, reflecting a 1.7% contraction during the April\u2013June period of 2020. The pandemic severely impacted the country's primary sources of foreign currency, particularly tourism and the oil and gas industry. Although both sectors began recovering in 2022, they struggled to return to pre-pandemic revenue levels by 2023 when the outbreak of war in Ukraine further strained Egypt's economic position, as Russian and Ukrainian tourists, who form a substantial portion of Egypt\u2019s visitor base, were largely absent. Additionally, the conflict led to sharp increases in global commodity prices, particularly wheat, which Egypt imports in large quantities. These factors contributed to a broader economic crisis characterized by a resurgence of the black market due to a shortage of U.S. dollars and other hard currencies.\nIn 2024, Egypt addressed its latest currency crisis by floating the pound once again, abandoning both implicit and tacit measures to support the currency. This led to a depreciation of nearly 40% and a was followed by a record 600-basis-point interest rate hike. These measures facilitated an expanded $8 billion IMF loan, part of a broader $20 billion support package from European Union, the World Bank, Japan and the UK. The currency stabilized and investor confidence improved, with Moody\u2019s upgrading Egypt\u2019s credit outlook and local stocks rallying. A pivotal element in this recovery was Egypt\u2019s $35 billion investment deal with the UAE for the development of Ras El Hekma, the largest foreign investment in the country\u2019s history. Egypt also made fiscal adjustments, agreeing with the IMF to raise the tax-to-revenue ratio and accelerate the privatization of state-owned companies to strengthen public finances. Both the IMF and the World Bank predicted 3.8% growth in the Egyptian economy in the fiscal year 2024/2025.\nData.\nThe following tables shows the main economic indicators in 1986\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027).\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nCapital flows.\nInternational trade.\nEgypt\u2019s international trade has long been a central pillar of its economy, constituting 40% of its GDP according to the World Bank. Over the years, the country has pursued greater economic integration through a series of free trade agreements, including those with the EU-Egypt Association Agreement and the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). The association agreement with the EU, in force since 2004, established a free-trade area by eliminating tariffs on industrial goods and facilitating agricultural trade. A subsequent agreement in 2010 expanded this arrangement to processed agricultural and fisheries products. The gradual reduction of customs duties has significantly strengthened economic ties, with bilateral trade between the EU and Egypt more than doubling from \u20ac11.8 billion in 2004 to \u20ac27.9 billion in 2017. \nThe Pan-Arab Free Trade Area (PAFTA), signed by 17 Arab League members in 1981 and implemented in 1997, aims to enhance trade among Arab states by eliminating non-tariff barriers and gradually reducing tariffs. Originally planned to achieve full tariff removal by 2007, an Arab League summit in 2002 accelerated this timeline, establishing a zero-tariff trade zone by 2005 while granting preferential treatment to the least developed member states.\nEgypt's participation in the AfCFTA is expected to enhance its trade with African markets, expanding beyond its traditional partners in Europe and the Middle East. As part of the Guided Trade Initiative (GTI), Egypt is working to accelerate integration, with sectors such as renewable energy, pharmaceuticals, and textiles identified as potential areas of growth. While logistical challenges exist, Egypt\u2019s established industrial base and supply chain networks may support greater regional trade and economic cooperation.\nEgypt also benefits from Qualified Industrial Zones (QIZs), which grant tariff-free access to U.S. markets for exports meeting predefined rules of origin. These zones offer cost advantages, exemption from non-tariff barriers, and access to Egypt\u2019s large labor pool, attracting both local and foreign investors. Initially established in Alexandria, the Suez Canal, Greater Cairo, and the Central Delta, the program has since expanded to Minya and Beni Suef.\nPetroleum and natural gas have historically dominated both exports and imports, reflecting the country\u2019s role as a regional energy hub. In addition to hydrocarbons, Egypt exports a diverse range of goods, including textiles, fertilizers, plastics, and agricultural products.\nImports, meanwhile, are characterized by a high demand for intermediate and investment goods, reflecting the needs of the country\u2019s industrial and infrastructure sectors. Essential commodities such as iron, steel, plastics, wheat, and pharmaceuticals also constitute a substantial share of inbound trade.\nEgypt's exports have seen significant growth in the past years, reaching $51.1 billion in 2023. The Egyptian government has set a target to increase exports to $145 billion by 2030. A new export support program, expected to launch in early 2026, will focus on boosting competitiveness by enhancing the value of Egyptian products and offering incentives for small companies and start-ups. This system, alongside the settlement of overdue dues, aims to address challenges faced by exporters, ensuring fair support distribution and fostering investment\nRemittances.\nRemittances from Egyptians working abroad constitute a key source of hard currency for the Egyptian economy. The Minister of Emigration and Expatriate Affairs reported that the number of Egyptians living abroad has increased more than fivefold since 2013, rising from 2.7 million in 2013 to 14 million in 2023 and according to the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE), remittances reached $23.7 billion between January and October 2024, reflecting a 45.3% increase from $16.3 billion during the same period in 2023.\nRemittances recorded a decline during 2022/2023, when inflows dropped to $22.1 billion from a peak of $31.9 billion in 2021/2022, figures rebounded in 2024. This was attributed to global disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, exchange rate volatility, and geopolitical factors, including the Russian-Ukrainian war. The March 2024 economic measures, particularly the liberalization of exchange rates and increased interest rates on Egyptian pound and dollar-denominated savings instruments, played a key role in restoring remittance inflows to the formal banking system.\nAs a result of this recovery, Egypt has moved from sixth to fifth place globally among the top remittance-receiving countries, ranking behind India, Mexico, China, and the Philippines. The sustained rise in remittances underscores their continued importance to Egypt\u2019s economy and highlights the impact of recent economic policies on foreign currency inflows.\nThe Egyptian government considers remittances from Egyptians abroad vital to the economy and aims to sustain their growth as part of its broader economic strategy. To that end, the government has introduced various measures to attract remittances, including offering dollar savings certificates with some of the highest interest rates globally, according to the Minister of Emigration and Expatriate Affairs. These efforts aim to bolster foreign currency inflows and integrate remittances into the formal banking system.\nAdditional incentives include customs exemptions for cars imported for personal use, requiring a foreign currency deposit refundable in Egyptian pounds after five years at the prevailing exchange rate. The government has also introduced a final exemption from compulsory conscription for draft evaders or male students abroad over the age of 18, available for a fee of $5,000 or \u20ac5,000. Furthermore, the state has promoted real estate sales in foreign currency, offering land and property to Egyptians abroad and foreign investors.\nAccording to a study by the International Organization for Migration, most remittance-receiving households use the funds for daily expenses, but 20% portion is invested in real estate, small businesses, and other economic activities.\nSuez Canal.\nThe Suez Canal, a vital maritime passageway linking the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, has played a crucial role in global trade since its completion in 1869. Constructed under the direction of Ferdinand de Lesseps, the canal provided a direct shipping route between Europe and Asia, significantly reducing travel time by bypassing the lengthy voyage around the Cape of Good Hope. Over the decades, the canal has undergone multiple expansions to accommodate the growing volume of global maritime trade. In 2021, more than 20,600 vessels passed through the canal, with an average of 56 ships per day. To enhance its capacity, the Egyptian government launched an expansion project in 2014, widening key sections of the canal and nearly doubling its capacity from 49 to 97 ships per day.\nThe New Suez Canal, inaugurated in 2015, introduced a parallel shipping lane and deepened sections of the original canal to accommodate larger vessels. The expansion aimed to reduce transit times from 18 to 11 hours and significantly cut waiting periods for ships. The project, costing about $8 billion, was financed exclusively through domestic investment, with Egyptians contributing via bank certificates of deposit yielding 12%, later raised to 15.5%. The Armed Forces Engineering Authority played a major role in the excavation and construction of the expansion, which was completed in just one year.\nBeyond its role as a maritime corridor, the Suez Canal has become an economic hub, with the establishment of the Suez Canal Economic Zone (SCZONE). Encompassing 461 km\u00b2 across Port Said, Ismailia, and Suez, the SCZONE offers zero customs rates to attract foreign investment. Major infrastructure projects within the zone focus on the development of East Port Said and Ain Sokhna, with planned expansions to West Port Said, El-Adabiya, Arish, and El Tor. This initiative is part of a broader effort to transform the canal into a global trade and logistics center, with Egypt aiming to attract $30 billion in investment within five years. The canal remains a critical global trade route, setting a record annual revenue of $9.4 billion in the fiscal year ending June 2023.\nExchange rate policies.\nIn the 19th century, Egypt's currency system was based on the piastre (qirsh), subdivided into 40 para. Although formally equal to its Ottoman counterpart after the 1840 Turkish-Egyptian treaty, the Egyptian piastre was typically valued higher, leading to disparities in exchange, such as 10 Egyptian piastres equaling 11 Turkish piastres around the mid-19th century. Egypt adopted a bimetallic standard in 1834, basing its system on the Maria Theresa thaler, known as \"abu taqa\" in Egypt, which was valued at 20 piastres. The 1830s saw the introduction of new gold and silver coins, yet foreign coins like the British sovereign continued to circulate at unofficial rates.\nThe 1885 currency reform led to the adoption of the gold standard, introducing the Egyptian pound (jeneih) at E\u00a31 = 7.4375 grams of fine gold. Pegged to the British gold sovereign, it maintained an exchange value of 97.5 piastres per pound sterling, replacing the Egyptian piastre (qirsh) as the primary currency unit. This reform standardized foreign exchange rates by law and adjusted the Maria Theresa thaler to 21 piastres, while 20 piastres equaled 5 French francs.\nWith the outbreak of World War I, Egypt abandoned the gold standard and pegged its currency to the British pound at a fixed rate, which remained until 1962 when it shifted to the U.S. dollar. In 1969, Egypt adopted a multiple exchange rate system to address two key challenges. It helped mitigate the negative effects of an overvalued currency on external competitiveness while also managing the country's heavy reliance on workers\u2019 remittances.\nBy the 1980s, external shocks, including declining oil prices and rising debt, exposed the vulnerabilities of Egypt's economy. The government attempted exchange rate liberalization in 1987, reducing multiple exchange rates from five to three, implementing a gradual devaluation, and establishing a free exchange market. However, these measures proved insufficient due to Egypt's continued dependence on external revenues from oil, the Suez Canal, and remittances, and by the early 1990s, Egypt faced mounting fiscal deficits, inflation, and a balance of payments crisis. \nIn response, the Economic Reform and Structural Adjustment Program was launched in 1991, backed by the IMF and World Bank. This program sought to unify exchange rates, liberalize trade, and reduce state intervention. The Egyptian pound was pegged to the U.S. dollar, supported by tight fiscal policies and high-interest rates. While this approach stabilized inflation and attracted capital inflows, it led to a gradual overvaluation of the currency, reducing competitiveness and straining foreign exchange reserves.\nThe late 1990s and early 2000s saw growing pressure on the fixed exchange rate system due to external shocks, including the 1997 Asian financial crisis and declining oil prices. By 2003, Egypt adopted a managed float, allowing greater currency flexibility while still maintaining central bank interventions. However, persistent trade imbalances and political instability following the 2011 revolution led to renewed currency pressures. A foreign exchange black market sprung up, and by 2016, Egypt was forced to implement a full float of the pound under an IMF-backed reform program. The sharp devaluation that followed improved Egypt's external balance but also led to inflationary pressures.\nBy 2018, despite official claims of a free float, the Central Bank of Egypt was reportedly intervening through state-owned banks to manage the pound\u2019s value. The COVID-19 pandemic and later the Russia-Ukraine war further weakened Egypt\u2019s external position, disrupting tourism, raising commodity prices, and triggering a dollar shortage that revived the black market.\nIn 2024, the government floated the pound again, leading to a 40% depreciation and a 600-basis-point interest rate hike. This unlocked an $8 billion IMF loan within a $20 billion international support package and helped stabilize the currency. Recovery was further supported by a $35 billion investment deal with the UAE to develop Ras El Hekma, the largest foreign investment in Egypt\u2019s history.\nNatural resources.\nArable land.\nPractically all Egyptian agriculture takes place in some of fertile soil in the Nile Valley and Delta, with the rest of the country being primarily desert. Egypt\u2019s generally favorable climate allows for the cultivation of multiple crops annually, with most fields producing two crops per year and some vegetable areas reaching a cropping index of 300 percent.\nSince 2009, the growing issue of desertification has emerged as a significant challenge. To address this, as well as its limited arable land and growing population, Egypt has long pursued land reclamation, with efforts dating back to the 1930s. Since then, 2.6 million feddan have been reclaimed, increasing agricultural land by 44%. The latest initiative aims to reclaim 4.5 million feddan by 2027, nearly half of Egypt\u2019s existing cultivated land. The largest of these projects, the New Delta Project, spans 2.2 million feddan, the project accounts for about 25% of the country\u2019s historically reclaimed agricultural lands. The Future of Egypt, the first phase of this initiative, covers 1 million feddan and includes an industrial zone for agricultural industries.\nTo provide water for the project, Egypt constructed the New Delta Wastewater Treatment Plant, the largest of its kind globally, as a key component of the country\u2019s strategy to expand agricultural land and enhance water security. With a daily capacity of 7.5 million m\u00b3, the plant supports irrigation efforts and mitigates pollution in Lake Mariout and the Mediterranean Sea.\nAdditionally, the Toshka Project, initiated in the 1990s, was revived under President El-Sisi\u2019s administration. This initiative aims to reclaim 1.5 million feddan in the Western Desert using water from Lake Nasser, transported via the Sheikh Zayed Canal.\nAcquisition and ownership of desert land in Egypt is governed by the Egyptian Desert Land Law (Law No. 143 of\n1981). It defines desert land as the land two kilometers outside the border of the city.\nIn July 2025, funding from Italy and the EU to help smallholding farmers in Egypt was agreed, totalling \u20ac24 million.\nWater resources.\n\"Egypt\", wrote the Greek historian Herodotus 25 centuries ago, \"is the gift of the Nile\". Due to the country's arid climate and minimal rainfall, the vast majority of Egypt\u2019s population and agricultural activity is concentrated along the Nile Valley and Nile Delta. The Nile Valley in Egypt is a narrow, elongated corridor of fertile land that cuts through an otherwise arid and hyper-arid landscape. Bordered by vast desert plateaus to the east and west, the valley forms a ribbon of greenery stretching from the Sudanese border in the south to the Nile Delta in the north.\nTo manage its limited water resources, Egypt constructed the Aswan High Dam, completed in 1970, which created Lake Nasser, one of the world\u2019s largest artificial reservoirs with a total storage capacity of 130 billion m\u00b3. The dam plays a critical role in regulating Nile flows, enabling year-round irrigation, and mitigating flood and drought cycles. With a fixed annual release of 55.5 billion m\u00b3 (1.96\u00a0trillion cu ft), as stipulated by the 1959 Nile Waters Agreement between Egypt and Sudan, it constitutes 97 percent of the country's renewable water resources.\nFacing increasing water scarcity and rising demand, Egypt has adopted treated wastewater reuse as a strategic component of its national water management policy. The volume of wastewater produced in Egypt is approximately 16.4 billion m\u00b3 annually, comprising 4.4 billion m\u00b3 of municipal sewage and 12 billion m\u00b3 of agricultural drainage water. As of recent estimates, Egypt operates over 400 wastewater treatment plants employing a range of technologies including activated sludge, oxidation ponds, up-flow anaerobic sludge blankets, and membrane bioreactors. Treated wastewater is primarily reused for agricultural irrigation.\nRainfall in Egypt is minimal, with significant precipitation occurring only along the north coast, where annual averages range between 50 and 250 millimetres. Rainfall increases eastward, reaching about 150 mm in Arish and 250 mm in Rafah. Based on average winter precipitation, the volume of rainwater falling over the northern regions of Egypt, which cover an area of approximately 200,000 km\u00b2, is estimated at 5 to 10 billion m\u00b3 per year. Of this, about 1.5 billion m\u00b3 contributes to surface runoff, while most of the remainder evaporates or percolates into the groundwater system. In the Sinai Peninsula, surface runoff from rainfall amounts to approximately 131.67 million m\u00b3 per year, constituting 5.25% of total rainfall there. Only 200\u2013300 million m\u00b3 are effectively harvested in regions such as Sinai, the north coast, and the Red Sea mountains.\nDesalination.\nDesalination plays a growing role in Egypt's water strategy, particularly in coastal areas lacking conventional freshwater sources. Although seawater contains high salinity levels of up to 35,000 ppm, modern desalination technologies can produce high-quality drinking water. However, the process remains costly, with expenses influenced by the type of energy, technology used, and project scale. Egypt currently operates 90 desalination plants with a combined capacity of 1.3 billion m\u00b3 annually, built at a cost of $0.4 billion. Of these, 76 are fully operational, producing 850,000 m\u00b3 per day.\nEgypt has launched an ambitious long-term desalination strategy aimed at addressing chronic water scarcity by significantly expanding its desalination capacity. Under this national plan, the country seeks to quadruple its seawater desalination output through the construction of 21 new plants. These proposed facilities will collectively add 3.3 million m\u00b3 per day, alleviating pressure on the Nile. In a subsequent phase, Egypt plans to boost total desalination capacity by an additional 8.8 million m\u00b3 per day, with a projected investment of $8 billion.\nGroundwater.\nEgypt's groundwater resources consist of both renewable and non-renewable aquifers. Renewable groundwater is primarily drawn from two shallow reservoirs associated with the Nile River system: the Nile Valley aquifer, with reserves estimated at 200 billion m\u00b3, and the Delta aquifer, with reserves of about 400 billion m\u00b3. As of 2017, an estimated 7.2 billion m\u00b3 of groundwater was extracted annually, with the Delta aquifer accounting for approximately 85 percent of this total. This extraction rate remains below the estimated safe limit of 7.5 billion m\u00b3 per year, according to the Groundwater Research Institute. Groundwater quality in these regions is generally high, with salinity levels ranging from 300 to 800 parts per million in the southern Delta. \nNon-renewable groundwater sources are located in the deeper aquifer systems of the Eastern and Western Desert and the Sinai Peninsula. The most significant among them is the Nubian Sandstone Aquifer System, the world's largest known fossil water aquifer system. This vast underground reservoir, located beneath the eastern end of the Sahara desert, extends across the political boundaries of four northeastern African countries. The system spans approximately 2.2 million km\u00b2, with about 826,000 km\u00b2 located in Egypt, nearly 40% of the total area and the largest share among the four countries, covering over 80% of the country's land surface. Estimates of its total freshwater volume are as high as 500,000 billion m\u00b3. Due to the depth of the aquifer and associated extraction costs, current withdrawals in Egypt are limited to approximately 0.6 billion m\u00b3 annually, primarily for irrigation in land reclamation projects. Sustainable extraction is projected to increase to 2.5\u20133 billion m\u00b3 per year in the future, contingent on cost-effective pumping technologies.\nMineral and energy resources.\nEgypt possesses substantial mineral wealth, spanning both petroleum and non-petroleum resources. The country has deposits of gold, copper, iron ore, phosphate, uranium, tantalum, manganese, chromium, coal, zinc, lead, tin, and black sand minerals such as ilmenite, zircon, rutile, and magnetite It also produces abundant industrial materials like granite, marble, limestone, white sand, kaolin, and feldspar. These resources are primarily located in the Eastern Desert, Western Desert, Sinai Peninsula, and Alaqa Valley.\nThe Eastern Desert hosts over 1,000 ancient mining sites, including Egypt\u2019s largest gold mine, Sukari, which began production in 2009 and has since produced over 5 million ounces of gold. Egypt's gold exports reached $1.63 billion in 2022. The country\u2019s known reserves include 3.1 billion metric tons of iron ore near Aswan, 48 million tons of tantalite in South Sinai, and 16 million tons of coal in North Sinai. Uranium is found in the Eastern Desert and Sinai, with estimated reserves of 1,900 metric tons. Manganese deposits at Um Bogma are estimated at 1.7 million tons, and copper reserves are about 1.6 million tons. The country also holds an estimated 700,000 tons of tin.\nPetroleum remains a cornerstone of Egypt's economy, accounting for approximately 25% of GDP. As of late 2023, Egypt had proven oil reserves of 3.1 billion barrels, with production around 559,000 barrels per day, and natural gas reserves of 2.1 trillion cubic meters, producing 175 million cubic meters per day.\nRecent legislative reforms, such as the Mineral Resources Law No. 198 of 2014 and Executive Regulations No. 108 of 2020, have modernized the investment climate. These laws eliminated profit-sharing requirements, simplified licensing, and introduced tax incentives. Egypt aims to increase mining\u2019s contribution to GDP from 0.5% in 2021 to 5% by 2040, raising annual sector exports from $1.6 billion in 2020 to $10 billion. The government has set a target of $1 billion in annual mining investments by 2030.\nMain economic sectors.\nAgricultural sector.\nIrrigation.\nIrrigation plays a major role in Egypt, the very livelihood of which depends upon a single river, the Nile. The most ambitious of all irrigation projects was the Aswan High Dam, completed in 1971. A report from the National Council for Production and Economic Affairs in March 1975 reflected the dam's success in regulating floodwaters and providing a reliable water supply. However, it was noted that water consumption had exceeded expectations, and measures to control this were being considered. Some fertile land was lost due to the cessation of the flow of Nile silt, and increasing salinity presented challenges. Additionally, a period of drought in the Ethiopia highlands, the source of the Nile's waters, caused the level of Lake Nasser, the dam's reservoir, to reach its lowest point in 1987.\nIn the 1970s, despite considerable investments in land reclamation, agriculture gradually lost its place as the primary sector of the economy. Agricultural exports, which accounted for 87% of Egypt\u2019s merchandise export value in 1960, had declined to 35% by 1974 and 11% by 2001. As of the 2020s, agriculture accounts for approximately 10% of Egypt\u2019s GDP and provides employment for 18% of the labor force.\nIn 2010 Egypt's fertile area totaled about , about one-quarter of which has been reclaimed from the desert after the construction of the Aswan High Dam. The government aims to increase this number to 4.8\u00a0million hectares by 2030 through additional land reclamation. Even though only 3 percent of the land is arable, it is extremely productive and can be cropped two or even three times annually. However, the reclaimed lands only add 7 percent to the total value of agricultural production. Surface irrigation is forbidden by law in reclaimed lands and is only used in the Nile Valley and the Delta, the use of pressurized irrigation and localized irrigation is compulsory in other parts of the country. Most land is cropped at least twice a year, but agricultural productivity is limited by salinity which in 2011 affected 25% of irrigated agriculture to varying degrees. This is mainly caused by insufficient drainage as well as seawater intrusion in aquifers as a result of over-extraction of groundwater, the latter primarily affects the Nile Delta. Thanks to the installation of drainage systems a reduction in salinized areas from about 1.2\u00a0million hectares in 1972 to 900 000 hectares in 2010 was achieved.\nCrops.\nAccording to 2022 statistics from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Egypt is the world's largest producer of dates and artichokes; the second largest producer of figs and fava beans; the third largest producer of onions, eggplants, and rabbit meat; the fourth largest producer of strawberries, garlic, buffalo and goose meat as well as the fifth largest producer of buffalo milk, tomatoes and watermelon.\nThe country has achieved self-sufficiency in several key agricultural products, including vegetables, fruits, poultry, dairy, eggs, and rice, while nearing full self-sufficiency in sugar and fish, with production reaching approximately 90% of demand. Self-sufficiency ratios are lower for red meat (60%), cereals (58%), vegetable oils (26%), and oil crops (35%). Consequently, Egypt relies on imports for roughly 45% of its domestic food demand.\nCotton has long been a primary exported cash crop, but it is no longer vital as an export. Egypt is a substantial producer of wheat, maize, sugarcane, fruit and vegetables, fodder, and rice; but also needs to import significant quantities of wheat and maize, primarily from Ukraine and Russia, despite yield increases since 1970. This is largely due to high domestic demand, driven by subsidies and a culinary preference for bread, alongside Egypt\u2019s limited arable land and a focus on cultivating high-value export crops such as vegetables. Egypt exports rice but this can vary periodically based on government regulations, which are influenced by water and land use considerations.\nLand is worked intensively and yields are high. Increasingly, modern techniques are applied to producing fruits, vegetables and flowers, in addition to cotton, for export. Further improvement is possible. The most common traditional farms occupy each, typically in a canal-irrigated area along the banks of the Nile. Many small farmers also own cows, water buffalos, and chickens. Between 1953 and 1971, some farms were collectivised, especially in Upper Egypt and parts of the Nile Delta.\nCacti, particularly cactus pears, are widely cultivated across Egypt, including Sinai, and extend into neighboring countries. Introduced during the Columbian Exchange, they have become a significant crop in the region.\nThe government exercises a strong degree of control over agriculture, usually through financial incentives and export bans, not only to ensure the best use of irrigation water but also to confine the planting of water intensive crops like cotton in favor of food grains. However, the government's ability to achieve this objective is limited by crop rotational constraints.\nLand ownership.\nThe agrarian reform law of 1952 provided that no one might hold more than 200 feddans, that is, (1 Egyptian feddan=0.42 hectares=1.038 acres), for farming, and that each landholder must either farm the land himself or rent it under specified conditions. Up to 100 additional feddans might be held if the owner had children, and additional land had to be sold to the government. In 1961, the upper limit of landholding was reduced to 100 feddans, and no person was allowed to lease more than 50 feddans. Compensation to the former owners was in bonds bearing a low rate of interest, redeemable within 40 years. A law enacted in 1969 reduced landholdings by one person to 50 feddans.\nBy the mid-1980s, 90% of all land titles were for holdings of less than five feddans (), and about 300,000 families, or 8% of the rural population, had received land under the agrarian reform program. According to a 1990 agricultural census, there were some three million small land holdings, almost 96% of which were under five feddans. As these small landholdings restricted the ability of farmers to use modern machinery and agricultural techniques that improve and take advantage of economies of scale, there have since the late 1980s been many reforms attempting to deregulate agriculture by liberalizing input and output prices and eliminating crop area controls. As a result, the gap between world and domestic prices for Egyptian agricultural commodities has been closed.\nIndustrial sector.\nChemical products.\nThe chemical industry in Egypt is one of the country\u2019s largest, comprising seven key subsectors: plastics, rubber, paper, detergents, paints, miscellaneous chemicals, fertilizers, and glass. The petrochemical segment alone accounts for approximately 12% of Egypt's industrial output.\nThe sector is forecast to generate $9 billion in exports by the end of 2024, with growth supported by abundant raw materials and foreign investments. The government aims to enhance competitiveness by focusing on infrastructure, technological advancements, and export incentives. The sector also benefits from Egypt\u2019s participation in regional trade agreements, helping to further expand its export market and strengthen its global position.\nAbu Qir Fertilizers Company is one of Egypt and the MENA region's largest nitrogen fertilizer producers, accounting for nearly 50% of Egypt's nitrogen fertilizer output. Established in 1976, its first ammonia-urea production facility is located in Abu Qir, 20 kilometers east of Alexandria. Egypt Basic Industries Corporation (EBIC) is also a leading ammonia producer in the country.\nConsumer electronics and home appliances.\nEgypt's consumer electronics and home appliance industry has witnessed significant expansion, driven by government initiatives and foreign investments. The \"Egypt Makes Electronics\" initiative, launched in 2015, aims to localize manufacturing, reduce imports, and boost exports. It has attracted major players like Samsung, Hisense, Beko, and Haier, who have established production facilities in Egypt, benefiting from tax incentives and golden licenses. The country\u2019s strategic location, competitive labor costs, and growing consumer market have positioned it as a key regional manufacturing and export hub. The home appliance industry is seeing increased localization, with some manufacturers already sourcing 70% of components domestically. Electrolux, which entered the Egyptian market by acquiring local Olympic Group, also aims to expand its market share and boost exports, capitalizing on the strong local presence of its brands, particularly Zanussi and Olympic Electric.\nThe mobile phone segment has also expanded, with brands like Vivo, Infinix, Oppo, Xiaomi and Nokia setting up local factories. However, challenges persist, particularly in accessing raw materials, navigating bureaucratic hurdles, and securing timely export subsidies. The easing of foreign currency restrictions and policy adjustments have alleviated some constraints, fostering a more favorable investment climate. As of 2025, the country hosts 14 mobile phone manufacturing plants, with annual output projected to increase sharply from 3.5 million units in 2024 to around 9 million units in 2025. \nDespite challenges, Egypt\u2019s electronics and home appliance sector continues to grow, with international investors increasingly viewing it as a reliable manufacturing base. Rising local production has reduced import dependency while creating jobs and strengthening supply chains. If current trends continue, with improvements in raw material availability and regulatory efficiency, Egypt could solidify its role as a leading producer and exporter in the region\u2019s electronics and home appliance market.\nGold.\nGold mining in Egypt's Red Sea region has developed into a fast-growing industry, driven by vast untapped reserves. In an effort to establish a modern mining sector, the Egyptian government launched its first international bid round, awarding mineral concessions to attract investment. This marked a significant shift in policy, encouraging private sector participation in a historically state-dominated industry. Among the early participants were AngloGold Ashanti and Alexander Nubia International, both of which reported promising technical results in their exploration efforts.\nThe Sukari mine, located in the Sukari Hills near Marsa Alam, became Egypt\u2019s first large-scale modern gold production facility. The government granted a concession to Centamin in 2005, awarding the company an exploitation lease covering 160 square kilometers. Sukari quickly became Egypt\u2019s largest gold mining operation, representing a turning point in the country\u2019s efforts to commercialize its gold resources.\nEgypt has launched a sweeping modernization drive to raise the mining sector\u2019s GDP contribution to 5\u20136% by 2030. Reforms include transforming the Mineral Resources Authority into an economic entity, removing bureaucratic hurdles, and introducing new investment models for gold extraction, all intended to attract investment and align regulations with global standards. As part of this effort, a Digital Mining Platform is set to launch in early 2025 to boost transparency, streamline licensing, and enhance investor engagement through digital tools.\nThese reforms have driven a surge in gold exports, which nearly doubled to $2.17 billion in the first nine months of 2024, up from $1.11 billion during the same period in 2023. With continued government backing, Egypt aims to rank among the world\u2019s top 10 gold exporters by 2027.\nIron and steel.\nEgypt's iron and steel industry has played a crucial role in the nation's economic development, with a history dating back to 1936. Over the decades, the sector has expanded through state-owned enterprises and private firms, becoming a key driver of industrial growth and employment. As of 2024, Egypt is Africa\u2019s leading steel producer, third largest in the Middle East and 19th globally, with an output of 10.7 million metric tons of crude steel produced in 2024. EZDK is the largest steel company in Egypt and the Middle East, today part of Ezz Industries. It owns four steel plants in Alexandria, Sadat, Suez and 10th of Ramadan. It was ranked 77th on the list of the world's largest steel companies by the World Steel Association in 2020, with a production of 4.57\u00a0million tons. \nIn 2023 exports of reinforced steel surged more than threefold, reaching 1.54 million tons compared to 523,000 tons in the previous year. At the same time, crude steel production grew by 6% to 10.4 million tons, supported by increased exports, particularly in hot-rolled coil. \nDomestic consumption of steel products has steadily increased, reflecting the industry's importance to infrastructure and construction projects. However, the sector faces challenges, including outdated production technologies and competition from lower-cost imports, particularly from Turkey, China, and Ukraine. The government has implemented policies to support the industry, including trade protections and incentives to attract investment. Forecasts indicate a steady growth rate of 1.5% annually over the next decade, driven by Egypt\u2019s expanding infrastructure projects and strategic geographic position as a trade hub.\nMotor vehicles.\nEl Nasr Automotive Manufacturing Company, Egypt\u2019s state-owned automaker, was established in 1960 in Helwan and began operations in 1962, producing vehicles under license from brands such as Zastava Automobili, Mercedes-Benz Group, Kia, and Peugeot. The company resumed production in 2024 after a 15-year hiatus, beginning with electric buses in partnership with China\u2019s Yutong. It markets three bus models under its own brand: Nasr Green, Nasr Sky, and Nasr Star. The company plans to reintroduce passenger cars by the end of 2025, targeting an annual output of 20,000 vehicles.\nOther major manufacturers include Arab American Vehicles, Egy-Tech Engineering, Ghabbour Group, WAMCO, and MCV, which has represented Mercedes-Benz since 1994 and operates a factory in El Salheya employing around 2,500 workers.\nEgypt\u2019s 2024\u20132030 automotive strategy aims to boost annual production to 400,000\u2013500,000 vehicles, with 25% for export, targeting $4 billion in revenue. Local firms like Ezz Elarab Group and El Sewedy Electric have partnered with Indonesia\u2019s Proton Holdings, while Nissan Motor Egypt plans to add new models. Chinese automaker Exeed, in partnership with Egyptian-German Automotive, has also begun local assembly in 6th of October City.\nA key component of the strategy is launching electric vehicle production in 2025 through partnerships with international firms. This includes integrating EVs into public transport via e-taxis and initiating trial production at Nasr Auto. Broader plans involve establishing automotive hubs and enhancing local component manufacturing to support both domestic and export growth.\nPersonal care and pharmaceutical products.\nEstablished in 1939 with the founding of the Misr Company for Pharmaceutical Industries, Egypt's pharmaceutical sector is one of the nation's oldest strategic industries. Over the past two decades, the market has expanded fivefold, and as the healthcare system modernizes, the industry is expected to continue its growth trajectory, attracting multinational pharmaceutical companies focused on emerging markets. The number of pharmaceutical factories increased from 130 in 2015 to 170 in 2023, marking a 30.8% rise. Similarly, production lines expanded by 40%, growing from 500 in 2015 to 700 in 2022. In this period Egypt went from being the world's 47th largest pharmaceutical producer in 2015 to 29th in 2023.\nEgypt has the largest pharmaceutical market in Africa, with an estimated value of $56.6 billion. The country's pharmaceutical exports were valued at approximately $400 million in 2023. However, the domestic pharmaceutical industry remains highly dependent on imported inputs, with around 90% of raw materials sourced from abroad. While the sector exhibits a relatively high level of complexity, opportunities exist to increase local manufacturing capacity and reduce import reliance.\nThe Egyptian beauty and personal care market has experienced significant growth, driven in part by a series of currency devaluations that have increased consumer preference for locally produced goods. In 2025, the sector is expected to generate $7.6 billion in revenue, with a projected compound annual growth rate of approximately 8.1% between 2024 and 2030.\nTextiles and clothing.\nThe textile industry is a key component of Egypt\u2019s economy, accounting for approximately 12% of the country's export earnings and 3.4% of its gross national product as of 2023. It employs around 2.5 million people and includes one of the largest and most productive cotton and textile clusters in Africa. The entire production process, from cotton cultivation to finished garments, occurs domestically, with cotton comprising roughly 75% of natural fibre use. Egypt is internationally known for its extra-long staple cotton varieties, particularly Giza cotton, derived from Gossypium barbadense.\nEgypt's apparel market was valued at approximately $17.04 billion in 2023, with women\u2019s apparel comprising the largest segment at $7.58 billion. The market is projected to grow at an annual rate of 5.53% through 2028. Between 2014 and 2021, 6,740 textile companies were established, with issued capital totaling EGP 10.5 billion. Over 450 of these were established between 2016 and 2019 with foreign investment. The public sector accounts for 50% of spinning, 60% of knitting, and 60% of weaving, while the private sector dominates garment manufacturing with a 90% share.\nMahalla El Kobra serves as the center of Egypt\u2019s textile production and is home to the state-owned Misr Spinning and Weaving Company, which owns one of the largest spinning and weaving factories in the world. The sector includes approximately 6,500 textile-only factories among 85,000 establishments. Between 2011 and 2020, Egypt experienced a compound annual growth rate of 12% in textile exports. Major export destinations include the European Union, Asia, the Middle East, and Africa, with products such as denim, cotton yarns, and non-woven fabrics.\nEnergy sector.\nElectricity.\nEgypt suffered blackouts during the summer of 2014 that lasted for up to six hours per day. A rapid series of reforms cut energy subsidies, and Egypt quickly developed the Zohr gas field in the Mediterranean, which was discovered in 2015. The country now has an oversupply of electricity and aims to source 20% of its electricity from renewables by 2022 and 55% by 2050. \nAs part of its renewable energy strategy, Egypt has undertaken large-scale projects like the Benban Solar Park and the Gabal El Zeit wind farm. Benban, located near Aswan, has a total capacity of 1650 MW and generates about 3.8 TWh annually, making it the fourth-largest solar power plant globally. Additionally, the Gabal El Zeit wind farm, costing \u20ac340 million, spans 100 square kilometers with 300 turbines, generating 580 MW of electricity.\nEgypt and Cyprus are considering implementing the proposed EuroAfrica Interconnector project. This consists of laying a 2 GW HVDC undersea power cable between them and between Cyprus and Greece, thus connecting Egypt to the greater European power grid. The interconnector will make Egypt an electricity hub between Europe and Africa. The president of Egypt and the prime minister of Cyprus met in Nicosia on 21 November 2017 and showed their full support for the EuroAfrica Interconnector pointing out its importance for energy security of the three countries.\nOn 29 October 2007, Egypt's president, Hosni Mubarak gave the go-ahead for building several nuclear power plants, but this failed to take off under his leadership. On November 19, 2015 Egypt and Russia signed an initial agreement, under which Russia will build and finance Egypt\u2019s first nuclear power plant. In December 2017 preliminary contracts for the construction of four VVER-1200 units were signed in the presence of Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and Russian President Vladimir Putin. The permit for unit 1 was issued by the Egyptian Nuclear and Radiological Regulatory Authority (ENRRA) in June 2022. First safety-related concrete was poured in July 2022. In October 2022, ENRRA gave construction approval for unit 2, whose construction started on 19 November.\nHydrocarbons.\nThe Egyptian government has long prioritized expanding the petrochemical industry and increasing natural gas exports. By 2009, 38% of locally produced natural gas was allocated for export. However, declining crude oil production, peaking at in 1993 before falling to by 2008, led Egypt to shift focus toward natural gas. By 2008, gas production had reached 48.3 billion cubic meters, though rising domestic consumption turned Egypt into a net oil importer by 2008\u20132009.\nIn 2014, Egypt prioritized domestic gas consumption over exports, significantly reducing international supply. The country also signed a 15-year agreement with Israel to import 7 billion cubic meters of gas annually from the Leviathan field. A year later, BP announced a $12 billion investment in Egypt\u2019s natural gas sector, primarily in the West Nile Delta project, which now produces nearly 1 billion cubic feet per day (bcf/d). BP also developed the Atoll field (300 million standard cubic feet per day) and the North Damietta concession, with production from the Qattameya discovery starting in 2020.\nThe Zohr gas field, discovered by Eni in 2015, remains the Mediterranean\u2019s largest natural gas find, with estimated reserves of 30 trillion cubic feet. Production began in December 2017, reaching 2.7 bcf/d by August 2019. However, recent technical challenges have reduced Zohr\u2019s output, leading to domestic supply constraints and increased reliance on imports. Egypt has secured agreements with Cyprus to import gas from the Cronos and Aphrodite fields, processing it in Idku and Damietta for LNG exports to Europe. Efforts to revitalize Zohr include new drilling plans to increase production by 220 million cubic feet per day.\nConstruction sector.\nEgypt\u2019s construction industry, valued at USD 55.04 billion in 2025, is projected to reach USD 82.34 billion by 2030, with an annual growth rate of 8.4%. Contributing around 14% to GDP, the sector benefits from state-led infrastructure investment and growing foreign interest, particularly from Gulf sovereign funds. Real estate remains a key driver, with USD 20 billion invested in Cairo in 2022, largely in housing. The introduction of real estate trading on the Egyptian Exchange and the launch of a dedicated real estate fund have further diversified the market.\nMajor projects such as the Cairo Metro Lines 3 and 4, the two-line Cairo Monorail, and the high-speed rail network are reshaping national infrastructure. These initiatives are complemented by large-scale energy projects like the El Dabaa Nuclear Power Plant and various renewable energy developments.\nFlagship developments include the proposed new capital of Egypt, launched in 2015, and New Alamein, a north coast city spanning 48,000 feddans, both part of Egypt\u2019s fourth-generation cities.\nResidential construction leads the market with a 37% share in 2024, supported by a young population and pro-housing policies. Industrial construction, meanwhile, is the fastest-growing segment, expected to grow 12% annually through 2029, driven by foreign investment and specialized industrial zones.\nLeading firms include Hassan Allam Construction, Dorra Holding, Arab Contractors, Orascom Construction, and SIAC Industrial Construction &amp; Engineering.\nServices sector.\nBanking.\nThe Central Bank of Egypt is the national reserve bank, regulating the financial market and the Egyptian pound. Egypt\u2019s banking sector has undergone major reforms since the 1990s, resulting in a liberalized and modernized system aligned with international standards. By late 2024, total bank assets reached approximately 21 trillion Egyptian pounds (USD 420 billion), a significant rise from EGP 633 billion (USD 101 billion) in 2004.\nEgypt\u2019s banking system dates back to 1856, evolving through privatization, mergers, and foreign bank exits, such as Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale's 2012 sale of National Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 G\u00e9n\u00e9rale Bank to QNB Al Ahli. Despite private sector growth, state-owned commercial banks remain dominant.\nFinancial inclusion has expanded, with 74.8% of Egyptians aged 15 and above using financial accounts, reaching 52 million users by 2024. Usage spans banks, Egypt Post, mobile wallets like Vodafone Cash and MobiCash, and prepaid cards like Meeza. Women\u2019s financial inclusion grew 295% since 2016 thanks to policies and initiatives aimed at empowering women financially, reaching 68.8%, while youth participation rose 65% from 2020 to 2024, hitting 53.1%.\nThe fintech sector has expanded 5.5-fold since 2020, with 177 startups ranking Egypt 10th among emerging markets. Growth, driven by digital payments, lending platforms, and B2B marketplaces, is bolstered by financial inclusion policies. With over 60% of the population under 30, youth adoption is high, though cybersecurity risks, regulatory gaps, and digital literacy disparities remain challenges.\nFinance.\nThe origins of Egypt's stock exchange date back to 1883 with the establishment of the first futures market in Alexandria. In 1902, the Brokers' Syndicate was formed, introducing the first set of regulations governing stock market activities.\nToday, the Egyptian Exchange (EGX) comprises the Cairo and Alexandria stock exchanges, operating under a unified trading, clearing, and settlement system. It serves as the primary platform for equities, bonds, and financial instruments in Egypt. The exchange has undergone multiple phases of reform, including privatization initiatives, regulatory adjustments, and structural enhancements to improve market liquidity and attract foreign investment.\nEgypt\u2019s stock market has experienced fluctuations due to global economic conditions, foreign capital flows, and domestic policy changes. Periods of IPO activity and privatization efforts have contributed to market expansion, while external shocks, such as global financial downturns and geopolitical events, have periodically impacted performance. Government-led reforms have included revisions to listing rules, the introduction of sectoral indices, and measures to increase market depth, such as the establishment of a treasury bonds index and approval for special purpose acquisition companies. Plans for further market development include the launch of EGYCOMEX, the Egyptian Commodities Exchange, and the introduction of derivatives trading, both aimed at diversifying financial instruments and strengthening Egypt\u2019s position as a regional financial hub.\nICT and communications.\nThe liberalization of Egypt\u2019s telecommunications sector began in 1998, gradually expanding private sector involvement in mobile telephony and internet services. In 2004, the Information Technology Industry Development Agency (ITIDA) was established under Law 15 to drive Egypt\u2019s digital transformation, implement e-signature legislation, and promote an export-oriented IT sector. Deregulation followed in 2006 after Egypt joined the World Trade Organization's Information Technology Agreement in 2003, opening the market to competition and foreign investment. By 2007, Egypt had 10 million fixed lines, 31 million mobile subscribers, and 8.1 million internet users.\nThe ICT sector has since become a major driver of economic growth, expanding by 15.2% in FY 2022/2023 and contributing 5.1% to Egypt\u2019s GDP, up from 4.4% in 2019/2020. Investments in the sector reached $4.2 billion in 2022/2023, a 20% increase from the previous year. The telecommunications market operates under a unified license system, with key players including Telecom Egypt, Vodafone, Orange, Etisalat Egypt, and Ericsson.\nLooking ahead, Egypt\u2019s ICT market is projected to grow from $23.6 billion in 2025 to $53.1 billion by 2030, at a compound annual growth rate of 17.61%. The government\u2019s Digital Egypt initiative aims to transform the country into a digitally-driven society by expanding infrastructure, fostering innovation, and modernizing public services. As part of this strategy, and the broader Egypt Vision 2030, the government has integrated 33,000 institutions into a secured digital network and enhanced online services, improving transparency and efficiency.\nBetween 2019 and 2022, mobile internet subscriptions surged by 77.9%, from 39 million to 69.4 million, with total mobile subscriptions reaching 106.2 million by December 2023. Internet penetration reached 72.2% in early 2024, with 82 million users. The country also leads Africa in internet speed rankings and is set to generate $3.5 billion in smartphone revenue by 2025, growing at an annual rate of 6.11% until 2029.\nTransport.\nTransport in Egypt centers on Cairo and follows settlement along the Nile. The Nile River () and major canals of equal length serve local transport.\nSince 2014, the National Roads Project has driven major upgrades to Egypt\u2019s road network, adding 6,300\u00a0km of new roads and upgrading 8,400\u00a0km at a combined cost of 265 billion Egyptian pounds. This expanded main roads by 29.8% to 30,500\u00a0km and improved Egypt\u2019s ranking in the Road Quality Index from 118th globally in 2015 to 18th in 2024.\nEgypt\u2019s railway network is operated by Egyptian National Railways. In 2021, the National Authority for Tunnels signed a $4.5 billion contract with Siemens Mobility, Orascom Construction, and Arab Contractors to build a electrified high-speed rail line linking Ain Sokhna, Mersa Matruh, and Alexandria. Dubbed the \"Green Line\" or \"Suez Canal on rails,\" it will carry both freight and passengers using Velaro high-speed trains, Desiro regional sets, and Vectron freight locomotives. Two more lines were announced in 2022, connecting Greater Cairo to Aswan and Luxor to Hurghada and Safaga.\nEgypt Air and private carriers such as Nile Air and Air Cairo operate frequent domestic flights from Cairo International Airport to major tourist destinations.\nThe Suez Canal, managed by the Suez Canal Authority, is a vital global shipping route linking the Mediterranean and Red Seas. Egypt\u2019s main ports include Alexandria, Port Said, and Damietta on the Mediterranean, and Suez, Ain Sokhna, and Safaga on the Red Sea.\nTourism.\nTourism in Egypt grew significantly after 1975 when the government eased visa restrictions and focused on tourism infrastructure. By 1981, tourist arrivals had risen to 1.8 million, reaching 14.7 million in 2010. However, the COVID-19 pandemic caused a sharp decline, with revenues dropping to $4 billion in 2020 and arrivals falling to 3.5 million. In February 2022, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) noted that Egypt's tourism sector was the biggest loser from the pandemic.\nEgypt's government has initiated several projects in the tourism sector, including the Grand Egyptian Museum. Once completed, it will be the largest museum in the world. This museum aims to showcase Egypt's rich archaeological heritage, strengthening the country's position as a global tourist destination.\nIn 2024, Egypt achieved a record 15.7 million tourists, surpassing the previous year\u2019s 14.9 million. This achievement, attributed to government efforts to enhance security and tourism support, marks a strong recovery from the pandemic's impact. After the drastic decline in 2020, tourism has rebounded, with revenues reaching $14.1 billion, up from previous years.\nThe country's tourism strategy includes plans to attract 30 million tourists by 2028, with continued improvements to infrastructure and the tourist experience. Egypt's top markets in 2024 included Germany, Russia, and Saudi Arabia.\nEmerging sectors.\nDefence and security products.\nEgypt\u2019s defence industry is among the oldest and most extensive in the Arab world, comprising a network of state-owned enterprises and a growing private sector. It produces small arms, munitions, drones, armored vehicles, and naval vessels, often through local manufacturing or co-production agreements.\nTo bolster self-sufficiency and exports, Egypt launched a $479 million weapons manufacturing strategy in 2020 to modernize 84 production lines. It has leveraged partnerships and events like the Egypt Defence Expo to showcase capabilities and position itself as a regional hub.\nThe Ministry of Military Production oversees firms such as Abu Zaabal Specialized Industries, Abu Zaabal Engineering Industries, and the Armoured Production and Repair Factory, which produces systems like the M1A1 Abrams, K9A1EGY, RAAD 200, and Sinai 200. It also oversees Thales &amp; Benha Electronics S.A.E., a joint venture with Thales Group for co-producing communications and electronic systems.\nThe Arab Organization for Industrialization (AOI) oversees companies like Kader, Sakr, and Arab American Vehicles, as well as joint ventures such as Arab British Dynamics. It operates aerospace and engine factories in Helwan, producing the Alpha Jet, K-8E, and pursuing licensed production of the KAI T-50 Golden Eagle. The Alexandria Shipyard builds corvettes, frigates, and patrol vessels, and has partnered with Naval Group and ThyssenKrupp Marine Systems to produce the Gowind 2500 and Meko A200 classes locally.\nPrivate sector players include Robotics Engineering Systems, specializing in drones, smart munitions, and guided missiles, and Amstone, which develops advanced unmanned aerial and naval systems.\nSemiconductors and electronic chips.\nIn 2024, Egypt launched a national policy to localize semiconductor and electronic chip manufacturing, identifying the sector as a strategic priority for economic growth and technological self-reliance. The initiative provides incentives such as tax breaks, land access, and technical support to promote investment in semiconductors, embedded systems, and circuit design. It forms part of the broader \"Egypt Makes Electronics\" program, a presidential strategy launched in 2015 to advance high-value electronics design and manufacturing and generate employment in labor-intensive production. \nTo coordinate implementation, the government established the National Council for the Localization of Semiconductor Technology, chaired by the Prime Minister and comprising representatives from key ministries. The council is responsible for setting strategy, tracking investments, addressing regulatory barriers, and coordinating with both domestic and international stakeholders. A major component of the policy is the integration of local mineral resources into supply chains for microelectronics. It also includes training initiatives, incentives for investors, and a national roadmap to guide integration into global value chains, supported by an international consultant.\nIn parallel, Egypt partnered with China's Tsinghua Unigroup in 2024 to launch a $300 million investment fund focused on semiconductors and artificial intelligence, with over 80% of the capital contributed by the Chinese side in collaboration with Egyptian partners. \nAs of 2025, Egypt hosts 23 semiconductor startups, with several notable companies emerging in the sector. These include Si-Ware Systems, which specializes in ASICs and MEMS; Avelabs, focused on embedded software for the automotive industry; SilMinds, a developer of hardware acceleration solutions for high-performance computing; Wasiela, which designs communication IP cores and digital media systems; and NeoSpectra, known for MEMS-based spectral sensors. InfiniLink, an Egyptian semiconductor startup founded in 2023, secured $10 million in seed funding in 2025, one of the largest deep-tech seed rounds in the MENA region. The company specializes in next-generation, energy-efficient optical transceiver chiplets designed for telecom, AI data centers, and IoT infrastructure.\nLargest listed companies.\nIn 2024, one Egyptian company was listed in the Forbes Global 2000 list, an annual ranking of the top 2000 public companies in the world by Forbes magazine. \nForbes Middle East also published a separate 2024 ranking of the top 50 listed companies in Egypt, highlighting other major publicly traded firms that did not feature on the global list but remain key players in Egypt\u2019s economy. Following Commercial International Bank in the local ranking were QNB Al Ahli and Elsewedy Electric, each with a market capitalization of $1.4 billion. They were followed by Telecom Egypt (4th), Orascom Construction (5th), and Talaat Mostafa Group (6th). Rounding out the top ten were Egypt Kuwait Holding, Faisal Islamic Bank of Egypt, Abu Qir Fertilizers, and Misr Fertilizers Production Company.\nThe banking and financial services sector dominated with 16 entries, contributing $8.4 billion in sales and holding $58.5 billion in assets. The real estate and construction sector followed with nine firms, and the industrial sector accounted for seven.\nInvestment climate.\nHistorically, private equity has played a limited role in business financing in Egypt. However, the government has undertaken several initiatives to improve the investment climate and attract foreign direct investment (FDI). The Investment Law of 2017 was introduced to streamline procedures and investor incentives, and was followed by a new company law and bankruptcy law in 2018 and a customs law in 2020, all aimed at creating a more efficient business environment. Alongside these legal amendments, efforts to simplify company registration and encourage foreign participation have contributed to making Egypt one of the leading FDI destinations in Africa between 2016 and 2020.\nTo further enhance its economic attractiveness, Egypt has implemented fiscal reforms such as reducing corporate tax rates and cutting trade tariffs, aimed at increasing foreign investment and economic growth. At the same time, large-scale infrastructure projects, including transportation modernization, new urban communities, and the Suez Canal's expansion, have been pursued to reduce logistical costs, enhance trade efficiency, and provide improved facilities for investors.\nAs part of the reforms, Egypt introduced \"golden licenses\", a single-approval mechanism that allows investors to acquire land and begin operations without requiring multiple approvals from various government bodies. The General Authority for Investment and Free Zones (GAFI) oversees the program, which aims to reduce bureaucracy and attract FDI. As of March 2024, 26 golden licenses had been granted. Additionally, in July 2023, President El-Sisi ratified Law No. 159 of 2023, which eliminated exemptions for state-owned enterprises, ensuring equal regulatory treatment for all investors.\nTo further encourage foreign capital inflows, the government has also introduced a citizenship-by-investment program, offering residency and citizenship in exchange for financial contributions.\nDespite these efforts, challenges persist. Issues like corruption and the need for improved enforcement of regulatory frameworks continue to impact investor confidence. In 2024, Egypt scored 30 out of 100 on Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index, ranking 130th out of 180 countries.\nRegional data.\nData shown are for the year 2021 in nominal numbers.\nChallenges.\nPoverty.\nEgypt has struggled to implement effective policies to address poverty. Past efforts to alleviate economic burdens often benefited wealthier segments of society. For example, food, electricity, and petroleum subsidies have historically disproportionately aided the non-poor.\nEgypt\u2019s fertility rate has dropped from 6.6 children per woman in the 1960s to 3.2 children per woman in 2021, though it remains high relative to global standards. The population increased from 44 million in 1981 to over 106 million today. Overpopulation remains one of the biggest challenges to confronting poverty.\nThe country\u2019s reliance on international loans, such as from the IMF, has sometimes resulted in increased hardship for the population. In August 2022, Egypt sought another loan amid rising prices, triggering criticism of economic policies that primarily benefited elites.\nThe poverty rate in Egypt increased from 19 percent in 2005 to 21 percent in 2009, as reported by then Minister of Economic Development, Othman Mohamed Othman. The national poverty rate stood at 24.3% in 2010, rising to approximately 30% by 2015. Additionally, a 2019 World Bank report indicated that 60% of Egypt\u2019s population was either poor or vulnerable. \nAs of 2020, Egypt's population stood at 102 million, with 33% under the age of 14. Approximately 30% of the population lived below the poverty line. By 2021, this figure had declined slightly to 29.7% of the population.\nRole of the military.\nThe Egyptian armed forces have wielded substantial influence over Egypt's economy. Military-run companies play a pivotal role across various industries, contributing significantly to public spending on housing and infrastructure, including activities such as cement and food production, as well as infrastructure development like roads and bridges. According to a study by the Carnegie Middle East Centre, the Egyptian army has control over about 25% of public spending allocated to housing and infrastructure.\nDespite Egypt's commitment to reducing the military's economic impact per its agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), recent developments indicate an opposing trend. The National Service Products Organization (NSPO), a firm under military ownership, is currently constructing new factories for the production of fertilizers, irrigation machines, and veterinary vaccines. The government discussed selling stakes in military-run companies Safi and Wataniya for two years. Despite claims of receiving offers, there are visible asset transfers, like the rebranding of Wataniya franchises into ChillOut stations. The army's expanding economic influence, from petrol stations to media, has stifled competition, hindered private investment and contributing to slower growth, higher prices, and limited opportunities for ordinary Egyptians.\nIn 2022, responding to international calls for economic reform, Egypt introduced the State Ownership Policy Document in collaboration with the IMF. The document outlines Egypt\u2019s strategy to reduce state and military involvement in the economy, withdrawing entirely from certain industries within three years while maintaining or expanding a presence in strategic sectors. It also seeks to increase private sector participation by clearly defining the state's economic role, enhancing governance of state-owned enterprises according to OECD standards, and promoting competitive neutrality. By the final quarter of 2024, these reforms had led private investment to exceed public investment for the second consecutive quarter, representing over half of total investments. During this period, private investments increased by 35.4% year-on-year, whereas public investments declined by 25.7%, marking a significant departure from Egypt\u2019s recent history of public investment dominance.\nOpportunity cost of conflict.\nA report by Strategic Foresight Group has calculated the opportunity cost of conflict for Egypt since 1991 is almost US $800 billion. In other words, had there been peace since 1991, an average Egyptian citizen would be earning over US $3,000 a year instead of US $1,700.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9352", "revid": "1319607127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9352", "title": "Telecommunications in Egypt", "text": " \nEgypt has long been the cultural and informational centre of the Middle East and North Africa, and Cairo is the region's largest publishing and broadcasting centre.\nThe telecommunications segment has benefited from effective competition and progressive government policies aimed at comprehensive digital transformation. A liberal regulatory environment permits operators to offer both fixed-line and mobile services under unified licenses. Major players in the market include Telecom Egypt, Vodafone, Orange, Etisalat Egypt, and Ericsson. \nThe Egypt ICT market is projected to grow from an estimated $23.60 billion in 2025 to $53.11 billion by 2030, at a compound annual growth rate of 17.61%. This expansion is driven by rising government investments, increasing internet and mobile penetration, a burgeoning tech startup ecosystem, and ongoing technological advancements. The government's commitment to digital transformation and infrastructure development positions Egypt's ICT sector as a pivotal contributor to the nation's economic growth and modernization efforts.\nBetween 2019 and 2022, mobile internet subscriptions rose by 77.9 percent, from 39 million to 69.4 million. By December 2023, mobile subscriptions reached 106.2 million. As of January 2024, Egypt's internet penetration rate reached 72.2%, with approximately 82 million internet users. Additionally, Egypt\u2019s smartphone market is projected to generate $3.5 billion in revenue by 2025, with an annual growth rate of 6.11% between 2025 and 2029. Notably, Egypt achieved the fastest internet speed on the African continent in 2022.\nHistory.\nThe origins of telecommunications in Egypt traces back to 1854 when the British Eastern Telegraph Company constructed a telegraph line between Cairo and the Alexandria. Egypt's first telephone line was installed between Cairo and Alexandria in 1881, and later that year, the Egyptian government acquired the Eastern Telephone Company, establishing the Telephone and Telegraph Authority.\nIn 1957, Law No. 107 transferred the assets of the Eastern Telegraph Company and other telecom providers to the Ministry of Telecommunications. Presidential Decree No. 709 of the same year placed all wire and wireless communications under the jurisdiction of the Wire and Wireless Communications Authority, which reported to the Ministry of Transport.\nIn 1980, the Arab Republic of Egypt National Telecommunications Organization (ARENTO) was formed as an autonomous public utility under the Ministry of Transport. Under Law No. 19 of 1998, ARENTO was renamed Telecom Egypt and restructured as a joint stock company, with the Egyptian government retaining full ownership.\nThe liberalization of Egypt\u2019s telecommunications sector began in 1998 and progressed gradually over the following decades. The private sector played an increasing role in mobile telephony and internet services, contributing to the sector\u2019s expansion. In 2004, the Information Technology Industry Development Agency (ITIDA) was established under Law 15 to support Egypt\u2019s digital transformation. ITIDA was tasked with implementing e-signature legislation and promoting an export-oriented IT sector. Over the years, it played a critical role in advancing e-business services, facilitating digital security measures, and supporting Egypt\u2019s ICT-driven economic development.\nThe market underwent official deregulation in 2006 following Egypt\u2019s commitment to the World Trade Organization Information Technology Agreement in 2003. This move aimed to open the telecommunications market, encourage competition, and attract foreign investment. In 2007, Egypt had approximately 10 million fixed phone lines, 31 million mobile phones, and 8.1 million internet users. \nEgypt's ICT sector has experienced significant growth in recent years, consistently outpacing the nation's overall economic expansion. In the fiscal year 2022/2023, the sector achieved a growth rate of 15.2%, contributing 5.1% to Egypt's Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This marks an increase from a 4.4% contribution in 2019/2020. Total investments in the ICT sector reached approximately $4.2 billion in 2022/2023, reflecting a 20% increase from the previous fiscal year.\nDigital Egypt.\nIn line with the Egypt Vision 2030 strategy, the country has launched the Digital Egypt initiative, aiming to transform the nation into a digitally-driven society. This comprehensive plan focuses on developing robust digital infrastructure, fostering innovation, and enhancing public services through digital means. A key component of this initiative is the Digital Egypt e-platform, which offers citizens access to a wide range of government services online, including traffic management, real estate registration, and social housing applications. The platform's goal is to streamline service delivery, reduce bureaucratic hurdles, and promote transparency within governmental operations.\nComplementing the Digital Egypt initiative are various e-government programs designed to modernize public administration and improve service accessibility. The government has prioritized the digital transformation of public services, resulting in the integration of approximately 33,000 institutions into a secured government network. This network facilitates efficient data exchange between agencies, enhancing coordination and service delivery. Additionally, efforts have been made to train civil servants in digital competencies, ensuring the sustainability and effectiveness of e-government services. These initiatives collectively aim to create a more citizen-centric approach to governance, leveraging technology to meet the evolving needs of the population.\n\"See also Egyptian Radio and Television Union &amp; List of radio stations in Egypt\"\nTelecommunication in Egypt.\nRadio.\nThe first radio service in Egypt began in 1925. It is almost all government controlled, using 44 short-wave frequencies, 18 medium-wave stations, and four FM stations. There are seven regional radio stations covering the country. Egyptian Radio transmits 60 hours daily overseas in 33 languages and three hundred hours daily within Egypt. In 2000, Radio Cairo introduced new specialized (thematic) channels on its FM station. So far, they include news, music, and sports. Radio enjoys more freedom than TV in its news programs, talk shows and analysis. \nStarting 2003, Nile Radio Productions, a private company, was given license to operate two radio stations; Nile FM and Nogoum FM. Nile FM broadcasts in English and Nogoom FM broadcasts in Egyptian. Both stations mostly broadcast mainly to the Greater Cairo region. In the early 2009, Radio Masr was launched, broadcasting popular Egyptian songs, news &amp; other programs.\n\"See also Television in Egypt\"\nTelevision.\nEgyptian ground-broadcast television (ERTU) is government controlled and depends heavily on commercial revenue. ETV sells its specially produced programs and soap operas to the entire Arab world. ETV has two main channels, six regional channels, and three satellite channels. Of the two main channels, Channel I uses mainly Arabic, while Channel II is dedicated to foreigners and more cultured viewers, broadcasting news in English and French as well as Arabic.\nEgyptian Satellite channels broadcast to the Middle East, Europe, and the U.S. East Coast. In April 1998, Egypt launched its own satellite known as NileSat 101. Seven specialized channels cover news, culture, sports, education, entertainment, health, and drama. A second, digital satellite, Nilesat 102, was launched in August 2000. Many of its channels are rented to other stations.\nThree new private satellite-based TV stations were launched in November 2001, marking a great change in Egyptian government policy. Dream TV 1 and 2 produce cultural programming, broadcast contemporary video clips and films featuring Arab and international actors, as well as soap operas; another private station focuses on business and general news. Both private channels transmit on NileSat.\nIn addition to Egyptian programming, the Middle East Broadcast Company, a Saudi television station transmitting from London (MBC), Arab Radio and Television (ART), Al-Jazeera television, and other Gulf stations as well as Western networks such as CNN and BBC, provide access to more international programs to Egyptians who own satellite receivers.\n\"See also Telephone numbers in Egypt\"\nLandline telephony.\nCurrently, there is a single company in charge of landline telephony, Telecom Egypt which is also government-controlled.\n\"See also Telephone numbers in Egypt\"\nCellular communications.\nCurrently, there are four companies which offer cellular communication service: Orange, Vodafone, Etisalat, and We (by Telecom Egypt). These companies also provide services surpassing voice communication, such as 4G, 3G, and mobile internet.\nInternet.\nThe Internet companies market is dealt to two: infrastructure providers and service providers.\nList following goes in most used.\nThere are 8 major service provider which sell their services to smaller ISPs. The highest available speed through ADSL technologies was upgraded to 8\u00a0Mb in download in February 2008 and then to 24\u00a0Mb later that year.\nThe Egyptian ISP market is not competitive, at least in Cairo and Alexandria, with only 3 ISPs offering below-average speeds(Up to 16\u00a0Mbit/s).\nOrascom, one of the shareholders in the leading cellular operator MobiNil, is also the biggest player in the Internet service provision market and owns 75 per cent of one of Egypt's largest ISP, LINKdotNET. The tie-up with the mobile operator is significant in that WAP services were introduced in May for a trial period, making Egypt one of the first countries in Africa to have introduced WAP.\nNileOnline and Egynet has been recently sold to Etisalat, increasing Etisalat access into the broadband market. with this acquisition all class I tier ISPs mentioned above are owned by the major telecommunication companies operating in the country.\nRaya is owned by Vodafone Egypt, Nileonline and Egynet are now owned by Etisalat, TEdata is owned and operated by the oldest telecom company in the region telecom Egypt and link.net is owned by Orascom telecom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9353", "revid": "41454490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9353", "title": "Transport in Egypt", "text": "Ministry of Transportation in Arab Republic of Egypt \nTransport in Egypt is centered in Cairo and largely follows the pattern of settlement along the Nile. The Ministry of Transportation and other government bodies are responsible for transportation in Egypt, whether by sea, river, land or air.\nWith regards to rail, air and waterway travel, the main line of the nation's rail system follows along the Nile river and is operated by Egyptian National Railways. In addition to overseas routes, Egypt Air provides domestic air service to major tourist destinations from its Cairo hub. The Nile River system (about ) and the principal canals () are important locally for transportation. People still travel via the Nile, mainly between Cairo and Aswan. The Suez Canal is a major waterway for international commerce and navigation, linking the Mediterranean and Red Sea. Major ports are Alexandria, Port Said, Damietta on the Mediterranean and Suez and Safaga on the Red Sea.\nRoad system.\nEgypt has significantly expanded and modernized its road network, primarily through the National Roads Project, which aims to construct 7,000 km of new roads. By 2024, 6,300 km had been completed at a cost of 155 billion Egyptian pounds, increasing the total length of main roads by 29.8% to 30,500 km, compared to 23,500 km in 2014. Additionally, 8,400 km of roads have been upgraded at a cost of 110 billion Egyptian pounds, out of a 10,000 km target. These improvements have enhanced Egypt\u2019s Road Quality Index, which rose from 2.9 points (118th place) in 2015 to 5.53 points (18th place) in 2024.\nEgypt is integrated into regional road networks, with two routes in the Trans-African Highway network originating in Cairo and multiple highway links connecting to Asia through the Arab Mashreq International Road Network. While national highways remain the primary mode of transport, the country has developed an extensive system of 4-lane highways that function as freeways, though they accommodate mixed traffic, making them slower than dedicated motorways.\nDespite infrastructure improvements, traffic regulations are poorly enforced and frequently disregarded, resulting in one of the highest rates of road fatalities worldwide per miles driven.\nSome of the country's major motorways include:\nRailways.\nEgypt's railway system is the oldest in Africa and the Middle East, with its first line between Alexandria and Kafr Eissa opening in 1854. As of 2018, the network spans approximately and is operated by Egyptian National Railways, carrying around 800 million passengers and 12 million tonnes of freight annually. A modernization program was initiated in 2007 to enhance safety and infrastructure.\nIn 2021, Egypt signed a $4.5 billion contract with Siemens Mobility, Orascom Construction, and Arab Contractors to construct and maintain a high-speed electrified railway connecting Ain Sokhna, Mersa Matruh, and Alexandria. Known as the \"Green Line\" or \"Suez Canal on Rails,\" it is designed for both passenger and freight transport. Siemens will supply Velaro high-speed trains, Desiro regional sets, and Vectron freight locomotives. In 2022, the project expanded to include two additional lines linking Greater Cairo to Aswan, and Luxor to Hurghada and Safaga.\nThe Cairo Metro currently operates three lines, with a fourth under construction and further expansions planned. Additionally, an Alexandria Metro system is under development to improve urban transportation.\nWaterways.\nEgypt has of navigable waterways, including the Nile, Lake Nasser, the Mahmudiyya Canal connecting Alexandria with the Nile, as well as numerous smaller canals in the Nile Delta. The Suez Canal, spanning , serves as a major maritime route, accommodating oceangoing vessels with a maximum draft of 17.68 meters (as of 2011).\nNile River.\nThe Nile River system (about ) and the principal canals (1,600\u00a0km) are used for local transportation. Motorboats, ferries and feluccas are common means of transport along the Nile.\nSuez Canal.\nThe Suez Canal is a critical maritime corridor connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea, facilitating global trade since its completion in 1869. Built under the direction of Ferdinand de Lesseps, it established a direct shipping route between Europe and Asia, significantly reducing travel distances by eliminating the need for passage around the Cape of Good Hope. The canal has undergone multiple expansions to meet the growing demands of international shipping. In 2021, over 20,600 vessels transited the canal, averaging 56 ships per day.\nTo enhance capacity, the Egyptian government initiated an expansion project in 2014, widening key sections and increasing the daily transit capacity from 49 to 97 ships. The New Suez Canal, inaugurated in 2015, introduced a parallel lane and deepened sections of the original canal, reducing transit times from 18 to 11 hours and minimizing delays for vessels.\nPipelines.\nAs of 2018, Egypt's pipeline infrastructure includes of condensate pipelines, of condensate/gas pipelines, and an extensive network for natural gas. The country also operates of liquid petroleum gas pipelines, for crude oil, and designated for oil, gas, and water transport. Additionally, Egypt has of refined product pipelines and for water distribution.\nPorts.\nEgypt has 15 commercial ports and 29 specialized ports. The specialized ports include 5 tourist seaports, 12 petroleum seaports, 6 mining seaports, and \n6 fishing seaports.\nMerchant marine.\nIn 2018, the number of Egypt's sea vessels, according to the CIA World Factbook is 399 as follows:\nAirports.\n \nCairo International Airport is used by numerous international airlines, including the country's own Egypt Air and Nile Air.\nAirports with paved runways.\n\"Total:\" 72\n\"Over 3,047 m:\" 15\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 36\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 15\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 0\n\"Under 914 m:\" 6\nAirports with unpaved runways.\n\"Total:\" 11\n\"2,438 to 3,047 m:\" 1\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\" 3\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\" 4\n\"Under 914 m:\" 3 (2013)\nMonorail.\nEgypt is currently constructing a two-line monorail rapid transit system in the Greater Cairo region. Upon completion, it is projected to be the longest driverless monorail system in the world. The system will provide the first public transport link between the New Administrative Capital and 6th of October City with the greater Cairo metropolitan area. The 53 km line connecting the New Administrative Capital to eastern Cairo is expected to have a travel time of approximately 60 minutes, while the 42 km line linking 6th of October City to Giza is expected to take around 42 minutes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9354", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9354", "title": "Egyptian Armed Forces", "text": "Combined military forces of Egypt\nThe Egyptian Armed Forces () are the military forces of the Arab Republic of Egypt. The Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces directs (a) Egyptian Army forces, (b) the Egyptian Navy, (c) Egyptian Air Force and (d) Egyptian Air Defense Forces. The Chief of Staff directly supervises army field forces (armies and districts), without any separate Egyptian Army headquarters.\nSince the 1952 Egyptian revolution that led to the overthrow of the monarchy, Egypt\u2019s military has centralized Egypt\u2019s governance and dominated its politics and economy. Senior members of the military can convene the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, such as during the course of the 2011 Egyptian revolution, when President Mubarak resigned and transferred power to this body on February 11, 2011.\nThe Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces directs all branches, forces, armies, regions, bodies, agencies and departments of the Armed Forces. The Commander-in-Chief simultaneously holds the position of Minister of Defence. Since July 2024, General Abdel Mageed Saqr has been Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces; Minister of Defense; and Military Production. The only person above him in the leadership ladder is the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, who is the President of the Republic, and this position is currently held by Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. The Chief of Staff is Lieutenant General Ahmed Fathy Khalifa (since July 2024). The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces consists of 23 members, headed by the Commander-in-Chief and Minister of Defense, and represented by the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, with membership of: Commanders of the main branches of air, navy, and air defense, commanders of the border guard forces, commanders of the armies (Second and Third), and commanders of the military regions (Central, Northern, Western and Southern) and the heads of the Operations, Armament, Logistics and Supply, Engineering, Training, Financial Affairs, Military Justice, Management and Administration, the directors of the Officers Affairs and Military Intelligence departments, the Assistant Minister of Defense for Constitutional and Legal Affairs, and the Secretary of the Council is the Secretary-General of the Ministry of Defense.\nThe armament of the Egyptian armed forces varies between eastern and western sources through weapons deliveries by several countries, led by the United States, Russia, France, China, Italy, Ukraine and Britain. Much of the equipment is manufactured locally at Egyptian factories. The Egyptian armed forces celebrate their anniversary on October 6 each year to commemorate the Crossing of the Suez during the October War of 1973.\nThe modern Egyptian armed forces have been involved in numerous military crises and wars since independence, including the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War, Egyptian Revolution of 1952, Suez Crisis, North Yemen Civil War, Six-Day War, Nigerian Civil War, War of Attrition, Yom Kippur War, Egyptian bread riots, 1986 Egyptian conscripts riot, Egyptian-Libyan War, Gulf War, war on terror, Egyptian Crisis, Second Libyan Civil War, War on ISIL and the Sinai insurgency.\nHistory.\nNineteenth century.\nThe modern Egyptian military was established by Muhammad Ali during his consolidation of power in Egypt, which significantly reduced Ottoman influence and contributed to Egypt becoming an autonomous vassal of the Ottoman Empire and effectively a de facto independent state.\nIn the early 19th century, Muhammad Ali of Egypt undertook comprehensive military reforms aimed at establishing a centralized, European-style army capable of securing his territorial ambitions and consolidating his authority over Egypt and beyond. Though his initial campaigns, such as those in Arabia and Greece, were formally conducted on behalf of the Ottoman Empire, Muhammad Ali progressively distanced himself from the Sublime Porte and expanded Egypt\u2019s military power through independent campaigns.\nCentral to his military project was the reorganization of the Egyptian army along modern lines. Recruits were placed under strict discipline and surveillance within newly constructed barracks, subject to multiple daily roll calls and corporal punishment, including the use of the bastinado and whipping. Military regulations and codes of conduct were developed to ensure obedience and uniform discipline, while new administrative practices introduced standardized record-keeping, personal identification numbers for soldiers, and hierarchical unit structures. These measures facilitated internal control, particularly in deterring desertion during forced marches or redeployment.\nInitially, Muhammad Ali relied on Bedouin groups to monitor troops at training camps, but tensions soon arose, prompting a shift toward a system of internment and self-contained oversight within military facilities. His reforms extended to logistical administration, including the centralization of salaries, distinctions between officers and enlisted men, and the formalization of career military service.\nThese internal reforms laid the foundation for a series of expansionist campaigns. In 1811, Muhammad Ali launched a campaign into the Arabian Peninsula to suppress the First Saudi State, recapturing the Hejaz region and eventually defeating the House of Saud after a prolonged campaign led by his sons, Tusun Pasha and Ibrahim Pasha. This was followed by the Turco-Egyptian conquest of Sudan (1820\u20131824), in which Egyptian forces subdued fragmented tribal entities, establishing Egyptian authority in the region and creating a new source of conscripts and slaves for the Egyptian army, including the formation of the \"Gihadiya\" foot regiments.\nMuhammad Ali also participated in the suppression of the Greek War of Independence on behalf of the Ottomans, deploying a large expeditionary force under Ibrahim Pasha. Despite early advances, the Egyptian navy was decisively defeated at the Battle of Navarino (1827) by a coalition of European powers, costing Egypt its fleet and forcing withdrawal.\nFrom 1831 to 1840, Muhammad Ali engaged in two major wars against the Ottoman Empire, seeking to annex Syria and eventually challenge Ottoman sovereignty. His forces captured much of the Levant and advanced into Anatolia, winning major victories such as the Battle of Konya (1832) and Battle of Nezib (1839). However, sustained pressure from the European powers led to diplomatic intervention and the signing of the Convention of London (1840). Under its terms, Muhammad Ali was forced to relinquish control of most of his conquests in exchange for recognition of hereditary rule over Egypt and Sudan, thus laying the groundwork for Egypt's de facto autonomy within the Ottoman Empire.\nUnder Muhammad Ali\u2019s successors, the military remained central to the state but faced constraints. During the reign of Abbas I and Sa'id Pasha, modernization slowed, although limited reforms were introduced, including early railway construction and the beginning of land and labor reforms.\nThe most ambitious military and infrastructural expansions occurred under Ismail Pasha, who restructured the military academies, supported public works, and briefly pursued naval modernization, ordering ironclads and expanding the military's logistical capabilities. Egypt\u2019s military also played a role in territorial expansion, particularly in Sudan and Darfur. However, this coincided with fiscal mismanagement and rising foreign debt, leading to increasing European oversight, culminating in the sale of Egyptian shares in the Suez Canal Company to Britain in 1879.\nDissatisfaction with foreign influence, combined with longstanding grievances among Egyptian officers, culminated in the Urabi Revolt (1881\u20131882), led by Ahmed \u2018Urabi. Originally sparked by resentment against favoritism toward officers of Turkish origin, the movement evolved into a broader nationalist uprising. Despite initial military resistance, Urabi\u2019s forces were ultimately defeated by the British Army at the Battle of Tel-el-Kebir, leading to the de facto British occupation of Egypt. Though nominally autonomous, Egypt effectively became a British protectorate until the unilateral declaration of independence in 1922.\nTwentieth century.\nBy 1914, the Egyptian military functioned largely as a native home-defence and colonial garrison force. It was organized and equipped under British supervision and staffed primarily with British officers. Its structure included infantry battalions, mounted infantry, camel corps units, support services, and irregular militia components.\nThe 1922 declaration of Egyptian independence formally ended the British protectorate but still left Egypt\u2019s sovereignty constrained, particularly in military affairs. Britain retained control over Egypt\u2019s defense, foreign relations, and Sudan, effectively limiting Egypt\u2019s autonomy and perpetuating British military presence and influence. Although the declaration ended the legal fiction of Ottoman rule and met some nationalist demands, it failed to satisfy broader aspirations for full sovereignty. The resulting frustrations over continued British dominance, especially regarding the military, fueled further nationalist opposition and anti-British sentiment.\nThe Egyptian Air Force was initially established in 1930 as the Egyptian Army Air Force and formally inaugurated in 1932. In 1937, it was separated from army command and reorganized as an independent service under the name Royal Egyptian Air Force, becoming the third branch of the Egyptian military after the army and navy.\nDuring World War I, Egypt\u2019s strategic importance increased significantly due to the threat posed by Ottoman incursions across the Sinai. Although such offensives were ultimately repulsed, Egyptian forces remained focused primarily on internal security and regional garrison duties, especially in Sudan. By 1917, approximately 15,000 Egyptian volunteers were serving in the regular military, while over 98,000 Egyptians served in logistical capacities through the Egyptian Labour Corps and Egyptian Camel Transport Corps.\nIn the interwar period, although military service was technically compulsory, the armed forces remained limited in size and scope. By 1939, the total strength was modest, and British oversight remained extensive. Under the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, Britain retained the right to station troops in Egypt for the protection of the Suez Canal and continued to exert influence over training and operations.\nAt the onset of the World War II, Egypt's military capacity remained limited. Following the Italian invasion of western Egypt in 1940, Egypt broke relations with the Axis powers and increasingly aligned itself with British military operations. While Egypt's forces were not the primary combatants, they contributed to British-led operations, including in the Western Desert campaign. Axis forces under General Erwin Rommel made temporary advances into Egyptian territory before being repelled at the Second Battle of El Alamein.\nBy the late 1940s, internal dissatisfaction with military leadership was growing. Many younger officers, particularly those educated in Britain, became disillusioned with the entrenched senior command, which was perceived as corrupt and incompetent, accusations heightened by Egypt's poor performance in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. Although a partial purge of the senior officer corps was carried out in 1950, many of the dismissed officers were later reinstated by royal decree, further fueling discontent within the ranks.\nIn an effort to assert greater independence and reduce British influence, King Farouk dismissed the British Military Mission in 1950 and invited former German Wehrmacht officers, including Generals Wilhelm Fahrmbacher and Oskar Munzel, to serve as advisors to the Egyptian military establishment. These advisors remained in the country until 1958.\nThe Egyptian military\u2019s failure in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War was a catalyst for the formation of the Free Officers led by Muhammad Naguib and Gamal Abdel Nasser. In the Egyptian coup d'\u00e9tat of 1952, they overthrew King Farouk and initiated sweeping reforms within the military and state. \nOne of the early achievements of the new regime was the signing of the Anglo\u2013Egyptian Agreement of 1954, which mandated the phased withdrawal of British forces from the Suez Canal zone. The agreement allowed for continued British access to the base under specific circumstances and stipulated complete withdrawal by June 1956.\nIn 1956, the Egyptian Armed Forces were thrust into a major international conflict during the Suez Crisis, also known as the Tripartite Aggression. The crisis erupted after President Gamal Abdel Nasser revoked the concession of the Anglo-French owned Suez Canal Company and transferred canal operation to the state-owned Suez Canal Authority, prompting a coordinated military response from Israel, the United Kingdom, and France. On 29 October, Israeli forces invaded the Sinai Peninsula, followed days later by Anglo-French landings in the Canal Zone. The stated aim was to separate the combatants and secure freedom of navigation through the canal, but the operation was widely perceived as a ploy to topple Nasser and restore Western control over the vital waterway.\nIn the early 1950s, particularly after the revolution of 1952, politics rather than military competence was the main criterion for promotion. Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer in particular was a purely political appointment, whose approach would lead to large-scale problems during the Suez War. Promotions were often based on loyalty rather than merit, and a rigid divide between officers and enlisted men contributed to widespread dysfunction. Although some Egyptian defensive positions, such as at Abu Agelia and Mitla Pass, were organized and offered resistance, the Israeli forces quickly seized the initiative and routed Egyptian positions across the Sinai. Nasser ordered a general withdrawal from the peninsula, which allowed Israeli troops to advance rapidly toward the Suez Canal.\nThe invasion was soon halted under intense international pressure. The United States, Soviet Union, and United Nations condemned the attack, forcing a ceasefire by 7 November. Although Egypt suffered tactical defeats, the crisis ultimately elevated Nasser\u2019s stature in the Arab world and signaled the decline of British and French influence in the Middle East. The Egyptian Armed Forces emerged from the conflict with considerable reputational damage, having revealed deep structural weaknesses, but the political outcome was widely seen as a strategic victory for Egypt. \nDuring the North Yemen Civil War that began in 1962, the Egyptian Armed Forces undertook one of their most extensive foreign deployments, dispatching tens of thousands of troops in support of republican forces against the royalists backed by Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Israel. \"In addition to Egyptian aid, the Soviet Union supplied 24 MiG-19s to the republicans.\" Authorized by President Gamal Abdel Nasser, the campaign involved sustained aerial and ground operations with Soviet support. Within months of the initial deployment in 1962, Nasser recognized that the campaign would demand far more than anticipated and sought a face-saving exit strategy, but the scope of engagement continued to escalate.\nFewer than 5,000 troops were initially deployed in October 1962, rising to 15,000 by December, 36,000 by late 1963, and 50,000 by late 1964. The peak came in late 1965, with approximately 55,000 personnel divided across 13 infantry regiments, an artillery division, a tank division from the Egyptian Armoured Corps, and multiple Special Forces and airborne regiments. Egyptian field commanders reported logistical constraints, notably the absence of reliable topographical maps during the early phase of operations. The prolonged and resource-intensive conflict strained Egypt\u2019s military capabilities and readiness, contributing to its strategic vulnerability ahead of Israel's invasion in 1967.\nIn the period leading up to the Six-Day War in 1967, the Egyptian Armed Forces were organized into four regional military commands, Suez, Sinai, the Nile Delta, and the Nile Valley up to the border with Sudan, while the remaining 75 percent of Egypt\u2019s territory fell under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Frontier Corps. Tensions escalated in May 1967 when President Gamal Abdel Nasser announced the closure of the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping, an action Israel interpreted as a casus belli and responded to by mobilizing its forces.\nIn response, Egypt deployed three battalions of commandos to Amman in coordination with Jordan on 3 June. According to historian Trevor N. Dupuy, drawing on the memoirs of King Hussein of Jordan, Nasser\u2019s intent was not to initiate a war but to achieve political and rhetorical leverage. Nevertheless, Israel proceeded with military action on 5 June.\nAt the time, the Egyptian Army had seven divisions positioned in the Sinai, two armored and five infantry, under the newly established Sinai Front Command, led by General Abdel Mohsin Murtagi, who had recently returned from Yemen. In the weeks before the outbreak of hostilities, Field Marshal Abdel Hakim Amer implemented wide-ranging changes to the command structure, replacing both the commanders and chiefs of staff in six of the seven divisions. Scholars such as Kenneth Pollack argue that these changes aimed to enhance operational effectiveness by placing veterans of the Yemeni conflict in key leadership roles.\nOn the morning of 5 June, Israel launched a coordinated military offensive, targeting Egyptian airbases and achieving a substantial degradation of Egypt\u2019s air power early in the conflict. Ground forces soon advanced into the Sinai Peninsula, where Egyptian units faced mounting pressure across several fronts. Amid the deteriorating situation, Field Marshal Amer issued an order for a general withdrawal to the Suez Canal. The execution of this withdrawal, conducted under fire and without coherent coordination, contributed to considerable disruption among Egyptian forces, who sustained further losses during the retreat.\nIn July 1972, President Anwar Sadat expelled Soviet Armed Forces advisors from Egypt. On 6 October 1973, during the Yom Kippur holiday, which coincided with the 10th day of Ramadan, Egypt and Syria launched a surprise offensive to recover occupied territory, initiating the October War. In the Sinai, Egyptian forces crossed the Suez Canal as part of Operation Badr and established positions on the eastern bank, which it held throughout the conflict. On 14 October, Egyptian forces advanced deeper into the peninsula to relieve pressure on the Syrian front; however, the Israelis halted this offensive after three days. Seizing the initiative, Israeli forces crossed the canal through a single crossing point at Deversoir, cleared during the Battle of the Chinese Farm, and proceeded to advance north toward Ismailia and Port Said to isolate the Egyptian Second Army, south toward Suez to isolate the Third Army, and westward towards Cairo but were held at Nefalia. They encountered fierce resistance on all fronts and Israel suffered a major setback northwards at the Battle of Ismailia. A UN-brokered ceasefire took effect on 22 October, only to collapse soon after amid mutual accusations of violations. When hostilities resumed, Israel managed to achieve a breakthrough southward, effectively threatening the Third Army\u2019s supply lines, but was ultimately unable to capture Suez despite multiple attempts. A second ceasefire on 25 October ended the fighting.\nWhen Sadat and the Israelis concluded the Camp David Accords in September 1978, part of the \"quid pro quo\" for Egypt\u2019s acceptance of peace was the provision of substantial U.S. military assistance. Today, the U.S. provides an annual assistance package often quoted at a nominal $1.3\u00a0billion to the Egyptian Armed Forces. This level is second only to that provided to Israel.\nScholars such as Kenneth Pollack, DeAtkine, and Robert Springborg have proposed multiple explanations for the challenges that Arab (and Egyptian) armies encountered in conflicts with Israel from 1948 through the 1970s and beyond. In particular, they suggest that from 1948 onward, junior officers often exhibited limited willingness to manoeuvre, innovate, or act independently. Ground forces units reportedly struggled with manipulation of information and insufficient attention to intelligence gathering and unbiased analysis. Observers note that elements from two Egyptian divisions sent to Saudi Arabia in 1990\u201391, accompanied by U.S. personnel during the 1991 Gulf War, frequently reported intense combat despite facing minimal or no resistance, whether or not U.S. military personnel or journalists were present. Later studies, such as those by Springborg, indicate that these patterns continued within the Egyptian Armed Forces into the twenty-first century.\nTwenty-first century.\nDuring the 2011 Egyptian revolution, the Egyptian Army was deployed to restore order in major cities. On 31 January 2011, Israeli media reported that the 9th, 2nd, and 7th Divisions were ordered into Cairo. Subsequently, on 3 July 2013, the Armed Forces removed President Mohamed Morsi from office following mass protests demanding his resignation, an action widely described as a coup d\u2019\u00e9tat. In the days that followed, several violent incidents occurred, including the Republican Guard headquarters clashes on 8 July 2013, which resulted in the deaths of 61 protesters. On 14 August 2013, security forces, including the army and police, carried out the dispersal of pro-Morsi sit-ins at Rabaa and Nahda Squares, resulting in large-scale casualties. Estimates of the death toll vary, with some reports stating over 2,600 fatalities. The events of 14 August 2013 are considered the deadliest day in Egypt since the 2011 revolution. The international response included widespread condemnation from foreign governments and human rights organizations.\nSince the 2013 Egyptian coup d'etat, the Egyptian Armed Forces has maintained a prominent role within the state, enjoying a high degree of institutional autonomy and influence across multiple sectors. The military also holds a substantial presence in the economy, participating in areas such as infrastructure, housing, consumer goods, and tourism, and possesses large real estate holdings. Information regarding its budget, leadership, and force size remains largely undisclosed and is considered classified. \nEstimates of the military's economic reach vary; journalist Joshua Hammer reported that the armed forces may control up to 40% of the Egyptian economy, though such figures have been criticized for lacking empirical foundations and for rarely being grounded in systematic analysis. These estimates often fail to distinguish between different forms of military economic engagement, such as the annual output of goods and services versus ownership of physical assets. They also tend to conflate three distinct domains of economic involvement: formally registered military-owned enterprises under the Ministry of Military Production, the Arab Organization for Industrialization, and other affiliated agencies whose actual production is significantly more modest than often portrayed; a wider group of public and private sector entities led or influenced by retired military officers, whose revenues do not belong to the armed forces; and regulatory privileges that generate income through licensing, leasing, tolls, and partnerships with national and international firms. \nIn 2016, President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and military officials estimated that the formal military economy accounted for between 1% and 2% of Egypt\u2019s GDP, likely encompassing the combined output of military agencies and revenues from public works. According to Yezid Sayigh, senior fellow at the Carnegie Middle East Center, this estimate is likely closer to the actual scale of the military's formal economic activity. While the military has expanded its access to extra-budgetary resources and assumed a growing role in state capital expenditure since 2013, analysts argue that its economic footprint is generally smaller, less efficient, and less productive than widely believed, though still of considerable significance.\nBy 2018, analysts observed no overt signs of institutional fragmentation within the Armed Forces. According to Hussein and Martino, the military's entrenched dominance in political and security affairs may be attributed to a combination of factors: its expansive economic interests, long-standing national legitimacy reinforced by its role in welfare and development programs, and a conscription-based recruitment system that facilitates cross-class integration within the armed services.\nIn 2019, it was reported that the Egyptian Armed Forces had begun a broad modernization effort under President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, following a long period of operational stagnation, since the 1970s. This initiative has included a notable increase in military procurement, with purchases from France, Russia, and Germany that have added new fighter aircraft, naval vessels, submarines, and surveillance systems to Egypt\u2019s inventory. These acquisitions have supplemented longstanding military assistance from the United States and reflect a shift toward a more diversified supply strategy. Parallel efforts have focused on doctrinal and structural reforms, including greater emphasis on interoperability, air mobility, maritime operations, and special forces. Joint exercises with both regional and international partners have also expanded during this period. However, the modernization program faces ongoing structural obstacles, such as entrenched command hierarchies, insufficient training regimes, and limited investment in logistical sustainment. Despite these limitations, the current scope of reform is regarded as the most extensive military overhaul in Egypt in decades.\nIn March 2021, Human Rights Watch published a report alleging that the Egyptian Armed Forces had committed violations of international law during operations in North Sinai, including the demolition of more than 12,300 residential and commercial structures and the clearance of approximately 6,000 hectares of farmland since 2013.\nStructure.\nThe Supreme Commander-in-Chief is the President of Egypt, currently Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. All branches, forces, armies, regions, bodies, organs and departments of the Armed Forces are under the command of the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, who is at the same time the Ministry of Defence and Military Production.\nThe Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) is composed of 23 members, chaired by the Commander-in-Chief and Minister of Defence, and is represented by the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. Commanders of military areas (central, northern, western, southern), heads of bodies (operations, armament, logistics, engineering, training, finance, military justice, Armed Forces Management and Administration), directors of many departments (officers and Military Intelligence and Reconnaissance), and assistant secretary of defence for constitutional and legal affairs. The Secretary of the Board is the Secretary General of the Ministry of Defence.\nArmy.\nA separate command for the Egyptian Land Forces was created on March 25, 1964. It was officially abolished after the Six-Day War of 1967, and the command of land forces was returned directly to the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. The ground formations are divided into the forces east of the canal, under whose command the two armies (the Second and the Third) and the military regions (central, northern, western, and southern), in contrast to the rest of the forces, bodies, departments, and auxiliary agencies.\nConscripts for the Egyptian Army and other service branches without a university degree serve three years as enlisted soldiers. Conscripts with a General Secondary School Degree serve two years as enlisted personnel. Conscripts with a university degree serve one year as enlisted personnel or three years as a reserve officer. Officers for the army are trained at the Egyptian Military Academy. The IISS estimated in 2020 that the Army numbered 90\u2013120,000, with 190\u2013220,000 conscripts, a total of 310,000.\nAir Force.\nThe Egyptian Air Force (EAF), a key branch of the Egyptian Armed Forces, operates a diverse array of aircraft sourced from the United States, France, Russia, and other countries. Its mainstay platform is the F-16 Fighting Falcon, with Egypt having received 220 aircraft as of 2015, including Block 52 variants. \nSince the mid-2010s, Egypt has pursued a comprehensive modernization of its air force to enhance combat readiness, diversify procurement sources, and replace aging fleets. A central component of this effort was the 2015 agreement with France for the acquisition of 24 Dassault Rafale fighter jets, followed by a second deal in 2021 for an additional 30 units, bringing the total to 54. These aircraft are stationed at Gebel El Basur and are equipped with advanced weapon systems supplied by MBDA and Safran Electronics &amp; Defense, significantly improving Egypt\u2019s multirole strike capabilities.\nComplementing these are 46 MiG-29M/M2 fighters acquired from Russia,&lt;ref name=\"46 MiG-29M/M2s\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; and legacy platforms such as the Mirage 2000, MiG-21, F-7 Skybolt, and Mirage V, though many older aircraft have been retired. The EAF\u2019s rotary wing assets include 46 AH-64 Apache helicopters upgraded to the AH-64D variant, as well as 42 Kamov Ka-52 from Russia. The EAF also operates airborne early warning aircraft such as the E-2C Hawkeye and upgraded F-16s equipped with AGM-84 Harpoon capabilities.\nEfforts to modernize existing platforms have included the integration of Emirati-supplied Al Tariq precision-guided munitions onto Egypt\u2019s Mirage 2000s, and similar upgrades on later-block F-16Cs.\nEgypt has also explored expanding its fixed-wing fleet with platforms from multiple suppliers. Planned acquisitions included 24 Eurofighter Typhoons and 24 M-346 jet trainers from Italy, although these deals were not finalized. More recently, Egypt has shown interest in acquiring Chinese J-10C and J-31 fighter aircraft, potentially to further diversify its arsenal and reduce reliance on traditional Western suppliers.\nWhile Egypt has historically faced US-imposed limitations in its access to long-range air-to-air weaponry, recent procurement choices and diversification strategies suggest a growing emphasis on achieving technological parity with regional air forces. This shift in air defense posture reflects a broader goal of reinforcing deterrence and ensuring greater operational independence.\nIn 2024 Israeli media reported that Egypt now possesses long-range Meteor air-to-air missiles, capable of striking targets beyond visual range at supersonic speeds with high precision and a range of over 150 kilometres. Egypt has also received a significant amount of Russian R-77 beyond visual range air-to-air missiles as part of its MiG-29M/M2 deliveries.\nFor training, the EAF fields Grob G-115 and K-8 Karakorum aircraft, and has developed UAV capabilities through various private sector and international partnerships. Strategic airlift capabilities have also expanded, with Egypt acquiring two Il-76MF aircraft in 2019.\nAir Defense Forces.\nThe Egyptian Air Defense Forces is Egypt's military service responsible for air defense. Egypt patterned its force after the Soviet Air Defence Force, which integrated all its air defence capabilities; antiaircraft guns, rocket and missile units, interceptor planes, and radar and warning installations. It appears to comprise five subordinate divisions, 110 surface-to-air missile battalions, and 12 anti-aircraft artillery brigades. Personnel quality has been assessed as somewhat lower than that of the Egyptian Air Force. The IISS estimated in 2020 that personnel numbered 80,000 active and 70,000 reserve. Its commander is Lieutenant General Aly Fahmy Mohammed Aly Fahmi.\nIn recent years Egypt has undertaken a broad and sustained modernization of its air defense network, integrating a mix of Western, Russian, and domestic systems into a layered architecture. This includes the acquisition of German-made IRIS-T systems, comprising seven IRIS-T SLM medium-range batteries, six IRIS-T SLS short-range units, and ten IRIS-T SLX long-range batteries. The first systems were delivered in 2021, though subsequent shipments were delayed in 2022 after Germany redirected some systems to Ukraine in response to the Russian invasion. These platforms are supported by German TRML-4D radars and operate alongside French Ground Master 400 AESA radars and Russian 59N6E Protivnik-GE early warning systems.\nIn addition to European acquisitions, Egypt received the Russian S-300VM surface-to-air missile system beginning in 2017, offering long-range, high-altitude intercept capabilities. The S-300VM complements Egypt\u2019s existing inventory and significantly boosts its ability to counter ballistic and cruise missile threats.\nThe United States has also contributed to Egypt\u2019s air defense capacity, supplying surplus systems including the Chaparral short-range air defense system and associated spare parts. These systems are used primarily for localized defense, particularly along Egypt\u2019s borders, complimenting Egypt's extensive arsenal of American MIM-104F/PAC-3 Patriot batteries acquired in 1999.\nIn 2025 Egypt confirmed acquiring China\u2019s advanced HQ-9B long-range surface-to-air missile system. The system significantly enhances Egypt\u2019s air defense capabilities by providing long-range coverage of up to 300 kilometers and the ability to track and engage multiple targets simultaneously, thanks to its advanced HT-233 3D phased-array radar. Its launchers carry a mix of smaller and larger missiles to address various aerial threats, including aircraft, cruise missiles, ballistic missiles, and stealth targets. The system provides 360-degree radar coverage and cold-launch capability.\nNavy.\nOrganized naval activity in Egypt can be traced to the Early Dynastic period, around 2800 BCE, when the state developed rudimentary maritime capabilities to support transport, trade, and military expeditions along the Nile and adjacent coasts.\nDuring the early modern period, Muhammad Ali, who became \"wali\" in 1805, established autonomous rule over Egypt and initiated a broad program of state and military development. As part of his efforts to build an empire, he prioritized the creation of a strong military, beginning with the army and followed by the navy. At the outset of his rule, Egypt already possessed a rudimentary naval force primarily used for troop transport. Its first recorded deployment was during the Wahhabi War, facilitating the movement of troops from Egypt to Yanbu in the Hejaz.\nIn 1815, Muhammad Ali established the Alexandria Shipyard to construct warships, marking a significant step toward naval modernization. By the time of the Greek War of Independence, the Egyptian Navy had expanded considerably, fielding more than 100 warships and several hundred transport vessels. In 1827, this fleet participated in the Battle of Navarino, a pivotal engagement during the war.\nFollowing World War II, elements of Egypt\u2019s naval forces were stationed in the Red Sea, although the majority remained concentrated in the Mediterranean. The navy\u2019s main headquarters and operational facilities are based at Ras el-Tin near Alexandria.\nThe Egyptian Navy also oversees the Egyptian Coast Guard, which is tasked with protecting coastal infrastructure and patrolling territorial waters to counter smuggling. According to the IISS Military Balance 2017, the Coast Guard comprised approximately 2,000 personnel, operating 14 fast patrol boats and 65 additional patrol vessels, including 15 Swiftships, 21 \"Timsah\"-class, three Type-89s, and nine \"Peterson\"-class boats.\nSince 2014, Egypt has undertaken a broad naval modernization program aimed at addressing structural limitations in its maritime capabilities and enhancing its ability to operate beyond territorial waters. This initiative has included significant investment in new platforms, infrastructure, and training, reflecting a shift toward developing a blue-water navy. Notable acquisitions include Mistral class amphibious assault ships, FREMM and MEKO A-200 frigates, Gowind class corvettes, and Type 209 submarines, as well as utility helicopters and coastal patrol vessels. \nEgypt has also pursued domestic shipbuilding through technology transfer agreements and expanded its naval infrastructure with new bases such as Berenice on the Red Sea and Ras Gargoub on the Mediterranean. These efforts reflect a strategic emphasis on maritime power projection, logistical reach, and the defense of national maritime interests.\nOther agencies.\nThe Armed Forces Medical Service Department provides many military health services. The Armed Forces College of Medicine in Heliopolis, Cairo, provides medical training. As of February 2020, the AFCM commandant was Maj. Gen. Dr. Amr Hegab.\nEgypt also maintains 397,000 paramilitary troops. The Central Security Forces comes under the control of the Ministry of Interior. As of 2017, the Egyptian Border Guard Corps falls under the control of the Ministry of Interior as well. Circa 2020, according to the \"IISS Military Balance 2020,\" they comprised an estimated 12,000, in 18 border regiments, with light weapons only (IISS 2020, p.\u00a0375). However, that listing of numbers has remained the same at least since the 2017 edition (p. 375).\nMilitary equipment and industry.\nThe inventory of the Egyptian Armed Forces comprises equipment originating from a diverse array of countries, including the United States, France, Russia, Germany, Brazil, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and the People's Republic of China. This broad range of suppliers has posed challenges in terms of interoperability and maintenance. However, older systems are being gradually phased out in favor of more modern platforms acquired from multiple sources, with a substantial share produced under license in Egypt, most notably the M1A1 Abrams tank.\nIn 2023 Egyptian company ACME SAICO released a C5ISR system designed to integrate and coordinate military platforms from both Western and Eastern origins. Developed to address the interoperability challenges of Egypt\u2019s diverse arsenal, the platform uses real-time \"interface layers\" to translate data across incompatible systems. Already certified and operational within the Egyptian Armed Forces, the system has been integrated into all current air force aircraft and is being expanded to land and naval platforms. It builds on earlier iterations such as RISC3, and a more advanced C6ISR system is under joint development with Lockheed Martin.\nThe Ministry of Military Production oversees a wide network of factories and companies, including Abu Zaabal Specialized Industries, which manufactures ammunition and small arms; Abu Zaabal Engineering Industries, which produces artillery systems and shells; and the Armoured Production and Repair Factory, which builds and maintains armored vehicles such as the M1A1 Abrams, K9A1EGY, RAAD 200, and Sinai 200. The Thales &amp; Benha Electronics S.A.E. joint venture, formed between France\u2019s Thales Group and Benha Electronics, specializes in advanced communication systems, research, and training. Meanwhile, the Arab Organization for Industrialization (AOI) supervises multiple enterprises engaged in aerospace, electronics, vehicles, and armaments. AOI\u2019s subsidiaries include Kader for Developed Industries, which designs and manufactures armored vehicles; Sakr for Developed Industries, which produces missiles and rockets; and joint ventures such as Arab British Dynamics Co., which specializes in guided weaponry, and Arab American Vehicles Co., which assembles military and civilian vehicles. AOI also has a history of licensed aircraft production in Helwan, manufacturing the Alpha Jet and K-8E, and now seeks to replace these with the KAI T-50 Golden Eagle.\nNaval defense production is led by the Alexandria Shipyard, which constructs frigates, corvettes, and patrol boats. Through partnerships with France\u2019s Naval Group, the shipyard produces the Gowind 2500 corvettes, while cooperation with Germany\u2019s ThyssenKrupp Marine Systems enables local manufacturing of the MEKO A200 frigates. In the private sector, Robotics Engineering Systems develops unmanned aerial vehicles, high-precision smart munitions such as guided missiles and glide bombs, while Amstone specializes in fifth-generation technologies focused on naval and aerial unmanned systems.\nEgypt is one of the few countries in the Middle East to possess spy satellites, launching EgyptSat 1 in 2007, followed by EgyptSat 2 in 2014. In 2019, Egypt launched MisrSat-A, an observation satellite, followed later that year by Tiba-1, a civilian and military communications satellite. In 2023, Egypt launched Horus-1 and Horus-2, about a month apart. The country also placed MisrSat-2 into orbit later that year. All three of them are high-resolution observation satellites. In 2024, two months after MisrSat-2\u2019s launch, the country successfully completed the initial operational phase of NEXSAT-1, its first experimental Earth observation satellite, achieving milestones such as developing indigenous onboard software, advanced attitude-control systems, and independently capturing and processing satellite imagery, all of which marked a major step forward in Egypt\u2019s national space capabilities.\nMilitary schools.\nThere is an undergraduate military school for each branch of the Egyptian Armed Forces, and they include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9355", "revid": "50961620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9355", "title": "Foreign relations of Egypt", "text": "The Foreign relations of Egypt are the Egyptian government's external relations with the outside world. Egypt's foreign policy operates along a non-aligned level. Factors such as population size, historical events, military strength, diplomatic expertise and a strategic geographical position give Egypt extensive political influence in the Africa, the Mediterranean, Southwest Asia, and within the Non-Aligned Movement as a whole. Cairo has been a crossroads of the Mediterranean's, Africa's and Asia's commerce and culture for millennia, and its intellectual and religious institutions are at the center of the region's social and cultural landmarks.\nDiplomatic relations.\nIsraeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nEgypt has been seeking to play a role in the resolution of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nEgypt played an important role in the negotiations leading to the Madrid Conference of 1991, which, under United States and Soviet sponsorship, brought together all parties in the region, including for the first time a Palestinian delegation, to discuss Middle East peace.\nThis support has continued to the present, with former President Hosni Mubarak often intervening personally to promote peace negotiations. In 1996, he hosted the Sharm El-Sheikh \"Summit of the Peacemakers\" attended by President Bill Clinton and other world leaders.\nIn 2000, he hosted two summits at Sharm El-Sheikh and one at Taba in an effort to resume the Camp David negotiations suspended in July 2000, and in June 2003, Mubarak hosted President George W. Bush for another summit on Middle East peace process. Another summit was convened in Sharm El Sheik in early 2005, which was attended by Egypt, Israel, the Palestinian Authority and Jordan. The former Egyptian Chief of Intelligence, General Omar Suleiman, played a role in negotiations between the Israeli and Palestinian sides.\nList.\nList of countries which Egypt maintains diplomatic relations with:\nBilateral relations.\nAfrica.\nIn the 21st-century Egypt has encountered a major problem with immigration, as millions of Africans attempt to enter Egypt fleeing poverty and war. Border control methods can be \"harsh, sometimes lethal.\" This has strained relations with Egypt's southern neighbors, and with Israel and the members of the EU as these immigrants attempt to move on to wealthier countries.\nThe dispute between Egypt and Ethiopia over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam has become a national preoccupation in both countries. Egypt sees the dam as an existential threat, fearing that the dam will reduce the amount of water it receives from the Nile. Egypt's Foreign Minister Sameh Shoukry said: \"Survival is not a question of choice, but an imperative of nature.\"\nEurope.\nEuropean Union relations with Egypt are based on a partnership relation within the Euro \u2013 Mediterranean and Middle East area, which is of vital strategic importance and a key external relations priority for the EU.\nThe Euro-Mediterranean Partnership launched at the 1995 Barcelona Conference between the European Union and its originally 12 Mediterranean Partners: Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, and the Palestinian Authority. Libya currently has observer status at certain meetings. Since the enlargement, in May 2004 and January 2007, the co-operation and needs covers 35 countries, the EU of 27, including Cyprus and Malta and the 10 Mediterranean Partners.\nEgypt has also taken an active role regarding Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, such as its participation in the technical meeting of which it was the speaker for the Arab group. Additionally, the first meeting of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary assembly was co-chaired by an Egyptian.\nEgypt has been one of the leading recipients among the Mediterranean partners in terms of total funds received from the MEDA programme, the principal financial instrument of the European Union for the implementation of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership. It is focused on policy-led, national structural reform and liberalisation programmes with a sector-wide approach.\nThe EU is Egypt's biggest trading partner currently accounting for 42% of Egyptian exports and 37% of imports, with the balance of trade still in the EU's favour. Trade between the EU and Egypt has risen by more than 5% in the last five years to reach around 11.6 billion euro in 2004. Egypt's main exports to the EU in 2004 were energy (39%), textiles and clothing (15%), agricultural products (9%), and chemicals (5%). Major imports from the EU were power generating machinery (21%), chemicals (16%), transport equipment (16%), and food and agricultural products (10%). Egypt has a serious but improving trade deficit that has put considerable pressure on the Egyptian pound.\nTrade relations with the EU are good although there are several outstanding trade and phyto-sanitary issues. These range from specific market access issues and difficulties for businesses facing a highly regulated and complex system through to restrictions in the export of agricultural goods (potatoes) and fishery products because they do not conform with EU quality norms.\nEgypt is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.\nSome time after the starting of the Arab Spring, in March 2011 the European Union adopted the joint declaration ' A partnership for democracy and shared prosperity with the Southern Mediterranean', aimed at making a number of initiatives in the field of civic society support, financial assistance and further access to the EU market dependent upon advancement in the democratization process.\nAs far as Egypt was concerned this declaration envisioned the further deepening of the previous Free Trade Agreement stipulated in 2004, geared towards the inclusion of areas such as trade in services, government procurement, competition, intellectual property rights, and investment protection. To the 2011 declaration, a preliminary phase of the negotiations followed in June 2013, when the EU and Egypt began an exploratory dialogue on how to deepen trade and investment relations, in particular through the possible negotiation of a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (DCFTA).\nIn August 2014, the European Union discussed the possibility of revising provision of aid to Egypt. However, divisions over the appropriate stance to adopt among European diplomats persisted, coupled by the fear that the vacuum might be soon filled by other actors, following a Saudi Foreign Minister's declaration that the Kingdom was ready to step in and those of Prime Minister Hazem al Beblawi about the possibility to appeal to Russia for foreign aid. Therefore, the only measure upon which the Foreign Ministers agreed was to suspend the sale of arms and materials that could be used for repression, but fell short to halt aid program which could damage civil society.\nEarlier in July 2013, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton had visited Egypt in an attempt to promote reconciliation among the parties involved. She is credited for being the only foreign diplomat to get access to deposed president Mohamed Morsi.\nIn an official statement released at the end of a following visit held in April 2014, the Representative raised the issue of the death penalties and incarceration of journalists and activists. At the same time, her later declarations about el-Sisi's bid for presidential candidacy as \"difficult\" but \"brave\" sparked harsh criticism among supporters of the Muslim Brotherhood, who claimed the Representative, who advanced logistical reasons, did not make any efforts to get in touch with them and members of their Anti-Coup Alliance.\nIn April 2014, the European Union agreed to conduct electoral monitoring, for the first time, in occasion of the Presidential elections scheduled for 26/27 May 2014. Other organizations declined to join, as in their opinion this would legitimize what they called an unlawful take on power.\nA contract for the sale of 30 Rafale fighter jets was signed between the defense ministries of Egypt and France in May 2021. The official value of the contract was not disclosed at first and was later exposed to be worth 3.75 billion euro or $4.5 billion, by an investigative website called Disclose. In December 2020, French President Emmanuel Macron received criticism for not controlling the sale of weapons to Egypt on its poor human rights record, stating counter-terrorism concerns. The Egyptian defense ministry cited that the deal would be supported via a 10-year loan without disclosing its value or any further details. Rights organizations have denounced the deal and accused the French president of overlooking the increasing violation of freedom in Egypt under the regime of President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi. France's armed forces, finance, and foreign ministries were unavailable for comment. However, French officials claim that Paris, under one of its policies, is avoiding criticism of countries on their human rights records to work with them effectively in private.\nOn 3 February 2022, around 175 Members of European Parliament wrote a joint letter to foreign ministers and ambassadors to the UN Human Rights Council and requested them to secure the establishment of a UN human rights monitoring and reporting mechanism on Egypt. The MEPs were concerned that despite devastating human rights crisis in Egypt, the international communities persistently failed to take any meaningful action to address the situation. The Egyptian authorities, under President Abdel Fattah Al-Sisi, have \"brutally and systematically\" repressed all forms of dissent and severely curtailed civic space.\nInternational involvement.\nEgypt played a key role during the 1990-91 Persian Gulf crisis. President Mubarak helped assemble the international coalition and deployed 35,000 Egyptian troops against Iraq to liberate Kuwait. The Egyptian contingent was one of the largest in the coalition forces, along with the U.S., U.K. and Saudi Arabia.\nIn the aftermath of the Gulf War, Egypt signed the Damascus Declaration with Syria and the Persian Gulf states to strengthen Persian Gulf security. Egypt continues to contribute regularly to United Nations peacekeeping missions, most recently in East Timor, Sierra Leone, and Liberia.\nFollowing the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States, Egypt, which has itself been the target of terrorist attacks, has been a key supporter of the U.S. war against terrorists and terrorist organizations such as Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda, and has supported the Iraqi Governing Council.\nOn December 25, 2006, the Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Abul Gheit called for end to \"nuclear double standards\" where sanctions are imposed on Iran for enriching uranium, but the Israeli nuclear program is not subject to any control by the International Atomic Energy Agency.\nEgypt is member of ABEDA, ACC, ACCT (associate), AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AU, BSEC (observer), CAEU, CTBT, EBRD, ECA, ESCWA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MONUC, NAM, OAPEC, OAS(observer), OAU, OIC, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN, UNAMSIL, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTAET, UPU, WCO, EFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, and WTrO. Egypt is one of only seven U.N. members which is not a member of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9356", "revid": "50717717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9356", "title": "El Salvador", "text": "Country in North Central America\nEl Salvador, officially the Republic of El Salvador, is a country in Central America. It is bordered on the northeast by Honduras, on the northwest by Guatemala, and on the south by the Pacific Ocean. El Salvador's capital and largest city is San Salvador. El Salvador's population in 2024 was estimated to be 6 million.\nAmong the Mesoamerican nations that historically controlled the region are the Maya and then the Cuzcatlecs. Archaeological monuments also suggest an early Olmec presence around the first millennium BC. In the beginning of the 16th century, the Spanish Empire conquered the Central American territory, incorporating it into the Viceroyalty of New Spain ruled from Mexico City. However, the Viceroyalty of New Spain had little to no influence in the daily affairs of the isthmus, which was colonized in 1524. In 1609, the area was declared the Captaincy General of Guatemala by the Spanish, which included the territory that would become El Salvador until its independence from Spain in 1821. It was forcibly incorporated into the First Mexican Empire, then seceded, joining the Federal Republic of Central America in 1823. When the federation dissolved in 1841, El Salvador became a sovereign state. It then formed a short-lived union with Honduras and Nicaragua, called the Greater Republic of Central America, which lasted from 1896 to 1898.\nFrom the late 19th to the mid-20th century, El Salvador endured chronic political and economic instability characterized by coups, revolts, and a succession of authoritarian rulers. Persistent socioeconomic inequality and civil unrest culminated in the Salvadoran Civil War from 1979 to 1992, fought between the military-led government and a coalition of left-wing guerrilla groups. The conflict ended with the Chapultepec Peace Accords. This negotiated settlement established a multiparty constitutional republic, which remains in place to this day. \nDuring the civil war and afterwards, large numbers of Salvadorans emigrated to the United States. From 1980 to 2008, nearly one million Salvadorans emigrated to the United States, such that by 2008, they were the sixth largest immigrant group in the US.\nThe economy of El Salvador has historically been dominated by agriculture, beginning with the Spanish taking control of the indigenous cacao crop in the 16th century, with production centred in Izalco, along with balsam from the ranges of La Libertad and Ahuachap\u00e1n. This was followed by a boom in use of the indigo plant in the 19th century, mainly for its use as a dye. Thereafter the focus shifted to coffee, which by the early 20th century accounted for 90% of export earnings. El Salvador has since reduced its dependence on coffee and embarked on diversifying its economy by opening up trade and financial links and expanding the manufacturing sector. The col\u00f3n, the currency of El Salvador since 1892, was replaced by the United States dollar in 2001. As of 2019 economic improvements had led to El Salvador experiencing the lowest level of income inequality among nearby countries. Among 77 countries included in a 2021 study, El Salvador had one of the least complex economies for doing business.\nEtymology.\nAfter the Spanish conquest, the land was divided into the Province of San Salvador, the Spanish version of \"Holy Saviour\", a biblical title for Jesus. From 1579 it included the province of San Miguel (Saint Michael). San Salvador became, throughout the colonial era, an ('great mayor's office'), an intendancy, and finally a province with a provincial council, and the province of Izalco, which was later called the mayor's office of Sonsonate. In 1824, the two jurisdictions were united in the State of Salvador, a part of the Federal Republic of Central America.\nAfter the dissolution of the Federal Republic of Central America, the country was referred to as the \"Republic of Salvador\" (). In 1915, the Legislative Assembly passed a law which stated that the country's name should be rendered as the definite form ('The Saviour')\u2009\u2014\u2009again a reference to Jesus\u2009\u2014\u2009rather than . With another law passed in 1958, the legislature reaffirmed the country's name as .\nHistory.\nPrehistoric.\nDuring the Pleistocene El Salvador was inhabited by now extinct megafauna species, including the elephant-sized giant ground sloth \"Eremotherium\", the rhinoceros-like \"Mixotoxodon\", the gomphothere (elephant-relative) \"Cuvieronius\", the glyptodont \"Glyptotherium\", the llama \"Hemiauchenia\", and the horse \"Equus conversidens\". El Salvador has likely been occupied by humans since the Paleoindian period, based on fluted stone points found in western El Salvador.\nPre-Columbian era.\nArchaeological knowledge of Pre-Columbian civilization in El Salvador is poor, due to its high population density limiting excavation, as well as volcanic eruptions blanketing potential archaeological sites. This lack of knowledge particularly affects the Preclassic Period and earlier.\nA notable archaeological site in western El Salvador is Chalchuapa, which was first settled around 1200 BC, and became a major urban settlement on the periphery of the Maya civilization during the Preclassic Period and was heavily involved in the trading of valuable items like ceramics, obsidian, cacao and hematite. The settlement was heavily damaged around 430 AD by a volcanic eruption, after which it never regained its former prominence. Another major Pre-Columbian settlement is Cara Sucia in the far west of the country, which began as a small settlement around 800 BC at the beginning of the Middle Preclassic, during the Late Classic (600\u2013900 AD), Cara Sucia emerged as a major urban settlement, before being abruptly destroyed during the 10th century. \nThe Pipil people, Nahua speaking groups migrated from Anahuac beginning around 800 AD and occupied the central and western regions of El Salvador. The Nahua Pipil were the last indigenous people to arrive in El Salvador. They called their territory \"Kuskatan\", a Nawat word meaning \"The Place of Precious Jewels\", back-formed into Classical Nahuatl \"C\u014dzcatl\u0101n\", and as \"Cuzcatl\u00e1n\". It was the largest domain in Salvadoran territory up until European contact. The term \"Cuzcatleco\" is commonly used to identify someone of Salvadoran heritage, although the majority of the eastern population has an indigenous heritage of Lenca origin, as do their place names such as Intipuca, Chirilagua, and Lolotique.\nMost of the archaeological sites in western El Salvador such as Lago de Guija and Joya De Ceren indicate a pre-Columbian Mayan culture. Cihuatan shows signs of material trade with northern Nahua culture, eastern Mayan and Lenca culture, and southern Nicaraguan and Costa Rican indigenous culture. Tazumal's smaller B1-2 structure shows a talud-tablero style of architecture that is associated with Nahua culture and corresponds with their migration history from Anahuac. In eastern El Salvador, the Lenca site of Quelepa is highlighted as a major pre-Columbian cultural centre and demonstrates links to the Mayan site of Copan in western Honduras as well as the previously mentioned sites in Chalchuapa, and Cara Sucia in western El Salvador. An investigation of the site of La Laguna in Usulutan has also produced Copador items that link it to the Lenca-Maya trade route.\nEuropean arrival (1522).\nBy 1521, the indigenous population of the Mesoamerican area had been drastically reduced by the smallpox epidemic that was spreading throughout the territory, although it had not yet reached pandemic levels in Cuzcatl\u00e1n or the northern portion Managuara. The first known visit by Spaniards to what is now Salvadoran territory was made by the admiral Andr\u00e9s Ni\u00f1o, who led an expedition to Central America. He disembarked in the Gulf of Fonseca on 31 May 1522, at Meanguera island, naming it Petronila, and then traversed to Jiquilisco Bay on the mouth of Lempa River. The first indigenous people to have contact with the Spanish were the Lenca of eastern El Salvador.\nConquest of Cuzcatl\u00e1n and Managuara.\nIn 1524, after participating in the conquest of the Aztec Empire, Pedro de Alvarado, his brother Gonzalo, and their men crossed the Rio Paz southwards into Cuzcatlec territory. Upon their arrival, Spaniards were disappointed to discover that the Pipil had little gold compared to what they had found in Guatemala or Mexico. The small amount of gold that was available had to be panned so that it could be obtained. Eventually, the Spaniards recognized the richness of the land's volcanic soil. Following this discovery, the Spanish crown began granting land based on the terms of the encomienda system.\nPedro Alvarado led the first incursion to extend their dominion to the domain of Cuzcatlan in June 1524. When he arrived at the borders of the kingdom, he saw that civilians had been evacuated. Cuzcatlec warriors moved to the coastal city of Acajutla and waited for Alvarado and his forces. Alvarado approached, confident that the result would be similar to what occurred in Mexico and Guatemala. He thought he would easily deal with this new indigenous force since the Mexican allies on his side and the Pipil spoke a similar language.\nAlvarado described the Cuzcatlec soldiers as having shields decorated with colourful exotic feathers, a vest-like armour made of three inch cotton which arrows could not penetrate, and long spears. Both armies suffered many casualties, with a wounded Alvarado retreating and losing a lot of his men, especially among the Mexican Indian auxiliaries. Once his army had regrouped, Alvarado decided to head to the Cuzcatlan capital and again faced armed Cuzcatlec. Wounded, unable to fight and hiding in the cliffs, Alvarado sent his Spanish men on their horses to approach the Cuzcatlec to see if they would fear the horses, but they did not retreat, Alvarado recalls in his letters to Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s.\nThe Cuzcatlec attacked again, and on this occasion stole Spanish weaponry. Alvarado retreated and sent Mexican messengers to demand that the Cuzcatlec warriors return the stolen weapons and surrender to their opponent's king. The Cuzcatlec responded with the famous response, \"If you want your weapons, come get them\". As days passed, Alvarado, fearing an ambush, sent more Mexican messengers to negotiate, but these messengers never came back and were presumably executed.\nThe Spanish efforts were firmly resisted by Pipil and their Mayan-speaking neighbours. They defeated the Spaniards and what was left of their Tlaxcalan allies, forcing them to withdraw to Guatemala. After being wounded, Alvarado abandoned the war and appointed his brother, Gonzalo de Alvarado, to continue the task. Two subsequent expeditions (the first in 1525, followed by a smaller group in 1528) brought the Pipil under Spanish control, since the Pipil also were weakened by a regional epidemic of smallpox. In 1525, the conquest of Cuzcatl\u00e1n was completed and the city of San Salvador was established. The Spanish faced much resistance from the Pipil and were not able to reach eastern El Salvador, the area of the Lencas.\nIn 1526, the Spanish founded the garrison town of San Miguel in northern Managuara\u2014territory of the Lenca, headed by another explorer and conquistador, Luis de Moscoso Alvarado, nephew of Pedro Alvarado. Oral history holds that a Maya-Lenca crown princess, Antu Silan Ulap I, organized resistance to the conquistadors. The commonwealth of the Lenca was alarmed by de Moscoso's invasion, and Antu Silan travelled from village to village, uniting all the Lenca towns in present-day El Salvador and Honduras against the Spaniards. Through surprise attacks and overwhelming numbers, they were able to drive the Spanish out of San Miguel and destroy the garrison.\nFor ten years the Lencas prevented the Spanish from building a permanent settlement. Then the Spanish returned with more soldiers, including about 2,000 forced conscripts from indigenous communities in Guatemala. They pursued the Lenca leaders further up into the mountains of Intibuc\u00e1.\nAntu Silan Ulap eventually handed over control of the Lenca resistance to Lempira (also called Empira). Lempira was noteworthy among indigenous leaders in that he mocked the Spanish by wearing their clothes after capturing them and using their weapons captured in battle. Lempira fought in command of thousands of Lenca forces for six more years in Managuara until he was killed in battle. The remaining Lenca forces retreated into the hills. The Spanish were then able to rebuild their garrison town of San Miguel in 1537.\nColonial period (1525\u20131821).\nDuring the colonial period, San Salvador and San Miguel were part of the Captaincy General of Guatemala, also known as the Kingdom of Guatemala (), created in 1609 as an administrative division of New Spain. The Salvadoran territory was administered by the mayor of Sonsonate, with San Salvador being established as an \"intendencia\" in 1786.\nIn 1811, a combination of internal and external factors motivated Central American elites to attempt to gain independence from the Spanish Crown. The most important internal factors were the desire of local elites to control the country's affairs free of involvement from Spanish authorities, and the long-standing Creole aspiration for independence. The main external factors motivating the independence movement were the success of the French and American revolutions in the 18th century, and the weakening of the Spanish Crown's military power as a result of the Napoleonic Wars, with the resulting inability to control its colonies effectively.\nIn November 1811 Salvadoran priest Jos\u00e9 Mat\u00edas Delgado rang the bells of Iglesia La Merced in San Salvador, calling for insurrection and launching the 1811 Independence Movement. This insurrection was suppressed, and many of its leaders were arrested and served sentences in jail. Another insurrection was launched in 1814, which was also suppressed.\nIndependence (1821).\nIn 1821, in light of unrest in Guatemala, Spanish authorities capitulated and signed the Act of Independence of Central America, which released all of the Captaincy General of Guatemala (comprising current territories of Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica and the Mexican state of Chiapas) from Spanish rule and declared its independence. In 1821, El Salvador joined Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua in a union named the Federal Republic of Central America.\nIn early 1822, the authorities of the newly independent Central American provinces, meeting in Guatemala City, voted to join the newly constituted First Mexican Empire under Agust\u00edn de Iturbide. El Salvador resisted, insisting on autonomy for the Central American countries. A Mexican military detachment marched to San Salvador and suppressed dissent, but with the fall of Iturbide on 19 March 1823, the army decamped back to Mexico.\nShortly thereafter, the authorities of the provinces revoked the vote to join Mexico, deciding instead to form a federal union of the five remaining provinces (Chiapas permanently joined Mexico at this juncture) known as the Federal Republic of Central America. El Salvador declared its independence from the Federal Republic of Central America on 30 January 1841. El Salvador joined Honduras and Nicaragua in 1896 to form the Greater Republic of Central America, which dissolved in 1898.\nAfter the mid-19th century, the economy was based on coffee growing. As the world market for indigo withered away, the economy prospered or suffered as the world coffee price fluctuated. The enormous profits that coffee yielded as a monoculture export served as an impetus for the concentration of land into the hands of an oligarchy of just a few families.\nThroughout the last half of the 19th century, a succession of presidents from the ranks of the Salvadoran oligarchy, nominally both conservative and liberal, generally agreed on the promotion of coffee as the predominant cash crop, the development of infrastructure (railroads and port facilities) primarily in support of the coffee trade, the elimination of communal landholdings to facilitate further coffee production, the passage of anti-vagrancy laws to ensure that displaced \"campesinos\" and other rural residents provided sufficient labour for the coffee \"fincas\" (plantations), and the suppression of rural discontent. In 1912, the national guard was created as a rural police force.\n20th century.\nIn 1898, General Tom\u00e1s Regalado gained power by force, deposing General Rafael Antonio Guti\u00e9rrez and ruling as president until 1903. Once in office he revived the practice of presidents designating their successors. After serving his term, he remained active in the Salvadoran Army and was killed on 11 July 1906, at El Jicaro, during a war against Guatemala. Until 1913 El Salvador was politically stable, with undercurrents of popular discontent. When President Manuel Enrique Araujo was killed in 1913, many hypotheses were advanced for the political motive of his murder.\nManuel Enrique Araujo's administration was followed by the Mel\u00e9ndez\u2013Qui\u00f1\u00f3nez dynasty that lasted from 1913 to 1927. P\u00edo Romero Bosque, a former minister and a trusted collaborator of the dynasty, succeeded President Alfonso Qui\u00f1\u00f3nez Molina, and in 1930 announced free elections, in which Arturo Araujo came to power on 1 March 1931, in what was considered the country's first freely contested election. His government lasted only nine months before it was overthrown by junior military officers, who accused his Salvadoran Laborist Party of lacking political and governmental experience and of using its government offices inefficiently. Arturo Araujo faced general popular discontent, as the people had expected economic reforms and the redistribution of land. There were demonstrations in front of the National Palace from the first week of his administration. His vice president and minister of war was General Maximiliano Hern\u00e1ndez Mart\u00ednez.\nIn December 1931, a coup d'\u00e9tat was organized by junior officers and led by Mart\u00ednez. Only the First Regiment of Cavalry and the National Police defended the presidency (the National Police had been on its payroll), but later that night, after hours of fighting, the badly outnumbered defenders surrendered to rebel forces. The Directorate, composed of officers, hid behind a shadowy figure, a rich anti-communist banker called Rodolfo Duke, and later installed the vice-president Mart\u00ednez as president. The revolt was probably caused by the army's discontent at not having been paid by President Araujo for some months. Araujo left the National Palace and unsuccessfully tried to organize forces to defeat the revolt.\nThe U.S. Minister in El Salvador met with the Directorate and later recognized the government of Mart\u00ednez, which agreed to hold presidential elections. He resigned six months prior to running for re-election, winning back the presidency as the only candidate on the ballot. He ruled from 1935 to 1939, then from 1939 to 1943. He began a fourth term in 1944 but resigned in May after a general strike. Mart\u00ednez had said he was going to respect the constitution, which stipulated he could not be re-elected, but he refused to keep his promise.\nLa Matanza.\nBeginning in January 1932, there was brutal suppression of a rural revolt known as La Matanza. In the unstable political climate of the previous few years, social activist and revolutionary leader Farabundo Mart\u00ed helped found the Communist Party of Central America, and led a communist alternative to the Red Cross, called \"International Red Aid\", serving as one of its representatives. Their goal was to help poor and underprivileged Salvadorans through the use of Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology.\nIn December 1930, at the height of the country's economic and social depression, Mart\u00ed was once again exiled because of his popularity among the nation's poor and rumours of his upcoming nomination for president the following year. Once Araujo was elected president in 1931, Mart\u00ed returned to El Salvador and, along with Alfonso Luna and Mario Zapata, began the movement that was later truncated by the military.\nOn 22 January 1932, thousands of poorly armed peasants in the western part of El Salvador revolted against \nthe government and Mart\u00ednez.The rebellion occurred amid widespread unrest over suppression of democratic political freedoms following the cancellation of the results of the\u00a01932 legislative election. The rebels were led by\u00a0Feliciano Ama\u00a0and\u00a0Farabundo Mart\u00ed and were largely composed of indigenous people and communists. The rebellion made gains initially, capturing several towns and cities across the western\u00a0part of the country, killing an estimated 2,000 people. The government suppressed the rebellion brutally, killing between 10,000 and 40,000 people, mostly, Pipil peasants. Many of the rebellion's leaders, including Ama and Mart\u00ed, were\u00a0captured and executed.\nHistorically, the high Salvadoran population density has contributed to tensions with neighbouring Honduras, as land-poor Salvadorans emigrated to less densely populated Honduras and established themselves as squatters on unused or underused land. This phenomenon was a major cause of the 1969 Football War between the two countries. As many as 130,000 Salvadorans were forcibly expelled or fled from Honduras.\nThe Christian Democratic Party (PDC) and the National Conciliation Party (PCN) were active in Salvadoran politics from 1960 until 2011, when they were disbanded by the Supreme Court because they had failed to win enough votes in the 2004 presidential election. Both parties have since reconstituted. They share common ideals, but one represents the middle class and the latter the interests of the Salvadoran military.\nPDC leader Jos\u00e9 Napole\u00f3n Duarte was the mayor of San Salvador from 1964 to 1970, winning three elections during the regime of PCN president, Julio Adalberto Rivera Carballo, who allowed free elections for mayors and the National Assembly. Duarte later ran for president with a political grouping called the National Opposition Union (UNO) but was defeated in the 1972 presidential elections. He lost to the ex-minister of interior, Colonel Arturo Armando Molina, in an election that was widely viewed as fraudulent; Molina was declared the winner even though Duarte was said to have received a majority of the votes. Duarte, at some army officers' requests, supported a revolt to protest the election fraud, but was captured, tortured and later exiled. Duarte returned to the country in 1979 to enter politics after working on projects in Venezuela as an engineer.\nSalvadoran Civil War (1979\u20131992).\nCarlos Humberto Romero was the final president of the country's military dictatorship which began in 1931. The U.S. had been Romero's biggest supporter, but by October 1979, the Carter administration decided that El Salvador needed regime change.\nOn 15 October 1979, a coup d'\u00e9tat brought the Revolutionary Government Junta (JRG) to power. It nationalized many private companies and took over much privately owned land. The purpose of this new junta was to stop the revolutionary movement already underway in response to Duarte's stolen election. Nevertheless, the oligarchy opposed agrarian reform, and a junta formed with young reformist elements from the army such as Colonels Adolfo Arnoldo Majano and Jaime Abdul Guti\u00e9rrez, as well as with progressives such as Guillermo Ungo and Alvarez.\nPressure from the oligarchy soon dissolved the junta because of its inability to control the army in its repression of the people fighting for unionization rights, agrarian reform, better wages, accessible health care and freedom of expression. In the meantime, the guerrilla movement was spreading to all sectors of Salvadoran society. Middle and high school students were organized in MERS (Movimiento Estudiantil Revolucionario de Secundaria, Revolutionary Movement of Secondary Students); college students were involved with AGEUS (Asociacion de Estudiantes Universitarios Salvadorenos; Association of Salvadoran College Students); and workers were organized in BPR (Bloque Popular Revolucionario, Popular Revolutionary Block). In October 1980, several other major guerrilla groups of the Salvadoran left had formed the Farabundo Mart\u00ed National Liberation Front, or FMLN. By the end of the 1970s, government-contracted death squads were killing about 10 people each day. Meanwhile, the FMLN had 6,000 to 8,000 active guerrillas and hundreds of thousands of part-time militia, supporters, and sympathizers.\nThe U.S. supported and financed the creation of a second junta to change the political environment and stop the spread of a leftist insurrection. Napole\u00f3n Duarte was recalled from his exile in Venezuela to head this new junta. However, a revolution was already underway and his new role as head of the junta was seen by the general population as opportunistic. He was unable to influence the outcome of the insurrection.\n\u00d3scar Romero, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of San Salvador, denounced injustices and massacres committed against civilians by government forces. He was considered \"the voice of the voiceless\", but he was assassinated by a death squad while saying Mass on 24 March 1980. Some consider this to be the beginning of the full Salvadoran Civil War, which lasted from 1980 to 1992.\nAn unknown number of people \"disappeared\" during the conflict, and the UN reports that more than 75,000 were killed. The Salvadoran Army's US-trained Atl\u00e1catl Battalion was responsible for the El Mozote massacre where more than 800 civilians were murdered, over half of them children, the El Calabozo massacre, and the murder of UCA scholars.\nOn 16 January 1992, the government of El Salvador, represented by president Alfredo Cristiani, and the FMLN, represented by the commanders of the five guerrilla groups \u2013 Schafik H\u00e1ndal, Joaqu\u00edn Villalobos, Salvador S\u00e1nchez Cer\u00e9n, Francisco Jovel and Eduardo Sancho, all signed peace agreements brokered by the United Nations ending the 12-year civil war. This event, held at Chapultepec Castle in Mexico, was attended by U.N. dignitaries and other representatives of the international community. After signing the armistice, the president stood and shook hands with the newly ex-guerrilla commanders, an action which was widely admired.\nPost-war (1992\u20132019).\nThe Chapultepec Peace Accords mandated reductions in the size of the army, and the dissolution of the National Police, the Treasury Police, the National Guard and the Civilian Defence, a paramilitary group. A new Civil Police was to be organized. Judicial immunity for crimes committed by the armed forces ended; the government agreed to submit to the recommendations of a Commission on the Truth for El Salvador \"(Comisi\u00f3n de la Verdad Para El Salvador)\", which would \"investigate serious acts of violence occurring since 1980, and the nature and effects of the violence, and...recommend methods of promoting national reconciliation\". In 1993 the Commission delivered its findings reporting human rights violations on both sides of the conflict. Five days later the Salvadoran legislature passed an amnesty law for all acts of violence during the period.\nFrom 1989 until 2004, Salvadorans favoured the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA), voting in ARENA presidents in every election (Alfredo Cristiani, Armando Calder\u00f3n Sol, Francisco Flores P\u00e9rez, Antonio Saca) until 2009. The unsuccessful attempts of the left-wing party to win presidential elections led to its selection of a journalist rather than a former guerrilla leader as a candidate. On 15 March 2009, Mauricio Funes, a television figure, became the first president from the FMLN. He was inaugurated on 1 June 2009. One focus of the Funes government has been revealing the alleged corruption from the past government.\nARENA formally expelled Saca from the party in December 2009. With 12 loyalists in the National Assembly, Saca established his own party, the Grand Alliance for National Unity (GANA), and entered into a tactical legislative alliance with the FMLN. After three years in office, with Saca's GANA party providing the FMLN with a legislative majority, Funes had not taken action to either investigate or to bring corrupt former officials to justice.\nEconomic reforms since the early 1990s brought major benefits in terms of improved social conditions, diversification of the export sector, and access to international financial markets at investment grade level. Crime remains a major problem for the investment climate. Early in the new millennium, El Salvador's government created the Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales\u00a0\u2014 the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN)\u00a0\u2014 in response to climate change concerns. El Salvador adopted the United States dollar as its currency on 1 January 2001.\nIn March 2014, former FMLN guerrilla leader Cer\u00e9n narrowly won the election. He was sworn in as president on 31 May 2014. He was the first former guerrilla to become the president of El Salvador.\nIn October 2017, an El Salvador court ruled that former president Funes and one of his sons had illegally enriched themselves. Funes had sought asylum in Nicaragua in 2016.\nIn September 2018, former president Saca was sentenced to 10 years in prison after he pleaded guilty to diverting more than US$300 million in state funds to his own businesses and third parties.\n2019\u2013present.\nOn 1 June 2019, Nayib Bukele became the new president of El Salvador. Bukele was the winner of February 2019 presidential election. He represented GANA, as he was denied participating with the newly formed Nuevas Ideas party. ARENA and the FMLN, El Salvador's two main parties, had dominated politics in El Salvador over the past three decades.\nAccording to a report by the International Crisis Group (ICG) 2020, the homicide rate in El Salvador had dropped by as much as 60% since Bukele became president in June 2019. Although the government officially denied any collusion with organised crime, press reports based on testimony from government members and security officials stated a \"non-aggression deal\" between parts of the government and the gangs existed.\nThe party Nuevas Ideas (NI, \"New Ideas\"), founded by Bukele, with its ally (GANA) won around 63% of the vote in the February 2021 legislative elections. His party and allies won 61 seats, well over the coveted supermajority of 56 seats in the 84-seat parliament, allowing for uncontested decisions at the legislative level. The supermajority permits President Bukele's party to appoint judiciary members and pass laws with little to no opposition, for instance, to remove presidential term limits.\nOn 8 June 2021, at the initiative of President Bukele, pro-government deputies in the Legislative Assembly voted legislation to make bitcoin legal tender in El Salvador. In September 2021, El Salvador's Supreme Court ruled to allow Bukele to run for a second term in 2024, despite the fact that the constitution prohibits the president to serve two consecutive terms in office. The decision was organized by judges appointed to the court by Bukele. On 25 February 2021, El Salvador became the first Central American country to be awarded certification for the elimination of malaria by the WHO.\nIn January 2022, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) urged El Salvador to reverse its decision to make cryptocurrency legal tender. Bitcoin had rapidly lost about half of its value, meaning economic difficulties and, as of May 2022, with government bonds trading at 40% of their original value, the prospect of a looming sovereign default; however, as of April 2025, the value of bitcoin since it was declared legal tender is trading twice the price that it was when El Salvador made it legal tender. Bukele announced back in January 2022 plans to build Bitcoin City at the base of a volcano in El Salvador.\nIn 2022, the Salvadoran government initiated a massive fight against criminal gangs and gang-related violence. A state of emergency was declared on 27 March and was extended on 20 July. More than 53,000 suspected gang members were arrested, precipitating the highest reported incarceration rate in the world. The crackdown has reportedly produced hundreds of deaths of detainees, with international human rights organizations such as Amnesty International declaring it the worst abuse of human rights in the country since its civil war.\nOn 30 November 2023, the Legislative Assembly granted Bukele and Vice President Felix Ulloa a leave of absence so that they could focus on their 2024 re-election campaign. Bukele was succeeded by Claudia Rodr\u00edguez de Guevara as acting president, the first female president in Salvadoran history.\nIn January 2024, it was announced that homicide rate dropped nearly 70% year over year, with 154 in 2023 compared to 495 homicides in 2022. On 4 February 2024, Bukele won re-election with 84% of the vote in the presidential election. His party Nuevas Ideas won 58 of the parliament's 60 seats. On 1 June 2024, he was sworn in for his second five-year term. In February 2025, El Salvador\u2019s Congress agreed to remove Bitcoin's legal tender status, following pressure from the International Monetary Fund. In late-July 2025, the Legislative Assembly approved of changes to the Constitution of El Salvador, which would remove presidential term-limits, and extend individual terms from 5 years to 6. The Legislative Assembly also moved the next presidential election from 2029 to 2027 (making it coterminous with the legislative elections that year), after which the constitutional changes would take effect.\nGeography.\nEl Salvador lies in the isthmus of Central America between latitudes 13\u00b0 and 15\u00b0N, and longitudes 87\u00b0 and 91\u00b0W. It stretches from west-northwest to east-southeast and north to south, with a total area of . As the smallest and most densely populated country in continental America, El Salvador is affectionately called \"Pulgarcito de America\" (the \"Tom Thumb of the Americas\"). El Salvador shares borders with Guatemala and Honduras, as well as a coastline with the Pacific Ocean. The total national boundary length is : with Guatemala and with Honduras. It is the only Central American country that has no Caribbean coastline. The coastline on the Pacific is long.\nEl Salvador has over 300 rivers, the most important of which is the Rio Lempa. Originating in Guatemala, the Rio Lempa cuts across the northern range of mountains, flows along much of the central plateau, and cuts through the southern volcanic range to empty into the Pacific. It is El Salvador's only navigable river. It and its tributaries drain about half of the country's area. Other rivers are generally short and drain the Pacific lowlands or flow from the central plateau through gaps in the southern mountain range to the Pacific. These include the Goascor\u00e1n, Jiboa, Torola, Paz and the R\u00edo Grande de San Miguel.\nThe geography of El Salvador is volcanic. El Salvador is a country located on the Ring of Fire, where the majority of the earth's volcanos and earthquakes occur. The most notable volcano is Volcan Chaparrastique (San Miguel Volcano), which also exhibits the most volcanic activity. The tallest volcano is Ilamatepec (Santa Ana Volcano), reaching above sea level. Along with these, there are 20 other volcanoes, many which are active, or potentially active. El Salvador has the second highest number of volcanoes of any Central American country.\nThere are several lakes enclosed by volcanic craters in El Salvador, the most important of which are Lake Ilopango () and Lake Coatepeque (). Lake G\u00fcija is El Salvador's largest natural lake (). Several artificial lakes were created by the damming of the Lempa, the largest of which is Cerr\u00f3n Grande Reservoir (). There are a total of water within El Salvador's borders.\nThe highest point in El Salvador is Cerro El Pital, at , on the border with Honduras. Two parallel mountain ranges cross El Salvador to the west with a central plateau between them and a narrow coastal plain hugging the Pacific. These physical features divide the country into two physiographic regions. The mountain ranges and central plateau, covering 85% of the land, comprise the interior highlands. The remaining coastal plains are referred to as the Pacific lowlands.\nClimate.\nEl Salvador has a tropical climate with pronounced wet and dry seasons. Temperatures vary primarily with elevation and show little seasonal change. The Pacific lowlands are uniformly hot and humid. The central plateau and mountain areas are more moderate.\nThe rainy season, known locally as \"invierno\", extends from May to October. Almost all the annual rainfall during this time, and yearly rain totals, particularly on southern-facing mountain slopes, can be as high as . Protected areas and the central plateau receive lesser, although still significant, amounts. Rainfall during this season generally comes from low pressure over the Pacific and usually falls in heavy afternoon thunderstorms. Although hurricanes occasionally form in the Pacific, they seldom affect El Salvador, with the notable exception of Hurricane Mitch in 1998 (which actually formed over the Atlantic Basin) and Hurricane Emily in 1973.\nFrom November to April, the northeast trade winds control weather patterns. During these months, air flowing from the Caribbean has lost most of its precipitation while passing over the mountains in Honduras. By the time this air reaches El Salvador, it is dry, hot, and hazy. This season is known locally as \"verano\", or summer.\nTemperatures vary little with season; elevation is the primary determinant. The Pacific lowlands are the hottest region, with annual averages ranging from . San Salvador is representative of the central plateau, with an annual average temperature of and absolute high and low readings of , respectively. Mountain areas are the coolest, with annual averages from and minimum temperatures sometimes approaching freezing.\nNatural disasters.\nExtreme weather events.\nEl Salvador's position on the Pacific Ocean makes it subject to severe weather conditions, including heavy rainstorms and severe droughts, both of which may be made more extreme by the El Ni\u00f1o and La Ni\u00f1a effects. Hurricanes occasionally form in the Pacific, with the notable exception of Hurricane Mitch, which formed in the Atlantic and crossed Central America.\nIn the summer of 2001 a severe drought destroyed 80% of El Salvador's crops, causing famine in the countryside. On 4 October 2005, severe rains resulted in dangerous flooding and landslides, which caused at least 50 deaths.\nEarthquakes and volcanic activity.\nEl Salvador lies along the Pacific Ring of Fire and is subject to significant tectonic activity, including frequent earthquakes and volcanic activity. The capital San Salvador was destroyed in 1756 and 1854, and it suffered heavy damage in the 1919, 1982, and 1986 tremors. Recent examples include the magnitude 7.7 earthquake on 13 January 2001 that caused a landslide that killed more than 800 people. Another earthquake a month later, on 13 February 2001, killed 255 people and damaged about 20% of the country's housing. A 5.7 Mw earthquake in 1986 resulted in 1,500 deaths, 10,000 injuries, and 100,000 people left homeless.\nEl Salvador has over twenty volcanoes. Two of them, San Miguel and Izalco, have been active in recent years. From the early 19th century to the mid-1950s, Izalco erupted with a regularity that earned it the name \"Lighthouse of the Pacific\". Its brilliant flares were clearly visible for great distances at sea, and at night its glowing lava turned it into a brilliant luminous cone. The most recent destructive volcanic eruption took place on 1 October 2005, when the Santa Ana Volcano spewed a cloud of ash, hot mud and rocks that fell on nearby villages and caused two deaths. The most severe volcanic eruption in this area occurred in the 5th century AD, when the Ilopango volcano erupted with a VEI strength of 6, producing widespread pyroclastic flows and devastating Mayan cities.\nFlora and fauna.\nIt is estimated that there are 500 species of birds, 1,000 species of butterflies, 400 species of orchids, 800 species of trees, and 800 species of marine saltwater fish in El Salvador.\nOf the eight species of sea turtles in the world, six of them nest on the coasts of Central America, and four make their home on the Salvadoran coast: the leatherback turtle, the hawksbill, the green sea turtle, and the olive ridley. The hawksbill is critically endangered.\nRecent conservation efforts provide hope for the future of the country's biological diversity. In 1997, the government established the Ministry of the Environment and Natural Resources. In 1999, a general environmental framework law was approved by the National Assembly. Several non-governmental organizations are doing work to safeguard some of El Salvador's most important forested areas. Foremost among these is SalvaNatura, which manages El Imposible, El Salvador's largest national park under an agreement with El Salvador's environmental authorities.\nEl Salvador is home to six terrestrial ecosystems: Central American montane forests, Sierra Madre de Chiapas moist forests, Central American dry forests, Central American pine-oak forests, Gulf of Fonseca mangroves, and Northern Dry Pacific Coast mangroves. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.06/10, ranking it 136th globally out of 172 countries.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe 1983 constitution has the highest legal authority in the country. El Salvador has a democratic and representative government, whose three bodies are:\nThe political framework of El Salvador is a presidential representative democratic republic with a multiform, multi-party system. The president, currently Nayib Bukele, is both head of state and head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Legislative Assembly. The country also has an independent judiciary and Supreme Court. It was ranked the 5th least electoral democratic country in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2023 by V-Dem Democracy Report.\nPolitics.\nEl Salvador has a multi-party system. Two political parties, the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) and the Farabundo Mart\u00ed National Liberation Front (FMLN) have tended to dominate elections. ARENA candidates won four consecutive presidential elections until the election of Mauricio Funes of the FMLN in March 2009. The FMLN Party is leftist in ideology, and is split between the dominant Marxist-Leninist faction in the legislature, and the social liberal wing led by Mauricio Funes until 2014.\nThe two-party dominance was broken after Nayib Bukele, a candidate from GANA won the 2019 Salvadoran presidential election. In February 2021, the results of legislative election caused a major change in the politics of El Salvador. The new allied party of president Nayib Bukele, Nuevas Ideas (New Ideas) won the biggest congressional majority in the country's history.\nThe departments of the Central region, especially the capital and the coastal regions, known as ' (red departments) are relatively leftist. The ' (blue departments) in the east, western and highland regions are relatively conservative.\nAdministrative divisions.\nEl Salvador is divided into 14 departments (\"departamentos\"), which in turn are subdivided into 44 municipalities (\"municipios\") which are also divided into 262 districts.\nForeign relations.\nEl Salvador is a member of the United Nations and several of its specialized agencies. It is also member of the Organization of American States, the Central American Parliament, and the Central American Integration System among others. It actively participates in the Central American Security Commission, which seeks to promote regional arms control. El Salvador is a member of the World Trade Organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements. An active participant in the Summit of the Americas process, El Salvador chairs a working group on market access under the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative.\nIn November 1950, El Salvador was the only country to help the newly empowered 14th Dalai Lama by supporting his Tibetan Government cabinet minister's telegram requesting an appeal before the General Assembly of the United Nations to stop the annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China. With no other countries in support, \"the UN unanimously dropped the Tibetan plea from its agenda\".\nEl Salvador is a party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.\nMilitary.\nThe Armed Forces of El Salvador have three branches: the Salvadoran Army, the Salvadoran Air Force and the Navy of El Salvador. There are around 25,000 personnel in the armed forces in total.\nIncarceration.\nAs of February 2025, El Salvador had the highest prisoner rate worldwide, with over 1,600 prisoners per 100,000 of the national population.\nEl Salvador\u2019s Terrorism Confinement Center (CECOT) mega-prison is considered the largest prison in the Americas with a capacity of 40,000 inmates. The incarcerations have been part of president Bukele\u2019s efforts to reduce high crime rates and gang violence. In March 2025, the United States transferred more than 200 immigrants, alleging them to be members of a Venezuelan gang, to be imprisoned in El Salvador in violation of court orders.\nHuman rights.\nAmnesty International has drawn attention to several arrests of police officers for unlawful police killings. Other issues to gain Amnesty International's attention include missing children, failure of law enforcement to properly investigate and prosecute crimes against women properly, and rendering organized labour illegal.\nAbortion is banned, with no exceptions for rape, incest, or threat to the mother's life; as a result, 180 women have been imprisoned in the last two decades, some for up to 30 years. Discrimination against LGBT people in El Salvador is very widespread. In a 2013 survey by Pew Research, 53% of Salvadorans believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society. Although homosexuality itself is legal, gay marriage is legally not recognized, as proposals were rejected twice in 2006, and once again in 2009.\nEconomy.\nEl Salvador's economy has been hampered at times by natural disasters such as earthquakes and hurricanes, by government policies that mandate large economic subsidies, and by official corruption. Subsidies became such a problem that in April 2012, the International Monetary Fund suspended a $750\u00a0million loan to the central government. President Funes' chief of cabinet, Alex Segovia, acknowledged that the economy was at the \"point of collapse\".\nGross domestic product (GDP) in purchasing power parity estimate for 2021 is US$57.95\u00a0billion growing real GDP at 4.2% for 2021. The service sector is the largest component of GDP at 64.1%, followed by the industrial sector at 24.7% (2008 est.) and agriculture represents 11.2% of GDP (2010 est.). The GDP grew after 1996 at an annual rate that averaged 3.2% real growth. The government committed to free market initiatives and the 2007 GDP's real growth rate hit 4.7%. As of December 2017, net international reserves stood at $3.57\u00a0billion.\nIt has long been a challenge in El Salvador to develop new growth sectors for a more diversified economy. In the past, the country produced gold and silver, but recent attempts to reopen the mining sector, which were expected to add hundreds of millions of dollars to the local economy, collapsed after President Saca shut down the operations of Pacific Rim Mining Corporation. Nevertheless, according to the Central American Institute for Fiscal Studies (Instituto Centroamericano for Estudios Fiscales), the contribution of metallic mining was a minuscule 0.3% of the country's GDP between 2010 and 2015. Saca's decision although not lacking political motives, had strong support from local residents and grassroots movements in the country. President Funes later rejected a company's application for a further permit based on the risk of cyanide contamination on one of the country's main rivers.\nAs with other former colonies, El Salvador was considered a mono-export economy (an economy that depended heavily on one type of export) for many years. During colonial times, El Salvador was a thriving exporter of indigo, but after the invention of synthetic dyes in the 19th century, the newly created modern state turned to coffee as the main export.\nThe government has sought to improve the collection of its current revenues, with a focus on indirect taxes. A 10% value-added tax (IVA in Spanish), implemented in September 1992, was raised to 13% in July 1995. Inflation has been steady and among the lowest in the region. As a result of the free trade agreements, from 2000 to 2006, total exports have grown 19% from $2.94\u00a0billion to $3.51\u00a0billion, and total imports have risen 54% from $4.95\u00a0billion to $7.63\u00a0billion. This has resulted in a 102% increase in the trade deficit, from $2.01\u00a0billion to $4.12\u00a0billion.\nIn 2006, El Salvador was the first country to ratify the Central America-Dominican Republic Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) \u2014 negotiated by the five countries of Central America and the Dominican Republic \u2014 with the United States. CAFTA requires that the Salvadoran government adopt policies that foster free trade. CAFTA has bolstered exports of processed foods, sugar, and ethanol, and supported investment in the apparel sector, which faced Asian competition with the expiration of the Multi Fibre Arrangement in 2005. In anticipation of the declines in the apparel sector's competitiveness, the previous administration sought to diversify the economy by promoting the country as a regional distribution and logistics hub, and by promoting tourism investment through tax incentives.\nIn June 2021, President Nayib Bukele said he would introduce legislation to make Bitcoin legal tender in El Salvador. The Bitcoin Law was passed by the Legislative Assembly of El Salvador on 9 June 2021. Bitcoin officially became a legal tender on 7 September 2021. As part of the law, foreigners can gain permanent residence in El Salvador if they invest 3 Bitcoin into the country. The implementation of the law has been met with protests, with the majority of the country being against using Bitcoin as legal tender.\nAccording to a survey conducted by the Salvadoran Chamber of Commerce, as of March 2022 only 14% of merchants in the country processed at least one Bitcoin transaction. Since May 2024, an official government entity named the Bitcoin Office of El Salvador reports that the government holds 5,750 bitcoin (approximately $354 million circa May 2024) -- with nearly 474 bitcoin (approx $29 million circa May 2024) mined since September 2021 using geothermal energy from the Tecapa volcano.\nEl Salvador leads the region in remittances per capita, with inflows equivalent to nearly all export income; in 2019 2.35 million Salvadorans lived in the U.S. and about a third of all households received remittances. Remittances from Salvadorans living in the United States, sent to family members in El Salvador, are a major source of foreign income and offset the trade deficit. Remittances have increased steadily since the early 2000s, growing from $3.32\u00a0billion, or approximately 16.2% of GDP in 2006, to nearly $6 billion (around 20% of GDP in 2019, one of the highest rates in the world, according to the World Bank.)\nIn December 2024, Nayib Bukele's government purchased 11 new BTC for over a million dollars, thus strengthening its strategic reserves.\nEnergy.\nEl Salvador's energy industry is diversified across, relying on fossil fuels, hydro, other renewables (mainly geothermal) for local electricity production, along with a reliance on imports for oil. El Salvador has an installed capacity of 1,983 MW generating 5,830 GWh of electricity per year, 84% of this comes from renewable sources including 26.85% from geothermal (produced from the country's many volcanoes), 29.92% from hydro and the rest is from fossil fuels.\nAccording to the National Energy Commission, 94.4% of total injections during January 2021 came from hydroelectric plants (28.5% - 124.43 GWh), geothermal (27.3% - 119.07 GWh), biomass (24.4% 106.43 GWh), photovoltaic solar (10.6% - 46.44 GWh) and wind (3.6% - 15.67 GWh).\nTelecommunications and media.\nEl Salvador has 900,000 fixed telephone lines, 500,000 fixed broadband lines and 9.4 million mobile cellular subscriptions. Much of the population is able to access the internet through their smartphones and mobile networks, which liberal government regulation promotes mobile penetration over fixed line including the deployment of 5G coverage (which testing of began in 2020). Transition to digital transmission of TV/radio networks was done in 2018 with the adaptation of the ISDB-T standard. There are hundreds of privately owned national TV networks, cable TV networks (that also carry international channels), and radio stations available; while there is also 1 government owned broadcast station.\nOfficial corruption and foreign investment.\nIn an analysis of ARENA's electoral defeat in 2009, the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador pointed to official corruption under the Saca administration as a significant reason for public rejection of continued ARENA government. Subsequent policies under Funes administrations improved El Salvador to foreign investment, and the World Bank in 2014 rated El Salvador 109, a little better than Belize (118) and Nicaragua (119) in the World Bank's annual \"Ease of doing business\" index.\nAs per Santander Trade, a Spanish think tank in foreign investment, \"Foreign investment into El Salvador has been steadily growing during the last few years. In 2013, the influx of FDI increased. Nevertheless, El Salvador receives less FDI than other countries of Central America. The government has made little progress in terms of improving the business climate. In addition to this, the limited size of its domestic market, weak infrastructures and institutions, as well as the high level of criminality have been real obstacles to investors. However, El Salvador is the second most 'business friendly' country in Central America in terms of business taxation. It also has a young and skilled labour force and a strategic geographical position. The country's membership in the DR-CAFTA, as well as its reinforced integration to the C4 countries (producers of cotton) should lead to an increase of FDI\".\nForeign companies have lately resorted to arbitration in international trade tribunals in total disagreement with Salvadoran government policies. In 2008, El Salvador sought international arbitration against Italy's Enel Green Power, on behalf of Salvadoran state-owned electric companies for a geothermal project Enel had invested in. Four years later, Enel indicated it would seek arbitration against El Salvador, blaming the government for technical problems that prevent it from completing its investment.\nThe government came to its defence claiming that Art 109 of the constitution does not allow any government (regardless of the party they belong), to privatize the resources of the national soil (in this case geothermic energy). The dispute came to an end in December 2014 when both parties came to a settlement, from which no details have been released. The small country had yielded to pressure from the Washington-based powerful ICSID.\nIn 2009, the U.S. Embassy warned that the Salvadoran government's populist policies of mandating artificially low electricity prices were damaging private sector profitability, including the interests of American investors in the energy sector. The U.S. Embassy noted the corruption of El Salvador's judicial system and quietly urged American businesses to include \"arbitration clauses, preferably with a foreign venue\", when doing business in the country.\nIn terms of how people perceived the levels of public corruption in 2014, El Salvador ranks 80 out of 175 countries as per the Corruption Perceptions Index. El Salvador's rating compares relatively well with Panama (94 of 175) and Costa Rica (47 of 175).\nTourism.\nIt was estimated that 1,394,000 international tourists visited El Salvador in 2014. Tourism contributed US$2970.1\u00a0million to El Salvador's GDP in 2019. This represented 11% of total GDP. Tourism directly supported 80,500 jobs in 2013. This represented 3.1% of total employment in El Salvador. In 2019, tourism indirectly supported 317,200 jobs, representing 11.6% of total employment in El Salvador.\nMost North American and European tourists seek out El Salvador's beaches and nightlife. El Salvador's tourism landscape is slightly different from those of other Central American countries. Because of its geographic size and urbanization there are not many nature-themed tourist destinations such as ecotours or archaeological sites open to the public. Nonetheless, El Salvador remains best known for its beaches and volcanoes. The most frequently visited beaches include El Tunco, Punta Roca, El Sunzal, El Zonte beach, La Costa del Sol, El Majahual, and La Libertad beach. The most hiked volcanoes are Santa Ana and Izalco.\nInfrastructure.\nThe level of access to water supply and sanitation has been increased significantly. A 2015 conducted study by the University of North Carolina called El Salvador the country that has achieved the greatest progress in the world in terms of increased access to water supply and sanitation and the reduction of inequity in access between urban and rural areas. However, water resources are seriously polluted and a large part of the wastewater discharged into the environment without any treatment. Institutionally a single public institution is both de facto in charge of setting sector policy and of being the main service provider. Attempts at reforming and modernizing the sector through new laws have not borne fruit over the past 20 years.\nIn response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government converted the country's main convention centre into Hospital El Salvador to be the largest hospital in Latin America. The facility was inaugurated by the president on 22 June 2020, at which time he announced the hospital conversion would be permanent because of the large investment made. US$25\u00a0million was spent on the first phase of the conversion of the former convention centre, with the entire facility costing $75\u00a0million and featuring a blood bank, morgue, radiology area, among other amenities. The hospital will have a total capacity of 1,083 ICU beds and 2,000 beds total once phase 3 is completed.\nThe airport serving international flights in El Salvador is Monse\u00f1or \u00d3scar Arnulfo Romero International Airport. This airport is located about southeast of San Salvador.\nDemographics.\nEl Salvador's population was in , compared to 2,200,000 in 1950. In 2010 the percentage of the population below the age of 15 was 32.1%, 61% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 6.9% were 65 years or older. The capital city of San Salvador has a population of about 2.1\u00a0million people. An estimated 42% of El Salvador's population live in rural areas. Urbanization has expanded at a phenomenal rate in El Salvador since the 1960s, with millions moving to the cities and creating associated problems for urban planning and services.\nThere are up to 100,000 Nicaraguans living in El Salvador.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the 2024 Global Hunger Index, El Salvador ranks 43rd out of the 127 countries with sufficient data to calculate 2024 GHI scores. With a score of 8.0, El Salvador has a level of hunger that is low.\nEthnic groups.\nAround 86% of Salvadorans identify as mestizo, or mixed Amerindian and European descent, 12.7% identify as being of full European ancestry, 0.1% identify as Afro-descended while about 0.6% do not identify with any of the aforementioned categories.\nOf the population, 0.23% report as fully indigenous. The ethnic groups are Kakawira which represents 0.07% of the total country's population, Nahua (0.06%), Lenca (0.04%) and other minor groups (0.06%). Very few Amerindians have retained their customs and traditions, having over time assimilated into the dominant mestizo culture. There is a small Afro-Salvadoran group that is 0.13% of the total population, with Blacks, among other races, having been prevented from immigrating via government policies in the early 20th century. The descendants of enslaved Africans, however, had already integrated into the Salvadoran population and culture well before, during the colonial and post-colonial period.\nAmong the various immigrant groups in El Salvador, Palestinians stand out. Though few in number, their descendants have attained great economic and political power in the country, as evidenced by the election of President Antonio Saca, whose opponent in the 2004 election, Schafik Handal, was also of Palestinian descent, and the flourishing commercial, industrial, and construction firms owned by this ethnic group. The current President, Nayib Bukele, is also of Palestinian descent.\nAs of 2004[ [update]], there were approximately 3.2\u00a0million Salvadorans living outside El Salvador, with the United States traditionally being the destination of choice for Salvadoran economic migrants. By 2012, there were about 2.0\u00a0million Salvadoran immigrants and Americans of Salvadoran descent in the U.S., making them the sixth largest immigrant group in the country. The second destination of Salvadorans living outside is Guatemala, with more than 111,000 persons, mainly in Guatemala City. Salvadorans also live in other nearby countries, such as Belize, Honduras and Nicaragua. Other countries with notable Salvadoran communities include Canada, Mexico, the United Kingdom (including the Cayman Islands), Sweden, Brazil, Italy, and Colombia.\nLanguages.\nSpanish is the official language and is spoken by virtually all inhabitants, although a very small number (around 500) of indigenous Pipils speak Nawat. The other indigenous languages, namely Poqomam, Cacaopera, and Lenca, are extinct. Q'eqchi' is spoken by indigenous immigrants of Guatemalan and Belizean origin living in El Salvador.\nThe local Spanish vernacular is called \"Caliche\", which is considered informal. As in other regions of Central and South America, Salvadorans use . This refers to the use of \" as the second person singular pronoun, instead of \".\nReligion.\nThe majority of the population in El Salvador is Christian. Catholics (43.3%) and Protestants (33.9%) are the two major religious groups in the country, with the Catholic Church the largest denomination. Those not affiliated with any religious group amount to 18.6% of the population. The remaining is that of 3% Jehovah's Witnesses, Hare Krishnas sect of Hinduism, Muslims, Jews, Buddhists, Latter-day Saints, and those adhering to indigenous religious beliefs, and 1.2% being made up of those who identify as agnostic or atheist. The number of evangelicals in the country is growing rapidly. \u00d3scar Romero, the first Salvadoran saint, was canonized by Pope Francis on 14 October 2018.\nEducation.\nThe public education system in El Salvador is severely lacking in resources. Class sizes in public schools can be as large as 50 children per classroom. Salvadorans who can afford the cost often choose to send their children to private schools, which are regarded as being better-quality than public schools. Most private schools follow American, European or other advanced systems. Lower-income families are forced to rely on public education.\nEducation in El Salvador is free through high school. After nine years of basic education (elementary\u2013middle school), students have the option of a two-year high school or a three-year high school. A two-year high school prepares the student for transfer to a university. A three-year high school allows the student to graduate and enter the workforce in a vocational career, or to transfer to a university to further their education in their chosen field.\nUniversities in El Salvador include a central public institution, the Universidad de El Salvador, and many other specialized private universities. El Salvador was ranked 98th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025, up from 108th in 2019.\nCrime.\nSince the early twenty-first century, El Salvador has experienced high crime rates, including gang-related crimes and juvenile delinquency. El Salvador had the highest murder rate in the world in 2012 but experienced a sharp decline in 2019 with a new conservative government in power. In 2005 it was considered an epicentre of a gang crisis, along with Guatemala and Honduras. Several journalistic investigations indicate that the government administrations of Carlos Mauricio Funes Cartagena and Salvador S\u00e1nchez Cer\u00e9n, far from working to eradicate violence and the actions of gang groups, made truces with the gangs Barrio 18 and Mara Salvatrucha to keep a certain control over criminal activities and murders in the Salvadoran territory.\nIn response to this, the government has set up countless programmes to try to guide the youth away from gang membership; so far its efforts have not produced any quick results. One of the government programmes was a gang reform called \"Super Mano Dura\" (Super Firm Hand). Super Mano Dura had little success and was highly criticized by the United Nations. It experienced temporary success in 2004 but there was a rise in crime after 2005.\nHomicide rates.\nIn 2004, there were 41 intentional homicides per 100,000 citizens, with 60% of the homicides committed being gang-related. In 2012, the homicide rate had increased to 66 per 100,000 inhabitants, more than triple the rate in Mexico. In 2011 there were an estimated 25,000 gang members at large in El Salvador, with another 9,000 in prison. The most well-known gangs, called \"maras\" in colloquial Spanish, are Mara Salvatrucha and their rivals Barrio 18. Maras are hunted by death squads including Sombra Negra.\nIn 2015, there were 6,650 homicides recorded in El Salvador. In 2016, at least 5,728 people were murdered. In 2017, there were 3,962 recorded homicides. In 2018, there were 3,348 recorded deaths. In 2019, authorities reported a total of 2,365 homicides. In 2020, there were only 1,322 reported homicides. In 2021, the country recorded 1,140 homicides. According to official data, 2021 had the lowest number of recorded murders since the end of the civil war in 1992.\nBy 2022, El Salvador had a homicide rate of 7.8 per 100,000 individuals. On 10 May 2023, Bukele stated on Twitter that El Salvador had completed one full year or 365 days since 2019 without a single homicide occurring. This announcement was accompanied by a video detailing his government's claims about this dramatic change in the occurrences of homicide. In 2024, El Salvador reported a homicide rate of 1.9 per 100,000 people, a figure lower than any other Latin American country. This rate represents a 98% decrease in nine years.\n2022 crackdown on gangs.\nBeginning on 25 March 2022, three days of gang-related violence occurred that left 87 people dead. In response, President Bukele asked the Salvadoran parliament to ratify a state of emergency. On 26 March, Bukele also ordered the police and army to initiate mass-arrests against those responsible for the violence.\nA day later, Congress approved a \"State of Emergency\" that gives legal coverage to arrest any citizen suspected to be a gang member even with no proof. In addition, Congress also approved reforms to increase the maximum sentence for gang membership from 9 to 45 years in prison and punish the dissemination of gang messages, including independent journalism talking about the gang crisis, with up to 15 years in prison.\nThe law was directed against those who \"mark\" their territories with acronyms of the gangs, a practice that gang members use to intimidate, and threaten with death those who denounce them to the authorities. The Directorate of Penal Centres began to erase the graffiti that the gangs use to mark the territory in which they operate.\nThe Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) and Barrio 18 gangs, among others, were estimated in 2022 to have around some 70,000 members, and as of August 2023, around 72,000 suspected gang members have been sent to prison as a part of the government crackdown on the gangs.\nCulture.\nPulling from indigenous, colonial Spanish and African influences, a composite population was formed as a result of intermarrying between the natives, European settlers, and enslaved Africans. The Catholic Church plays an important role in the Salvadoran culture. Archbishop \u00d3scar Romero is a national hero for his role in resisting human rights violations that were occurring in the lead-up to the Salvadoran Civil War. Significant foreign personalities in El Salvador were the Jesuit priests and professors Ignacio Ellacur\u00eda, Ignacio Mart\u00edn-Bar\u00f3, and Segundo Montes, who were murdered in 1989 by the Salvadoran Army during the height of the civil war.\nPainting, ceramics and textiles are the principal manual artistic mediums. Writers Francisco Gavidia, Salarru\u00e9 (Salvador Salazar Arru\u00e9), Claudia Lars, Alfredo Espino, Pedro Geoffroy Rivas, Manlio Argueta, Jos\u00e9 Roberto Cea, and poet Roque Dalton are important writers from El Salvador. Notable 20th-century personages include the late filmmaker Baltasar Polio, female film director Patricia Chica, artist Fernando Llort, and caricaturist To\u00f1o Salazar.\nAmong the more renowned representatives of the graphic arts are the painters Studio Lenca, Augusto Crespin, Noe Canjura, Carlos Ca\u00f1as, Giovanni Gil, Julia D\u00edaz, Mauricio Mejia, Maria Elena Palomo de Mejia, Camilo Minero, Ricardo Carbonell, Roberto Huezo, Miguel Angel Cerna, (the painter and writer better known as MACLo), Esael Araujo, and many others.\nMusic.\nTraditional Salvadoran music is a mixture of indigenous, Spanish, and African influences. It includes religious songs (mostly used to celebrate Christmas and other holidays, especially feast days of the saints). Other musical repertoire consists of danza, pasillo, marcha and cancione which are composed of parading bands, street performances, or onstage dances, either in groups or paired. Satirical and rural lyrical themes are common. Traditional instruments used are the \"marimba\", \"tepehuaste\", flutes, drums, scrapers and gourds, as well as guitars among others. El Salvador's well known folk dance is known as \"Xuc\" which originated in Cojutepeque, Cuscatlan. Caribbean, Colombian, and Mexican music has become customary listening radio and party in the country, especially boleros, cumbia, merengue, Latin pop, salsa, bachata, and reggaeton.\nCuisine.\nOne of El Salvador's notable dishes is the \"pupusa\". \"Pupusas\" are handmade maize tortillas (made of \"masa de ma\u00edz\" or \"masa de arroz\", a maize or rice flour dough used in Latin American cuisine) stuffed with one or more of the following: cheese (usually a soft Salvadoran cheese such as \"quesillo\", similar to mozzarella), \"chicharr\u00f3n\", or refried beans. Sometimes the filling is \"queso con loroco\" (cheese combined with \"loroco\", a vine flower bud native to Central America). \"Pupusas revueltas\" are \"pupusas\" filled with beans, cheese and pork. There are also vegetarian options. Some adventurous restaurants even offer \"pupusas\" stuffed with shrimp or spinach. The name \"pupusa\" comes from the Pipil-Nahuatl word, \"pupushahua\". The origins of the \"pupusa\" are debated, although its presence in El Salvador is known to predate the arrival of the Spaniards.\nIn El Salvador, the pupusa is considered a Mesoamerican ancestral legacy and the most popular dish nationally. It has been designated as the \"National Dish of El Salvador\" via the Legislative Decree no. 655 in the Salvadoran Constitution. The decree also indicates that every second Sunday in November, the country will celebrate the \"National Day of the Pupusas\".\nTwo other typical Salvadoran dishes are \"yuca frita\" and \"panes con pollo\". \"Yuca frita\" is deep fried cassava root served with curtido (a pickled cabbage, onion and carrot topping) and pork rinds with \"pescaditas\" (fried baby sardines). Yuca is sometimes served boiled instead of fried. \"Pan con pollo/pavo\" (bread with chicken/turkey) are warm turkey or chicken-filled submarine sandwiches. The bird is marinated and then roasted with spices and hand-pulled. This sandwich is traditionally served with tomato and watercress along with cucumber, onion, lettuce, mayonnaise, and mustard.\nOne of El Salvador's typical breakfasts is fried plantain, usually served with cream. It is common in Salvadoran restaurants and homes, including those of immigrants to the United States. Alguashte, a condiment made from dried, ground pepitas, is commonly incorporated into savoury and sweet Salvadoran dishes. \"Maria Luisa\" is a dessert commonly found in El Salvador. It is a layered cake that is soaked in orange marmalade and sprinkled with powdered sugar. One of the most popular desserts is the cake \"Pastel de tres leches\" (Cake of three milks), consisting of three types of milk: evaporated milk, condensed milk, and cream.\nA popular drink that Salvadorans enjoy is \"horchata\". \"Horchata\" is most commonly made of the morro seed ground into a powder and added to milk or water, and sugar. \"Horchata\" is drunk year-round, and can be drunk at any time of day. It mostly is accompanied by a plate of \"pupusas\" or fried yuca. \"Horchata\" from El Salvador has a very distinct taste and is not to be confused with Mexican \"horchata\", which is rice-based. Coffee is also a common morning beverage. Other popular drinks in El Salvador include \"ensalada\", a drink made of chopped fruit swimming in fruit juice, and \"Kolachampan\", a sugar cane-flavoured carbonated beverage.\nSport.\nFootball is the most popular sport in El Salvador. The El Salvador national football team qualified for the FIFA World Cup in 1970 and 1982. Their qualification for the 1970 tournament was marred by the Football War, a war against Honduras, whose team El Salvador's had defeated. The national football team play at the Estadio Cuscatl\u00e1n in San Salvador. It opened in 1976 and seats 53,400, making it the largest stadium in Central America and the Caribbean.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9358", "revid": "36623386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9358", "title": "Geography of El Salvador", "text": "El Salvador is a country in Central America. Situated at the meeting point of three tectonic plates, it is highly seismologically active and the location of numerous earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The country has a tropical climate.\nPlate tectonics.\nEl Salvador, along with the rest of Central America, is one of the most seismologically active regions on earth, situated atop three of the large tectonic plates that constitute the Earth's surface. The motion of these plates causes the area's earthquake and volcanic activity.\nMost of Central America and the Caribbean Basin rests on the relatively motionless Caribbean Plate. The Pacific Ocean floor, however, is being carried northeast by the underlying motion of the Cocos Plate. Ocean floor material is largely composed of basalt, which is relatively dense; when it collides with the lighter granite rocks of Central America, the ocean floor is forced down under the land mass, creating the deep Middle America Trench that lies off the coast of El Salvador.\nThe subduction of the Cocos Plate accounts for the frequency of earthquakes near the coast. As the rocks constituting the ocean floor are forced down, they melt, and the molten material pours up through weaknesses in the surface rock, producing volcanoes and geysers.\nNorth of El Salvador, Mexico and most of Guatemala are riding on the westward-moving North American Plate that butts against the northern edge of the stationary Caribbean Plate in southern Guatemala. The grinding action of these two plates creates a fault (similar to the San Andreas fault in California) that runs the length of the valley of the R\u00edo Motagua in Guatemala. Motion along this fault is the source of earthquakes in northernmost El Salvador.\nEl Salvador has a long history of destructive earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. San Salvador was destroyed in 1756 and 1854, and suffered heavy damage in the 1919, 1982, and 1986 tremors. The country has over twenty volcanoes, although only two, San Miguel and Izalco, have been active in recent years. From the early nineteenth century to the mid-1950s, Izalco erupted with a regularity that earned it the name \"Lighthouse of the Pacific\". Its brilliant flares were clearly visible for great distances at sea, and at night its glowing lava turned it into a brilliant luminous cone.\nPhysical features.\nTwo parallel mountain ranges cross El Salvador to the west with a central plateau between them and a narrow coastal plain hugging the Pacific. These physical features divide the country into two physiographic regions. The mountain ranges and central plateau, covering 85 percent of the land, comprise the interior highlands. The remaining coastal plains are referred to as the Pacific lowlands.\nThe northern range of mountains, the Sierra Madre, form a continuous chain along the border with Honduras. Elevations in this region range from 1,600 to 2,700 meters. The area was once heavily forested, but overexploitation led to extensive erosion, and it has become semibarren. As a result, it is the country's most sparsely populated zone, with little farming or other development.\nThe southern range of mountains is actually a discontinuous chain of more than twenty volcanoes, clustered into five groups. The westernmost group, near the Guatemalan border, contains Izalco and Santa Ana, which at 2,365 meters is the highest volcano in El Salvador. Between the cones lie alluvial basins and rolling hills eroded from ash deposits. The volcanic soil is rich, and much of El Salvador's coffee is planted on these slopes.\nThe central plateau constitutes only 25 percent of the land area but contains the heaviest concentration of population and the country's largest cities. This plain is about 50 kilometers wide and has an average elevation of 600 meters. Terrain here is rolling, with occasional escarpments, lava fields, and geysers.\nA narrow plain extends from the coastal volcanic range to the Pacific Ocean. This region has a width ranging from one to thirty-two kilometers with the widest section in the east, adjacent to the Golfo de Fonseca. Near La Libertad, however, the mass of the mountains pushes the lowlands out; the slopes of adjacent volcanoes come down directly to the ocean. Surfaces in the Pacific lowlands are generally flat or gently rolling and result from the alluvial deposits of nearby slopes.\nEl Salvador has over 300 rivers, the most important of which is the R\u00edo Lempa. Rising in Guatemala, the R\u00edo Lempa cuts across the northern range of mountains, flows along much of the central plateau, and finally cuts through the southern volcanic range to empty into the Pacific. It is El Salvador's only navigable river; it and its tributaries drain about half the country. Other rivers are generally short and drain the Pacific lowlands or flow from the central plateau through gaps in the southern mountain range to the Pacific.\nNumerous lakes of volcanic origin are found in the interior highlands; many of these lakes are surrounded by mountains and have high, steep banks. The largest lake, the Lago de Ilopango, lies just to the east of the capital. Other large lakes include the Lago de Coatepeque in the west and the Lago de G\u00fcija on the Guatemalan border. The Cerr\u00f3n Grande Dam on the R\u00edo Lempa has created a large reservoir, the Embalse Cerr\u00f3n Grande, in northern El Salvador.\nIzalco has erupted at least 54 times since 1770. It earned the nickname \"Lighthouse of the Pacific\" because it served as a beacon for ships during the night.\nClimate.\nEl Salvador has a tropical climate with pronounced wet and dry seasons. Temperatures vary primarily with elevation and show little seasonal change. The Pacific lowlands are uniformly hot and humid; the central plateau and mountain areas are more moderate.\nThe rainy season, known locally as \"invierno\", or winter, extends from May to October. Almost all the annual rainfall during this time, and yearly rain totals, particularly on southern-facing mountain slopes, can be as high as . Protected areas and the central plateau receive lesser, although still significant, amounts. Rainfall during this season generally comes from low pressure over the Pacific and usually falls in heavy afternoon thunderstorms. Although hurricanes occasionally form in the Pacific, they seldom affect El Salvador, with the notable exception of Hurricane Mitch in 1998 (which actually formed over the Atlantic Basin) and Hurricane Emily in 1973.\nFrom November through April, the northeast trade winds control weather patterns. During these months, air flowing from the Caribbean has lost most of its precipitation while passing over the mountains in Honduras. By the time this air reaches El Salvador, it is dry, hot, and hazy. This season is known locally as \"verano\", or summer.\nTemperatures vary little with season; elevation is the primary determinant. The Pacific lowlands are the hottest region, with annual averages ranging from . San Salvador is representative of the central plateau, with an annual average temperature of and absolute high and low readings of , respectively. Mountain areas are the coolest, with annual averages from and minimum temperatures sometimes approaching freezing.\nOther facts.\nThe total land area of El Salvador is 23,041\u00a0km2, with 20,721\u00a0km2 of land and 320\u00a0km2 of water. El Salvador is about the size of Israel and the U.S. states of New Jersey and Vermont, but has the population size of Libya and Lebanon. El Salvador has 590\u00a0km of borders, including 391\u00a0km of borders with Honduras and 199\u00a0km with Guatemala. El Salvador has a coastline of 307\u00a0km.\nEl Salvador claims a territorial sea of .\nThe lowest point of elevation in El Salvador is the Pacific Ocean, at sea level. The highest point is Cerro El Pital, at 2,730 m.\nMaritime claims:&lt;br&gt;\n\"Exclusive economic zone:\"\nNatural resources:\nHydropower, geothermal power, petroleum, arable land\nLand use (2012 estimate) includes 34.03 percent arable land, 10.86 percent permanent crops, 55.12 percent other.\nIrrigated land:\n449.9\u00a0km2 (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n25.23\u00a0km3 (2011)\nNatural hazards:\nEl Salvador is known as the \"Land of Volcanoes\"; there are frequent and sometimes very destructive earthquakes and volcanic activity; hurricanes rarely make direct landfall.\nEnvironmental issues.\nDeforestation; soil erosion; water pollution; contamination of soils from disposal of toxic wastes.\nEl Salvador is party to the Convention on Biological Diversity, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, CITES, Basel Convention, Partial Test Ban Treaty, Montreal Protocol, Ramsar Convention. El Salvador has signed, but not ratified the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9359", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9359", "title": "Demographics of El Salvador", "text": "This is a demography of the population of El Salvador including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nEl Salvador's population numbers 6.03 million. Ethnically, 86.3% of Salvadorans are mixed (mixed Native Salvadoran and European (mostly Spanish) origin). Another 12.7% is of pure European descent, 1% are of pure indigenous descent, 0.16% are black and others are 0.64%.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nEl Salvador's population was in , compared to 2,200,000 in 1950. In 2010 the percentage of the population below the age of 15 was 32.1%, 61% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 6.9% were 65 years or older.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 12.V.2007):: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2011) (Estimates based on the 2007 Population Census) : \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Data refer to national projections based on 2007 census.) (Source: El Salvador National Population Estimates and Projections 2005-2050 (2021 revision).): \nVital statistics.\nUN estimates.\nThe Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nRegistered data.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nEthnic groups.\nOut of the 6,408,111 people in El Salvador, 86.3% are Mestizo, 15% are European, 1% Indigenous, 0.8% Afro-Salvadorans, and 0.64% other.\nIndigenous Salvadorans.\nAccording to the Salvadoran government, about 1% of the population are of full or partial indigenous origin (principally Pipil, located in the west and central part of the country, and Lenca, found east of the Lempa River) also there are small populations of Cacaopera people in the Moraz\u00e1n Department. In the prehispanic age, the largest most dominant Native Salvadoran groups in the actual territory of El Salvador were the Lenca people and Pipil people followed by small enclaves of Maya peoples: (Poqomam people/Chorti people), Cacaopera people, Xinca people, and Mangue language people.\nThe number of indigenous people in El Salvador have been criticized by indigenous organizations and academics as too small and accuse the government of denying the existence of indigenous Salvadorans in the country. According to the National Salvadoran Indigenous Coordination Council (CCNIS) and CONCULTURA (National Council for Art and Culture at the Ministry of Education ), approximately 70,000 or 1 per cent of Salvadorian peoples are indigenous. Nonetheless, very few Amerindians have retained their customs and traditions, having over time assimilated into the dominant Mestizo/Spanish culture. The low numbers of indigenous people may be partly explained by historically high rates of old-world diseases, absorption into the Mestizo population, as well as mass murder during the 1932 Salvadoran peasant uprising (or \"La Matanza\") which saw (estimates of) up to 30,000 peasants killed in a short period of time. Many authors note that since \"La Matanza\" the indigenous in El Salvador have been very reluctant to describe themselves as such (in census declarations for example) or to wear indigenous dress or be seen to be taking part in any cultural activities or customs that might be understood as indigenous. Departments and cities in the country with notable indigenous populations include Sonsonate (especially Izalco, Nahuizalco, Cuisnahuat, San Antonio del Monte, and Santo Domingo), Cacaopera, San Sim\u00f3n and Panchimalco, in the department of San Salvador.\nMestizo Salvadorans.\nAn estimated 86.3% of the population are Mestizo/Castizo, having mixed indigenous and European ancestry. Historical evidence and census supports the explanation of \"strong sexual asymmetry\", as a result of a strong bias favoring matings between European males and Native Salvadoran females, and to statistically significant indigenous male mortality during the Conquest. The genetics thus suggests the native men were sharply reduced in numbers due to the war and disease. Large numbers of Spaniard men settled in the region and had children with the local women. The Natives were forced to adopt Spanish names, language, and religion, and in this way, the Lencas and Pipil women and children were Westernised. A vast majority over 90% of Salvadorans are Mestizo/Native Salvadoran.\nEuropean Salvadorans.\nSpanish Salvadorans.\nSpaniards began to settle in El Salvador in the mid-1520s. Some 12.7% of Salvadorans are white. This population is made up of those of Spanish origin, while there are also Salvadorans of French, German, Swiss, English, Irish, and Italian descent. A majority of Central European settlers in El Salvador arrived during World War II as refugees from the Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Switzerland with many settling in the region that is now Chalatenango in the late 18th century. In 1789, Francisco Luis H\u00e9ctor de Carondelet was named governor of El Salvador. Because the local indigenous population working in the indigo industry had declined greatly, Carondolet recruited Spanish laborers from northern Spain to settle in El Salvador. In 1790, de Carondelet, ordered families from the north of Spain (Galicia, Asturias, the Basque Country, Cantabria and Navarra) to settle in the area to compensate for the lack of indigenous people to work the land; important settlements of these Spaniards were the Northern and Central parts of El Salvador. Their descendants are among the blonde and fair-skinned people of today's Chalatenango Department.\nDuring 1880 to 1920, El Salvador had its Migratory Peak of Immigrants from Europe, as well as immigrants from nearby countries, Asians and other North Americans, when more than 120,000 arrived in El Salvador, the demographic weight was unprecedented, in 1880 the Population was of 480,000 inhabitants and by 1920 it was already 1,170,000. the main groups were the Spanish, Italians, Germans and some French, Polish and British\nFrench Salvadorans.\nThe French Immigration to the Republic of El Salvador was an important movement that the country received between the 19th century and the middle of the 20th century. Between 1850 and 1870, the French formed the largest foreign group in El Salvador. Later in 1940 to 1950, they formed one of the largest groups in the country, only surpassed by the Spanish and Italians. Between 1850 and 1870, El Salvador was the main recipient of French in Central America, most were merchants and businessmen together with their families.\nIt is estimated that between 1850 and 1950, more than 7,000 French emigrated to El Salvador, the majority came from Aquitaine, Occitania and the Alps. Between 1850 and 1870, 2,000 French arrived in El Salvador; between 1911 and 1937, 2,000 French entered the country, and finally in 1938 to 1945, 2,500 French entered the country. French immigration at that time greatly influenced the economy and education.\nSince the colonial period there is a record of French in Salvadoran territory, in which several French corsairs and French pirates stand out In 1850. Several French businessmen and merchants left for El Salvador to work in different types of jobs such as commerce, planting of sugar cane, industry and cultivation of coffee. During that time 2,000 French arrived in the territory, most were wealthy families and merchants. Most of the French who would arrive between 1880 and 1910 were merchants and professionals, but from 1911 to 1937, immigration would begin to shine again for various reasons. Many businessmen and merchants arrived in Salvadoran territory, at that time French investment in El Salvador was equal to that of the United States. During that period of time 2,000 French entered El Salvador. According to historical records, the French were the third largest group of foreigners in the country, only surpassed by the Spanish and Italians.\nThe majority of the French who arrived in the national territory first came from Corsica later in 1850 to 1950, the majority of the French who arrived in the territory were from Aquitaine, Occitanie and Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes but also Paris and other parts of the Alps, most of the French settled in San Salvador, however the City of Santa Tecla in the La Libertad Department (El Salvador) historically received large numbers of French Immigrants, other places with significant numbers are Santa Ana and Antiguo Cuscatl\u00e1n.\nGerman Salvadorans.\nGerman immigration to El Salvador was a migratory movement that began between 1880 and 1940, when the largest influx of Germans is recorded. The first Germans in El Salvador joined their mostly wealthy families in 1870 establishing coffee shops. At that time El Salvador had implemented the liberal reforms that attracted thousands of immigrants from Europe, Middle East and Asia, as well as the German immigration in the country, more families migrated to El Salvador and the agricultural land was also distributed. The main settlements of these families were the coffee-growing areas and also large cities like Nueva San Salvador now known as Santa Tecla, San Salvador, Chalatenango, Cuscatlan, Usulut\u00e1n and other areas where German immigrants saw economic opportunities in the country, they excelled in industry, commerce and farming.\nOne of the most famous Germans who immigrated to El Salvador was Walter Thilo Deininger, who moved to the Cuscatlan department in 1885. He soon built his coffee estate and other industries. Soon after, arrived more German families to Cuscatl\u00e1n, as well as important people like J\u00fcrgen H\u00fcbner, a German historian and author of \"Die Deutschen und El Salvador (The Germans and El Salvador).\nBy 1890, Germans were one of the country's largest immigrant groups and were able to settle and stand out from the crowd of other European immigrants. Germans numbers in El Salvador later increased, their descendants were much more than the number of German immigrants living in El Salvador. There were cities founded by German families, like Berl\u00edn, Usulut\u00e1n which is a very clear example of a settlement founded by a German. Later other Germans families came to the area. North of El Salvador, specifically what is now north of Metapan and Chalatenango, existed German settlements.\nThe Usulutan department was the area with the greatest presence of Germans in El Salvador. The Germans started arriving in the early 1900s and settled down to produce coffee.\nThe book, \u201cThe Population of El Salvador\u201d, by Rodolfo Bar\u00f3n Castro, published in 1942, shows one of the first Statistical Census published by the Central Office of Migration in 1937; there it indicated that the four largest groups of immigrants in El Salvador, at that time, were made up of Spaniards, Palestinians, Italians and Germans. Germans arrived in the country in the early 1900s and, along with Italians, French and other Europeans, helped develop roads and build the Port of El Triunfo.\nIn addition, from the municipality of Berl\u00edn, Usulut\u00e1n there was a direct route to reach Puerto El Triunfo; an ideal route to transport the merchandise they produced and to obtain work materials.\nIt was the meeting point where German descendants and those close to Germany met to do their business because the farms were somewhat distant. They found in this part of El Salvador a center of excellence to live or develop, but they also needed to have a place to meet on weekends, to go and talk, which is typical of the cultures of these peoples: to have a meeting point.\nThe settlement was also agricultural. In 1958, the German Embassy in El Salvador founded the \"C\u00edrculo Cultural Salvadore\u00f1o-Alem\u00e1n\", (German-Salvadoran cultural circle) to promote cultural exchange between Germany and El Salvador. The German School was dedicated on March 3, 1965, the Salvadoran German Cultural Forum has been celebrating every second Friday in November since 2006 Gardens of the Hilton Princess Hotel Oktoberfest. More than 700 people/families take part participate in a typically German dinner, German music and a typically German parade enjoy costumes. The traditional \"Beer Festival\" will continue thanks to the sponsorship of La Constancia and organized by German companies. The city of San Salvador, since 2011 in the third October week the Oktoberfest Pilsener celebrated in the exhibition and congress center. More than 27,000 people attended the 2013 edition, which became the largest Octoberfest in Central America. Over four days of festivities, participants enjoy traditional German cuisine and music, as well as a large selection of beers, some of which are made exclusively for the event.\nGermany is one of the main European Union trading partners of El Salvador and is the largest importer of Salvadoran coffee. The Chamber of Commerce German-Salvadoran consists of around 85 companies. In addition to a German school in San Salvador.\nItalian Salvadorans.\nItalian Immigration in El Salvador refers to the movement of Italians to the Republic of El Salvador and one of the most historically important movements in El Salvador. The Italo-Salvadorans are one of the largest European communities in the country, and one of the largest in Central America and the Caribbean, as well as one of those with the greatest social and cultural weight in America.\nDuring the mid-nineteenth century to the mid-twentieth century, waves of Italian immigrants from all regions of Italy were registered and arrived, mainly from northern Italy and southern Italy, the first Italians who arrived in the country were mainly from the Kingdom of Sardinia-Piedmont, and also from the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, which include several Italians from different cities and provinces, since 1880, there has been a flow from all Italian regions but mainly from the south of the peninsula. highlighting regions such as Campania, Basilicata, Apulia and Sicily.\nThere is a record of Italians residing and arriving in the country since 1850, who came from the Kingdom of Sardinia-Piedmont and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, several intellectuals, merchants and other lower-middle class Italians stand out, during those years several boats arrived to the country mainly from important port cities of Italy, which include Naples, Genoa and Palermo, most of these Italians entered through the port of La Libertad and in the East of the country, during that time the Italians in the country did not exceed 2,000, however in the following years the number of arrivals would grow more.\nBy 1870, more boats arrived from Naples and Genoa, ranging from 30 to 60 Italian immigrants, but many merchants also entered the country every day. During that period of time, the country created very free immigration reforms, which attracted more immigrants from the world, many Italians arrived between 1876 and 1879, several boats to the country stand out, mainly from Campania and Liguria, between 1870 and 1879, it is estimated that more than 2,500 Italians entered the country, at that time El Salvador was the main receiver of Italians in Central America, mainly attracted by various agricultural opportunities. In 1880 to 1889, more than 2,000 Italians arrived in the country mainly from Campania and Piedmont, many boats of more than 100 Italian immigrants arrived at the Salvadoran coasts, these boats sailed from Naples and Liguria, this time was highlighted by arrivals of lower-class Italians and some professionals, however, also there were nuns and priests who came to the country to found several churches, schools and important organizations. In 1890, Italian immigration grew exponentially, it is estimated that between 1890 and 1899, more than 6,500 Italians arrived in the country, the vast majority arrived at the port of La Libertad, several architects and other Italian professionals arrived, such as those who built the Santa Ana Theater.\nIn 1890, many Salesians arrived in the country from Turin, they set sail on ships full of Italian immigrants and arrived at the port of La Libertad Department (El Salvador), many stayed in the city of Santa Tecla, El Salvador, where they founded various organizations and schools such as the Colegio Santa Cecilia, which It was founded in 1899 by Italians.\nIn 1898, the first Italian organization was founded in El Salvador and the first in Central America, the Sociedad de Asistencia y Beneficencia entre Italianos en El Salvador, better known as the Italian Assistenza, the objective of this organization is to help newly arrived Italians to get a job and help them financially while they got it.\nTwentieth century.\nThe time was characterized by the massive entry of Italians into the country, between 1900 and 1909 more than 10,000 Italians arrived in the country from all Italian regions, at that time, El Salvador was the second largest recipient of Italian immigrants in Central America, many seeking better opportunities for their businesses and improve their quality of life, where several merchants and Italians entering the country stand out, many standing out in areas such as Education, Music, Agriculture, Industry, Commerce and infrastructure.\nBetween 1910 and 1919, other thousands of Italians enter as they register more than 6,000 arrivals in the country, the Italians easily adapted to the country and more Italians arrived in the country every day, El Salvador at that time managed to reach the main recipient of Italians in Central America, between 1920 and 1929, several Italian merchants and professionals arrived, but also lower-class Italians, many set up their businesses, in 1930, Italian immigration was paralyzed for various reasons, between 1930 and 1939, it is estimated that more than 1,000 Italians They arrived in the country and many set up their businesses.\nIn 1940, due to the Second World War, a large migratory wave of thousands of Italians emigrating to the country begins, where several merchants and Italians who wanted to improve their quality of life stand out, this time was characterized by the entry of several refugees, and Italians, most of whom came from northern Italy.\nBetween 1960 and 1980, several Franciscans arrived in the country, many founded schools and organizations to help the Salvadoran people, and also to reactivate the Italian culture in the country.\nIn 1989 a son of Italians, Alfredo Cristiani, was elected President of El Salvador. After five difficult years, his term ended in 1994, leaving his nation stabilized from the civil war that had plagued it for 20 years.\nItalian immigration to El Salvador was a very large movement that the country received, from 1850 to 1929, it is estimated that more than 32,000 Italians arrived in the small country, looking for job opportunities and improvements in their quality of life, but the migratory peak It was between 1880 and 1930, when thousands of Italians from all regions arrived in El Salvador, the main recipients of Italians in America were the United States, Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and other countries in the region, although El Salvador received large amounts of Italian immigrants and at the American level is one that has had more weight socially and culturally.\nItalian immigrants occupations and age.\nThe Italians who arrived in the mid-nineteenth century were mostly middle class or poor, many were farmers and workers who came to the country to look for work, several merchants also arrived, according to some records, the Italians who arrived in the country between 1850 and 1870, were many families, who on average were between 22 and 26 years old, more 60% of immigrants who arrived in the country were men and 40% were women.\nFrom 1870 to 1879, 2,5000 Italians arrived in the country, 63.5% were men, the average age was around 20 to 30 years and the majority were merchants, workers and farmers, between 1880 and 1889, they emigrated to the country around 2,000 Italians, 64% men and 44% women, age ranged widely, from 2 years to 50 years old, most were merchants, laborers and farmers, with increasing arrivals of priests, nuns and preachers. Between 1890 and 1891, the second highest peak was recorded, when 6,500 Italians entered El Salvador, the average age was around 20 to 30 years, and the most numerous occupations were merchants, workers, farmers, priests, nuns, teachers. and architects. The highest peak of Italian immigration in the country occurred between 1900 and 1909, when 10,000 Italians emigrated to the country looking for a better future, 60% were men and 40% women, and the average age was around 20 years. 30 years of age, the most numerous occupations were workers, merchants and some teachers, for 1910 to 1919, more than 6,000 Italians entered El Salvador, this year is distinguished by a growth of immigrants who are women with around 43% and 57% are men, the age varies between 3 years and 50 years, later, between 1920 and 1930, the majority who arrived in the country were engaged in commerce, agriculture and other businesses and activities.\nItalian settlements in El Salvador.\nThe first Italians who entered the country settled in Santa Ana and San Miguel. Others settled mainly in the east of the country, in San Miguel, Usulut\u00e1n and La Uni\u00f3n. In the north of the country, in Chalatenango, several groups of Italians also settled.\nThe southern Italians settled mainly in San Miguel, Santa Ana, San Salvador and other departments of the country, where several cities stand out. Santa Tecla was the one that received the greatest demographic weight due to Italian immigration, since it became the capital, they arrived various Italian communities.\nThe Lucanians, Campanians, Sicilians and Pulleses, had their main destinations in San Salvador, Santa Ana and San Miguel Department (El Salvador), while the northern Italians: the Piedmontese, Venetians, Ligurians and Lombards settled mainly in La Libertad, San Salvador, Chalatenango, Santa Ana and San Miguel. Several Italians settled in the department of Sonsonate, particularly from Castelnuovo di Conza in the Campania region, and Usulut\u00e1n received several Italian farmers from northern Italy, also in La Uni\u00f3n where several southerners and northerners settled, mainly Piedmontese and Calabrian. In the other departments of the country, minority but visible groups of Italians settled. succeeding in trade and agriculture.\nAfro-Salvadorans.\nAfro-Salvadorans, called Pardo and sometimes Afro-Mestizos in the colonial period, are the descendants of the African population that were enslaved and shipped to El Salvador to work in mines in specific regions of El Salvador. They have mixed into and were naturally bred out by the general Mestizo population, which is a combination of a Mestizo majority and the minority of African descendants, both of whom are racially mixed populations. Thus, there remains no significant extremes of African physiognomy among Salvadorans like there is in the other countries of Central America. A total of only 10,000 African slaves were brought to El Salvador over the span of 75 years, starting around 1548, about 25 years after El Salvador's colonization. El Salvador is the only country in Central America that does not have English Antillean (West Indian) or Garifuna populations of the Caribbean, but instead had older colonial African slaves that came straight from Africa. This is the reason why El Salvador is the only country in Central America not to have a caribbeanized culture, and instead preserved its classical Central America culture.\nJewish Salvadorans.\nThere is a small community of Jews who came to El Salvador from France, Germany, Morocco, Tunisia, and Turkey. Some Jews also arrived as World War II refugees.\nSince colonial times, there is a record of Jews in Latin America, in El Salvador there is a record of several Jewish immigrations from Portugal, after the independence of El Salvador, it is believed that the first Jewish immigrant was Bernardo Haas, born in Alsace. Subsequently, the first documented German Jew arrived in the country in 1888, according to scholar Jessica Alpert. France and Central Europe were the main countries of origin of this contemporary Jewish migration, the majority were Ashkenazi and Sephardic, they stayed permanently in El Salvador.\nThe immigration laws of El Salvador were very free between 1821 and 1930, however they changed after 1930, but these strict laws culminated in 1940, during the Second World War several Ashkenazi Jewish refugees arrived mainly from Hungary, Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Slovakia and France, giving them several documents of Salvadoran nationality.\nAt present the Jewish community in El Salvador is quite small, however there are a considerable number of descendants and they have stood out in society, as are several businessmen and politicians of Jewish origin, such as Ernesto Muyshondt, Gabriela Rodr\u00edguez de Bukele and Bernard Lewinsky.\nGypsies in El Salvador.\nThe Gypsy caravans in El Salvador in the 20th century. The city of Santa Tecla, El Salvador was one of the places where there were Gypsy camps in El Salvador in the first decades of the 20th century. On May 7, 1926, newspapers from the city of San Miguel, El Salvador reported that within its urban area there was a nomadic community of Gypsies, who were also called Hungarians or Magyars (for Magyar or Hungary, an area from which they then belonged) believed that they were originally from), Gypsies or \"peroleros\", a designation due to the huge pots or pans that they always carried in their wagons and with which they prepared community meals between huge wood-fired stoves.\nIn 1929, the writer Francisco Miranda Ruano would remember \"The tired Gypsies of that day\" from his distant childhood and whose adventures opened his vocation as a writer. The propagation of theosophical, fascist and national socialist ideas among soldiers and civilians in El Salvador in the 1920s and 1930s created an adverse environment for the periodic arrival of the Gypsy people in El Salvador. The maximum expression of this mental and cultural closure occurred during the dictatorial government of Brigadier Maximiliano Hern\u00e1ndez Mart\u00ednez, issued the Law of Migration that prohibited the entry of Blacks, Arabs, Turks, Chinese and Gypsies into the country. This cause Gypsies in El Salvador to hide their identity.\nThe Romani Holocaust in Nazi Europe from 1935 to 1945, killed thousands of Gypsy people. Some of them were able to save themselves from that sad fate, thanks to the thousands of Salvadoran nationality certificates issued, in a clandestine operation, by the Salvadoran consul in Geneva, Colonel Jos\u00e9 Castellanos Contreras, Jos\u00e9 Gustavo Guerrero and his Transylvanian-Jewish secretary George Mandel-Mantello.\nIn the 1980s, the writer Claribel Alegr\u00eda included the character \"The Gypsy\" in her novel Alice in the Land of Reality, which functioned as a rebellious and feminist conscience within the literary structure of the work. At the same time, it turned out be a tribute to the Gypsy caravans that once passed through Santa Ana, Sonsonate, Nahulingo, Usulut\u00e1n, Santiago de Mar\u00eda, Chalatenango, San Miguel, La Uni\u00f3n and many towns, streets, cities and other local territories of El Salvador.\nMore than eight decades after such terrible racist legislation, the Romani language is no longer heard in Salvadoran territory. In the Romani language, the father of the family is called \"Shero Rom\", and it is theorized that it could be the origin of the Salvadoran word \u201cChero\u201d to designate a friend.\nArab Salvadorans.\nThere is a significant Arab population (of about 100,000); mostly from Palestine (especially from the area of Bethlehem), but also from Lebanon. Salvadorans of Palestinian descent numbered around 70,000 individuals, while Salvadorans of Lebanese descent is around 25,000.\nThe history of the Arabs in El Salvador dates back to the end of the 19th century, when religious clashes in the Ottoman Empire induced many Palestinians, Lebanese, Egyptians, Tunisians, Algerians, Iraqis, Omani, Saudis and Syrians to leave the land where they were born and travel to El Salvador in search of a place where they could live in relative peace. For similar reasons Turkish people and Persian Christians from Turkey, Iran and Afghanistan also arrived to El Salvador around the same time. There were also economic factors that contributed to immigration from the Middle East; many immigrants felt they could achieve success abroad on a level they couldn't in their native lands.\nThe first wave of Arab migration to El Salvador began between 1880 and 1920, amidst a large scale influx of immigrants to the country. These Arabs settled in the cities of San Salvador, San Miguel, Santa Ana, Santa Tecla, Usulutan and La Union. The population of El Salvador increased from 482,400 in 1879 to 1,168,000 in 1920, with immigration, including immigration from the late Ottoman Empire, substantially driving growth.\nArab immigration in El Salvador began at the end of the 19th century in the wake of the repressive policies applied by the Ottoman Empire against Maronite Catholics. Several of the destinations that the Lebanese chose at that time were in countries of the Americas, including El Salvador. This resulted in the Arab diaspora residents being characterized by forging in devoutly Christian families and very attached to their beliefs, because in these countries they can exercise their faith without fear of persecution, which resulted in the rise of Lebanese-Salvadoran, Syrian-Salvadoran and Palestinian-Salvadoran communities in El Salvador.\nCurrently, the Palestinian community forms the largest Arab diaspora population in El Salvador, with 70,000 direct descendants, followed by the Lebanese community with more than 27,000 direct descendants. Both are almost entirely composed of Catholic and Orthodox Christians. The slaughter of Lebanese and Palestinian Arab Christians at the hands of Muslims initiated the first Arab migrations to El Salvador.\nInter-ethnic marriage in the Lebanese community with Salvadorans, regardless of religious affiliation, is very high; most have only one father with Lebanese nationality and mother of Salvadoran nationality. As a result, some of them speak Arabic fluently. But most, especially among younger generations, speak Spanish as a first language and Arabic as a second.\nDuring the war between Israel and Lebanon in 1948 and during the Six-Day War, thousands of Lebanese left their country and went to El Salvador. Many arrived at La Libertad, where they comprised half of the economic activity of immigrants.\nLebanon had been an iqta of the Ottoman Empire. Although the imperial administration, whose official religion was Islam, guaranteed freedom of worship for non-Muslim communities, and Lebanon in particular had a semi-autonomous status, the situation for practitioners of the Maronite Catholic Church was complicated, since they had to cancel exaggerated taxes and suffered limitations for their culture. These tensions were expressed in a rebellion in 1821 and a war against the Druze in 1860. The hostile climate caused many Lebanese to sell their property and take ships in the ports of Sidon, Beirut and Tripoli heading for the Americas.\nArab-Salvadoreans and their descendants have traditionally played an outsized role in El Salvador's economic and political life, with many becoming business leaders and noteworthyt political figures.\nIn 1939, the Arab community based in San Salvador organized and founded the \"Arab Youth Union Society\"\nEmigration.\nThe migration rate accelerated during the period of 1979 to 1981, this marked the beginning of the civil unrest and the spread of political killings. The total impact of civil wars, dictatorships and socioeconomics drove over a million Salvadorans (both as immigrants and refugees) into the United States; Guatemala is the second country that hosts more Salvadorans behind the United States, approximately 110,000 Salvadorans according to the national census of 2010. in addition small Salvadoran communities sprung up in Canada, Australia, Belize, Panama, Costa Rica, Italy, Taiwan and Sweden since the migration trend began in the early 1970s. The 2010 U.S. census counted 1,648,968 Salvadorans in the United States, up from 655,165 in 2000.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9360", "revid": "30380342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9360", "title": "Politics of El Salvador", "text": "Politics of El Salvador takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of El Salvador is both head of state and head of government, and of an executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Legislative Assembly. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. \nEl Salvador has a history of political instability, coups and political violence. After the end of the 1979\u20131992 Salvadoran Civil War, El Salvador had a sustained period of stable albeit fragile democracy. However, under Nayib Bukele's tenure as president, El Salvador has undergone democratic backsliding. El Salvador was ranked 5th least electoral democratic country in Latin America and the Caribbean according to V-Dem Democracy indices in 2023 with a score of 0.378 out of 1.\nPolitical culture.\nEl Salvador has a multi-party system. Three political parties Nuevas Ideas (NI), the Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) and the Farabundo Mart\u00ed National Liberation Front (FMLN) have tended to dominate elections since the end of the civil war. ARENA candidates won four consecutive presidential elections until the election of Mauricio Funes of the FMLN in March 2009. In 2014, he was followed by another FMLN president, Salvador S\u00e1nchez Cer\u00e9n.\nThe 2019 election was won by Nayib Bukele as the candidate of the center-right Grand Alliance for National Unity (GANA) party. In February 2021, El Salvador's legislative election was an important breakthrough. The new party, founded by President Bukele, Nuevas Ideas (NI), won around two-thirds of votes with its allies (NI\u2013GANA). His party won a supermajority of 56 seats in the 84-seat legislature. Bukele became the country's most powerful leader in three decades.\nOn 4 February 2024, President Nayib Bukele, won re-election with 84% of the vote in the presidential election. His party Nuevas Ideas (New Ideas) won 58 of the El Salvador parliament's 60 seats.\nBefore the Bukele era, the departments of the central region, especially the capital and the coastal regions, known as \"departamentos rojos\", or red departments, were mostly left-wing while the \"departamentos azules\", or blue departments, in the east, western and highland regions were generally conservative.\nExecutive branch.\nEl Salvador elects its head of state, the President of El Salvador, directly through a fixed-date general election whose winner is decided by absolute majority. If an absolute majority is not achieved by any candidate in the first round of a presidential election, then a run-off pool election is conducted 30 days later between the two candidates who obtained the most votes in the first round. The president serves a five-year term. He is barred from immediately succeeding himself, though previously elected presidents may run for a second, non-consecutive term.\nIn September 2021, El Salvador's Supreme Court decided to allow President Nayib Bukele to run for a second term in the 2024 presidential election, despite the Constitution prohibiting the president from serving two consecutive terms in office. The decision was made by judges appointed to the court by President Bukele. On 1 June 2024, President Nayib Bukele was sworn in for the second five-year term.\nLegislative branch.\nSalvadorans also elect a single-chamber, unicameral national legislature, the Legislative Assembly of El Salvador, of 60 members (deputies) elected by open-list proportional representation for three-year terms, with the possibility of immediate re-election.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Judiciary, headed by the Supreme Court, is composed of 15 judges, one of them being elected as President of the Judiciary.\nForeign relations.\nEl Salvador is a member of the United Nations and several of its specialized agencies, the Organization of American States (OAS), the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), and the Central American Integration System (SICA). It actively participates in the Central American Security Commission (CASC), which seeks to promote regional arms control.\nEl Salvador also is a member of the World Trade Organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements. An active participant in the Summit of the Americas process, El Salvador chairs a working group on market access under the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9361", "revid": "29421082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9361", "title": "Economy of El Salvador", "text": "The economy of El Salvador has experienced relatively low rates of GDP growth, in comparison to other developing countries. Rates have not risen above the low single digits in nearly two decades. The Salvadoran economy is characterized by income inequality, with 37.8% of the population below the poverty line. \nThe Salvadoran government undertook a monetary integration plan beginning 1 January 2001, by which the U.S. dollar became legal tender alongside the col\u00f3n, and all formal accounting was undertaken in U.S. dollars. This way, the government has formally limited its possibility of implementing open market monetary policies to influence short term variables in the economy. Since 2004, the col\u00f3n stopped circulating and is now never used in the country for any type of transaction; however some stores still have prices in both colons and U.S. dollars. The change to the dollar precipitated a trend toward lower interest rates in El Salvador, helping many to secure credit in order to buy a house or a car. Over time, displeasure with the change has largely disappeared, though the issue resurfaces as a political tool when elections are on the horizon.\nIn June 2021, president Nayib Bukele said he would introduce legislation to make Bitcoin legal tender in El Salvador. The Bitcoin Law was passed by the Legislative Assembly on 9 June 2021, with a majority vote of 62 out of 84. Bitcoin officially became legal tender ninety days after the publication of the law in the official gazette. As part of the law, foreigners can gain permanent residence in El Salvador if they invest 3 Bitcoin into the country. In January 2022, The International Monetary Fund (IMF) urged El Salvador to reverse its decision to make cryptocurrency Bitcoin legal tender. Bitcoin had rapidly lost about half of its value, meaning economic difficulties for El Salvador. President Bukele had announced his plans to build a Bitcoin city at the base of a volcano in El Salvador. In the first 18\u00a0months of Bitcoin adoption, the cryptocurrency was rarely used by the local population or tourists, leaving USD the de facto standard for transactions. The Bitcoin experiment was largely a failure.\nIn 2021, El Salvador received a $40 million loan for small enterprises and projects for climate action, from the European Investment Bank to the country's development bank, Banco de Desarollo de el Salvador. $20 million will be used to assist investments in renewable energy projects, specifically photovoltaics, biogas, and micro hydro projects. Up to 50% of the loan line will be used to assist small and medium-sized enterprises who were affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.\nEconomic history.\nHistorically, El Salvador had inequitable distribution of land, with most of it concentrated among the so-called Fourteen Families. Whereas other states in Latin America had implemented land reforms, El Salvador still had a highly inequitable land system by the middle of the 20th century. El Salvador has been characterized as an oligarchic agro-export economy.\nEl Salvador had an economic boom in the 1920s, which was brought to an end with the onset of the Great Depression, which brought coffee prices down. Over the period 1926 to 1932, income from exports were halved.\nPublic sector.\nFiscal policy has been one of the biggest challenges for the Salvadoran government. In December 1999, net international reserves equaled US$1.8\u00a0billion. Having this hard currency buffer to work with, the Salvadoran government undertook a monetary integration plan beginning in January 2001 by which the U.S. dollar became legal tender alongside the Salvadoran col\u00f3n, and all formal accounting was done in U.S. dollars. With the adoption of the U.S. dollar, El Salvador lost control over monetary policy. Any counter-cyclical policy response to the downturn must be through fiscal policy, which is constrained by legislative requirements for a two-thirds majority to approve any international financing.\nThe 1992 peace accords committed the government to heavy expenditures for transition programs and social services. The stability adjustment programs (PAE, for the initials in Spanish) initiated by president Cristiani's administration committed the government to the privatization of banks, the pension system, electric and telephone companies. The total privatization of the pension system has implied a serious burden for the public finances, because the newly created private Pension Association Funds did not absorb coverage of retired pensioners covered in the old system. As a result, in July 2017, the Government of El Salvador wanted to take $500 million from the privatized pension system to cover retired pensioners from the old not privatized system, but the Supreme Court of El Salvador declared this move unconstitutional.\nThe government lost the revenues from contributors and absorbed completely the costs of coverage of retired pensioners. This has been the main source of fiscal imbalance. ARENA governments have financed this deficit with the emission of bonds, something the leftist party FMLN has opposed. Debates surrounding the emission of bonds have stalled the approval of the national budget for many months on several occasions, reason for which in 2006 the government will finance the deficit by reducing expenditure in other posts. The emission of bonds and the approval of a loans need a qualified majority (3/4 of the votes) in the parliament. If the deficit is not financed through a loan it is enough with a simple majority to approve the budget (50% of the votes plus 1). This would facilitate an otherwise long process in Salvadoran politics.\nDespite such challenges to keep public finances in balance, El Salvador still has one of the lowest tax burdens in the American continent (around 11% of GDP). The government has focused on improving the collection of its current revenues with a focus on indirect taxes. Leftist politicians criticize such a structure since indirect taxes (like the value added tax) affect everyone alike, whereas direct taxes can be weighed according to levels of income and are therefore more punitive toward productive people. However, some basic goods are exempt from the indirect taxes. A value-added tax (VAT) of 10%, implemented in September 1992, was raised to 13% in July 1995. The VAT is the biggest source of revenue for the government, accounting for about 52.3% of total tax revenues in 2004.\nAs of 3 November 2014, the IMF reports official reserve assets to be $3.192B. Foreign currency reserves (in convertible foreign currencies) are $2.675B. Securities are $2.577B with total currency and deposits at $94.9M. Securities with other national central banks (BIS and IMF) are $81.10M. Securities with banks headquartered outside the reporting country $13.80M. SDRs are at $245.5M. Gold reserves (including gold deposits and, if appropriate, gold swapped) reported at $271.4M with volume in millions of fine Troy ounces at $200k. Other reserve assets are financial derivatives valued at $2.7M.\nEconomic sectors.\nRemittances.\nRemittances from Salvadorans working in the United States sent to family members are a major source of foreign income and offset the substantial trade deficit of around $2.9 billion. Remittances have increased steadily in the last decade and reached an all-time high of $2.9 billion in 2005\u2014approximately 17.1% of gross national product (GNP).\nRemittances have had positive and negative effects on El Salvador. In 2005, the number of people living in extreme poverty in El Salvador was 20%, according to a United Nations Development Program report. While Salvadoran education levels have gone up, wage expectations have risen faster than productivity. This has led to an influx of Hondurans and Nicaraguans who are willing to work for the prevailing wage. Also, the local propensity for consumption has increased. Money from remittances has increased prices for certain commodities such as real estate. With much higher wages, many Salvadorans abroad can afford higher prices for houses in El Salvador and thus push up the prices that all Salvadorans must pay.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2018, El Salvador produced 7 million tons of sugarcane, being heavily dependent on this product. In addition to sugarcane, the country produced 685 thousand tons of maize, 119 thousand tons of coconut, 109 thousand tons of sorghum, 93 thousand tons of beans, 80 thousand tons of coffee, 64 thousand tons of orange, in addition to smaller yields of other agricultural products such as watermelon, yautia, apple, manioc, mango, banana, rice etc.\nThe ultimate goal was to develop a rural middle class with a stake in a peaceful and prosperous future for El Salvador. At least 525,000 people\u2014more than 12% of El Salvador's population at the time and perhaps 25% of the rural poor\u2014benefited from agrarian reform, and more than 22% of El Salvador's total farmland was transferred to those who previously worked the land but did not own it. But when agrarian reform ended in 1990, about 150,000 landless families still had not benefited from the reform actions.\nThe 1992 peace accords made provisions for land transfers to all qualified ex-combatants of both the FMLN and ESAF, as well as to landless peasants living in former conflict areas. The United States undertook to provide $300 million for a national reconstruction plan. This included $60 million for land purchases and $17 million for agricultural credits. USAID remains actively involved in providing technical training, access to credit, and other financial services for many of the land beneficiaries.\nEnergy.\nEl Salvador's energy industry is diversified across fossil fuels, hydro, other renewables (mainly geothermal) for local electricity production, along with a reliance on imports for oil. El Salvador has an installed capacity of 1,983 MW generating 5,830 GWh of electricity per year, 52% of this comes from renewable sources including 29% from geothermal (produced from the country's many volcanoes), 23% from hydro and the rest is from fossil fuels.\nAccording to the National Energy Commission, 94.4% of total injections during January 2021 came from hydroelectric plants (28.5% - 124.43 GWh), geothermal (27.3% - 119.07 GWh), biomass (24.4% 106.43 GWh), photovoltaic solar (10.6% - 46.44 GWh) and wind (3.6% - 15.67 GWh).\nManufacturing.\nEl Salvador historically has been the most industrialized state in Central America, though a decade of war eroded this position. In 1999, manufacturing accounted for 22% of GDP. The industrial sector has shifted since 1993 from a primarily domestic orientation to include free zone (maquiladora) manufacturing for export. Maquila exports have led the growth in the export sector and in the last 3 years have made an important contribution to the Salvadoran economy.\nMining.\nMining in El Salvador expanded in scope from artisanal mining to industrial mining at the San Sebasti\u00e1n mine in the 1970s. Chemicals from that mine polluted the San Sebasti\u00e1n River.\nMining ceased during the Salvadoran Civil War. After the war, the country's right-wing government proposed 33 mining zones, issuing exploration licences to American, Australian, and Canadian companies. The plan was met with opposition of many local community and community leaders, who successfully blocked exploration in Chalatenango in 2005.\nPacific Rim Mining Corporation obtained a permit to explore the El Dorado gold mine in 2002, but were denied a license to mine in 2008, following local opposition.\nMining for metal was banned in 2017, although the creation of a mining regulator in 2021 and the arrest of anti-mining activists in 2023 prompted public speculation that the government is considering resuming mining.\nTelecommunications.\nEl Salvador has 0.9 million fixed telephone lines, 0.5 million fixed broadband lines and 9.4 million mobile cellular subscriptions. Much of the population is able to access the internet through their smartphones and mobile networks, which liberal government regulation promotes mobile penetration over fixed line including the deployment of 5G coverage (which testing of began in 2020). Transition to digital transmission of TV/radio networks was done in 2018 with the adaptation of the ISDB-T standard. There are hundreds of privately owned national TV networks, cable TV networks (that also carry international channels), and radio stations available; while there is also 1 government owned broadcast station.\nEl Salvador's IT Industry's history started early with several IT outsourcing companies such as Gpremper and an early search engine that predated Google in 1995 called \"Buscaniguas\". The industry has since expanded with companies such as Creativa Consultores, Applaudo Studios, and Elaniin providing software and website design services to clients globally while employing thousands of people. Canadian Telus International, a major global IT outsourcing and software development firm, has a significant workforce in the country employing nearly 1,500 people in high tech and customer service roles. The startup scene has also been growing with firms such as HugoApp employing 600 locals and providing delivery and ride sharing services to nearly 1 million users in the Central American/CAFTA region. In 2020, the government announced its \"Digital Agenda 2020\" a plan to digitize government services, digitize identities, make it easier to start businesses, attract foreign investment and improve the education system. Finally, the passing of the Bitcoin Law in 2021 made El Salvador the first country in the world to adopt a cryptocurrency (Bitcoin) as legal tender, this move seeks to improve access to financial services to the non-banked and under banked while also making El Salvador a hub for innovation.\nServices.\nIn the 21st century, numerous call centers serving North American markets have been developed in El Salvador, including Ubiquity Global Services and Synnex. The industry benefits from the availability of a large English speaking work force, composed of deportees from the United States.\nTrade.\nA challenge in El Salvador has been developing new growth sectors for a more diversified economy. As many other former colonies, for many years El Salvador was considered a mono exporter economy. This means, an economy that depended heavily on one type of export. During colonial times, the Spanish decided that El Salvador would produce and export indigo, but after the invention of synthetic dyes in the 19th century, Salvadoran authorities and the newly created modern state turned to coffee as the main export of the economy.\nSince the cultivation of coffee required the highest lands in the country, many of these lands were expropriated from indigenous reserves and given or sold cheaply to those that could cultivate coffee. The government provided little or no compensation to the indigenous peoples. On occasions this compensation implied merely the right to work for seasons in the newly created coffee farms and to be allowed to grow their own food. Such policies provided the basis of conflicts that would shape the political situation of El Salvador in the years to come.\nARENA governments have followed policies that intend to develop other exporting industries in the country as textiles and sea products. Tourism is another industry Salvadoran authorities regard as a possibility for the country. But rampant crime rates, lack of infrastructure and inadequate social capital have prevented these possibilities from being properly exploited. The government is also developing ports and infrastructure in La Uni\u00f3n in the east of the country, in order to use the area as a \"dry canal\" for transporting goods from Gulf of Fonseca in the Pacific Ocean to Honduras and the Atlantic Ocean in the north. Currently there are fifteen free trade zones in El Salvador. The largest beneficiary has been the maquila industry, which provides 88,700 jobs directly, and consists primarily of cutting and assembling clothes for export to the United States.\nEl Salvador signed the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), negotiated by the five countries of Central America and the Dominican Republic, with the United States in 2004. In order to take advantage of CAFTA-DR, the Salvadoran government is challenged to conduct policies that guarantee better conditions for entrepreneurs and workers to transfer from declining to growing sectors in the economy. El Salvador has already signed free trade agreements with Mexico, Chile, the Dominican Republic, and Panama, and increased its exports to those countries. El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua also are negotiating a free trade agreement with Canada, and negotiations started on 2006 for a free trade agreement with Colombia.\nEl Salvador's balance of payments continued to show a net surplus. Exports in 1999 grew 1.9% while imports grew 3%, narrowing El Salvador's trade deficit. As in the previous year, the large trade deficit was offset by foreign aid and family remittances. Remittances are increasing at an annual rate of 6.5%, and an estimated $1.35 billion will enter the national economy during 1999.\nPrivate foreign capital continued to flow in, though mostly as short-term import financing and not at the levels of previous years. The Central American Common Market continued its dynamic reactivation process, now with most regional commerce duty-free. In September 1996, El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras opened free trade talks with Mexico. This trade alliance is also known as the Northern Triangle in relation to the Central American economies that are grouped together by proximity and location.http:// Although tariff cuts that were expected in July 1996 were delayed until 1997, the government of El Salvador is committed to a free and open economy.\nTotal U.S. exports to El Salvador reached $2.1 billion in 1999, while El Salvador exported $1.6 billion to the United States. U.S. support for El Salvador's privatization of the electrical and telecommunications markets has markedly expanded opportunities for U.S. investment in the country. More than 300 U.S. companies have established either a permanent commercial presence in El Salvador or work through representative offices in the country. The Department of State maintains a country commercial guide for U.S. businesses seeking detailed information on business opportunities in El Salvador.\nOfficial corruption and foreign investment.\nIn an analysis of ARENA's electoral defeat in 2009, the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador pointed to official corruption under the Saca administration as a significant reason for public rejection of continued ARENA government.\nSubsequent policies under Funes administrations improved El Salvador to foreign investment, and the World Bank in 2014 rated El Salvador 109, a little better than Belize (118) and Nicaragua (119) in the World Bank's annual \"Ease of doing business\" index.\nAs per Santander Trade, a Spanish think tank in foreign investment, \"Foreign investment into El Salvador has been steadily growing during the last few years. In 2013, the influx of FDI increased. Nevertheless, El Salvador receives less FDI than other countries of Central America. The government has made little progress in terms of improving the business climate. In addition to this, the limited size of its domestic market, weak infrastructures and institutions, as well as the high level of criminality have been real obstacles to investors. However, El Salvador is the second most 'business friendly' country in South America in terms of business taxation. It also has a young and skilled labour force and a strategic geographical position. The country's membership in the DR-CAFTA, as well as its reinforced integration to the C4 countries (producers of cotton) should lead to an increase of FDI.\"\nForeign companies have lately resorted to arbitration in international trade tribunals in total disagreement with Salvadoran government policies. In 2008, El Salvador sought international arbitration against Italy's Enel Green Power, on behalf of Salvadoran state-owned electric companies for a geothermal project Enel had invested in. Four years later, Enel indicated it would seek arbitration against El Salvador, blaming the government for technical problems that prevent it from completing its investment. The government came to its defence claiming that Art 109 of the constitution does not allow any government (regardless of the party they belong), to privatize the resources of the national soil (in this case geothermic energy). The dispute came to an end in December 2014 when both parties came to a settlement, from which no details have been released. The small country had yielded to pressure from the Washington-based powerful ICSID.\nA 2008 report by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development indicates that one third of the generation of electricity in El Salvador was publicly owned while two thirds was in American hands and other foreign ownership.\nIn terms of how people perceived the levels of public corruption in 2014, El Salvador ranks 80 out of 175 countries as per the Corruption Perception Index. El Salvador's rating compares relatively well with Panama (94 of 175) and Costa Rica (47 of 175).\nNatural disasters: Hurricane Mitch (1998) and the earthquakes (2001).\nHurricane Mitch hit El Salvador in late October 1998, generating extreme rainfall of which caused widespread flooding and landslides. Roughly 650\u00a0km2 were flooded, and the Salvadoran Government pronounced 374 people dead or missing. In addition, approximately 55,900 people were rendered homeless. The areas that suffered the most were the low-lying coastal zones, particularly in the floodplain of the Lempa and San Miguel Grande Rivers. Three major bridges that cross the Lempa were swept away, restricting access to the eastern third of the country and forcing the emergency evacuation of many communities. The heavy rainfall, flooding, and mudslides caused by Hurricane Mitch also severely damaged El Salvador's road network. Along with the three major bridges over the Lempa River, 12 other bridges were damaged or destroyed by the Mitch flooding.\nThe largest single-affected sector was El Salvador's agriculture. Nearly 18% of the total 1998\u201399 basic grain harvest was lost. Coffee production was hit particularly hard; 3% of the harvest was lost in addition to 8.2% that was lost earlier in the year due to El Ni\u00f1o. Major losses of sugarcane, totaling 9% of the estimated 1998\u201399 production, were sustained primarily in the coastal regions. Livestock losses amounted to $1 million, including 2,992 head of cattle. In addition to these losses, El Salvador also had to face the threat of disease outbreak. The Ministry of Health recorded a total of 109,038 medical cases related to Hurricane Mitch between 31 October and 18 November 1998; 23% of these cases were respiratory infections, followed by skin ailments, diarrhea, and conjunctivitis.\nReconstruction from Mitch was still underway when, in early 2001, the country experienced a series of devastating earthquakes that left nearly 2,000 people dead or missing, 8,000 injured, and caused severe dislocations across all sectors of Salvadoran society. Nearly 25% of all private homes in the country were either destroyed or badly damaged, and 1.5 million persons were left without housing. Hundreds of public buildings were damaged or destroyed, and sanitation and water systems in many communities put out service. The total cost of the damage was estimated at between $1.5 billion and $2 billion, and the devastation thought to equal or surpass that of the 1986 quake that struck San Salvador. Given the magnitude of the disaster, reconstruction and economic recovery will remain the primary focus of the Salvadoran Government for some time to come.\nThe Hurricane Mitch disaster prompted a tremendous response from the international community governments, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and private citizens alike. Sixteen foreign governments\u2014including the U.S., 19 international NGOs, 20 Salvadoran embassies and consulates, and 20 private firms and individuals provided El Salvador with in-kind assistance. The Government of El Salvador reports that 961 tons of goods and food were received. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs estimates that contribution in cash given directly to the Salvadoran Government totaled $4.3 million. The U.S. Government has provided $37.7 million in assistance through USAID and the U.S. Departments of Agriculture and Defense.\nFollowing the 2001 earthquakes, the U.S. embassy assumed a leading role in implementing U.S.-sponsored assistance. The U.S. Government responded immediately to the emergency, with military helicopters active in initial rescue operations, delivering emergency supplies, rescue workers, and damage assessment teams to stricken communities all over the country. USAIDs Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance had a team of experts working with Salvadoran relief authorities immediately after both quakes, and provided assistance totaling more than $14 million. In addition, the Department of Defense provided an initial response valued at more than $11 million. For long-term reconstruction, the international community offered a total aid package of $1.3 billion, over $110 million of it from the United States.\nMacro-economic trend.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132024. Inflation under 10% is in green.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "9362", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9362", "title": "Telecommunications in El Salvador", "text": " \nTelecommunications in El Salvador include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet, centered primarily around the capital, San Salvador.\nRadio and television.\nThe most powerful group in the media sector is Tele-Corporaci\u00f3n Salvadore\u00f1a (TCS), which controls four television channels with nation-wide coverage (Channels 2, 4, 6 and VTV) as well as two radio stations (Vox FM and Qu\u00e9 Buena). Together with TCS, Canal 12 (whose majority shareholder is TV Azteca), Canal 21 (of the Megavisi\u00f3n group) and Canal 33 (of the Tecnovisi\u00f3n group, owned by the Technological University of El Salvador) complete the national television spectrum.\nThe law permits the executive branch to use the emergency broadcasting service to take over all broadcast and cable networks temporarily to televise political programming. The president occasionally uses this law to highlight his accomplishments.\nInternet.\nIT Industry.\nEl Salvador's IT Industry's history started early with several IT outsourcing companies such as Gpremper and an early search engine that predated Google in 1995 called \"Buscaniguas\". The industry has since expanded with companies such as Creativa Consultores, Applaudo Studios, and Elaniin providing software and website design services to clients globally while employing thousands of people. Canadian Telus International, a major global IT outsourcing and software development firm, has a significant workforce in the country employing nearly 1,500 people in high tech and customer service roles. The startup scene has also been growing with firms such as HugoApp employing 600 locals and providing delivery and ride sharing services to nearly 1 million users in the Central American/CAFTA region. In 2020, the government announced its \"Digital Agenda 2020\" a plan to digitize government services, digitize identities, make it easier to start businesses, attract foreign investment and improve the education system. Finally, the passing of the Bitcoin Law in 2021 made El Salvador the first country in the world to adopt a cryptocurrency (Bitcoin) as legal tender, this move seeks to improve access to financial services to the non-banked and under banked.\nFreedom of Speech restrictions.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Individuals and groups engage in the expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail. Internet access is available in public places throughout the country.\nThe constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights. Individuals criticize the government publicly or privately without reprisal, and in most cases the government does not interfere with such criticism. \nThe constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions.\nBy gangs.\nIn March 2012, Carlos Dada, the owner of online newspaper El Faro, received death threats from gang members. The gangs were unhappy with El Faro's reporting on the gang truce. On April 13, the International Press Institute criticized the government for not taking any actions to guarantee the safety of El Faro journalists. According to the Salvadoran Association of Journalists (APES), the media practices self-censorship, especially in their reporting on gangs and narcotics trafficking. APES stated that many members of the media were afraid to report in detail on these subjects due to fear of retaliation from gangs and narcotics trafficking groups.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9363", "revid": "62058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9363", "title": "Transport in El Salvador", "text": " \nEl Salvador has transport links by road, rail, sea and air.\nEl Salvador has over 10,000 km of roads, and one passenger rail service. There are several seaports on the Pacific Ocean, and two international airports.\nRailways.\nA weekday passenger service links San Salvador and Apopa, a journey of 40 minutes. Of a total of 602\u00a0km narrow-gauge () rail, much is abandoned. In November 2013 the government rail agency FENADESAL announced plans for development of four electrified railways serving San Salvador, Sitio del Ni\u00f1o (La Libertad), El Salvador International Airport, La Uni\u00f3n, and the Honduran frontier.\nHighways.\nThe RN-21 (Bulevar Monse\u00f1or Romero) (East\u2013West) was the first freeway to be built in El Salvador and in Central America. The freeway passes through the northern area of the city of Santa Tecla, La Libertad. It has a small portion serving Antiguo Cuscatlan, La Libertad, and merges with the RN-5 (Autopista Comalapa) (East\u2013West, Boulevard de Los Proceres/Autopista del Aeropuerto) in San Salvador. \nThe total length of the RN-21 is and is currently working as a traffic relief in the metropolitan area. The RN-21 was named in honor of \u00d3scar Romero. The first phase of the highway was completed in 2009, and the second phase in November 2012.\nMerchant marine.\nnone (1999 est.)\nAirports.\n75 (2006 est.)\nHeliports.\n1 (2006 est.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9364", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9364", "title": "Armed Forces of El Salvador", "text": "Combined military forces of El Salvador\nThe Armed Forces of El Salvador () are the official governmental military forces of El Salvador. The Forces have three branches: the Salvadoran Army, the Salvadoran Air Force and the Navy of El Salvador.\nHistory.\nSpanish colonial rule.\nIn the 19th century, soldiers in El Salvador may have been nominally employed by the governing body. However, if not given their pay, the soldiers would supplement their income as mercenaries and militia for local politicians and landowners.\nCoffee barons and militia.\nIn the late 19th century, El Salvador went through a period of internal discord. In 1871, Santiago Gonz\u00e1lez seized power by military coup. General Carlos Ezeta did the same in 1890 and General Rafael Antonio Guti\u00e9rrez in 1894. However, these changes in power were fought between networks of rival landowners (coffee barons) and politicians under their patronage rather than between official military and government forces.\nLa Matanza.\nMilitary operations in El Salvador continued in a similar way until the early 20th century. During the Great Depression, coffee prices fell, the wages of indigenous Salvadoran workers were cut and unemployment was widespread. For three days in 1932, the indigenous workers rebelled. President General Maximiliano Hern\u00e1ndez Mart\u00ednez responded with force. Under his command, the national army proper, slaughtered up to 40,000 peasants.\nPalm Sunday coup.\nTwelve years of autocratic rule followed. Mart\u00ednez withheld democratic and civil rights. On 2 March 1944, a Palm Sunday, the landowners, intellectuals, students and also some sections of the Salvadoran armed forces rebelled. The First Infantry Regiment and the Second Artillery Regiment of San Salvador joined the rebels as did the Garrison of Santa Ana. Santa Ana was bombed from the air. The rebellion was put down by the remaining loyal sections of the military. Reprisals of torture and execution of those who had joined the rebellion followed. Martial law was put in place. However, in May 1944, non-violent protest leading to a general strike caused Mart\u00ednez to fall from power.\nRebellion of 1948.\nDuring the years that followed, young military officers became increasingly dissatisfied with their situation. They saw the generals clinging to senior posts for which they had little training and without making way for the younger officers. They saw the generals failing to prepare for the social and economic changes coming to Central America. They objected to unfair disciplinary measures and unfair surveillance. In 1948, fighting broke out between the younger officers and troops under their command and the senior generals and the police force under their command. The president, Salvador Castaneda Castro was imprisoned. Senior officers and politicians were dismissed. The new government promoted the formation of a truly national, apolitical and professional army in El Salvador.\nAmerican influence and the Cold War.\n From 1947 to 1953, El Salvador held an agreement with the US whereby an American military aviation mission would be sent to El Salvador; El Salvador would seek advice from the US preferentially and purchase arms from the US. Some Salvadoran military officers were trained in North America and the Panama Canal Zone. Nevertheless, the amount of American military aid purchased by El Salvador in the 1950s was small; just enough in munitions and light arms to suppress internal conflict such as communist activity.\nIn the 1950s, Salvadoran men underwent one year of national service before being discharged to a reserve army. They then underwent further training on a regular basis and could be called to join active provincial patrols (\"patrullas cantonalles\"). Regular meetings of the men were held reinforcing loyalty to the nation and opposition to communism. Men from disadvantaged circumstances were offered monetary and practical assistance and education for their children. The number of reservists grew to approximately 40,000.\nIn the 1960s, a junta of conservative military officers and landowners took power in a coup and then organised elections. In 1961, the junta's candidate Lieutenant Colonel Julio Adalberto Rivera was elected president. In 1967, Colonel Fidel Sanchez Hernandez became president.\nFootball War.\nIn 1969, tensions between El Salvador and Honduras increased. There was dispute concerning the border between the two countries. Approximately 300,000 Salvadorans had moved to Honduras due to population and land pressures in their homeland but Honduras had not renewed the El Salvador \u2013 Honduras Bilateral Treaty on Immigration. Honduras and El Salvador were competitors in the Central American Common Market. Honduras' economy was struggling and the Honduran Government started to deport the Salvadorans who they saw as illegal immigrants. Many Salvadorans fled after their Vice Consul was killed. In June 1969, El Salvador played three games against Honduras in the qualifying rounds of the World Cup.64 Then, on 26 June 1969, El Salvador won a play-off game 3 goals to 2 against Haiti, taking a place in the cup finals.\nOn 14 July 1969, armed hostilities began between El Salvador and Honduras. Due to the war's proximity to the World Cup qualifying games, it was called the \"Football War\" or the \"Soccer War\".\nAt this time, the Salvadoran forces included approximately 8,000 infantrymen with rifles, machine guns, mortars and bazookas, 105\u00a0mm cannons and a few armoured personnel carriers. Very few arms were manufactured in El Salvador. Most arms were supplied by the US. Honduras' infantry was smaller and less well equipped.\nThe Salvadoran Air Force, flying P-51 Mustangs, attacked Honduran targets and vice versa, but each air force had only a few working aeroplanes and was hampered by a lack of spare parts.64 El Salvador's infantry forces invaded Honduras and took Ocotepeque.\nAs Salvadoran troops approached Tegucigalpa, their supply lines failed, they became exhausted and were slowed by heavy rainfall, and their morale fell. On July 18, 1969, the Organization of American States (OAS) organised a ceasefire. Then as economic sanctions and an arms embargo took effect, both sides. The war lasted for four days and therefore is also called the \"one hundred hour war\".\nCivil War.\nThe Salvadoran Civil War was fought between 1979 and 1992. The Salvadoran armed forces fought the \"Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional\" (FMLN), a coalition of insurgent guerrilla groups. The war began when a reformist government was suppressed by hard line military elements and by landowners.\nBetween 1980 and 1983, the Salvadoran armed forces were driven out of territory controlled by large FMLN groups in rural areas. The FMLN membership later increased to over 12,000 when the organization was able to provide local governance and services.10 The government responded with counter-insurgency actions including the assassination of the archbishop, \u00d3scar Romero.\nIn late 1981, soldiers of the national armed forces' Atl\u00e1catl Battalion, a rapid response troop, killed 900 civilians at El Mozote. This was one of a number of actions including rapes, bashings, torture and killings. Men of this battalion were graduates of the US School of the Americas at Fort Benning, Columbus, Georgia. Another atrocity occurred on 16 November 1989. Army soldiers murdered six Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter at the Central American University.\nIn 1989, the armed forces of El Salvador had raised 56,000 fighting men with 63 aeroplanes and 72 helicopters.11 Between 1983 and 1987, El Salvador's military forces received over 100 million dollars per year from the US.\nIn 1990, at the end of the Cold War, the US restricted funding to the Salvadoran military. The US found its rigorous measures against left wing groups were no longer needed. This and the lack of advantage on either side led to the end of the war in 1992.\nUnder the terms of the Chapultepec Peace Accords which had been signed on 16 January 1992 in Chapultepec, Mexico, the Salvadoran Armed Forces was to be subordinated and removed from the political arena. The Ministry of Defense handed the role of internal security to a new body, the National Police Force. The number of soldiers in the Armed Forces was reduced by half. Counter-insurgency forces were demobilised. Military intelligence units reported directly to the president. The constitutional mission, doctrine and recruitment and educational systems of the Armed Forces were redefined.\nDuring the civil war, military and right wing paramilitary death squads used exemplary violence with murder and mutilation, massacre and forced displacement to gain control of the populace. In 1993, a General Amnesty Law was passed by the Salvadoran government. Victims of human rights violations had no redress. International human rights entities such as the UNHCR made formal objections to the law. Spain found jurisdiction in the matter and indicted twenty retired soldiers who were officers at the time of the killings.\nFor many reasons, the armed forces resisted the application of the requirement of the Peace Accord. Junior officers who had volunteered to work in security units did not want to be treated as raw army recruits when their units disbanded. Senior officers feared the autonomy of the military's core activities, such as training, would be lost. Military leaders feared that the loss of military units in rural areas would lead to social and political unrest. The civilian population feared that officers purged from military ranks for human rights violations would join right wing paramilitary organisations. 159\nPost civil war.\nFrom 2003 to January 2009, the Salvadoran Cuscatl\u00e1n Battalion was a part of the Multi-National Force \u2013 Iraq. El Salvador deployed more than 500 troops, mostly paratroopers and special forces. During the conflict, five Salvadoran soldiers were killed in action and more than 50 were wounded. Salvadoran forces operated next to the Spanish Legion and the U.S. Army. They were well regarded by both Spanish and U.S. forces. The last of the Salvadoran forces withdrew from Iraq in 2009. They were the last Central Americans allies to withdraw from the conflict.\nIn 2016, a new armed force was raised in El Salvador with the remit of stopping criminal gangs (especially MS-13) and narcotrafficking.\nIn 2021, the strength of the Salvadoran armed forces was estimated to be 24,500 active personnel.\nCrackdown on gangs.\nBeginning on 25 March 2022, three days of gang-related violence occurred that left 87 people dead. In response, President Bukele asked the Salvadoran parliament to ratify a state of emergency. On 26 March, Bukele also ordered the police and army to initiate mass-arrests against those responsible for the violence.\nA day later, the Legislative Assembly approved a state of emergency that gives legal coverage to arrest any citizen suspected to be a gang member even with no proof. In addition, Congress also approved reforms to increase the maximum sentence for gang member from nine to 45 years in prison and punish the dissemination of gang messages, including independent journalism talking about the gang crisis, with up to 15 years in prison.\nThe law was directed against those who \"mark\" their territories with acronyms of the gangs, a practice that gang members use to intimidate, and threaten with death those who denounce them to the authorities. The Directorate of Penal Centers began to erase the graffiti that the gangs use to mark the territory in which they operate.\nThe Mara Salvatrucha (MS-13) and Barrio 18 gangs, among others, were estimated in 2022 to have around some 70,000 members, and as of August 2023, around 72,000 people have been sent to prison as a part of the government crackdown on the gangs.\nStructure.\nThe Salvadoran armed forces are a combat force composed of army, navy and air force each led by their Chief of the General Staff. The support units are a military education and doctrine command, a logistics support command, a military health command, a military special security brigade and a directorate general of recruitment and reserves.\nThe duties of the Salvadoran Armed Force is described in articles 211 and 212 of the Constitution of 1983. It is the duty of the armed forces to defend national territory and sovereignty; maintain public peace, tranquillity, and security; and to support democracy. \nArticle 212 describes the armed forces as a 'fundamental institution for national security, of a permanent character, apolitical, obedient to established civilian authority, and non-deliberative\". It also charges the military with enforcing the no-reelection provision of the country's president; with guaranteeing universal suffrage, human rights;and with working with the executive branch of government in promoting national development\nThe Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces is the president. Reporting to the president is the Ministry of Defence. Members of the ministry advise the Secretary of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The military provides a panel composed of the Chiefs of the General Staff and military experts who provide the ministry with technical advice for policy making and strategic planning. Oversight of the military is provided by the Assistant Inspector General of the Armed Forces.\nWithin the military leadership are operating units, tactical units and advisory bodies. The operating units build on operational plans. The tactical units include detachments, training centers and forces of the army at the battalion level. The combat recognition and transport groups make up the Air Force tactical unit. The Navy uses transport and hydrographic tactical units.\nMedals.\nAmong the highest military decorations in the Salvadoran Armed Forces are the Gold Cross of War Heroism in Action; the Silver Cross of Heroism; the gold medal for Courage in Action; and the Silver Medal of Valor. for such actions, there may be a monetary payment in addition to the armed forces pension. There are other honours for field service, distinguished service, and merit.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9365", "revid": "49726914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9365", "title": "Foreign relations of El Salvador", "text": " \nEl Salvador is a member of the United Nations and several of its specialized agencies, the Organization of American States (OAS), the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), and the Central American Integration System (SICA). It actively participates in the Central American Security Commission (CASC), which seeks to promote regional arms control.\nIn November 1950, El Salvador helped the newly empowered 14th Dalai Lama by supporting his Tibetan Government cabinet minister's telegram requesting an appeal before the General Assembly of the United Nations to stop the Communist China's People's Liberation Army's invasion of Tibet.\nEl Salvador also is a member of the World Trade Organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements. An active participant in the Summit of the Americas process, El Salvador chairs a working group on market access under the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative.\nEl Salvador has joined its six Central American neighbors in signing the Alliance for Sustainable Development, known as the Conjunta Centroamerica-USA or CONCAUSA to promote sustainable economic development in the region.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which El Salvador maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9366", "revid": "10808929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9366", "title": "Equatorial Guinea", "text": "Country in Central Africa\nEquatorial Guinea, officially the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, is a country on the west coast of Central Africa. It has an area of . Formerly the colony of Spanish Guinea, its post-independence name refers to its location both near the Equator and in the African region of Guinea. As of 2024[ [update]], the country had a population of 1,795,834, over 85% of whom are members of the Fang people, the country's dominant ethnic group. The Bubi people, indigenous to Bioko, are the second largest group at approximately 6.5% of the population.\nEquatorial Guinea consists of two parts. The mainland region, R\u00edo Muni, is bordered by Cameroon to the north and Gabon to the south and east. It has the majority of the population and is the location of Bata, Equatorial Guinea's largest city, and Ciudad de la Paz, the country's planned future capital. R\u00edo Muni's small offshore islands include Corisco, Elobey Grande, and Elobey Chico. The insular region consists of the islands of Bioko (formerly Fernando Po) in the Gulf of Guinea and Annob\u00f3n. Bioko Island is the northernmost part of Equatorial Guinea and is the site of the country's capital, Malabo. The Portuguese-speaking island nation of S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe is located between Bioko and Annob\u00f3n.\nPygmies are the first confirmed inhabitants to settle in the area of present-day Equatorial Guinea, followed by a migration of Bantu-speaking groups in the 6th century BC. The Portuguese explorer Fernando P\u00f3 explored the area in 1472. Via the 1778 Treaty of El Pardo, Portugal ceded territories in the Bight of Biafra to Spain; the new territory was declared Spanish Guinea during the Scramble for Africa. Nearly 200 years later, it gained independence in 1968 under the bloody dictatorship of President Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema. He declared himself president for life in 1972, but was overthrown in a coup in 1979 by his nephew, Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who has served as the country's president since. Obiang's regime has also been widely characterized as a dictatorship by foreign observers. \nSince the mid-1990s, Equatorial Guinea has become one of sub-Saharan Africa's largest oil producers. It has subsequently become the richest country per capita in Africa; however, the wealth is extremely unevenly distributed, with few people benefiting from the oil riches. The country ranks 133rd on the 2023 Human Development Index, with less than half the population having access to clean drinking water and 7.9% of children dying before the age of five. \nSince Equatorial Guinea is a former Spanish colony, Spanish is the main official language. French and (as of 2010[ [update]]) Portuguese have also been made official. It is the only sovereign country in Africa where Spanish is an official language. Equatorial Guinea's government is authoritarian and sultanist and has one of the worst human rights records in the world, consistently ranking among the \"worst of the worst\" in Freedom House's annual survey of political and civil rights. Reporters Without Borders ranks Obiang among its \"predators\" of press freedom. Human trafficking is a significant problem, with the U.S. Trafficking in Persons Report identifying Equatorial Guinea as a source and destination country for forced labour and sex trafficking. The country is a member of the United Nations, African Union, Francophonie, OPEC, and the CPLP.\nHistory.\nPygmies likely once lived in the continental region that is now Equatorial Guinea, but are today found only in isolated pockets in southern R\u00edo Muni. Bantu migrations likely started around 2,000 BC from between south-east Nigeria and north-west Cameroon (the Grassfields). They must have settled continental Equatorial Guinea around 500 BC at the latest. The earliest settlements on Bioko Island are dated to AD 530. The Annob\u00f3n population, originally native to Angola, was introduced by the Portuguese via S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 island.\nFirst European contact and Portuguese rule (1472\u20131778).\nThe Portuguese explorer Fernando P\u00f3, seeking a path to India, is credited as being the first European to see the island of Bioko, in 1472. He called it \"Formosa\" (\"Beautiful\"), but it quickly took on the name of its European discoverer. Fernando P\u00f3 and Annob\u00f3n were colonized by Portugal in 1474. The first factories were established on the islands around 1500 as the Portuguese quickly recognized the positives of the islands including volcanic soil and disease-resistant highlands. Despite natural advantages, initial Portuguese efforts in 1507 to establish a sugarcane plantation and town near what is now Concepci\u00f3n on Fernando P\u00f3 failed due to Bubi hostility and fever.\nEarly Spanish rule and lease to Britain (1778\u20131844).\nIn 1778, Spain and Portugal signed the Treaty of El Pardo. The treaty ceded Bioko and adjacent islets along with commercial rights to the Bight of Biafra between the Niger and Ogoue rivers to Spain in exchange for large areas of modern-day western Brazil being ceded to Portugal. Brigadier Felipe Jos\u00e9, Count of Arjelejos of the Spanish Navy formally took possession of Bioko from Portugal on 21 October 1778. While sailing to Annob\u00f3n to take possession of it, Arjelejos died from a tropical disease contracted on Bioko and his fever-ridden crew mutinied. The crew, after having lost over 80% of their men to sickness, instead landed on S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 where they were imprisoned by Portuguese colonial authorities. \nAs a result of this disaster, Spain was subsequently hesitant to invest heavily in its new possession. However, despite such a setback, Spanish merchants began to use the island as a base for engaging in the Atlantic slave trade. Between 1778 and 1810, the territory of what became Equatorial Guinea was administered by the Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata, based in Buenos Aires. Unwilling to significantly invest in the development of Fernando P\u00f3, from 1827 to 1843 the Spanish leased a base in Bioko to the United Kingdom, which the British had sought as part of their efforts to suppress the slave trade. \nIn the same year the Spanish leased the base in Bioko, Britain unilaterally moved the headquarters of the Mixed Commission for the Suppression of Slave Traffic to Fernando P\u00f3 in 1827, before moving it back to Sierra Leone under an agreement with Spain in 1843. Spain's decision to abolish its involvement in the slave trade under British pressure in 1817 damaged the colony's perceived value to the Spanish and so leasing naval bases was an effective revenue earner from an otherwise unprofitable possession. Plans by Spain to sell its African colony to Britain was cancelled in 1841 due to opposition from Spanish politicians and the public.\nLate 19th century (1844\u20131900).\nIn 1844, the British returned the island to Spanish control and the area became known as the \"Territorios Espa\u00f1oles del Golfo de Guinea\". Due to epidemics, Spain did not invest much in the colony, and in 1862, an outbreak of yellow fever killed many of the whites that had settled on the island. Despite this, plantations continued to be established by private citizens through the second half of the 19th century.\nThe plantations of Fernando P\u00f3 were mostly run by a black Creole elite, later known as Fernandinos. The British settled some 2,000 Sierra Leoneans and freed slaves there during their rule, and a trickle of immigration from West Africa and the West Indies continued after the British left. A number of freed Angolan slaves, Portuguese-African creoles and immigrants from Nigeria, and Liberia also began to be settled in the colony, where they quickly began to join the new group. To the local mix were added Cubans, Filipinos, Jews and Spaniards of various colours, many of whom had been deported to Africa for political or other crimes, as well as some settlers backed by the government.\nBy 1870, the prognosis of whites that lived on the island was much improved after recommendations that they live in the highlands, and by 1884 much of the minimal administrative machinery and key plantations had moved to Basile hundreds of meters above sea level. Henry Morton Stanley had labeled Fernando P\u00f3 \"a jewel which Spain did not polish\" for refusing to enact such a policy. Despite the improved survival chances of Europeans living on the island, Mary Kingsley, who was staying on the island, still described Fernando P\u00f3 as \"a more uncomfortable form of execution\" for Spaniards appointed there.\nThere was also a trickle of immigration from the neighboring Portuguese islands, escaped slaves, and prospective planters. Although a few of the Fernandinos were Catholic and Spanish-speaking, about nine-tenths of them were Protestant and English-speaking on the eve of the First World War, and pidgin English was the \"lingua franca\" of the island. The Sierra Leoneans were particularly well placed as planters while labor recruitment on the Windward coast continued. The Fernandinos became traders and middlemen between the natives and Europeans. A freed slave from the West Indies by way of Sierra Leone named William Pratt established the cocoa crop on Fernando P\u00f3.\nEarly 20th century (1900\u20131945).\nSpain had not occupied the large area in the Bight of Biafra to which it had right by treaty, and the French had expanded their occupation at the expense of the territory claimed by Spain. Madrid only partly backed the explorations of men like Manuel Iradier who had signed treaties in the interior as far as Gabon and Cameroon, leaving much of the land out of \"effective occupation\" as demanded by the terms of the 1885 Berlin Conference. Minimal government backing for mainland annexation came as a result of public opinion and a need for labour on Fernando P\u00f3.\nThe eventual treaty of Paris in 1900 left Spain with the continental enclave of R\u00edo Muni, only 26,000\u00a0km2 out of the 300,000km2 stretching east to the Ubangi river which the Spaniards had initially claimed. The humiliation of the Franco-Spanish negotiations, combined with the disaster in Cuba led to the head of the Spanish negotiating team, Pedro Gover y Tovar, committing suicide on the voyage home on 21 October 1901. Iradier himself died in despair in 1911; decades later, the port of Cogo was renamed Puerto Iradier in his honour.\nLand regulations issued in 1904\u20131905 favoured Spaniards, and most of the later big planters arrived from Spain after that. An agreement was made with Liberia in 1914 to import cheap labor. Due to malpractice however, the Liberian government eventually ended the treaty after revelations about the state of Liberian workers on Fernando P\u00f3 in the Christy Report which brought down the country's president Charles D. B. King in 1930.\nBy the late nineteenth century, the Bubi were protected from the demands of the planters by Spanish Claretian missionaries, who were very influential in the colony and eventually organised the Bubi into little mission theocracies reminiscent of the famous Jesuit reductions in Paraguay. Catholic penetration was furthered by two small insurrections in 1898 and 1910 protesting conscription of forced labour for the plantations. The Bubi were disarmed in 1917, and left dependent on the missionaries. Serious labour shortages were temporarily solved by a massive influx of refugees from German Kamerun, along with thousands of white German soldiers who stayed on the island for several years.\nBetween 1926 and 1959, Bioko and R\u00edo Muni were united as the colony of Spanish Guinea. The economy was based on large cacao and coffee plantations and logging concessions and the workforce was mostly immigrant contract labour from Liberia, Nigeria, and Cameroun. Between 1914 and 1930, an estimated 10,000 Liberians went to Fernando Po under a labour treaty that was stopped altogether in 1930. With Liberian workers no longer available, planters of Fernando Po turned to R\u00edo Muni. Campaigns were mounted to subdue the Fang people in the 1920s, at the time that Liberia was beginning to cut back on recruitment. There were garrisons of the colonial guard throughout the enclave by 1926, and the whole colony was considered 'pacified' by 1929.\nThe Spanish Civil War had a major impact on the colony. A group of 150 Spanish whites, including the Governor-General and Vice-Governor-General of R\u00edo Muni, created a socialist party called the Popular Front in the enclave which served to oppose the interests of the Fernando P\u00f3 plantation owners. When the War broke out Francisco Franco ordered Nationalist forces based in the Canaries to ensure control over Equatorial Guinea. In September 1936, Nationalist forces backed by Falangists from Fernando P\u00f3 took control of R\u00edo Muni, which under Governor-General Luiz Sanchez Guerra Saez and his deputy Porcel had backed the Republican government. By November, the Popular Front and its supporters had been defeated and Equatorial Guinea secured for Franco. The commander in charge of the occupation, Juan Font\u00e1n Lob\u00e9, was appointed Governor-General by Franco and began to exert more Spanish control over the enclave interior.\nR\u00edo Muni officially had a little over 100,000 people in the 1930s; escape into Cameroun or Gabon was easy. Fernando P\u00f3 thus continued to suffer from labour shortages. The French only briefly permitted recruitment in Cameroun, and the main source of labour came to be Igbo smuggled in canoes from Calabar in Nigeria. This resolution led to Fernando P\u00f3 becoming one of Africa's most productive agricultural areas after the Second World War.\nFinal years of Spanish rule (1945\u20131968).\nPolitically, post-war colonial history has three fairly distinct phases: up to 1959, when its status was raised from \"colonial\" to \"provincial\", following the approach of the Portuguese Empire; between 1960 and 1968, when Madrid attempted a partial decolonisation aimed at keeping the territory as part of the Spanish system; and from 1968 on, after the territory became an independent republic. The first phase consisted of little more than a continuation of previous policies; these closely resembled the policies of Portugal and France, notably in dividing the population into a vast majority governed as 'natives' or non-citizens, and a very small minority (together with whites) admitted to civic status as \"emancipados\", assimilation to the metropolitan culture being the only permissible means of advancement.\nThis \"provincial\" phase saw the beginnings of nationalism, but chiefly among small groups who had taken refuge from the \"Caudillo\"'s paternal hand in Cameroun and Gabon. They formed two bodies: the Movimiento Nacional de Liberaci\u00f3n de la Guinea (MONALIGE), and the Idea Popular de Guinea Ecuatorial (IPGE). By the late 1960s, much of the African continent had been granted independence. Aware of this trend, the Spanish began to increase efforts to prepare the country for independence. The gross national product per capita in 1965 was $466, which was the highest in black Africa; the Spanish constructed an international airport at Santa Isabel, a television station and increased the literacy rate to 89%. In 1967, the number of hospital beds per capita in Equatorial Guinea was higher than Spain itself, with 1637 beds in 16 hospitals. By the end of colonial rule, the number of Africans in higher education was in only the double digits.\nA decision of 9 August 1963, approved by a referendum of 15 December 1963, gave the territory a measure of autonomy and the administrative promotion of a 'moderate' group, the Movimiento de Uni\u00f3n Nacional de Guinea Ecuatorial (MUNGE). This was unsuccessful, and, with growing pressure for change from the UN, Madrid was gradually forced to give way to the currents of nationalism. Two General Assembly resolutions were passed in 1965 ordering Spain to grant independence to the colony, and in 1966, a UN Commission toured the country before recommending the same thing. In response, the Spanish declared that they would hold a constitutional convention on 27 October 1967 to negotiate a new constitution for an independent Equatorial Guinea. The conference was attended by 41 local delegates and 25 Spaniards. The Africans were principally divided between Fernandinos and Bubi on one side, who feared a loss of privileges and 'swamping' by the Fang majority, and the R\u00edo Muni Fang nationalists on the other. At the conference, the leading Fang figure, the later first president Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema, gave a controversial speech in which he claimed that Adolf Hitler had \"saved Africa\". After nine sessions, the conference was suspended due to deadlock between the \"unionists\" and \"separatists\" who wanted a separate Fernando P\u00f3. Mac\u00edas resolved to travel to the UN to bolster international awareness of the issue, and his firebrand speeches in New York contributed to Spain naming a date for both independence and general elections. In July 1968 virtually all Bubi leaders went to the UN in New York to try and raise awareness for their cause, but the world community was uninterested in quibbling over the specifics of colonial independence. The 1960s were a time of great optimism over the future of the former African colonies, and groups that had been close to European rulers, like the Bubi, were not viewed positively.\nIndependence under Mac\u00edas (1968\u20131979).\nIndependence from Spain was gained on 12 October 1968, at noon in the capital, Malabo. The new country became the Republic of Equatorial Guinea (the date is celebrated as the country's Independence Day). Mac\u00edas became president in the country's only free and fair election to date. The Spanish (ruled by Franco) had backed Mac\u00edas in the election; much of his campaigning involved visiting rural areas of R\u00edo Muni and promising that they would have the houses and wives of the Spanish if they voted for him. He had won in the second round of voting.\nDuring the Nigerian Civil War, Fernando P\u00f3 was inhabited by many Biafra-supporting Ibo migrant workers and many refugees from the breakaway state fled to the island. The International Committee of the Red Cross began running relief flights out of Equatorial Guinea, but Mac\u00edas quickly shut the flights down, refusing to allow them to fly diesel fuel for their trucks nor oxygen tanks for medical operations. The Biafran separatists were starved into submission without international backing.\nAfter the Public Prosecutor complained about \"excesses and maltreatment\" by government officials, Mac\u00edas had 150 alleged coup-plotters executed in a purge on Christmas Eve 1969, all of whom were political opponents. Macias Nguema further consolidated his totalitarian powers by outlawing opposition political parties in July 1970 and making himself president for life in 1972. He broke off ties with Spain and the West. In spite of his condemnation of Marxism, which he deemed \"neo-colonialist\", Equatorial Guinea maintained special relations with communist states, notably China, Cuba, East Germany and the USSR. Macias Nguema signed a preferential trade agreement and a shipping treaty with the Soviet Union. The Soviets also made loans to Equatorial Guinea. The shipping agreement gave the Soviets permission for a pilot fishery development project and also a naval base at Luba. In return, the USSR was to supply fish to Equatorial Guinea. China and Cuba also gave different forms of financial, military, and technical assistance to Equatorial Guinea, which got them a measure of influence there. For the USSR, there was an advantage to be gained in the war in Angola from access to Luba base and later on to Malabo International Airport.\nIn 1974, the World Council of Churches affirmed that large numbers of people had been murdered since 1968 in an ongoing reign of terror. A quarter of the entire population had fled abroad, they said, while 'the prisons are overflowing and to all intents and purposes form one vast concentration camp'. Out of a population of 300,000, an estimated 80,000 were killed. Apart from allegedly committing genocide against the ethnic minority Bubi people, Macias Nguema ordered the deaths of thousands of suspected opponents, closed down churches and presided over the economy's collapse as skilled citizens and foreigners fled the country.\nObiang (1979\u2013present).\nThe nephew of Mac\u00edas Nguema, Teodoro Obiang deposed his uncle on 3 August 1979, in a bloody \"coup d'\u00e9tat\"; over two weeks of civil war ensued until Mac\u00edas Nguema was captured. He was tried and executed soon afterward, with Obiang succeeding him as a less bloody, but still authoritarian president.\nIn 1995, Mobil, an American oil company, discovered oil in Equatorial Guinea. The country subsequently experienced rapid economic development, but earnings from the country's oil wealth have not reached the population and the country ranks low on the UN human development index. 7.9% of children die before the age of 5, and more than 50% of the population lacks access to clean drinking water. Obiang is widely suspected of using the country's oil wealth to enrich himself and his associates. In 2006, \"Forbes\" estimated his personal wealth at $600 million.\nIn 2011, the government announced it was planning a new capital for the country, named Oyala. The city was renamed Ciudad de la Paz (\"City of Peace\") in 2017.\nAs of February\u00a02016[ [update]], Obiang was Africa's second-longest serving dictator. Equatorial Guinea was elected as a non-permanent member of the United Nations Security Council 2018\u20132019. On 7 March 2021, there were munition explosions at a military base near the city of Bata, causing 107 deaths. In November 2022, Obiang was re-elected in the 2022 Equatorial Guinean general election with 99.7% of the vote amid accusations of fraud by the opposition.\nIn 2024 it was published that mercenaries from the Wagner Group (now called \"Africa Corps\") had entered Equatorial Guinea at the request of Teodoro Obiang. According to opponents, the objective of the mercenaries was to help consolidate a hypothetical succession of Obiang's power to his son \"Teodor\u00edn\".\nOn 19 May 2025 the International Court of Justice (ICJ) granted Equatorial Guinea sovereignty over Mbanie Island, Cocoteros Island, and Conga Island in response to territorial claims that neighboring Gabon had been making since 1972.\nOn 10 November 2025 it was reported that the second Trump administration had sent $7.5M to the government of Equatorial Guinea to accept non-citizen deportees from the United States, an amount far exceeding the total amount of U.S. aid sent to the country in the past eight years according to Sen. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe current president of Equatorial Guinea is Teodoro Obiang. The 1982 constitution of Equatorial Guinea gives him extensive powers, including naming and dismissing members of the cabinet, making laws by decree, dissolving the Chamber of Representatives, negotiating and ratifying treaties and serving as commander in chief of the armed forces. The constitution defines the nation as a unitary state. According to Human Rights Watch, the dictatorship of President Obiang used an oil boom to entrench and enrich itself further at the expense of the country's people. Since August 1979, some 12 perceived unsuccessful coup attempts have occurred. According to a March 2004 BBC profile, politics within the country were dominated by tensions with Obiang's son, Teodoro Nguema Obiang Mangue.\nIn 2004, a planeload of suspected mercenaries was intercepted in Zimbabwe while allegedly on the way to overthrow Obiang. A November 2004 report named Mark Thatcher as a financial backer of the 2004 Equatorial Guinea coup d'\u00e9tat attempt organized by Simon Mann. Various accounts also named the United Kingdom's MI6, the United States' CIA, and Spain as tacit supporters of the coup attempt. Nevertheless, the Amnesty International report released in June 2005 on the ensuing trial of those allegedly involved highlighted the prosecution's failure to produce conclusive evidence that a coup attempt had actually taken place. Simon Mann was released from prison on 3 November 2009 for humanitarian reasons.\nSince 2005, Military Professional Resources Inc., a US-based international private military company, has worked in Equatorial Guinea to train police forces in appropriate human rights practices. In 2006, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice hailed Obiang as a \"good friend\" despite repeated criticism of his human rights and civil liberties record. The US Agency for International Development entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with Obiang in April 2006 to establish a social development fund in the country, implementing projects in the areas of health, education, women's affairs and the environment.\nIn 2006, Obiang signed an anti-torture decree banning all forms of abuse and improper treatment in Equatorial Guinea, and commissioned the renovation and modernization of Black Beach prison in 2007 to ensure the humane treatment of prisoners. However, human rights abuses have continued. Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International among other non-governmental organizations have documented severe human rights abuses in prisons, including torture, beatings, unexplained deaths and illegal detention. Obiang was re-elected to serve an additional term in 2009 in an election the African Union deemed \"in line with electoral law\". Obiang re-appointed Prime Minister Ignacio Milam Tang in 2010.\nIn November 2011, a new constitution was approved. The vote on the constitution was taken, though neither the text nor its content was revealed to the public before the vote. Under the new constitution, the president was limited to a maximum of two seven-year terms and would be both the head of state and head of the government, therefore eliminating the prime minister. The new constitution also introduced the figure of a vice president and called for the creation of a 70-member senate with 55 senators elected by the people and the 15 remaining designated by the president. In the following cabinet reshuffle, it was announced that there would be two vice-presidents in clear violation of the constitution that was just taking effect.\nIn October 2012, during an interview with Christiane Amanpour on CNN, Obiang was asked whether he would step down at the end of the current term (2009\u20132016) since the new constitution limited the number of terms to two and he has been reelected at least 4 times. Obiang answered he refused to step aside because the new constitution was not retroactive and the two-term limit would only become applicable from 2016.\nThe elections on 26 May 2013 combined the senate, lower house and mayoral contests in a single package. Like all previous elections, this was denounced by the opposition, and it too was won by Obiang's PDGE. During the electoral contest, the ruling party hosted internal elections, which were later scrapped. Clara Nsegue Eyi and Natalia Angue Edjodjomo, coordinators of the Movimiento de Protesta Popular (People's Protest Movement), were arrested. They were detained on 13 May. They called for a peaceful protest at the Plaza de la Mujer square on 15 May. Coordinator Enrique Nsolo Nzo was also arrested and taken to Malabo Central Police Station. Nsolo Nzo was released later that day without charge.\nShortly after the elections, opposition party Convergence for Social Democracy (CPDS) announced that they were going to protest peacefully against the 26 May elections on 25 June. Interior minister Clemente Engonga refused to authorise the protest on the grounds that it could \"destabilize\" the country and CPDS decided to go forward, claiming constitutional right. On the night of 24 June, the CPDS headquarters in Malabo were surrounded by heavily armed police officers to keep those inside from leaving and thus effectively blocking the protest. Several leading members of CPDS were detained in Malabo and others in Bata were kept from boarding several local flights to Malabo.\nIn 2016, Obiang was reelected for an additional seven-year term in an election that, according to Freedom House, was plagued by police violence, detentions and torture against opposition factions.\nFollowing the 2022 general elections, President Obiang's Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea holds all of the 100 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and all of those in the Senate. The opposition is almost non-existent in the country and is organized from Spain mainly within the social-democratic Convergence for Social Democracy. Most of the media are under state control; the private television channels, those of the Asonga group, belong to the president's family.\nIn their 2024 publishing, Transparency International awarded Equatorial Guinea a total score of 13 on their Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI). CPI ranks countries by their perceived level of public corruption where zero is very corrupt and 100 is extremely clean. Equatorial Guinea was ranked 173rd out of a total of 180 countries. Freedom House, a pro-democracy and human rights NGO, described Obiang as one of the world's \"most kleptocratic living autocrats\", and complained about the US government welcoming his administration and buying oil from it. According to 2023 V-Dem Democracy indices, Equatorial Guinea is the 7th least democratic country in Africa.\nArmed forces.\nThe Armed Forces of Equatorial Guinea consists of approximately 2,500 service members. The army has almost 1,400 soldiers, the police 400 paramilitary men, the navy 200 service members, and the air force about 120 members. There is also a gendarmerie, but the number of members is unknown.\nAccording to the 2024 Global Peace Index, Equatorial Guinea is the 94th most peaceful country in the world.\nGeography.\nEquatorial Guinea is on the west coast of Central Africa. The country consists of a mainland territory, R\u00edo Muni, which is bordered by Cameroon to the north and Gabon to the east and south, and five small islands, Bioko, Corisco, Annob\u00f3n, Elobey Chico (Small Elobey), and Elobey Grande (Great Elobey). Bioko, the site of the capital, Malabo, lies about off the coast of Cameroon. Annob\u00f3n Island is about west-south-west of Cape Lopez in Gabon. Corisco and the two Elobey islands are in Corisco Bay, on the border of R\u00edo Muni and Gabon.\nEquatorial Guinea lies between latitudes 4\u00b0N and 2\u00b0S, and longitudes 5\u00b0 and 12\u00b0E. Despite its name, no part of the country's territory lies on the equator\u2014it is in the northern hemisphere, except for the insular Annob\u00f3n Province, which is about south of the equator.\nClimate.\nEquatorial Guinea has a tropical climate with distinct wet and dry seasons. From June to August, R\u00edo Muni is dry and Bioko wet; from December to February, the reverse occurs. In between it, there is a gradual transition. Rain or mist occurs daily on Annob\u00f3n, where a cloudless day has never been registered. The temperature at Malabo, Bioko, ranges from to , though on the southern Moka Plateau, normal high temperatures are only . In R\u00edo Muni, the average temperature is about . Annual rainfall varies from at Malabo to at Ureka, Bioko, but R\u00edo Muni is somewhat drier.\nEcology.\nEquatorial Guinea spans several ecoregions. R\u00edo Muni region lies within the Atlantic Equatorial coastal forests ecoregion except for patches of Central African mangroves on the coast, especially in the Muni River estuary. The Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests ecoregion covers most of Bioko and the adjacent portions of Cameroon and Nigeria on the African mainland, and the Mount Cameroon and Bioko montane forests ecoregion covers the highlands of Bioko and nearby Mount Cameroon. The S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9, Pr\u00edncipe, and Annob\u00f3n moist lowland forests ecoregion covers all of Annob\u00f3n, as well as S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe.\nThe country had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.99/10, ranking it 30th globally out of 172 countries.\nWildlife.\nEquatorial Guinea is home to gorillas, chimpanzees, various monkeys, leopards, buffalo, antelope, elephants, hippopotamuses, crocodiles, and various snakes, including pythons.\nAdministrative divisions.\nEquatorial Guinea is divided into eight provinces. The newest province is Djibloho, created in 2017 with its headquarters at Ciudad de la Paz, the country's future capital. The eight provinces are as follows (numbers correspond to those on the map; provincial capitals appear in parentheses):\nThe provinces are further divided into 19 districts and 37 municipalities.\nEconomy.\nBefore the nation's independence from Spain, Equatorial Guinea exported cocoa, coffee and timber, mostly to its colonial ruler, Spain, but also to Germany and the UK. On 1 January 1985, the country became the first non-Francophone African member of the franc zone, adopting the CFA franc as its currency. The national currency, the ekwele, had previously been linked to the Spanish peseta.\nThe discovery of large oil reserves in 1996 and its subsequent exploitation contributed to a dramatic increase in government revenue. As of 2004[ [update]], Equatorial Guinea is the third-largest oil producer in Sub-Saharan Africa. Its oil production has risen to , up from 220,000 only two years earlier. Oil companies operating in Equatorial Guinea include ExxonMobil, Marathon Oil, Kosmos Energy and Chevron.\nIn July 2004, the United States Senate published an investigation into Riggs Bank, a Washington, D.C.-based bank into which most of Equatorial Guinea's oil revenues were paid until recently, and which also banked for Chile's Augusto Pinochet. The Senate report showed at least $35 million siphoned off by Obiang, his family and regime senior officials. The president has denied any wrongdoing. Riggs Bank in February 2005 paid $9 million in restitution for Pinochet's banking, no restitution was made with regard to Equatorial Guinea.\nForestry, farming, and fishing are also major components of the country's gross domestic product (GDP). Subsistence farming predominates. Agriculture is the country's main source of employment, providing income for 57% of rural households and employment for 52% of the workforce. From 2000 to 2010, Equatorial Guinea had the highest average annual increase in GDP, 17%.\nEquatorial Guinea is a member of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA). Equatorial Guinea is also a member of the Central African Monetary and Economic Union (CEMAC), a subregion that comprises more than 50 million people. Equatorial Guinea tried to be validated as an Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)-compliant country. The country obtained candidate status on 22 February 2008; when Equatorial Guinea applied to extend the deadline for completing EITI's validation, the EITI Board did not agree to the extension.\nAccording to the World Bank, Equatorial Guinea has the highest gross national income (GNI) per capita of any African country, 83 times larger than the GNI per capita of Burundi, the poorest country. However, Equatorial Guinea has extreme poverty brought about by wealth inequality. According to the 2016 United Nations Human Development Report, Equatorial Guinea had a GDP per capita of $21,517, one of the highest levels of wealth in Africa. However, it is one of the most unequal countries in the world according to the Gini index, with 70 per cent of the population living on one dollar a day. The country ranks 145th out of 189 on the United Nations Human Development Index in 2019.\nHydrocarbons account for 97% of the state's exports, and it is a member of the African Petroleum Producers Organization. In 2020, it faces its eighth year of recession, due in part to endemic corruption. The economy of Equatorial Guinea was expected to grow about 2.6% in 2021, a projection that was based on the successful completion of a large gas project and the recovery of the world economy by the second half of the year. But the country is expected to return to recession in 2022, with a real GDP decline of about 4.4%. In 2022, the country's Gini coefficient was 58.8.\nTransportation.\nDue to the large oil industry in the country, internationally recognized carriers flew to Malabo International Airport, which, in May 2014, had several direct connections to Europe and West Africa. There are three airports in Equatorial Guinea\u2014Malabo International Airport, Bata Airport and Annob\u00f3n Airport on the island of Annob\u00f3n. Malabo International Airport is the only international airport.\nEvery airline registered in Equatorial Guinea appears on the list of air carriers prohibited in the European Union (EU), which means that they are banned from operating services of any kind within the EU. However, freight carriers provide service from European cities to the capital.\nDemographics.\nThe majority of the people of Equatorial Guinea are of Bantu origin. The largest ethnic group, the Fang, is indigenous to the mainland, but substantial migration to Bioko Island since the 20th century means the Fang population exceeds that of the earlier Bubi inhabitants. The Fang constitute 80% of the population and comprise around 67 clans. Those in the northern part of R\u00edo Muni speak Fang-Ntumu, while those in the south speak Fang-Okah; the two dialects have differences but are mutually intelligible. Dialects of Fang are also spoken in parts of neighboring Cameroon (Bulu) and Gabon. These dialects, while still intelligible, are more distinct. The Bubi, who constitute 15% of the population, are indigenous to Bioko Island. The traditional demarcation line between Fang and 'Beach' (inland) ethnic groups was the village of Niefang (limit of the Fang), east of Bata.\nCoastal ethnic groups, sometimes referred to as Ndowe or \"Playeros\" (\"Beach People\" in Spanish): Combes, Bujebas, Balengues, and Bengas on the mainland and small islands, and Fernandinos, a Krio community on Bioko Island together comprise 5% of the population. Europeans (largely of Spanish or Portuguese descent, some with partial African ancestry) also live in the country, but most ethnic Spaniards left after independence.\nA growing number of foreigners from neighboring Cameroon, Nigeria, and Gabon have immigrated to the country. According to the \"Encyclopedia of the Stateless Nations\" (2002) 7% of Bioko islanders were Igbo. Equatorial Guinea received Asians and native Africans from other countries as workers on cocoa and coffee plantations. Other black Africans came from Liberia, Angola, and Mozambique. Most of the Asian population is Chinese, with small numbers of Indians.\nLanguages.\nSince its independence in 1968, the main official language of Equatorial Guinea has been Spanish (the local variant is Equatoguinean Spanish), which acts as a lingua franca among its different ethnic groups. In 1970, during Mac\u00edas' rule, Spanish was replaced by Fang, the language of its majority ethnic group, to which Mac\u00edas belonged. That decision was reverted in 1979 after Mac\u00edas' fall. Spanish remained as its lone official language until 1998, when French was added as its second one, as it had previously joined the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC), whose founding members are French-speaking nations, two of them (Cameroon and Gabon) surrounding its continental region. Portuguese was adopted as its third official language in 2010. Spanish has been an official language since 1844. It is still the language of education and administration. 67.6% of Equatorial Guineans can speak it, especially those living in the capital, Malabo. Spanish is spoken as a native language by a small minority usually in larger cities.\nFrench was only made official in order to join the Francophonie, and it is not locally spoken, except in some border towns; and Portuguese was only made official in order to join the Community of Portuguese Language Countries, so it too is not locally spoken, although the Annobonese and local Catholics have links to the language.\nAboriginal languages are recognised as integral parts of the \"national culture\" (Constitutional Law No. 1/1998, 21 January). Indigenous languages (some of them creoles) include Fang, Bube, Benga, Ndowe, Balengue, Bujeba, Bissio, Gumu, Igbo, Pichinglis, Fa d'Amb\u00f4 and the nearly extinct Baseke. Most African ethnic groups speak Bantu languages.\nFa d'Amb\u00f4, a Portuguese creole, is in use in Annob\u00f3n Province, in Malabo, and on Equatorial Guinea's mainland. Many residents of Bioko can also speak Spanish, particularly in the capital, and the local trade language, Pichinglis, an English-based creole. Spanish is not spoken much in Annob\u00f3n. In government and education, Spanish is used. Noncreolized Portuguese is used as a liturgical language by local Catholics. The Annobonese ethnic community tried to gain membership in the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP). The government financed an Instituto Internacional da L\u00edngua Portuguesa (IILP) sociolinguistic study in Annob\u00f3n. It documented strong links with the Portuguese creole populations in S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau.\nDue to historical and cultural ties, in 2010, the legislature amended Article 4 of the Constitution of Equatorial Guinea to establish Portuguese as an official language of the Republic. This was an effort by the government to improve its communications, trade, and bilateral relations with Portuguese-speaking countries. It also recognises long historical ties with Portugal and with Portuguese-speaking peoples of Brazil, S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, and Cape Verde.\nSome of the motivations for Equatorial Guinea's pursuit of membership in the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP) included access to several professional and academic exchange programmes and facilitated cross-border circulation of citizens. The adoption of Portuguese as an official language was the primary requirement to apply for CPLP acceptance. In addition, the country was told it must adopt political reforms allowing effective democracy and respect for human rights. The national parliament discussed this law in October 2011.\nIn February 2012, Equatorial Guinea's foreign minister signed an agreement with the IILP on the promotion of Portuguese in the country. In July 2012, the CPLP refused Equatorial Guinea full membership, primarily because of its continued serious violations of human rights. The government responded by legalising political parties, declaring a moratorium on the death penalty, and starting a dialog with all political factions. Additionally, the IILP secured land from the government for the construction of Portuguese language cultural centres in Bata and Malabo. At its tenth summit in Dili in July 2014, Equatorial Guinea was admitted as a CPLP member. Abolition of the death penalty and the promotion of Portuguese as an official language were preconditions of the approval.\nReligion.\nThe principal religion in Equatorial Guinea is Christianity, the faith of 93% of the population. Roman Catholics make up the majority (88%), while a minority are Protestants (5%). Of the population, 2% follows Islam (mainly Sunni). The remaining 5% practise Animism, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, and other beliefs, and traditional animist beliefs are often mixed with Catholicism.\nHealth.\nEquatorial Guinea's malaria programs in the early 21st century achieved success in reducing malaria infection and mortality. Their program consists of twice-yearly indoor residual spraying (IRS), the introduction of artemisinin combination treatment (ACTs), the use of intermittent preventive treatment in pregnant women (IPTp), and the introduction of long-lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets (LLINs). Their efforts resulted in a reduction in all-cause under-five mortality from 152 to 55 deaths per 1,000 live births (down 64%), a drop that coincided with the launch of the program.\nIn June 2014, four cases of polio were reported, making it the country's first outbreak of that disease.\nEducation.\nAmong sub-Saharan African countries, Equatorial Guinea has one of the highest literacy rates. According to the Central Intelligence Agency's World Factbook, as of 2015[ [update]], 95.3% of the population age 15 and over were able to read and write in the country. Under Francisco Macias, few children received any type of education. Under President Obiang, the illiteracy rate dropped from 73% to 13%, and the number of primary school students rose from 65,000 in 1986 to more than 100,000 in 1994. Education is free and compulsory for children between the ages of 6 and 14.\nThe Equatorial Guinea government has partnered with Hess Corporation and The Academy for Educational Development (AED) to establish a $20 million education program for primary school teachers to teach modern child development techniques. There are now 51 model schools whose active pedagogy will be a national reform.\nThe country has one university, the Universidad Nacional de Guinea Ecuatorial (UNGE), with a campus in Malabo and a Faculty of Medicine located in Bata on the mainland. In 2009 the university produced the first 110 national doctors. The Bata Medical School is supported principally by the government of Cuba and staffed by Cuban medical educators and physicians.\nCulture.\nIn June 1984, the First Hispanic-African Cultural Congress was convened to explore the cultural identity of Equatorial Guinea.\nTourism.\nAs of 2020[ [update]], Equatorial Guinea has no UNESCO World Heritage Site or tentative sites for the World Heritage List. The country also has no documented heritage listed in the Memory of the World Programme of UNESCO nor any intangible cultural heritage listed in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List.\nTourist attractions are the colonial quarter in Malabo, the southern part of Bioko where hikers can visit the Iladyi cascades and remote beaches with nesting turtles, Bata with its shoreline Paseo Maritimo and the tower of liberty, Mongomo with its basilica (the second largest Catholic church in Africa) and the new planned and built capital Ciudad de la Paz.\nMedia and communications.\nThe principal means of communication within Equatorial Guinea are three state-operated FM radio stations: the BBC World Service, Radio France Internationale and Gabon-based Africa No 1 broadcast on FM in Malabo. There is also an independent radio option called Radio Macuto; it is a web-based radio and news source known for publishing news that calls out Obiang's regime. There are also five shortwave radio stations. Televisi\u00f3n de Guinea Ecuatorial, the television network, is state-operated. The international TV programme RTVGE is available via satellites in Africa, Europe, and the Americas and worldwide via the Internet. There are two newspapers and two magazines.\nEquatorial Guinea ranked 161st out of 179 countries in the 2012 Reporters Without Borders press freedom index. The watchdog says the national broadcaster obeys the orders of the information ministry. Most of the media companies practice self-censorship, and are banned by law from criticising public figures. The state-owned media and the main private radio station are under the directorship of the president's son, Teodor Obiang.\nLandline telephone penetration is low, with only two lines available per 100 people. There is one GSM mobile telephone operator, with coverage of Malabo, Bata, and several mainland cities. As of 2009[ [update]], approximately 40% of the population subscribed to mobile telephone services. The only telephone provider in Equatorial Guinea is Orange. According to the World Bank, there were more than a million Internet users by 2022.\nMusic.\nPan-African styles like soukous and makossa are popular, as are reggaeton, Latin trap, reggae and rock and roll.\nCinema.\nIn 2014, the South African-Dutch-Equatorial Guinean drama film \"Where the Road Runs Out\" was shot in the country. There is also the documentary \"The Writer from a Country Without Bookstores\". It is openly critical of Obiang's regime.\nSports.\nEquatorial Guinea was chosen to co-host the 2012 African Cup of Nations in partnership with Gabon, and hosted the 2015 edition. The country was also chosen to host the 2008 Women's African Football Championship, which they won. The women's national team qualified for the 2011 World Cup in Germany. In June 2016, Equatorial Guinea was chosen to host the 12th African Games in 2019.\nEquatorial Guinea is famous for the swimmers Eric Moussambani, nicknamed \"Eric the Eel\", and Paula Barila Bolopa, \"Paula the Crawler\", who attended the 2000 Summer Olympics.\nBasketball has been increasing in popularity.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution"}
{"id": "9367", "revid": "20906888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9367", "title": "History of Equatorial Guinea", "text": " \nThe History of Equatorial Guinea is marked by centuries of colonial domination by the Portuguese, British and Spanish colonial empires, and by the local kingdoms.\nPre-colonial history.\nThe first inhabitants of the region that is now Equatorial Guinea are believed to have been Pygmies, of whom only isolated pockets remain in northern R\u00edo Muni. Bantu migrations between the 17th and 19th centuries brought the coastal groups and later the Fang. Elements of the latter may have generated the Bubi, who emigrated to Bakugan from Cameroon and R\u00edo Muni in several waves and succeeded former Neolithic populations. The Igbo of Nigeria (mostly Aro) slave traders arrived and founded small settlements in Bioko and Rio Muni which expanded the Aro Confederacy in the 18th and 19th centuries. The Annob\u00f3n population, originally from Angola, were brought by the Portuguese via S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9.\nColonial era.\nPortuguese colonial rule (1472\u20131778).\nThe Portuguese explorer Fern\u00e3o do P\u00f3, seeking a path to India, is credited as being the first European to discover the island of Bioko in 1472. He called it \"Formosa\" (\"Beautiful\"), but it quickly took on the name of its European discoverer, usually found on maps Hispanized into \"Fernando Po\". The islands of Fernando P\u00f3 and Annob\u00f3n were colonized by Portugal in 1474.\nSpanish colonial territory (1778\u20131968).\nIn 1778, Queen Maria I of Portugal and King Charles III of Spain signed the Treaty of El Pardo which ceded the Bioko, adjacent islets, and commercial rights to the Bight of Biafra between the Niger and Ogoue rivers to Spain. Spain intended to start slave-trading operations on the mainland. Between 1778 and 1810, the territory of Equatorial Guinea was administered by the Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata, based in Buenos Aires.\nFrom 1827 to 1843, the United Kingdom had a base on Bioko to suppress the transatlantic slave trade, which was then moved to Sierra Leone upon agreement with Spain in 1843. In 1844, on restoration of Spanish rule, it became known as the \"Territorios Espa\u00f1oles del Golfo de Guinea\". Spain had neglected to occupy the large area in the Bight of Biafra to which it had treaty rights, and the French had been expanding their occupation at the expense of the area claimed by Spain. The Treaty of Paris in 1900 left Spain with the continental enclave of Rio Muni, a mere 26,000\u00a0km2 out of the 300,000 stretching east to the Ubangi River, which the Spaniards had claimed.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the plantations of Fernando Po were largely in the hands of a black Creole elite, later known as Fernandinos. The British had settled some 2,000 Sierra Leoneans and freed slaves during their brief control of the island in the early 19th century, and a small trickle of immigration from West Africa and the West Indies continued after the departure of the British. To this core of settlers were added Cubans, Filipinos, Spaniards of various colours deported for political or other crimes, and some assisted settlers. There was also a trickle of immigration from the neighbouring Portuguese islands: escaped slaves and prospective planters. Although a few of the Fernandinos were Catholic and Spanish-speaking, about nine-tenths of them were Protestant and English-speaking on the eve of the First World War, and pidgin English was the lingua franca of the island. The Sierra Leoneans were particularly well placed as planters while labour recruitment on the Windward coast continued, for they kept family and other connections there and could easily arrange labour supplies.\nDuring World War I, due to Spain's neutrality, Rio Muni and Fernando Po were host to large numbers of German troops and refugees who fled German Kamerun after the Entente conquered the colony. They were well-treated by the Spanish authorities, largely because the 180-man militia was not large enough to forcibly intern them. Most of the Cameroonian natives stayed in Muni, while the Germans moved to Fernando Po.\nFrom the opening years of the 20th century, the Fernandinos were put on the defensive by a new generation of Spanish immigrants. New land regulations in 1904\u20135 favoured Spaniards, and most of the big planters of later years arrived in the islands from Spain following these new regulations. The Liberian labour agreement of 1914 favoured wealthy men with ready access to the state, and the shift in labour supplies from Liberia to Rio Muni increased this advantage. In 1940, it was estimated that only 20 per cent of the colony's cocoa production remained in African hands, nearly all of it in the hands of Fernandinos.\nThe greatest constraint to economic development was a chronic shortage of labour. The indigenous Bubi population of Bioko, pushed into the interior of the island and decimated by alcoholic addiction, venereal disease, smallpox and sleeping sickness, refused to work on plantations. Working their own small cocoa farms gave them a considerable degree of autonomy. Moreover, the Bubi were protected from the demands of the planters from the late 19th century by the Spanish Claretian missionaries, who were very influential in the colony and eventually organised the Bubi into small mission theocracies reminiscent of the famous Jesuit Reductions of Paraguay. Catholic penetration was furthered by two small insurrections protesting the conscription of forced labour for the plantations, in 1898 and 1910, which led to the Bubi being disarmed in 1917 and left them dependent on the missionaries.\nTowards the end of the 19th century Spanish, Portuguese, German and Fernandino planters started developing large cacao plantations. With the indigenous Bubi population decimated by disease and forced labour, the island's economy came to depend on imported agricultural contract workers. A Labour Treaty was signed with the Republic of Liberia in 1914, the transport of up to 15,000 workers was orchestrated by the German Woermann-Linie. The Liberian labour supply was cut off in 1930 after an International Labour Organization (ILO) commission discovered that contract workers had \"been recruited under conditions of criminal compulsion scarcely distinguishable from slave raiding and slave trading\".\nBetween 1926 and 1959 Bioko and Rio Muni were united as the colony of Spanish Guinea. The economy was based on large cacao and coffee plantations and logging concessions, and the workforce was mostly made up of immigrant contract labourers from Liberia, Nigeria, and Cameroon. Military campaigns were mounted to subdue the Fang people in the 1920s, at the time that Liberia was beginning to cut back on recruitment. There were garrisons of the colonial guard throughout the enclave by 1926, and the whole colony was considered 'pacified' by 1929. However, Rio Muni had a small population, officially put at a little over 100,000 in the 1930s, and escape over the frontiers into Cameroon or Gabon was very easy. Moreover, the timber companies needed growing amounts of labour, and the spread of coffee cultivation offered an alternative means of paying taxes. Fernando Po thus continued to suffer from labour shortages. The French only briefly permitted recruitment in Cameroon, and the main source of labour came to be Igbo smuggled in canoes from Calabar and Oron, Nigeria. The persisting labour shortage in the cacao, coffee and logging industries was only overcome by the mushrooming illegal canoe-based smuggling of Igbo and Ibibio workers from the Eastern Provinces of Nigeria. The number of clandestine contract workers on the island of Fernando Po grew to 20,000 in 1942. A labour treaty was signed in the same year, and a continuous stream of workers arrived in Spanish Guinea. It was this treaty which really permitted Fernando Po to become one of Africa's most productive agricultural areas after the Second World War. By 1968 there were almost 100,000 Nigerians in Spanish Guinea.\nSpanish Civil War (1936\u20131939).\nAt the beginning of the Spanish Civil War the colony remained loyal to the Republican government. On July 24, 1936, the Republican cruiser \"M\u00e9ndez N\u00fa\u00f1ez\" arrived at Santa Isabel; on its way back to Spain the officers planned to join the rebellion, but the Spanish government, knowing this, ordered the ship to go back to the colony; on August 14 the \"M\u00e9ndez N\u00fa\u00f1ez\" was back in Fernando Po, where the sailors took control of her; on September 21 the ship arrived in M\u00e1laga (Republican Spain). On September 19 the Colonial Guard and the Civil Guard began the rebellion and took control of the island of Fernando Po, while the rest of the colony remained loyal to the Republic. On September 22 a clash took place between a rebel group from Kogo and a loyal detachment from Bata. Finally, on October 14 a force of 200 rebels arrived in the merchant \"Ciudad de Mah\u00f3n\" and took control of Bata and the rest of the colony.\nProvincialisation and decolonisation.\nThe post-war political history of the colony can be divided into three fairly distinct phases: \nThe first of these phases consisted of little more than a continuation of previous policies; these closely resembled the policies of Portugal and France, notably in dividing the population into a vast majority governed as 'natives' or non-citizens, and a very small minority (together with whites) admitted to civic status as \"emancipados\", assimilation to the metropolitan culture being the only permissible means of advancement. The first local elections were held in 1959, and the first Equatoguinean representatives were seated in the Cortes Generales (Spanish parliament). Under the Basic Law of December 1963, limited autonomy was authorized under a joint legislative body for the territory's two provinces. A paradoxical effect of this autonomy was that Guineans could choose among several political parties while metropolitan Spaniards were under a single-party regime. The name of the country was changed to Equatorial Guinea. Although Spain's commissioner general had extensive powers, the Equatorial Guinean General Assembly had considerable initiative in formulating laws and regulations.\nNationalism began to emerge during this \"provincial\" phase, chiefly among small groups who had taken refuge from General Franco's dictatorship in Cameroon and Gabon. They formed two bodies: the Movimiento Nacional de Liberaci\u00f3n de la Guinea (MONALIGE), and the Idea Popular de Guinea Ecuatorial (IPGE). Their pressures were weak, but the general trend in West Africa was not. A decision of 9 August 1963, approved by a referendum of 15 December 1963, introduced the territory to a measure of autonomy and the administrative promotion of a 'moderate' grouping, the Movimiento de Uni\u00f3n Nacional de la Guinea Ecuatorial (MUNGE). This proved a feeble instrument, and, with growing pressure for change from the UN, Spain gave way to the currents of nationalism. Independence was conceded on 12 October 1968 and the Republic of Equatorial Guinea came into being with Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema elected as president.\nIndependence and Macias government (1968\u20131979).\nIn March 1968, under pressure from Equatoguinean nationalists and the United Nations, Spain announced that it would grant independence to Equatorial Guinea. A constitutional convention produced an electoral law and draft constitution. In the presence of a UN observer team, a referendum was held on August 11, 1968, and 63% of the electorate voted in favour of the constitution, which provided for a government with a General Assembly and a Supreme Court with judges appointed by the president.\nIn September 1968, Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema was elected first president of Equatorial Guinea, and independence was granted in October.\nAt independence, Equatorial Guinea had one of the highest per capita incomes in Africa, although it was also very unevenly distributed as most of the money was in the hands of colonial and elite planters. In its final years of rule the Spanish colonial government achieved a relatively high literacy rate and developed a good network of health care facilities. However, at the time of independence, the number of African doctors and lawyers was in the single digits.\nIn July 1970, Macias created a single-party state and by May 1971, key portions of the constitution were abrogated. In 1972 Macias took complete control of the government and assumed the title of President for Life. The Macias regime was characterized by human rights abuses, totalitarianism and the abandonment of all government functions except internal security, which was accomplished by terror; this led to the death or exile of up to one-third of the country's population. Due to pilferage, ignorance, and neglect, the country's infrastructure\u2014electricity, water, road, transportation, and health\u2014fell into ruin. The private and public sectors of the economy were devastated. Nigerian contract labourers on Bioko, estimated to have been 60,000, left en masse in early 1976. The economy collapsed, and skilled citizens and foreigners left.\nReligion was repressed, and education ceased. All schools were ordered closed in 1975, and the country's churches were also closed in 1978. Nguema introduced a campaign of 'authenticity', replacing colonial names with native ones: the capital Santa Isabel became Malabo, the main island of Fernando Po was renamed Masie Nguema Biyogo after himself, and Annob\u00f3n became Pagalu. As part of the same process, Nguema also ordered the entire population to drop their European names and adopt African ones. His own name underwent several transformations, so that by the end of his rule he was known as Masie Nguema Biyogo \u00d1egue Ndong. Much of the population residing on the island of Bioko, consisting of Nigerian labourers and traders, were forced to evacuate.\nIn August 1979 Macias' nephew from Mongomo and former director of the infamous Black Beach prison, Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, led a successful coup d'\u00e9tat; Macias was arrested, tried, and executed. Obiang assumed the presidency in October 1979. The islands were renamed Bioko and Annob\u00f3n. The new ruler faced the challenge of restoring order in a country that was in shambles\u2014by the end of Macias Nguema's dictatorship, the state coffers were empty and the population had been reduced to only one-third of what it was at independence.\nObiang government (1979\u2013present).\nAlthough President Obiang signed a national anti-torture decree in 2006 to ban all forms of abuse and improper treatment in Equatorial Guinea and commissioned the renovation and modernization of Black Beach prison in 2007 to ensure the humane treatment of prisoners, human rights abuses continue. Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International and other non-governmental organizations have documented severe human rights abuses in prisons, including torture, beatings, unexplained deaths and illegal detention.\nAccording to a March 2004 BBC profile, politics within the country are dominated by tensions between Obiang's son, Teodorin, and other close relatives with powerful positions in the security forces. The tension may be rooted in power shifts arising from the dramatic increase in oil production which has occurred since 1997.\nThe unsuccessful \"Wonga Coup\" by European and South African mercenaries in 2004 attempted to replace Obiang with a puppet ruler who would open the country's mineral wealth to the plotters. Simon Mann, a former officer in the SAS, led the plot, which also included former members of the South African Army 32 Battalion. Financial backers included Sir Mark Thatcher, son of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and possibly the novelist Jeffrey Archer. Somewhere between $3\u00a0million and $20\u00a0million was expended on the failed coup, which has been claimed by some to have had the tacit support of some Western governments and international corporations.\nIn 2011, the government announced it was planning a new capital for the country, which was to be named Oyala but will be Djibloho \u2013 Ciudad de la Paz.\nOn March 7, 2021, there were munitions explosions at a military base near the city of Bata that resulted in 98 deaths and 600 people were injured and a/tending in hospital.\nIn November 2022 Teodoro Obiang was re-elected in 2022 Equatorial Guinean general election with 99.7% of the vote amidst accusations of fraud by the opposition.\nIn 2024 it was published that mercenaries from the Wagner Group (now called \u201cAfrica Corps\u201d) had entered in Equatorial Guinea at the request of Teodoro Obiang. According to opponents, the objective of the mercenaries was to help consolidate a hypothetical succession of Obiang's power to his son \"Teodor\u00edn\".\nOn May 19, 2025 the International Court of Justice (ICJ) granted Equatorial Guinea sovereignty over Mbanie Island, Cocoteros Island, and Conga Island in response to territorial claims that neighboring Gabon had been making since 1972.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9368", "revid": "50609019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9368", "title": "Geography of Equatorial Guinea", "text": " \nThe Republic of Equatorial Guinea is located in west central Africa. Bioko Island lies about from Cameroon. Annob\u00f3n Island lies about southwest of Bioko Island. The larger continental region of R\u00edo Muni lies between Cameroon and Gabon on the mainland; it includes the islands of Corisco, Elobey Grande, Elobey Chico, and adjacent islets. The total land area is . It has an Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nBioko Island, called Fernando Po until the 1970s, is the largest island in the Gulf of Guinea \u2014 . It is shaped like a boot, with two large volcanic formations separated by a valley that bisects the island at its narrowest point. The coastline is steep and rugged in the south but lower and more accessible in the north, with excellent harbors at Malabo and Luba, and several scenic beaches between those towns.\nOn the continent, R\u00edo Muni covers . The coastal plain gives way to a succession of valleys separated by low hills and spurs of the Crystal Mountains. The Rio Benito (Mbini) which divides R\u00edo Muni in half, is unnavigable except for a 20-kilometer stretch at its estuary. Temperatures and humidity in R\u00edo Muni are generally lower than on Bioko Island.\nAnnobon Island, named for its discovery on New Year's Day 1472, is a small volcanic island covering . The coastline is abrupt except in the north; the principal volcanic cone contains a small lake. Most of the estimated 1,900 inhabitants are fisherman specializing in traditional, smallscale tuna fishing and whaling. The climate is tropical\u2014heavy rainfall, high humidity, and frequent seasonal changes with violent windstorms.\nLocation:\nCentral Africa, bordering the Bight of Biafra, between Cameroon and Gabon.\n* Total: 28,051 km\u00b2\n**\"country rank in the world:\" 141st\n* Land: 28,051 km\u00b2\n* Water: negligible km\u00b2\nArea and boundaries.\nEquatorial Guinea's land boundaries total 539\u00a0km. It borders Cameroon (189\u00a0km) in the north and Gabon (350\u00a0km) in the east and south.\n* Australia comparative: approximately the size of Tasmania\n* Canada comparative: approximately the size of Nova Scotia\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately larger than Wales\n* United States comparative: slightly larger than Massachusetts\n* EU comparative: slightly smaller than Belgium\nMaritime claims:\nterritorial sea:\nExclusive economic zone:\n with \nTerrain.\nCoastal plains rise to interior hills; islands are volcanic.\nTotal renewable water resources:\n26\u00a0km3 (2011)\nNatural hazards:\nviolent windstorms, flash floods\nEnvironment \u2014 current issues:\ntap water is not potable; deforestation\nEnvironment \u2014 international agreements:\nparty to:\nBiodiversity, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\nGeography note:\ninsular and continental regions rather widely separated\nClimate.\nThe climate of both the continental region and the islands is typically equatorial, with high temperatures, heavy rainfall, and much cloud cover most of the year. Local variations are due to differences in altitude and proximity to the sea. The wet seasons in the continental region are from February to June and from September to December. Rainfall is higher on the coast than inland. In Bata the rainiest months are September, October, and November, with rainfall averaging more than a year. At Calatrava, farther south on the coast, it sometimes reaches . Inland, however, rainfall diminishes; Mikomeseng, for example, receives only about . The average annual temperature is about and is fairly constant throughout the year. The temperature maxima are somewhat lower than in Bioko. The relative humidity, however, is higher than in Bioko. Bioko has a rather debilitating climate. The so-called dry season lasts from November to March, and the rest of the year is rainy. The average annual temperature of about varies little throughout the year. Afternoon temperatures reach the high 80s \u00b0F (low 30s \u00b0C) and drop to only about at night. Most of the time the sky is cloudy and overcast. Extreme rainfall occurs in the south, with rain brought by monsoon winds amounting to about a year around San Antonio de Ureca.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Equatorial Guinea, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9369", "revid": "45939385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9369", "title": "Demographics of Equatorial Guinea", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Equatorial Guinea include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation.\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 226,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 14 in 2020 was 38.73%, 57.35% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 3.92% was 65 years or older.\nPopulation Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2020) (Estimates or projections based on the 2015 population census.):\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events is in Equatorial Guinea not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):\nFertility data as of 2011 (DHS Program):\nEthnic groups.\nNative ethnic groups.\nThe majority of the people of Equatorial Guinea are of Niger-Congo origin. The largest ethnic group, the Fang, are indigenous to the mainland, but substantial migration to Bioko Island has resulted in Fang dominance over the earlier Bubi inhabitants. The Fang constitute 80% of the population and are themselves divided into 67 clans. Those in the northern part of Rio Muni speak Fang-Ntumu, while those in the south speak Fang-Okah; the two dialects are mutually unintelligible. The Bubi, who constitute 15% of the population, are indigenous to Bioko Island.\nIn addition, there are coastal ethnic groups, collectively referred to as \"Ndowe\" or \"Playeros\" (\"Beach People\" in Spanish): Combes, Bujebas, Balengues and Bengas on the mainland and small islands and a Fernandino community of Krio descended people on Bioko. Together, these groups compose 5% of the population.\nTwo small groups of Pygmies also inhabit the country, the Beyele and the Bokuign, the former being located in the Altos de Nsork region. Their population is dwindling, them being subjected to heavy pressure from their neighbours, who don't even consider them as human.\nRecently immigrated peoples.\nSome Europeans (largely of Spanish or Portuguese descent) \u2013 among them mixed with African ethnicity \u2013 also live in the nation. Most Spaniards left after independence. There is a growing number of foreigners from neighboring Cameroon, Nigeria, and Gabon. Equatorial Guinea received Asians and black Africans from other countries as workers on cocoa and coffee plantations. In the late 20th century, Equatorial Guinea became home to more than 80,000 Hispanics from Mexico, Central America, and other Spanish speaking nations in the Americas. 17,000 Spanish people and 5,000 Chinese people also live in Equatorial Guinea. The non-Africans living in Equatorial Guinea represent almost 10% of the nation's total population. Other black Africans came from Liberia, Angola, and Mozambique, and Asians are mostly Chinese with small numbers of Indians. Equatorial Guinea also allowed many fortune-seeking European settlers of other nationalities, including British, French and Germans. After independence, thousands of Equatorial Guineans went to Spain. Another 100,000 Equatorial Guineans went to Cameroon, Gabon, and Nigeria because of dictatorship of Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema. Some of its communities also live in Brazil, United States, Spain, Colombia, Mexico, Argentina, Peru, Portugal, and France.\nLanguages.\nSpanish, French and Portuguese are the official languages and spoken as second languages. Spanish is the language of education, and for this reason a majority of the population (about 88%) can speak it. Spanish is spoken as a native language by a small minority in Equatorial Guinea, primarily in larger cities.\nAnnobonese speak a Portuguese Creole, named Annobonese, as their first language. Asian migrants and descendants of European settlers (mostly Spaniards, Britons and Portuguese) usually speak their ancestral languages along with Spanish. Other Africans usually speak their native languages and their nation's official languages \u2013 English and Igbo for Nigerians; English for Cameroonians and Liberians; French for Cameroonians and Gabonese; and Portuguese for Angolans and Mozambicans. The latter was made an official language since July 13, 2007. 82% of first foreign language learners choose the French language and 18% the English language. The Roman Catholic Church has greatly influenced both religion and education.\nLanguages of traditional names.\nEquatoguineans tend to have both a Spanish first name and an African first and last name. When written, the Spanish and African first names are followed by the father's first name (which becomes the principal surname) and the mother's first name. Thus people may have up to four names, with a different surname for each generation.\nOther demographic statistics.\nDemographic statistics according to the World Population Review in 2022.\nThe following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook.\n1,679,173 (2022 est.)\n836,178 (July 2020 est.)\n\"note\": 2002 census results claim 1,015,000 residents, although this was most likely inflated in anticipation for the December election.\nLanguages.\nSpanish (official) 67.6%, other (includes Fang, Bubi, Portuguese (official), French (official), Portuguese-based Creoles spoken in Ano Bom) 32.4% (1994 est.)\nRoman Catholic 88%, Protestant 5%, Muslim 2%, other 5% (animist, Baha'i, Jewish) (2015 est.)\nRoman Catholic 80%, Protestant 5%, Muslim 2%, other 5% (animist, Baha'i, Jewish) (2010 est.)\n\"0-14 years:\" 38.73% (male 164,417 /female 159,400)\n\"15-24 years:\" 19.94% (male 84,820 /female 81,880)\n\"25-54 years:\" 32.72% (male 137,632 /female 135,973)\n\"55-64 years:\" 4.69% (male 17,252 /female 22,006)\n\"65 years and over:\" 3.92% (male 13,464 /female 19,334) (2020 est.)\n3.5% (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 5th\n2.35% (2020 est.) Country comparison to the world: 29th\n29.95 births/1,000 population (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 30th\n30.7 births/1,000 population (2020 est.) Country comparison to the world: 31st\n8.95 deaths/1,000 population (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 62nd\n7.3 deaths/1,000 population (2020 est.) Country comparison to the world: 112th\n4.19 children born/woman (2023 est.) Country comparison to the world: 20th\n4.26 children born/woman (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 24th\n4.11 children born/woman (2020 est.) Country comparison to the world: 29th\ntotal: 20.3 years. Country comparison to the world: 192nd\nmale: 19.9 years \nfemale: 20.7 years (2020 est.)\n12.6% (2011)\n13.96 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 3rd\n0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2020 est.) Country comparison to the world: 81st\ntotal dependency ratio: 72.16 (2022 est.)\nyouth dependency ratio: 60.5 (2020 est.)\nelderly dependency ratio: 3.9 (2020 est.)\npotential support ratio: 25.5 (2020 est.)\nurban population: 74% of total population (2022)\nrate of urbanization: 3.62% annual rate of change (2020-25 est.)\nurban population: 73.1% of total population (2020)\nrate of urbanization: 4.28% annual rate of change (2015\u201320 est.)\nSex ratio.\n\"at birth:\"\n1.03 male(s)/female\n\"under 15 years:\"\n1.03 male(s)/female\n\"15\u201364 years:\"\n0.93 male(s)/female\n\"65 years and over:\"\n0.7 male(s)/female\n\"total population:\"\n1 male(s)/female (2020 est.)\ntotal population: 63.7 years. Country comparison to the world: 206th\nmale: 61.44 years\nfemale: 66.03 years (2022 est.)\ntotal population: 65.7 years (2020 est.) Country comparison to the world: 192nd\nmale: 64.4 years (2020 est.)\nfemale: 66.9 years (2020 est.)\nLiteracy.\ndefinition: age 15 and over can read and write (2015 est.)\ntotal population: 95.3% (2015 est.)\nmale: 97.4% (2015 est.)\nfemale: 93% (2015 est.)\ndegree of risk: very high (2020)\nfood or waterborne diseases: bacterial and protozoal diarrhea, hepatitis A, and typhoid fever\nvectorborne diseases: malaria and dengue fever\nanimal contact diseases: rabies\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9370", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9370", "title": "Politics of Equatorial Guinea", "text": "The politics of Equatorial Guinea take place under an authoritarian regime where power has been centralized under President Teodoro Obiang Nguema since he seized power in a 1979 coup against his uncle, Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema. The regime party, Partido democr\u00e1tico de guinea ecuatorial, is the dominant party in Equatorial Guinea politics. The structure of Nguema's regime has varied over time. Initially, it was a military dictatorship before transforming into a single-party state before most recently becoming competitive authoritarian.\nElections take place in Equatorial Guinea but they are neither free nor fair. The political opposition is either repressed or co-opted by the Nguema regime.\nCorruption is widespread in Equatorial Guinea where members of the Nguema regime enrich themself on Equatorial Guinea's substantial oil wealth.\nNominally, the politics Equatorial Guinea takes place in a framework of a presidential republic, whereby the President is both the head of state and head of government. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Chamber of People's Representatives\nPolitical conditions.\nA great deal of political party activity ensued when Equatorial Guinea attained autonomy from Spain in 1963. Bubi and Fernandino parties on the island preferred separation from R\u00edo Muni or a loose federation. Ethnically based parties in R\u00edo Muni favored independence for a united country comprising Bioko and R\u00edo Muni, an approach that was adopted. The Movement for the Self-Determination of Bioko Island (MAIB), which advocates independence for the island under Bubi control, is one of the offshoots of the era immediately preceding independence.\nEquatorial Guinea became independent from Spain on October 12, 1968. Since then, the country has had two presidents: Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema, who had been the mayor of Mongomo under the Spanish colonial government, and Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo Mac\u00edas's nephew, who has ruled since 1979, when he staged a military coup d'\u00e9tat and executed his uncle. When Mac\u00edas came to power, political activity largely ceased. Opposition figures among the exile communities in Spain and elsewhere agitated for reforms; some of them had been employed in the Mac\u00edas and Obiang governments. After political activities in Equatorial Guinea were legalized in the early 1990s, some opposition leaders returned to test the waters, but repressive actions have continued sporadically.\nThe 1982 Constitution gives Obiang extensive powers, including the right to name, and dismiss, members of the cabinet. The 1982 constitution also give him the power to make laws by decree, dissolve the Chamber of Representatives, negotiate and ratify international treaties, and calling legislative elections. Obiang retained his role as commander-in-chief of the armed forces and minister of defense when he became president and he maintains close supervision of military activity. The Prime Minister is appointed by the President and operates under powers designated by the president. The prime minister coordinates government activities in areas other than foreign affairs, national defense and security.\nWith the prodding of the United Nations, the United States, Spain, and other donor countries, the government undertook an electoral census in 1995 and held freely contested municipal elections, the country's first, in September. Most observers agree that these elections were relatively free and transparent and also that the opposition parties garnered between 2/3 and 3/4 of the total vote. The government delayed announcing the results, then claimed a highly dubious overall 52% victory, and capture of 19 of the 27 municipal councils. The council of Malabo, the capital, went to the opposition however. In early January 1996 Obiang called presidential elections, to be held in six weeks. The campaign was marred by allegations of fraud, and most of the other candidates withdrew in the final week. Obiang claimed re-election with 98% of the vote. International observers agreed the election was neither free nor fair. In an attempt to mollify his critics, Obiang announced a new cabinet, giving minor portfolios to some people identified by the government as opposition figures.\nSince President Obiang has been constrained only by a need to maintain a consensus among his advisers and political supporters in the Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea, most of whom are drawn from the Nguema family in Mongomo,\npart of the Esangu subclan of the Fang in the eastern part of R\u00edo Muni. Alleged coup attempts in 1981 and 1983 raised little sympathy among the populace.\nUnder Obiang, schools reopened and primary education expanded, public utilities and roads were restored, a favorable contrast with Mac\u00edas' tyranny and terror, but his administration has been criticized for not implementing genuine democratic reforms. Corruption and a dysfunctional judicial system disrupt development of Equatorial Guinea's economy and society. In March 2001 the President appointed a new Prime Minister, C\u00e1ndido Muatetema Rivas, and replaced several ministers perceived to be especially corrupt. However, the government budget still does not include all revenues and expenditures. The United Nations Development Programme has proposed a broad governance reform program, but the Equatorial Guinean Government has not moved very rapidly to implement it.\nAlthough Equatorial Guinea lacks a well-established democratic tradition comparable to the developed democracies of the West, it has progressed toward developing a participatory political system out of the anarchic, chaotic, and repressive conditions of the Mac\u00edas years. In power since 1979, the Obiang government has made little progress in stimulating the economy. Extremely serious health and sanitary conditions persist, and the educational system remains in desperate condition. Although the abuses and atrocities that characterized the Mac\u00edas years have been eliminated, effective rule of law does not exist. Religious freedom is tolerated.\nOn December 15, 2002, Equatorial Guinea's four main opposition parties withdrew from the country's presidential election. Obiang won an election widely considered fraudulent by members of the western press.\nAccording to a March 2004 BBC profile, politics within the country are currently dominated by tensions between Obiang's son Teodoro (known by the nickname \"Teodor\u00edn\", meaning Little Teodoro), and other close relatives with powerful positions in the security forces. The tension may be rooted in a power shift arising from the dramatic increase since 1997 in oil production.\nA November 2004 report named Mark Thatcher as a financial backer of a March 2004 attempt to topple Obiang organized by Simon Mann. Various accounts also name the UK's MI6, the US Central Intelligence Agency, and Spain as having been tacit supporters of the coup attempt. Nevertheless, an Amnesty International report on the ensuing trial highlights the government's failure to demonstrate in court that the alleged coup attempt had ever actually taken place.\nExecutive branch.\nThe 1982 constitution of Equatorial Guinea gives the President extensive powers, including naming and dismissing members of the cabinet, making laws by decree, dissolving the Chamber of Representatives, negotiating and ratifying treaties and calling legislative elections. The President retains his role as commander in chief of the armed forces and minister of defense, and he maintains close supervision of military activity. The Prime Minister is appointed by the President and operates under powers designated by the President. The Prime Minister coordinates government activities in areas other than foreign affairs, national defense and security.\nTeodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo seized power in a military coup. He is elected by popular vote to a seven-year term.\nAnother branch of the government is the State Council. The State Council's main function is to serve as caretaker in case of death or physical incapacity of the President. It comprises the following ex-officio members: the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Defense, the President of the National Assembly and the Chairman of the Social and Economic Council.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Chamber of People's Representatives (\"C\u00e1mara de Representantes del Pueblo\") has 100 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation in multi-member constituencies. Equatorial Guinea is a dominant-party state. This means that only one political party, the Democratic Party of Equatorial Guinea, is in fact allowed to hold effective power. Although minor parties are allowed, they are required to accept the \"de facto\" leadership of the ruling party. The Convergence for Social Democracy is the only true opposition party to operate legally in the county, which holds only a single seat in each house of parliament.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial system follows similar administrative levels. At the top are the President and his judicial advisors (the Supreme Court). In descending rank are the appeals courts, chief judges for the divisions, and local magistrates. Tribal laws and customs are honored in the formal court system when not in conflict with national law. The court system, which often uses customary law, is a combination of traditional, civil, and military justice, and it operates in an ad hoc manner for lack of established procedures and experienced judicial personnel.\nAs for the legal profession, the Equatorial Guinea Bar Association (Colegio de Abogados de Guinea Ecuatorial) was dissolved by the government in 2002. Although a new bar association was created in 2003, a report issued the same year claimed that \" there are few independent lawyers and judges\" unless they are \"a member of [or sympathetic to] the ruling party.\" It was reported in 2014 (and later reconfirmed in 2016) that the association does not have an official headquarters.\nAdministrative divisions.\nEquatorial Guinea is divided in seven provinces (\"provincias\"); Annobon, Bioko Norte, Bioko Sur, Centro Sur, Kie-Ntem, Litoral, Wele-Nzas.\nThe President appoints the governors of the seven provinces. Each province is divided administratively into districts and municipalities. The internal administrative system falls under the Ministry of Territorial Administration; several other ministries are represented at the provincial and district levels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9371", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9371", "title": "Economy of Equatorial Guinea", "text": "The economy of Equatorial Guinea has traditionally been dependent on commodities such as cocoa and coffee, but is now heavily dependent on petroleum due to the discovery and exploitation of significant oil reserves in the 1980s. In 2017, it graduated from \"Least Developed Country\" status, one of six Sub-Saharan African nations that managed to do so.\nHowever, despite the economic growth and improving infrastructure, the country has been ranked only 138th out of 188 countries on the United Nations Human Development Index in 2015 and despite its impressive GNI figure, it is still plagued by extreme poverty. After the oil price collapsed in 2014, the economy went into a free fall which put growth in a downward spiral from around 15% to \u221210%. Only 950,000 of 1.6 million inhabitants are citizens, giving Equatorial Guinea the largest ratio of expatriates to residents in Africa.\nEconomy overview.\nPre-independence Equatorial Guinea counted on cocoa production for hard currency earnings. In 1959 it had the highest per capita income of Africa which it still has, after several decades as one of the poorest countries in the world.\nThe discovery of large oil reserves in 1996 and their subsequent exploitation have contributed to a dramatic increase in government revenue. As of 2004, Equatorial Guinea was the third-largest oil producer in Sub-Saharan Africa. Its oil production had then risen to , up from only two years earlier.\nForestry, farming, and fishing are also major components of GDP. Subsistence farming predominates. Although pre-independence Equatorial Guinea counted on cocoa production for hard currency earnings, the neglect of the rural economy under successive regimes has diminished potential for agriculture-led growth. However, the government has stated its intention to reinvest some oil revenue into agriculture. A number of aid programs sponsored by the World Bank and the IMF have been cut off since 1993 because of corruption and mismanagement. No longer eligible for concessional financing because of large oil revenues, the government has been unsuccessfully trying to agree on a \"shadow\" fiscal management program with the World Bank and IMF. Businesses, for the most part, are owned by government officials and their family members. Undeveloped natural resources include titanium, iron ore, manganese, uranium, and alluvial gold (Mining in Equatorial Guinea). Growth remained strong in 2005 and 2006, led by oil.\nIn greater depth.\nOil and gas exports have increased substantially and will drive the economy for years to come. Real GDP growth reached 23% in 1999, and initial estimates suggested growth of about 15% in 2001, according to IMF 2001 forecast. Per capita income grew from about $1,000 in 1998 to about $2,000 in 2000. The energy export sector is responsible for this rapid growth. Oil production has increased from to between 1998 and early 2001. There is ongoing additional development of existing commercially viable oil and gas deposits as well as new exploration in other offshore concessions.\nEquatorial Guinea has other largely unexploited human and natural resources, including a tropical climate, fertile soils, rich expanses of water, deepwater ports, and an untapped, if unskilled, source of labor. Following independence in 1968, the country suffered under a repressive dictatorship for 11 years, which devastated the economy. The agricultural sector, which historically was known for cocoa of the highest quality, has never fully recovered. In 1969 Equatorial Guinea produced 36,161 tons of highly bid cocoa, but production dropped to 4,800 tons in 2000. Coffee production also dropped sharply during this period to bounce back to 100,000 metric tons in 2000. Timber is the main source of foreign exchange after oil, accounting for about 12.4% of total export earnings in 1996\u201399. Timber production increased steadily during the 1990s; wood exports reached a record 789,000 cubic meters in 1999 as demand in Asia (mainly China) gathered pace after the 1998 economic crisis. Most of the production (mainly Okoume) goes to exports, and only 3% is processed locally. Environmentalists fear that exploitation at this level is unsustainable and point out to the permanent damage already inflicted on the forestry reserves on Bioko.\nConsumer price inflation has declined from the 38.8% experienced in 1994 following the CFA franc devaluation, to 7.8% in 1998, and 1.0% in 1999, according to BEAC data. Consumer prices rose about 6% in 2000, according to initial estimates, and there was anecdotal evidence that price inflation was accelerating in 2001.\nEquatorial Guinea's policies, as defined by law, comprise an open investment regime. Qualitative restrictions on imports, non-tariff protection, and many import licensing requirements were lifted when in 1992 the government adopted a public investment program endorsed by the World Bank. The Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea has sold some state enterprises. It is attempting to create a more favourable investment climate, and its investment code contains numerous incentives for job creation, training, promotion of non-traditional exports, support of development projects and indigenous capital participation, freedom for repatriation of profits, exemption from certain taxes and capital, and other benefits. Trade regulations have been further liberalized since implementation in 1994 of the ICN turnover tax, in conformity with Central African tax and custom reform codes. The reform included elimination of quota restrictions and reductions in the range and amounts of tariffs. The CEMAC countries agreed to replace the ICN with a value added tax (VAT) in 1999.\nWhile business laws promote a liberalized economy, the business climate remains difficult. Application of the laws remains selective. Corruption among officials is widespread, and many business deals are concluded under non-transparent circumstances.\nThere is little industry in the country, and the local market for industrial products is small. The government seeks to expand the role of free enterprise and to promote foreign investment but has had little success in creating an atmosphere conducive to investor interest.\nThe Equatorial-Guinea budget has grown enormously in the past 3 years as royalties and taxes on foreign company oil and gas production have provided new resources to a once poor government. The 2001 budget foresaw revenues of about 154 billion CFA francs (154 GCFAF) (about U.S.$200 million), up about 50% from 2000 levels. Oil revenues account for about two-thirds of government revenue, and VAT and trade taxes are the other large revenue sources.\nYear 2001 government expenditures were planned to reach 158 billion CFA francs, up about 50% from 2000 levels. New investment projects represented about 40% of the budget, and personnel and internal and external debt payments represented about one-third of planned expenditures.\nThe Equatorial-Guinea Government has undertaken a number of reforms since 1991 to reduce its predominant role in the economy and promote private sector development. Its role is a diminishing one, although many government interactions with the private sector are at times capricious. Beginning in early 1997, the government initiated efforts to attract significant private sector involvement through a Corporate Council on Africa visit and numerous ministerial efforts. In 1998, the government privatized distribution of petroleum products. There are now Total and Mobil stations in the country. The government has expressed interest in privatizing the outmoded electricity utility. A French company operates cellular telephone service in cooperation with a state enterprise. The government is anxious for greater U.S. investment, and President Obiang visited the U.S. three times between 1999 and 2001 to encourage greater U.S. corporate interest. Investment in agriculture, fishing, livestock, and tourism are among sectors the government would like targeted.\nEquatorial Guinea's balance-of-payments situation has improved substantially since the mid-1990s because of new oil and gas production and favorable world energy prices. Exports totaled about francs CFA 915 billion in 2000 (1.25 G$US), up from CFA 437 billion (700 M$US) in 1999. Crude oil exports accounted for more than 90% of export earnings in 2000. Timber exports, by contrast, represented only about 5% of export revenues in 2000. Additional oil production coming on line in 2001, combined with methanol gas exports from the new CMS-Nomeco plant, should increase export earnings substantially.\nImports into Equatorial Guinea also are growing very quickly. Imports totaled francs CFA 380 billion (530 M$US), up from franc CFA 261 million (420 M$US) in 1999. Imports of equipment used for the oil and gas sector accounted for about three-quarters of imports in 2000. Imports of capital equipment for public investment projects reached francs CFA 30 billion in 2000, up 40% from 1999 levels.\nEquatorial Guinea's foreign debt stock was approximately francs CFA 69 billion (100 M$US) in 2000, slightly less than the debt stock in 1999, according to BEAC data. Equatorial Guinea's debt service ratio fell from 20% of GDP in 1994 to only 1% in 2000. Foreign exchange reserves were increasing slightly, although they were relatively low in terms of import coverage. According to the terms of the franc CFA zone, some of these reserves are kept in an account with the French Ministry of Finance.\nEquatorial Guinea in the 1980s and 1990s received foreign assistance from numerous bilateral and multilateral donors, including European countries, the United States, and the World Bank. Many of these aid programs have ceased altogether or have diminished. Spain, France, and the European Union continue to provide some project assistance, as do China and Cuba. The government also has discussed working with World Bank assistance to develop government administrative capacity.\nEquatorial Guinea operated under an IMF-negotiated Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) until 1996. Since then, there have been no formal agreements or arrangements. The International monetary Fund held Article IV consultations (periodic country evaluations) in 1996, 1997, and in August 1999. After the 1999 consultations, IMF directors stressed the need for Equatorial Guinea to establish greater fiscal discipline, accountability, and more transparent management of public sector resources, especially energy sector revenue. IMF officials also have emphasized the need for economic data. In 1999, the Equato-Guinean Government began attempting to meet IMF-imposed requirements, maintaining contact with IMF and the World Bank representatives. However, the newfound oil wealth allowed the government to avoid improving fiscal discipline, transparency and accountability.\nInfrastructure.\nInfrastructure is generally old and in poor condition. , surface transport is extremely limited, with little more than 700 kilometres of paved roads. The African Development Bank is helping to improve the paved roads from Malabo to Luba and Riaba; the Chinese are undertaking a project to link Mongomo to Bata on the mainland, and the European Union is financing an inter-states road network linking Equatorial Guinea to Cameroon and Gabon. Road maintenance is often inadequate.\nElectricity is available in Equatorial Guinea's larger towns thanks to three small overworked hydropower facilities and a number of aged generators. In 1999, national production was about 13 MWh. In Malabo, the American company, CMS-Nomeco, built a 10 megawatt electricity plant financed by the government, which came in line in mid-2000, and plans to double capacity are advancing. This plant provides improved service to the capital, although there are still occasional outages. On the mainland the largest city, Bata, still has regular blackouts.\nWater is only available in the major towns and is not always reliable because of poor maintenance and mismanagement. Some villages and rural areas are equipped with generators and water pumps, usually owned by private individuals.\nParastatal Getesa, a joint venture with a minority ownership stake held by a French subsidiary of Orange, provides telephone service in the major cities. The regular system is overextended, but Orange has introduced a popular GSM system, which is generally reliable in Malabo and Bata.\nEquatorial Guinea has two of the deepest Atlantic seaports of the region, including the main business and commercial port city of Bata. The ports of both Malabo and Bata are severely overextended and require extensive rehabilitation and reconditioning. The British company, Incat, has an ongoing project with the government to renovate and expand Luba, the country's third-largest port which is located on Bioko Island. The government hopes Luba will become a major transportation hub for offshore oil and gas companies operating in the Gulf of Guinea. Luba is located some 50 kilometres from Malabo and had been virtually inactive except for minor fishing activities and occasional use to ease congestion in Malabo. A new jetty is also being built at km 5 on the way from Malabo to the airport. It is a project mainly supposed to service the oil industry, but can also relieve the congested Malabo Port due to its closeness. The Oil Jetty at km 5 was supposed to open the end of March 2003. Riaba is the other port of any scale on Bioko but is less active. The continental ports of Mbini and Cogo have deteriorated as well and are now used primarily for timber activities.\nThere are both air and sea connections between the two cities of Malabo and Bata. As of 2002, a few aging Soviet-built aircraft constituted the national air fleet. Since then, most Soviet-built aircraft have been replaced by ATR and Boeing. The runway at Malabo (3,200 m) is equipped with lights and can service aircraft similar to Boeing 777s and Ilyushin Il-76s. The one at Bata (2,400 m) does not operate at night but can accommodate aircraft as large as Boeing 737s. Their primary users are the national airline (EGA) and a private company (GEASA). Two minor airstrips (800 m) are located at Mongomo and Annobon. There are international connections out of Malabo to Madrid and Z\u00fcrich in Europe and to Cotonou, Douala and Libreville in West Africa.\nEnergy developments.\nAfter a slow start, Equatorial Guinea has recently (as of 2002) emerged as a major oil producer in the Gulf of Guinea, one of the most promising hydrocarbon regions in the world. The main oil fields, Zafiro and Alba, both lie offshore of Bioko island. In 1999 oil production was about five times its 1996 level; Zafiro Field, operated by ExxonMobil and Ocean Energy, produced about , and CMS Nomeco extracted approximately . In 2002, production was nearly 200,000 barrels per day.\nIn 1995 Mobil (now ExxonMobil) discovered the large Zafiro field, with estimated reserves of . Production began in 1996. The company announced a 3-year U.S.$1bn rapid-development program to boost output to by early 2001. Progress was delayed due to a contractual dispute with the government and by unexpectedly difficult geology. The difference with the government was eventually resolved.\nIn 1998 a more liberal regulatory and profit-sharing arrangement for hydrocarbon exploration and production activities was introduced. It revised and updated the production-sharing contract, which, until then, had favoured Western operators heavily. As a result, domestic oil receipts rose from 13% to 20% of oil export revenue. However, the government's share remains relatively poor by international standards.\nIn 1997 CMS Nomeco moved to expand its operation with a U.S.$300m methanol plant. The plant entered production in 2000 and helped boost natural gas condensate output from Alba field.\nIn August 1999 the government closed bidding on a new petroleum-licensing round for 53 unexplored deepwater blocks and seven shallow-water blocks. The response was small due to a combination of factors, including falling oil prices, restructuring within the oil industry, and uncertainty over an undemarcated maritime border with Nigeria (which was not resolved until 2000).\nIn late 1999 Triton Energy, a U.S. independent, discovered La Ceiba in block G in an entirely new area offshore the mainland of the country. Triton expected a U.S.$200m development program to enable La Ceiba and associated fields to produce by late 2001, despite disappointments and technical problems at the beginning of the year.\nWith an upturn in oil prices, exploration intensified in 2000. In April 2000 U.S.-based Vanco Energy signed a production-sharing contract for the offshore block of Corisco Deep. In May 2000, Chevron was granted block L, offshore R\u00edo Muni, and a further three production-sharing contracts (for blocks J, I, and H) were signed with Atlas Petroleum, a Nigerian company.\nIn early 2001 the government announced plans to establish a national oil company, to allow Equatorial Guinea to take a greater stake in the sector and to facilitate the more rapid transfer of skills. However, critics fear that such a company may become a vehicle for opaque accounting and inertia of the sort that has hindered development in neighbouring countries including Angola, Cameroon, and Nigeria.\nSince 2001 the government has created GEPetrol, a national oil company; and Sonagas, a national natural-gas company. The company EG LNG has been created to construct and operate the Bioko Island LNG plant and terminal. The plant began to operate in May 2007 and a second plant is now under development.\nEquatorial Guinea became a member of OPEC in May 2017.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017.\n 46.3% (2005 est.)\n Petroleum, fishing, sawmilling, natural gas\n 30% (2002 est.)\n 29.43 GWh (2005)\n 27.37 GWh (2005)\n Coffee, cocoa, rice, yams, cassava (tapioca), bananas, palm oil nuts; livestock; timber\n Communaut\u00e9 financi\u00e8re africaine francs (CFAF) per US$1 \u2013 480.56 (2005), 528.29 (2004), 581.2 (2003), 696.99 (2002), 733.04 (2001)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9372", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9372", "title": "Telecommunications in Equatorial Guinea", "text": " \nTelecommunications in Equatorial Guinea include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nThe state maintains direct or indirect control of all broadcast media. The government owns the only national radio and television broadcast system, RTVGE. The president's eldest son owns the only private radio station. Satellite broadcasts are widely available, including the French language Africa24 television news channel that occasionally carries opposition criticism. Foreign channels, including Radio France International (RFI) and the BBC World Service, were broadcast uncensored throughout the country.\nInternet.\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Most overt criticism of the government comes from the country's community in exile, and the Internet has replaced broadcast media as the primary way opposition views were expressed and disseminated.\nAlthough the constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, the law grants authorities extensive powers to restrict media activities, which the government uses to limit these rights. While criticism of government policies is allowed, individuals generally can not criticize the president, his family, other high-ranking officials, or the security forces without fear of reprisal. Libel is a criminal offense, but there were no instances of the government using these laws to suppress criticism during 2012.\nThe constitution and law prohibit arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, but the government often does not respect these prohibitions. Search warrants are required unless the crime is in progress or for reasons of national security. Security forces enter homes without authorization and arrest alleged criminals, foreign nationals, and others, often without required judicial orders. The government reportedly attempts to impede criticism by monitoring the activities of the political opposition, journalists, and others. Journalists are subject to surveillance and practice self-censorship.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9373", "revid": "4307181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9373", "title": "Transport in Equatorial Guinea", "text": "This article lists transport in Equatorial Guinea.\nRailways.\nThere are currently no railways in Equatorial Guinea.\nHighways.\nThere are 2,880\u00a0km (1,790\u00a0mi) of highways in Equatorial Guinea, the majority of which were not paved in 2002. Equatorial Guinea's roads and highways are underdeveloped, but improving. During the rainy season, roads are frequently impassable without four-wheel drive vehicles.\nFurthermore, the country has recently built a 175-km long two-lane expressway that runs between Bata and President Obiang Nguema International Airport, and it is expected to soon reach the city of Mongomo, located on the border with Gabon.\nMerchant marine.\nIn 2005, the country had one merchant ship of over \u00a0GT in service; a cargo vessel of \u00a0GT.\nAirports.\nThere are seven airports in Equatorial Guinea. Its main airport is Malabo International Airport in Punta Europa, Bioko Island. International flights operate from:\nFrom Malabo airport, you can fly to any of the other airports in the country. These airports are located in the region of Annob\u00f3n, Bata, Mongomoyen, and Corisco.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9374", "revid": "1315758079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9374", "title": "Armed Forces of Equatorial Guinea", "text": "National army of equatorial guinea\nThe Armed Forces of Equatorial Guinea (; ; ) consists of approximately 2,500 service members. The army has almost 1,400 soldiers, the navy 200 service members, and the air force about 120 members. There is also a gendarmerie, but the number of members is unknown. The Gendarmerie is a new branch of the service in which training and education is being supported by the French Military Cooperation in Equatorial Guinea. Military appointments are all reviewed by President Teodoro Obiang, and few of the native militiamen come from outside of Obiang's Mongomo-based Esangui clan. Obiang was a general when he overthrew his uncle, Francisco Mac\u00edas Nguema.\nHistory.\nThe Armed Forces were reorganized in 1979. In 1988, the United States donated a 68-foot patrol boat to the Equatoguinean navy to patrol its exclusive economic zone. The U.S. patrol boat \"Isla de Bioko\" is no longer operational. U.S. military-to-military engagement has been dormant since 1997 (the year of the last Joint Combined Exchange Training exercise). Between 1984 and 1992, service members went regularly to the United States on the International Military Education Training program, after which funding for this program for Equatorial Guinea ceased. The government spent 6.5% of its annual budget on defense in 2000 and 4.5% of its budget on defense in 2001. It recently acquired some Chinese artillery pieces, some Ukrainian patrol boats, and some Ukrainian helicopter gunships. Cooper and Weinert 2010 says that all aircraft are based on the military side of Malabo International Airport.\nIn 2002, an International Consortium of Investigative Journalists report said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The oil companies do not view Equatorial Guinea's military \u2013 a product of decades of brutal dictatorial rule \u2013 with much confidence. The army is believed to have only about 1,320 men under arms, the navy 120, and the air force 100. Seven of the army's nine generals are relatives of the president; the other two are from his tribe. There is no clear command structure, the level of discipline is low, and professionalism and training are almost non-existent, according to locals and foreign oil workers. Even the presidential guard \u2013 an indication of the lack of trust in the country's forces \u2013 is composed of 350 Moroccan troops.\"\nEquipment.\nAircraft.\nThe Equatorial Guinea Air Corps was founded in 1979 with mainly French and Spanish air frames. In 2005, 4 Su 25s including 2 Su-25UB combat trainers were delivered to the Equatorial Guinea Air Corps. The current status of the aircraft is unknown. In 2015 two CASA C-295 (one transport and one surveillance) aircraft were ordered for delivery from September 2016.\nNavy.\nThe Equatorial Guinean main task is to counter piracy and robbery at sea. In July 2010, after the visit of Brazilian president Luiz In\u00e1cio Lula da Silva, an order for a \"Barroso\"-class corvette was announced. However, as of 2014[ [update]] no further news has been announced. On 3 June 2014, the frigate \"Wele Nzas\" was commissioned and became the navy's flagship.\nHigher education and training.\nOn 6 November 2016, the Zimbabwe Defence Forces deployed a training contingent to the Equatorial Guinea to train the country's military officers on operational and logistic matters following an urgent request by the West African country. The security personnel contingent is composed of members of the Zimbabwe National Army and Air Force of Zimbabwe. In 2018, 28 graduates from the military received diplomas from the Nakhimov Naval Academy in Sevastopol.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "9375", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9375", "title": "Foreign relations of Equatorial Guinea", "text": "The government's official policy is one of nonalignment. In its search for assistance to meet the goal of national reconstruction, the government of Equatorial Guinea has established diplomatic relations with numerous European and Third World countries. Having achieved independence under UN sponsorship, Equatorial Guinea feels a special kinship with that organization. It became the 126th UN member on November 12, 1968. Equatorial Guinea served as a non-permanent member on the United Nations Security Council from 2017 to 2019.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Equatorial Guinea maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
