{"id": "10037", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10037", "title": "Euroscepticism", "text": "Body of criticism of the European Union\nEuroscepticism, also spelled as Euroskepticism or EU-scepticism, is a political position involving criticism of the European Union (EU) and European integration. It ranges from those who oppose some EU institutions and policies and seek reform (\"Eurorealism\", \"Eurocritical\", or \"soft Euroscepticism\"), to those who oppose EU membership and see the EU as unreformable (\"anti-European Unionism\", \"anti-EUism\", or \"hard Euroscepticism\"). The opposite of Euroscepticism is known as \"pro-Europeanism\".\nThe main drivers of Euroscepticism have been beliefs that integration undermines national sovereignty and the nation state, that the EU is elitist and lacks democratic legitimacy and transparency, that it is too bureaucratic and wasteful, that it encourages high levels of immigration, or perceptions that it is a neoliberal organisation serving the big business elite at the expense of the working class, that it is responsible for austerity, and drives privatization.\nEuroscepticism is found in groups across the political spectrum, both left-wing and right-wing, and is often found in populist parties. Although they criticise the EU for many of the same reasons, Eurosceptic left-wing populists focus more on economic issues, such as the European debt crisis and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, while Eurosceptic right-wing populists focus more on nationalism and immigration, such as the 2015 European migrant crisis. The rise in radical-right parties since the 2000s is strongly linked to a rise in Euroscepticism.\nEurobarometer surveys of EU citizens show that trust in the EU and its institutions declined strongly from 2007 to 2015. In that period, it was consistently below 50%. A 2009 survey showed that support for EU membership was lowest in the United Kingdom (UK), Latvia, and Hungary. By 2016, the countries viewing the EU most unfavourably were the UK, Greece, France, and Spain. The 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum resulted in a 51.9% vote in favour of leaving the EU (Brexit), a decision that came into effect on 31 January 2020.\nSince 2015, trust in the EU has risen in most EU countries as a result of falling unemployment rates and the end of the migrant crisis. A post-2019 election Eurobarometer survey showed that 68% of citizens support the EU, the highest level since 1983; however, sentiment that things are not going in the right direction in the EU had increased to 50%. Trust in the EU had increased significantly at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic with levels varying across member states.\nIn March 2025, support for the European Union reached an all-time high among citizens of EU members states. A Eurobarometer poll conducted in January and February found that 74% of EU citizens believe their country\u2019s membership in the bloc is beneficial, the highest level recorded since the question was first introduced in 1983. The decline in Euroscepticism has been attributed to growing security concerns amid ongoing geopolitical instability, including the continuation of Russia\u2019s invasion of Ukraine and renewed transatlantic tensions under Donald Trump, who has been critical of NATO and the European Union.\nReasoning.\nThe main reasons for Euroscepticism include beliefs that:\nTerminology.\nThere can be considered to be several different types of Eurosceptic thought, which differ in the extent to which adherents reject integration between member states of the EU and in their reasons for doing so. Aleks Szczerbiak and Paul Taggart described two of these as hard and soft Euroscepticism. At the same time, some scholars have said that there is no clear line between the presumed hard and soft Euroscepticism. Cas Mudde and Petr Kopecky have said that if the demarcation line is the number of and which policies a party opposes, then the question arises of how many must a party oppose and which ones should a party oppose that makes them hard Eurosceptic instead of soft.\nHard Euroscepticism.\nAccording to Taggart and Szczerbiak, hard Euroscepticism, or anti-EU-ism, is \"a principled opposition to the EU and European integration and therefore can be seen in parties who think that their countries should withdraw from membership, or whose policies towards the EU are tantamount to being opposed to the whole project of European integration as it is currently conceived\". The Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy group in the European Parliament (2014\u20132019) displayed hard Euroscepticism, but following the 2019 EU elections the group was disbanded due to too few members, as its largest member, the British Brexit Party, withdrew ahead of the United Kingdom's formal exit from the EU.\nSome hard Eurosceptics regard their position as pragmatic rather than in principle. Additionally, Tony Benn, a left-wing Labour Party MP who fought against European integration in 1975 by opposing membership of the European Communities in that year's referendum on the issue, emphasised his opposition to xenophobia and his support of democracy, saying: \"My view about the European Union has always been not that I am hostile to foreigners, but that I am in favour of democracy. ... I think they're building an empire there, they want us to be a part of their empire and I don't want that.\"\nThe Czech president V\u00e1clav Klaus rejected the term \"Euroscepticism\" for its purported negative undertones, saying at a meeting in April 2012 that the expressions for a Eurosceptic and their opponent should be \"a Euro-realist\" and someone who is \"Euro-na\u00efve\", respectively. Fran\u00e7ois Asselineau of the French Popular Republican Union has criticised the use of the term 'sceptic' to describe hard Eurosceptics, and would rather advocate the use of the term \"Euro opponent\". He believes the use of the term 'sceptic' for soft Eurosceptics to be correct, since other Eurosceptic parties in France are \"merely criticising\" the EU without taking into account the fact that the Treaty of Rome can be modified only with a unanimous agreement of all the EU member states, something he considers impossible to achieve.\nSoft Euroscepticism.\nSoft Euroscepticism, also known as Eurorealism, reflects a support for the existence of, and membership of, a form of EU but with opposition to specific EU policies, or in Taggart's and Szczerbiak's words, \"where there is NOT a principled objection to European integration or EU membership but where concerns on one (or a number) of policy areas lead to the expression of qualified opposition to the EU, or where there is a sense that 'national interest' is currently at odds with the EU's trajectory.\"\nBoth the European Conservatives and Reformists Group, dominated by the right-wing Polish party Law and Justice, and The Left Group, which is an alliance of the left-wing parties in the European Parliament, display soft Euroscepticism. The European Conservatives and Reformist Group does not itself use the descriptions Euroscepticism or soft Euroscepticism and instead describes its position as one of Eurorealism, a distinction described by Leruth as being one that is \"quite subtle but should not be ignored\" given the association of the term Euroscepticism with \"European disintegration\". Leruth describes Eurorealism as \"a pragmatic, anti-federalist, and flexible vision of European integration where the principle of subsidiarity prevails, aiming to reform the current institutional framework to extend the role of national parliaments in the decision-making process.\" Steven states that \"Eurorealism is a form of conservativism, first and foremost, rather than a form or Euroscepticism, even if it obviously very much also has the 'soft' Eurosceptic tendencies which are present in a number of ECR member parties.\"\nAnti-Europeanism.\nWhile having some overlaps, Euroscepticism and anti-Europeanism are different. Euroscepticism is criticism of the European Union (EU) and European integration. Anti-Europeanism is sentiment or policies in opposition to Europe. For example, American exceptionalism in the United States has long led to criticism of European domestic policy, such as the size of the welfare state in European countries, and foreign policy, such as European countries that did not support the US-led 2003 invasion of Iraq.\nOther terms.\nSome scholars consider the gradual difference in terminology between hard and soft Euroscepticism inadequate to accommodate the large differences in terms of political agenda; \"hard Euroscepticism\" has also been referred to as \"Europhobia\" as opposed to mere \"Euroscepticism\". Other alternative names for hard and soft Euroscepticism include \"withdrawalist\" and \"reformist\", respectively.\nEurobarometer surveys.\nA survey in November 2015[ [update]], conducted by TNS Opinion and Social on behalf of the European Commission, showed that, across the EU as a whole, those with a positive image of the EU were down from a high of 52% in 2007 to 37% in autumn 2015; this compares with 23% with a negative image of the EU, and 38% with a neutral image. About 43% of Europeans thought things were \"going in the wrong direction\" in the EU, compared with 23% who thought things were going \"in the right direction\" (11% \"don't know\"). About 32% of EU citizens tend to trust the EU as an institution, and about 55% do not tend to trust it (13% \"don't know\"). Distrust of the EU was highest in Greece (81%), Cyprus (72%), Austria (65%), France (65%), the United Kingdom (UK) and the Czech Republic (both 63%). Overall, more respondents distrusted their own government (66%) than they distrusted the EU (55%). Distrust of national government was highest in Greece (82%), Slovenia (80%), Portugal (79%), Cyprus (76%), and France (76%).\nA Eurobarometer survey carried out four days prior to and six days after the 2016 United States presidential election revealed that the surprise victory of Donald Trump caused an increase in the popularity of the EU in Europe. The increase was strongest among the political right and among respondents who perceived their country as economically struggling.\nA survey carried out in April 2018 for the European Parliament by Kantar Public consulting found that support for the EU was \"the highest score ever measured since 1983\". Support for the EU was up in 26 out of 28 EU countries, the exceptions being Germany and the UK, where support had dropped by about 2% since the previous survey. Almost half (48%) of the 27,601 EU citizens surveyed agreed that their voice counted in the EU, up from 37% in 2016, whereas 46% disagreed with this statement. Two-thirds (67%) of respondents felt that their country had benefited from EU membership and 60% said that being part of the bloc was a good thing, as opposed to 12% who felt the opposite. At the height of the EU's financial and economic crises in 2011, just 47% had been of the view that EU membership was a good thing. Support for EU membership was greatest in Malta (93%), Ireland (91%), Lithuania (90%), Poland (88%), Luxembourg (88%), Estonia (86%), and Denmark (84%), and lowest in Greece (57%), Bulgaria (57%), Cyprus (56%), Austria (54%), the United Kingdom (53%), and Italy (44%).\nWhen asked which issues should be a priority for the European Parliament, survey respondents picked terrorism as the most pressing topic of discussion, ahead of youth unemployment and immigration. Not all countries shared the same priorities. Immigration topped the list in Italy (66% of citizens surveyed considered it a priority issue), Malta (65%), and Hungary (62%) but fighting youth unemployment and support for economic growth were top concerns in Spain, Greece, Portugal, Cyprus, and Croatia. Social protection of citizens was the top concern for Dutch, Swedish, and Danish respondents.\nThe April 2019 Eurobarometer showed that despite the challenges of the past years, and in cases such as the ongoing debate surrounding Brexit, possibly even because of it, the European sense of togetherness had not weakened, with 68% of respondents across the EU27 believing that their countries have benefited from being part of the EU, a historically high level since 1983. On the other hand, more Europeans (27%) were uncertain and saw the EU as \"neither a good thing nor a bad thing\", an increase in 19 countries. Despite the overall positive attitude towards the EU but in line with the uncertainty expressed by a growing number of Europeans, the feeling that things were not going in the right direction in both the EU and in their own countries had increased to 50% on EU average since September 2018.\nThe Eurobarometer 93.1 survey was in the field across Europe when the European Council summit reached political agreement on a pandemic economic recovery fund (later named Next Generation EU) on 21 July 2020. A comparison of Eurobarometer responses gathered before this seminal decision and interviews conducted shortly thereafter indicates that the European Council's endorsement of pandemic economic relief increased popular support of COVID-19 economic recovery aid - but only among Europeans who view EU decisionmakers as trustworthy.\nHistory in the European Parliament&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;.\n1999\u20132004.\nA study analysed voting records of the Fifth European Parliament and ranked groups, concluding: \"Towards the top of the figure are the more pro-European parties (PES, EPP-ED, and ALDE), whereas towards the bottom of the figure are the more anti-European parties (EUL/NGL, G/EFA, UEN and EDD).\"\n2004\u20132009.\nIn 2004, 37 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) from the UK, Poland, Denmark and Sweden founded a new European Parliament group called \"Independence and Democracy\" from the old Europe of Democracies and Diversities (EDD) group.\nThe main goal of the ID group was to reject the proposed Treaty establishing a constitution for Europe. Some delegations within the group, notably that from UKIP, also advocated the complete withdrawal of their country from the EU, while others only wished to limit further European integration.\n2009 elections.\nThe elections of 2009 saw a significant fall in support in some areas for Eurosceptic parties, with all such MEPs from Poland, Denmark and Sweden losing their seats. In the UK, the Eurosceptic UKIP achieved second place in the election, finishing ahead of the governing Labour Party, and the British National Party (BNP) won its first-ever two MEPs. Although new members joined the ID group from Greece and the Netherlands, it was unclear whether the group would reform in the new parliament.\nThe ID group did reform, as the Europe of Freedom and Democracy (EFD) and is represented by 32 MEPs from nine countries.\n2014 elections.\nThe elections of 2014 saw a big anti-establishment vote in favour of Eurosceptic parties, which took around a quarter of the seats available. Those that came first their national elections included: UKIP in the UK (the first time since 1906 that a party other than Labour or the Conservatives had won a national vote), the National Front in France, the People's Party in Denmark and Syriza in Greece. Second places were taken by Sinn F\u00e9in in Ireland and the Five Star Movement in Italy. Herman Van Rompuy, the President of the European Council, agreed following the election to re-evaluate the economic area's agenda and to launch consultations on future policy areas with the 28 member states.\n2019 elections.\nThe elections of 2019 saw the centre-left and centre-right parties suffer significant losses including losing their overall majority, while green, pro-EU liberal, and some Eurosceptic right wing parties saw significant gains. Those that came first in their national elections included: the Brexit Party in the UK (which was only launched on 12 April 2019 by former UKIP leader Nigel Farage), the National Rally of France (formerly the National Front party until June 2018), Fidesz in Hungary, Lega in Italy, and Law and Justice in Poland. There were also notable falls in support for the Danish People's Party (previously topped the 2014 European election). Whilst Vox got elected with 3 seats, Spain's first Eurosceptic party and Belgium's Vlaams Belang rallied to gain second place after its poor 2014 result.\n2024 elections.\nIn the elections of 2024, 24 EU countries elected at least one member of a Eurosceptic group (European Conservatives and Reformists Group, Patriots for Europe or Europe of Sovereign Nations). The three exceptions were Ireland, Malta and Slovenia.\nIn EU member states.\nAustria.\nThe Freedom Party of Austria (FP\u00d6), established in 1956, is a right-wing populist party that mainly attracts support from young people and workers. In 1989, it changed its stance over the EU to Euroscepticism. It opposed Austria joining the EU in 1994, and opposed the introduction of the euro in 1998. The party would like to leave the EU if it threatens to develop into a country, or if Turkey joins. The FP\u00d6 received 20\u201327% of the national vote in the 1990s, and more recently received 18% in 2008. Following the 2017 Austrian legislative election, it has 51/183 National Council seats, 16/62 Federal Council seats, and 4/19 European Parliament seats.\nThe B\u00fcndnis Zukunft \u00d6sterreich (BZ\u00d6), established in 2005, is a socially conservative party that has always held Eurosceptic elements. In 2011 the party openly supported leaving the eurozone, and in 2012 it announced that it supported a full withdrawal from the European Union. The party has also called upon a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. In polls it generally received around 10\u201315%, although in one state it did receive 45% of the vote in 2009. Since the 2017 election, it has 0/183 National Council seats, 0/62 Federal Council seats, and 0/19 European Parliament seats.\nTeam Stronach, established in 2012, has campaigned to reform the European Union, as well as to replace the euro with an Austrian Euro. In 2012, it regularly received 8\u201310% support in national polls. Politicians from many different parties (including the Social Democratic Party and the BZ\u00d6) as well as previous independents switched their allegiances to the new party upon creation. In two local elections in March 2013, it won 11% of the vote in Carinthia, and 10% of the vote in Lower Austria. It dissolved in 2017.\nEwald Stadler, a former member of FP\u00d6 (and later of BZ\u00d6) was very Eurosceptic, but in 2011 became a member of the European Parliament due to the Lisbon Treaty. Before Stadler accepted the seat, this led to heavy critics by J\u00f6rg Leichtfried (SP\u00d6) \"Stadler wants to just rescue his political career\" because Stadler before mentioned he would never accept a seat as MEP if this was only due to the Lisbon Treaty. On 23 December 2013 he founded a conservative and Eurosceptic party called The Reform Conservatives, although it has been inactive since June 2016.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, the FP\u00d6 increased its vote to 19.7% (up 7.0%), gaining 2 new MEPs, making a total of 4; the party came third, behind the \u00d6VP and the SP\u00d6. EU-STOP (the electoral alliance of the EU Withdrawal Party and the Neutral Free Austria Federation) polled 2.8%, gaining no seats, and the Reform Conservatives 1.2%, with Team Stronach putting up no candidates.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the FP\u00d6 came 3rd with 17.2% of the vote which was only slightly down on 2014 despite a scandal allegedly promising public contracts to a woman posing as a Russian backer. This precipitated the collapse of the ruling coalition and a new election being called.\nBelgium.\nAccording to Eurostat, in the fall of 2018, 44% of Belgians stated that they did not trust the European Union. The main Eurosceptic party in Belgium is the far-right Vlaams Belang which is active in the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium. However, the left-wing PTB-PVDA also opposes the EU on many issues, primarily austerity and social policy, while defending a fundamental reform of the existing European framework instead of an exit from it.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, Vlaams Belang lost over half of its previous vote share, polling 4.3% (down 5.5%) and losing 1 of its 2 members of the European Parliament. Despite the presence of Eurosceptic parties in Belgium, their weight is relatively low, as Belgium is predominantly Europeanist.\nIn 2019, Vlaams Belang stated in its program for the 2019 European Parliament election that it opposes the creation of a European state, would like to change the Economic and Monetary Union of the EU, and to end the Schengen Area, and refuses the accession of Turkey to the EU. More widely, the euro-sceptic arguments of the Vlaams Belang are based on four pillars:\nThe New Flemish Alliance (N-VA) is a soft Eurosceptic party in the Dutch-speaking region of Belgium. Before 2010, the N-VA was pro-European and supported the idea of a democratic European confederation, but has since altered this policy to a more sceptical stance on further European integration and now calls for more democratic transparency within the EU, changes to the EU's common asylum policy and economic reforms to the Eurozone. The N-VA has obtained 26.8% of the votes or 4 seats of the Dutch-language college out of 12 (21 MEPs for Belgium) in the 2014 European Parliament election. In April 2019, it stood in the European Conservatives and Reformists Group of the European Parliament, and can be considered a moderate Eurosceptic party.\nIn the French-speaking part of Belgium (Walloons), there are four parties that are Eurosceptic to a varying extent. The first one is the Nation Movement, a far-right party which was a member of the Alliance for Peace and Freedom in the European Parliament. The second one is the National Front, also a far-right party which criticizes the European bureaucracy, intends to guarantee and preserve national independence and freedom in a liberated Europe; it also reaffirms the Christian roots of Europe. The third one is the People's Party, classified as right or extreme right. In its program for the 2019 European elections, the People's Party proposed to abolish the European Commission, reduce the number of European parliamentarians and fight against the worker-posted directive. For this party, the EU must be led by a president elected by universal suffrage with clear but limited competences. It also wants to renegotiate the European Union treaties, restrict the judicial activism of the European Court of Human Rights. It declares itself against the Global Compact for Migration. The last one is the Parti libertarien. In early 2019, the party aims to reduce the powers of the European Commission, to abolish the Common Agricultural Policy, to abandon common defense projects, to simplify the exit procedure of the European Union, to reject federalism and to forbid the European Union to direct economic, fiscal or social policy,\nFinally, the Workers' Party of Belgium (PTB-PVDA) is a Marxist electoral and unitary party. It intends to revise the European treaties considered too neoliberal for their enforcement of austerity measures. One of the Party's slogans is \"The left that stings, against the Europe of money\". The PTB-PVDA politician Marc Botenga (who went on to become the party's first MEP in 2019) published an extensive piece on EU politics in the magazine \"Lava\" in 2018. In it, Botenga criticized the EU structures, noting that the scope for economically progressive politics in the EU was limited due to its budget rules and pro-corporate frameworks. However, because the European market had already become integrated to a high extent, he also rejected an outright exit from the EU as he did not believe this would lead either to true sovereignty or to short-term economic benefits (an argument for which he cited Yanis Varoufakis). Instead of retreating into nationalism, Botenga argued that organized labour had to combat neoliberal policies on an EU-wide scale.\nBulgaria.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are NFSB, Attack, and VMRO \u2013 BND, which is a member of the Eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists Group.\nBulgaria's Minister of Finance, Simeon Djankov, stated in 2011 that ERM II membership to enter the Euro zone would be postponed until after the Eurozone crisis had stabilised.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election Bulgaria remained overwhelmingly pro-EU, with the Eurosceptic Attack party receiving 3% of the vote, down 9%, with the splinter group National Front for the Salvation of Bulgaria taking 3; neither party secured any MEPs. A coalition between VMRO \u2013 BND and Bulgaria Without Censorship secured an MEP position for Angel Dzhambazki from IMRO, who is a hard Eurosceptic.\nFollowers of Eurosceptic Attack tore down and trampled the European flag on 3 March 2016 at a meeting of the party in the Bulgarian capital Sofia, dedicated to the commemoration of the 138th anniversary of the liberation of Bulgaria from the Ottoman Empire.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Bulgaria remained overwhelmingly pro-EU with the ruling centre-right Gerb party winning with 31%, against 26% for the socialist BSP.\nSince the 2021\u20132023 Bulgarian political crisis, the far-right hard Eurosceptic party Revival has outplaced Attack, with it getting 14% on the most recent 2023 Bulgarian parliamentary election.\nCroatia.\nParties with Eurosceptic views are mainly small right-wing parties like Croatian Party of Rights, Croatian Party of Rights dr. Ante Star\u010devi\u0107, Croatian Pure Party of Rights, Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights, Croatian Christian Democratic Party, and Only Croatia \u2013 Movement for Croatia.\nThe only parliamentary party that is vocally Eurosceptic is The Key of Croatia (formerly known as Human Shield) that won 5 out of 151 seats at the 2016 parliamentary election. Their position is generally considered to waver between hard and soft Euroscepticism; it requests thorough reform of the EU so that all member states would be perfectly equal. \nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Key of Croatia gained its first seat in the European Parliament with 6% of the vote putting it in 5th place.\nThe Key of Croatia would go on to lose all of its seats in the 2020 Croatian parliamentary election, and merge into the Law and Justice party in 2024. Law and Justice won a single seat (now vacant) in the 2024 parliamentary elections as part of a coalition with the Homeland Movement. Its only remaining MEPs would lose re-election in the 2024 European Parliament election.\nCyprus.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views in Cyprus are the Progressive Party of Working People and ELAM.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, there was little change politically \u2013 the conservatives won narrowly, the ruling DISY taking two seats with 29%, followed by socialist AKEL (27.5%, two seats) with no seats taken by Eurosceptic parties.\nCzech Republic.\nIn May 2010, the Czech president V\u00e1clav Klaus said that they \"needn't hurry to enter the Eurozone\".\nPetr Mach, an economist, a close associate of president V\u00e1clav Klaus and a member of the Civic Democratic Party between 1997 and 2007, founded the Free Citizens Party in 2009. The party aims to mainly attract dissatisfied Civic Democratic Party voters. At the time of the Lisbon Treaty ratification, they were actively campaigning against it, supported by the president Vaclav Klaus, who demanded opt-outs such as were granted to the United Kingdom and Poland, unlike the governing Civic Democratic Party, who endorsed it in the Chamber of Deputies. After the treaty has been ratified, Mach's party is in favour of withdrawing from the European Union completely. In the 2014 European Parliament election, the Free Citizens Party won one mandate and allied with UKIP in the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy (EFD).\nThe 2025 Czech legislative election brought into the Chamber of Deputies three soft eurosceptic parties, the populist ANO 2011 (ANO), the centre-right Civic Democratic Party (ODS), and the right-wing Motorists for Themselves (AUTO). The election also brought into the Chamber of Deputies one hard eurosceptic party, the far-right Freedom and Direct Democracy (SPD) with representatives of Svobodn\u00ed, PRO Law Respect Expertise and Tricolour running on its list. The hard eurosceptic Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia (KS\u010cM) did not enter the Chamber of Deputies.\nDenmark.\nThe People's Movement against the EU only takes part in European Parliament elections and has one member in the European Parliament. The soft Eurosceptic June Movement, originally a split-off from the People's Movement against the EU, existed from 1992 to 2009.\nIn the Danish Parliament, the Red-Green Alliance previously advocated withdrawal from the EU, but in March 2019, the party announced it would no longer campaign for a referendum to leave the EU, pointing to Brexit illustrating the need for clarity before withdrawal can be considered. The Danish People's Party also advocates withdrawal, but says it supports some EU structures such as the internal market, and supported the EU-positive Liberal-Conservative coalition between 2001 and 2011 and again from 2015 to 2019.\nThe Socialist People's Party, minorities within the Social Liberal Party and Social Democratic Party, and some smaller parties were against accession to the European Union in 1972. Still in 1986, these parties advocated a no vote in the Single European Act referendum. Later, the Social Liberal Party changed to a strongly EU-positive party, and EU opposition within the Social Democratic Party faded. The Socialist People's Party were against the Amsterdam Treaty in 1998 and Denmark's joining the euro in 2000, but has become increasingly EU-positive, for example when MEP Margrete Auken left the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left and joined The Greens\u2013European Free Alliance in 2004.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, the Danish People's Party came first by a large margin with 27% of the vote, gaining 2 extra seats for a total of 4 MEPs. The People's Movement against the EU polled 8%, retaining its single MEP.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Danish People's Party lost around two-thirds of their previous vote share dropping from 4 seats to just 1. The People's Movement against the EU lost their seat and the Red-Green Alliance got one seat.\nThe 2019 Danish general election saw the emergence of a new hard Eurosceptic party Nye Borgerlige which supports Denmark leaving the EU. The party won four seats in parliament.\nEstonia.\nThe Independence Party and Centre Party were against accession to the EU, but only the Independence Party still wants Estonia to withdraw from the EU. The Conservative People's Party (EKRE) also has some Eurosceptic policies and increased its vote share from 4% in 2014 to 13% in the 2019 European Elections winning one seat.\nFinland.\nThe largest Eurosceptic party in Finland is the Finns Party. In the European Parliament election, 2014, the Finns Party increased their vote share by 3% to 13%, adding a second MEP. With their 39 seats, the Finns Party are also the second-biggest party in the 200-seat Finnish Eduskunta.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Finns Party increased their vote share slightly from 13% to 14% and retained their 2 seats.\nIn its latest party platform written in 2019, the Finns Party is strongly opposed to further EU integration. The party proposes introducing a parallel currency within Finland in tandem with the Euro in order to phase out Finnish membership of the Eurozone and argues that while Finland is needed in the short-term in the European Parliament to defend Finland's interests, the country should also enact policies to help gradually withdraw Finland from the EU. During the 2018 Finnish presidential election, the Finns Party candidate Laura Huhtasaari stated that her campaign would support exiting the EU.\nFrance.\nIn France there are multiple parties that are Eurosceptic to different degrees, varying from advocating less EU intervention in national affairs, to advocating outright withdrawal from the EU and the Eurozone. These parties belong to all sides of the political spectrum, so the reasons for their Euroscepticism may differ. In the past many French people appeared to be uninterested in such matters, with only 40% of the French electorate voting in the 2009 European Parliament elections.\nRight-wing Eurosceptic parties include the Gaullist \"Debout la R\u00e9publique\", and \"Mouvement pour la France\", which was part of Libertas, a pan-European Eurosceptic party. In the 2009 European Parliament elections, Debout la R\u00e9publique received 1.8% of the national vote, and Libertas 4.8%. In a similar way to some moderate parties, the French right and far-right in general are naturally opposed to the EU, as they criticise France's loss of political and economic sovereignty to a supranational entity. Some of these hard Eurosceptic parties include the Popular Republican Union and The Patriots and formerly the Front National (FN). Popular Republican Union seek France's withdrawal from the EU and the euro as well as France's withdrawal from NATO. The FN received 33.9% of the votes in the 2017 French presidential election, making it the largest Eurosceptic party in France. In June 2018, the National Front was renamed as National Rally (RN) and in 2019 dropped support for France leaving the European Union and the Eurozone from its manifesto, instead calling for \"reform from within\" the union.\nEurosceptic parties on the left in France tend to criticise what they see as the neoliberal agenda of the EU, as well as the elements of its structure which are undemocratic and seen as top-down. These parties include the \"Parti de Gauche\" and the French Communist Party, which formed the \"Front de Gauche\" for the 2009 European Parliament elections and received 6.3% of the votes. The leader of the Left Front defends a complete reform of the Monetary Union, rather than the withdrawal of France from the Eurozone. Some of the major far-left Eurosceptic parties in France include the New Anticapitalist Party which received 4.8% and Lutte Ouvri\u00e8re which received 1.2%. The Citizen and Republican Movement, a left-wing Eurosceptic and souverainist party, have not participated in any elections for the European Parliament.\nThe party \"Chasse, P\u00eache, Nature &amp; Traditions\", is an agrarianist Eurosceptic party that says it is neither left nor right.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the National Front won the elections with 24.9% of the vote, a swing of 18.6%, winning 24 seats, up from 3 previously. The former French President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande had called for the EU to be reformed and for a scaling back of its power.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the renamed National Rally won the elections with 23.3% of the vote, winning 22 seats, down from 23 previously when their vote share was 24.9%.\nGermany.\nThe Alternative for Germany (AfD) is Germany's largest Eurosceptic party. It was elected into the German Parliament with 94 seats in September 2017. Initially the AfD was a soft Eurosceptic party, that considered itself pro-Europe and pro-EU, but opposed the euro, which it believed had undermined European integration, and called for reforms to the Eurozone.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the Alternative for Germany came 5th with 7% of the vote, winning 7 seats and is a member of the Eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists Group. The Alternative for Germany went on to take seats in three state legislatures in the Autumn of 2014.\nThe party became purely Eurosceptic in 2015, when an internal split occurred, leading to Frauke Petry's leadership and a more hard-line approach to the European Union, including its calling for an end for German Eurozone membership, withdrawal from EU common asylum policies and significantly reducing the power of the EU with some AfD members supporting a complete exit from the EU altogether.\nIn July 2015 an AfD splinter group created a new soft Eurosceptic party called Alliance for Progress and Renewal.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Alternative for Germany increased their vote share from 7% and 7 seats to 11% and 11 seats.\nIn the 2021 German Federal Election, AfD won 10.3% of the vote and 94 seats whereas in 2017, they received 12.6% of the vote and 83 seats; this meant they moved from third place to fifth place, falling behind the Green Party and FDP, both of which had been less popular than the AfD in 2017. Despite their overall electoral decline, the AfD still emerged as the largest in the states of Saxony and Thuringia, and saw a strong performance in eastern Germany.\nGreece.\nGolden Dawn, Communist Party of Greece (KKE), Greek Solution, ANEL, Course of Freedom, Popular Unity, and LAOS have been the main Eurosceptic parties in Greece. According to the London School of Economics, Greece used to be the second most Eurosceptic country in the European Union, with 50% of Greeks thinking that their country has not benefited at all from the EU (only behind the UK). Meanwhile, 33% of Greeks viewed Greek membership in EU as a good thing, marginally ahead of the UK. 81% of Greeks felt that the EU was going in the wrong direction. These figures represented a major increase in Euroscepticism in Greece since 2009.\nIn June 2012, the Eurosceptic parties in Greece that were represented in the parliament before the Election in January 2015 (ANEL, Golden Dawn, KKE) got 45.8% of the votes and 40.3% of the seats in the parliament. In the legislative election of January 2015 the pro-European (left and right-wing) parties (ND, PASOK, Potami, KIDISO, EK and Prasinoi-DIMAR) got 43.3% of the votes. The Eurosceptic parties got 54.6%. The Eurosceptic left (KKE, ANTARSYA-MARS and KKE (M\u2013L)/M\u2013L KKE) got 42.6% of the votes and the Eurosceptic right (Golden Dawn, ANEL and LAOS) got 12.1% of the votes, with Syriza ahead with 36.3%. The Eurosceptic parties got 194 seats in the new parliament and the pro-EU parties got 106 seats.\nAccording to the polls conducted in June and July 2015 (12 polls), the Eurosceptic left would get on average 48.0% (excluding extraparliamentary parties as ANTARSYA-MARS and KKE (m\u2013l)/ML-KKE), the parliamentary pro-EU parties (Potami, New Democracy and PASOK) would get 33.8%, the extra-parliamentary (not represented in the Hellenic Parliament) pro-EU parties (KIDISO and EK) would get 4.4% and the Eurosceptic right would get 10.2% (excluding extraparliamentary parties, such as LAOS, not displayed on recent opinion polls). The soft Eurosceptic parties would get 42.3%, the hard Eurosceptic parties (including KKE, ANEL and Golden Dawn) would get 15.9%, and the pro-EU parties (including extra-parliamentary parties displayed on opinion polls) would get 38.3% of the votes.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, Syriza won the election with 26.6% of the vote (a swing of 21.9%) taking 6 seats (up 5), with Golden Dawn coming 3rd taking 3 seats, the Communist Party taking 2 seats and the Independent Greeks gaining their first ever seat. Syriza's leader Tsipras said he's not anti-European and does not want to leave the euro. According to \"The Economist\", Tsipras is willing to negotiate with Greece's European partners, and it is believed a Syriza victory could encourage radical leftist parties across Europe. Alexis Tsipras vowed to reverse many of the austerity measures adopted by Greece since a series of bailouts began in 2010, at odds with the Eurogroup's positions.\nThe government coalition in Greece was composed by Syriza and ANEL (right-wing hard Eurosceptic party, led by Panos Kammenos, who is the current Minister of Defence).\nEuroscepticism has softened in Greece as the economy improved. According to a research in early 2018, 68% of Greeks judge as positive the participation of Greece in the EU (instead of 53.5% in 2017).\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the New Democracy movement, beat the ruling left-wing Syriza formation with 33.1% and 23.8% of the vote respectively, maintaining Syriza's 6 seats and prompting the Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras to call a legislative election on 7 July 2019. In this election, which was won by ND, the pro-European parties (ND, SYRIZA, KINAL, MeRA25, and the extra-parliamentary Union of Centrists and Recreate Greece) got 84.9% of the vote and the Eurosceptic parties (KKE, Greek Solution, the extraparliamentary Golden Dawn and a host of other small mainly left-wing parties) got 15.1%. That drastic change in the balance is mostly the result of SYRIZA abandoning Euroscepticism.\nHungary.\nViktor Orb\u00e1n is the soft Eurosceptic Prime Minister of Hungary for the national-conservative Fidesz Party. Another Eurosceptic party that was present in Hungary was Jobbik, which until around 2016, was identified as a radical and far-right party. Those far-right factions, who left Jobbik, decided to form the Our Homeland Movement party.\nIn 2015, 39% of the Hungarian population had a positive image of the EU, 20% had a negative image, and 40% neutral (1% \"Don't know\").\nIn the 2014 Hungarian parliamentary election, Fidesz got 44.5% of the votes, Jobbik got 20.5% of the votes and the communist Hungarian Workers' Party got 0.6% of the votes. Thus at the time, Eurosceptic parties in Hungary obtained 65.7% of the votes, one of the highest figures in Europe.\nThe green-liberal Politics Can Be Different (Lehet M\u00e1s a Politika, LMP) classifies as a soft or reformist Eurosceptic party given its self-professed \"euro-critical\" stance. During the European parliamentary campaign of 2014 party Co-president Andr\u00e1s Schiffer described LMP as having a pronounced pro-integration position on environmental, wage and labour policy as supporting member state autonomy on the self-determination of local communities concerning land resources. So as to combat the differentiated integration of the multi-speed Europe which discriminates against Eastern and Southern member states, LMP would like to initiate an eco-social market economy within the union.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, Fidesz consolidated their position by increasing their vote share to 51.5% and adding a seat to take their tally to 13. Former Eurosceptic (now pro-European) Jobbik dropped to 6.3% of the votes, losing 2 of its 3 seats. The Momentum Movement, a newly created pro-European party, came 3rd with 9.3% of the vote, with the strongly pro-European Democratic Coalition coming second with 16.1% of the vote. Our Homeland Movement got 3.3% of the votes, gaining no seats.\nIreland.\nEuroscepticism is a minority view in Ireland, with opinion polls from 2016 to 2018 indicating growing support for EU membership, moving from 70% to 92% in that time.\nThe Irish people initially voted against ratifying the Nice and Lisbon Treaties. Following renegotiations, second referendums on both were passed with approximately 2:1 majorities in both cases. Some commentators and smaller political groups questioned the validity of the Irish Government's decision to call second referendums.\nThe left-wing Irish republican party Sinn F\u00e9in expresses soft Eurosceptic positions on the current structure of the European Union and the direction in which it is moving.\nThe party expresses, \"support for Europe-wide measures that promote and enhance human rights, equality and the all-Ireland agenda\", but has a \"principled opposition\" to a European superstate. In its manifesto for the 2015 UK general election, Sinn F\u00e9in pledged that the party would campaign for the UK to stay within the EU. In the 2019 European Parliament election, Sinn F\u00e9in won one seat and 11.7% of the vote, down 7.8%.\nThe Socialist Party, a Trotskyist organisation, supports Ireland leaving the EU and supported the Brexit result. It argues that the European Union is institutionally capitalist and neoliberal. The Socialist Party campaigned against the Lisbon and Nice Treaties and favours the foundation of an alternative Socialist European Union.\nItaly.\nThe Five Star Movement (M5S), an anti-establishment movement founded by comedian Beppe Grillo, originally set itself out as a Eurosceptic party. The M5S received 25.5% of vote in the 2013 general election, becoming the largest anti-establishment and Eurosceptic party in Europe. The party used to advocate a non-binding referendum on the withdrawal of Italy from the Eurozone (but not from the European Union) and the return to the lira. Since then, the party has toned down its eurosceptic rhetoric and such policy was rejected in 2018, and the M5S's leader has since stated that the \"European Union is the Five Star Movement's home\", clarifying that the party wants Italy to stay in the EU, even though it remains critical of some of its treaties. The M5S's popular support is distributed all across Italy: in the 2018 general election the party won 32.7% of the popular vote nationwide, and was particularly successful in central and southern Italy.\nA party that retains a Eurosceptic identity is the Northern League (LN), a regionalist movement led by Matteo Salvini favouring Italy's exit from the Eurozone and the re-introduction of the lira. When in government, Lega approved the Treaty of Lisbon. The party won 6.2% of the vote in the 2014 European Parliament elections, but two of its leading members are presidents of Lombardy and Veneto (where Lega gained 40.9% of the vote in 2015).\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election the Five Star Movement came second, with 17 seats and 21.2% of the vote after contesting EP seats for the first time. Northern League had five seats and The Other Europe with Tsipras had three seats.\nOther minor Eurosceptic organizations include right-wing political parties (e.g., Brothers of Italy, Tricolour Flame, New Force, National Front, CasaPound, National Movement for Sovereignty, the No Euro Movement), far-left political parties (e.g., the Communist Party of Marco Rizzo, the Italian Communist Party and the political movement Power to the People) and other political movements (e.g., the Sovereignist Front, MMT Italy). In addition, the European Union is criticized (especially for the austerity and the creation of the euro) by some left-wing thinkers, like the trade unionist Giorgio Cremaschi and the journalist Paolo Barnard, and some academics, such as Alberto Bagnai the philosopher Diego Fusaro.\nAccording to the Standard Eurobarometer 87 conducted by the European Commission in spring 2017, 48% of Italians tend not to trust the European Union compared to 36% of Italians who do.\nIn the 2019 European election, the Italian Eurosceptic and souverainist right-wing, represented in large part by the League, increased its number of seats in the EP, but was not assigned any presidency in the committees of the European Parliament. Despite its national political alliance with the League during the Conte Cabinet, the Five Star Movement voted for Ursula von der Leyen, member of pro-EU Christian Democratic Union of Germany, as President of the European Commission.\nIn July 2020, senator Gianluigi Paragone formed Italexit, a new political party with a main goal to withdraw Italy from the European Union.\nLatvia.\nThe National Alliance (For Fatherland and Freedom/LNNK/All for Latvia!), Union of Greens and Farmers and For Latvia from the Heart are parties that are described by some political commentators as bearing soft Eurosceptic views. A small hard Eurosceptic party Eurosceptic Party of Action exists, but it has failed to gain any administrative seats throughout history of its existence.\nLithuania.\nThe Order and Justice party had mainly Eurosceptic views.\nLuxembourg.\nThe Alternative Democratic Reform Party is a soft Eurosceptic party. It is a member of the Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists.\nMalta.\nIn the 2000s, the Labour Party (MLP/PL) was vehemently opposed to Malta entering the European Union. Instead of EU membership, the PL was in favour of a partnership with the EU in the broader context of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership (Euromed). After a long battle, a majority of the electorate voted to join the EU in the 2003 referendum and the Nationalist Party (PN) led by Eddie Fenech Adami, which took a pro-European stance, won the subsequent election. This led Malta to become one of the states to enter the European Union on 1 May 2004.\nAfter Malta joined the EU, the PL under Joseph Muscat quickly moved towards a strongly pro-European stance. Current-day Eurosceptic forces in Maltese politics are far-right parties such as the Maltese Brotherhood and Imperium Europa.\nAccording to Mark Harwood, Euroscepticism in Malta has moved from being a leftist stance in the early 2000s, connected to opposition to the EU's forced adoption of neoliberal policies such as austerity, towards a position that is more concerned with far-right talking points such as anti-immigrant sentiment in the 2010s.\nNetherlands.\nHistorically, the Netherlands have been a very pro-European country, being one of the six founding members of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1952, and campaigning with much effort to include the United Kingdom into the Community in the 1970s and others after that. It has become slightly more Eurosceptic in the 2000s, rejecting the European Constitution in 2005 and complaining about the relatively high financial investment into the Union or the democratic deficit amongst other issues.\nA number of hard and soft eurosceptic parties have politicians elected to the Dutch House of Representatives and European Parliament which include:\nA prominent former Eurosceptic party in the Netherlands was the Pim Fortuyn List (LPF) established by politician and academic Pim Fortuyn in 2002. The party campaigned to reduce Dutch financial contributions to the EU, was against Turkish membership and opposed what it saw as the excessive bureaucracy and threat to national sovereignty posed by the EU. During the 2002 general election, the LPF polled in second place with 17% of the vote. Following the assassination of Fortuyn in the run-up to the election, support for the party declined soon after and it was disbanded in 2008 with many of its former supporters transferring to the Party for Freedom.\nDespite these concerns, in 2014 the majority of the Dutch electorate continued to support parties that favour ongoing European integration: the Social Democrats, the Christian Democrats, the Liberals, but most of all the (Liberal) Democrats.\nIn 2016, a substantial majority in a low-turnout referendum rejected the ratification of an EU trade and association treaty with Ukraine.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Eurosceptic parties had mixed results with Geert Wilders' Party for Freedom losing all 4 of its seats taking only 3.5% of the vote. The new Forum for Democracy established in late 2016 took 11.0% of the vote and entered the European Parliament with 3 seats.\nPoland.\nThe main parties with Eurosceptic views are Law and Justice (PiS), United Poland (SP) and the Confederation Liberty and Independence and the main Eurosceptic politicians include Ryszard Bender, Andrzej Grzesik, Krzysztof Bosak, Dariusz Grabowski, Janusz Korwin-Mikke, Marian Kowalski, Pawe\u0142 Kukiz, Zbigniew Ziobro, Anna Sobecka, Robert Winnicki, Artur Zawisza, and Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142tek.\nFormer president of Poland Lech Kaczy\u0144ski resisted giving his signature on behalf of Poland to the Treaty of Lisbon, objecting specifically to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Subsequently, Poland got an opt-out from this charter. As Polish President, Kaczy\u0144ski also opposed the Polish government's intentions to join the euro.\nIn 2015, it was reported that Euroscepticism was growing in Poland, which was thought to be due to the \"economic crisis, concern over perceived interference from Brussels and migration\". Polish president Andrzej Duda indicated that he wished for Poland to step back from further EU integration. He suggested that the country should \"hold a referendum on joining the euro, resist further integration and fight the EU's green policies\", despite getting the largest share of EU cash.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Law and Justice party won the largest number of seats, with a vote share increase up from 31.8% to 45.4%, increasing its seats from 19 to 27.\nIn 2019, the former MEP Stanis\u0142aw \u017b\u00f3\u0142tek created a political party called PolEXIT, whose flagship ideology is Euroscepticism. Its candidate for president of Poland in the 2020 elections was the party's leader, \u017b\u00f3\u0142tek, who got 45 419 votes (0.23%), ranking 7th out of 11 candidates and did not qualify to the second round.\nPortugal.\nThe main Eurosceptic parties in Portugal are Chega, the Portuguese Communist Party (PCP), and Left Bloc (BE). Opinion polling in Portugal in 2015 indicated that 48 per cent tended not to trust the EU, while 79 per cent tended not to trust the Portuguese government (then led by Portugal Ahead). Eurosceptic political parties hold a combined total of 23 seats out of 230 in Portugal's parliament (BE 5, PCP 6, PNR 0, CHEGA 12) and a combined total of 4 out of Portugal's 21 seats in the European Parliament (PCP 2, BE 2, PNR 0, CHEGA 0).\nIn the last 2014 European Parliament election, the Portuguese Communist Party won three seats and the Left Bloc won one seat.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Left Bloc took 9.8% and gained 1 seat, Portuguese Communist Party working in coalition with Ecologist Party \"The Greens\" took 6.9% and 2 seats and National Renovator Party (PNR) polled just 0.5%, with no seats.\n2019 saw the emergence of a new Eurosceptic political party, Chega, who gained a seat in that year's legislative election. The party did not capture any seats in the 2019 European Parliament elections, but saw its leader Andr\u00e9 Ventura finish third in the 2021 presidential election, securing 11.9% of those voting.\nIn the 2022 Portuguese snap election, Chega got 7.2% of the vote and 12 out of the 230 seats in the Assembly of the Republic.\nRomania.\nSeveral parties espousing Eurosceptic views exist on the right, such as the New Republic, the Greater Romania Party and Noua Dreapt\u0103, but as of June 2020 none of these parties are represented in European Parliament. Euroscepticism is relatively unpopular in Romania, a 2015 survey found 65% of Romanians had a positive view of the country's EU membership.\nThe Eurosceptic parties remained unrepresented in the 2019 European Parliament election.\nThe soft Eurosceptic Alliance for the Union of Romanians, which was founded in September 2019, entered the Romanian parliament in 2020.\nSlovakia.\nParties with Eurosceptic views are the Slovak National Party, Republic, We Are Family, People's Party Our Slovakia. Prominent Slovak Eurosceptic politicians include Andrej Danko, Milan Uhr\u00edk, Boris Koll\u00e1r, Marian Kotleba.\nIn the 2024 European Parliament election, Republic came 3rd securing 12.5% and winning their first 2 seats in the European Parliament.\nSlovenia.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are Slovenian National Party and The Left. Neither won seats in the 2019 European Parliament election in Slovenia.\nSpain.\nThe process of Europeanization changed during the years in Spain. In 1986 Spain entered in the European Community. Since then, Spain has been one of the most Europeanist countries. Therefore, when Spain became part of the European Community, the country had a strong pro-Europeanist feeling, according to Eurobarometer, as it reflected a 60% of the population. In Spain different reasons explain its entrance to the European Community. On the one hand, democracy has just been established in Spain after Francisco Franco dictatorship. On the other hand, the main objectives of Spain were to achieve economic development, and also a social modernization. Spain was one of the few countries to vote Yes for the European Constitution in a referendum in February 2005, though by a lower margin in Catalonia and the Basque Country.\nIn 2008, after the financial crisis reached Spain, the percentage of pro European persons started to fall. Thus, during the five years of the economic crisis, the Eurobarometer shows how the trust in the EU increasingly fell in Spain, and the confidence of the Spanish citizens in the European Union decreased for more than 50 points. Spain became one of the most Eurosceptic countries among all European Union Members, as it happened in pretty much European countries, where nationalist and eurosceptic characterised parties became stronger.\nThe historical two-parties system, composed by the conservative Partido Popular and the social-democratic Partido Socialista Obrero Espa\u00f1ol, collapsed. In the 2000s, the liberal Ciudadanos and leftist party Podemos became part of the political context, gaining electoral consensus, followed years later by ultranationalist party Vox. The new parties were the effect of the disaffection of most Spaniards towards politics and politicians, that increased for several reasons: firstly, corruption at all political levels, reaching the Royal Family too; secondly, recession intensified distrust of the population towards national government; thirdly, a phase of renovation of the autonomous regions which extended the distance between the National government and the Regional ones.\nCandidatura d'Unitat Popular, a left-wing to far-left political party with about 1,300 members advocates independence for Catalonia outside of the European Union. Up to 2014 European elections, there were no Spanish parties present in the Eurosceptic groups at the European Parliament. In the 2015 Spanish general election, Podemos became the first left-wing Eurosceptic political party to win seats in the Congress of Deputies, obtaining 69 seats, and in the 2019 Spanish general election, Vox became the first far-right Eurosceptic political party to win seats in the Congress of Deputies, obtaining 24 seats.\nSweden.\nThe Left Party of Sweden is against accession to the eurozone and previously wanted Sweden to leave the European Union until 2019. The new party program, adapted in 2024, is highly EU-critical but states that an EU-withdrawal is only a \"last option\". Their youth organization Young Left is still campaigning for Sweden to leave the EU.\nThe nationalist and right-wing populist party Sweden Democrats (SD) support closer political, economic and military cooperation with neighboring Nordic and certain Northern European countries, but strongly oppose further EU integration and further transfers of Swedish sovereignty to the EU as a whole. The party is also against Swedish accession to the eurozone, the creation of a combined EU military budget and want to renegotiate Swedish membership of the Schengen Agreement. The SD also want a constitutional amendment to require that all EU treaties must be voted on by the Swedish public first and that if the EU cannot be reformed and assumes more power at the expense of national sovereignty Sweden must exit the bloc.\nThe June List, a Eurosceptic list consisting of members from both the political right and left won three seats in the 2004 Elections to the European Parliament and sat in the EU-critical IND/DEM group in the European Parliament. The movement Folkr\u00f6relsen Nej till EU favours a withdrawal from the EU.\nAround 75% of the Riksdag members represent parties that officially supports the Sweden membership.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the Sweden Democrats gained 2 seats with 9.7% of the vote, up 6.4%, and the Left Party took one seat with 6.3% of the vote.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Sweden Democrats increased from 2 to 3 seats with 15.3% of the vote, up from 9.7%, and the Left Party retained its one seat with 6.8% of the vote.\nIn winter 2019\u20132020, in connection with the request from \"poor\" member countries of much higher membership fees for \"rich\" member countries, for the reason of keeping support levels so \"poor\" countries would not suffer from Brexit, where a \"rich\" country left the union in part due to high membership fees, a media and social media debate for a \"Swexit\" increased. This was still rejected by parties representing a majority of the parliament, with the COVID-19 pandemic quickly taking over the debate.\nIn other European countries.\nArmenia.\nProsperous Armenia represents the main Eurosceptic party in Armenia. Following the 2018 Armenian parliamentary election, the party gained 26 seats in the National Assembly, becoming the official opposition. Following the 2021 Armenian parliamentary election, the party lost all political representation and currently acts as an extra-parliamentary force. The party was a member of the Alliance of Conservatives and Reformists in Europe.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nDespite an uncritical attitude towards the EU informed by a strong Europeanizing ideology as the consequence of a lack of coherent policy agendas from local political actors, Euroscepticism exists in Bosnia and Herzegovina. An example is the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats is a Bosnian Serb political party in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Founded in 1996, it is the governing party in Bosnia and Herzegovina's entity called Republika Srpska, with its leader being Milorad Dodik.\nGeorgia.\nGeorgian March is the main Eurosceptic party in Georgia. The party supports a slight distancing of Georgia from the West, as well as rejecting the country's entrance into NATO.\nIn March 2022, Georgia submitted a formal application for membership of the EU.\nIceland.\nThe three main Eurosceptic parties in Iceland are the Independence Party, Left-Green Movement and the Progressive Party. The Independence Party and the Progressive Party won the parliamentary election in April 2013 and they have halted the current negotiations with the European Union regarding Icelandic membership and tabled a parliamentary resolution on 21 February 2014 to withdraw the application completely.\nIn 2017, Iceland's newly elected government announced that it would hold a vote in parliament on whether to hold a referendum on resuming EU membership negotiations. In November 2017 that government was replaced by a coalition of the Independence Party, the Left Green Movement and the Progressive Party; all of whom oppose membership. Only 11 out of 63 MPs are in favour of EU membership.\nMoldova.\nThe main Eurosceptic parties in Moldova are the left-wing Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova, which officially declared its main purpose to be the integration of Moldova in the Eurasian Economic Union, Our Party, and the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova. As of October 2025 all the parties are represented in Moldovan Parliament, with 32 MPs out of a total of 101 MPs.\nIn March 2022, Moldova submitted a formal application for membership of the EU.\nMontenegro.\nThe right-wing Democratic Front alliance are the main moderate eurosceptic subject in the Parliament of Montenegro, although its initially declaratively supported country's bid for accession to the European Union, all other parliamentary subjects officially advocates Montenegrin access to EU. The only parties that advocates Montenegro's rejecting the European integration are the extra-parliamentary right-wing populist to far-right parties, such as True Montenegro, Party of Serb Radicals, Democratic Party of Unity and the Serb List, all four are known for their close cooperation with the parliamentary Democratic Front.\nNorway.\nNorway has rejected EU membership in two referendums, 1972 and 1994. The Centre Party, Christian Democratic Party, Socialist Left Party and Liberal Party were against EU membership in both referendums. The Liberal Party was particularly divided on the issue, and a large pro-EEC minority split off from the party before the 1972 referendum. In 2020, the Liberal Party officially reversed its position and since then, supports Norwegian EU membership.\nAmong the established political parties of Norway, the Centre Party, Socialist Left Party, and Red Party are also against Norway's current membership of the European Economic Area. In addition, the libertarian Capitalist Party and Christian-conservative The Christians, both of whom have never held a seat in the Norwegian parliament, are also against Norway's membership in the EEA.\nRussia.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are the ruling United Russia, and opposition parties the Communist Party of the Russian Federation and Liberal Democratic Party of Russia.\nFollowing the annexation of Crimea, the European Union issued sanctions on the Russian Federation in response to what it regards as an \"illegal\" annexation and \"deliberate destabilisation\" of a neighbouring sovereign country. In response to this, Alexey Borodavkin \u2013 Russia's permanent representative with the UN \u2013 said \"The EU is committing a direct violation of human rights by its actions against Russia. The unilateral sanctions introduced against us are not only illegitimate according to international law, they also undermine Russian citizens' freedom of travel, freedom of development, freedom of work and others\". In the same year, Russian president Vladimir Putin said: \"What are the so-called European values? Maintaining the coup, the armed seizure of power and the suppression of dissent with the help of the armed forces?\"\nA February 2014 poll conducted by the Levada Center, Russia's largest independent polling organization, found that nearly 80% of Russian respondents had a \"good\" impression of the EU. This changed dramatically in 2014 with the Russian annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas, resulting in 70% taking a hostile view of the EU compared to 20% viewing it positively.\nA Levada poll released in August 2018 found that 68% of Russians polled believe that Russia needs to dramatically improve relations with Western countries. 42% of Russian respondents said they had a positive view of the EU, up from 28% in May 2018.\nSan Marino.\nA referendum was held in the landlocked microstate on 20 October 2013 in which the citizens were asked whether the country should submit an application to join the European Union. The proposal was rejected because of a low turnout, even though 50.3% of voters approved it. The \"Yes\" campaign was supported by the main left-wing parties (Socialist Party, United Left) and the Union for the Republic whereas the Sammarinese Christian Democratic Party suggested voting with a blank ballot, the Popular Alliance declared itself neutral, and We Sammarinese and the RETE movement supported the \"No\" campaign. The Citizens' Rights Directive, which defines the right of free movement for the European citizens, may have been an important reason for those voting no.\nSerbia.\nIn Serbia, political parties with eurosceptic views tend to be right-orientated. The most notable examples are the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS) which since its inception has opposed entering the European Union and the right-wing populist Dveri. Political parties such as the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) had pro-Western views and was initially supportive of the accession into the European Union but under the late 2000s leadership of Vojislav Ko\u0161tunica they turned eurosceptic, and the Enough is Enough (DJB) political party, initially a liberal centrist party that also supported the accession turned towards the right-wing eurosceptic position shortly after 2018.\nHistorically, the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS) and the Yugoslav Left (JUL) were the only two left-leaning political parties that imposed eurosceptic and anti-Western views. The ruling coalition in Serbia, Serbia Must Not Stop, which is predominantly pro-European orientated is also composed of two minor eurosceptic parties, the right-wing Serbian People's Party that advocates closer ties to Russia, and the left-leaning Movement of Socialists which was formed as the eurosceptic split from SPS in the 2000s.\nOther minor political parties in Serbia that have eurosceptic views are Healthy Serbia, People's Freedom Movement, Russian Party, Love, Faith, Hope, Serbian Party Oathkeepers, Serbian Right, Leviathan Movement, We \u2013 Voice from the People, and We \u2013 Power of the People.\nSwitzerland.\nSwitzerland has long been known for its neutrality in international politics. Swiss voters rejected EEA membership in 1992, and EU membership in 2001. Despite the passing of several referendums calling for closer relations between Switzerland and the European Union such as the adoption of bilateral treaties and the joining of the Schengen Area, a second referendum of the joining of the EEA or the EU is not expected, and the general public remains opposed to joining.\nIn February 2014, the Swiss voters narrowly approved a referendum limiting the freedom of movement of EU citizens to Switzerland.\nEurosceptic political parties include the Swiss People's Party, which is the largest political party in Switzerland, with 29.4% of the popular vote as of the 2015 federal election. Smaller Eurosceptic parties include, but are not limited to, the Federal Democratic Union, the Ticino League, and the Geneva Citizens' Movement, all of which are considered right-wing parties.\nIn addition, the Campaign for an Independent and Neutral Switzerland is a political organisation in Switzerland that is strongly opposed to Swiss membership of or further integration otherwise with the European Union.\nRegionally, the German-speaking majority as well as the Italian-speaking areas are the most Eurosceptic, while French-speaking Switzerland tends to be more pro-European integration. In the 2001 referendum, the majority of French-speakers voted against EU membership. According to a 2016 survey conducted by M.I.S Trend and published in \"L'Hebdo\", 69 percent of the Swiss population supports systematic border controls, and 53 percent want restrictions on the EU accord of the free movements of peoples and 14 percent want it completely abolished. 54% of the Swiss population said that if necessary, they would ultimately keep the freedom of movement of people's accord.\nTurkey.\nThe two main Eurosceptic parties are the far-right ultranationalist, Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), which secured 11.1% of votes, and 49 seats in the Parliament at the last election, and the Felicity Party (Saadet Partisi), a far-right Sunni Islamist party, which has no seats in the Parliament, as it only secured 0.7% of the votes in the last election, far below the 10% threshold necessary to be represented in the Parliament.\nMany left-wing nationalist and far-left parties hold no seats at parliament but they control many activist and student movements in Turkey. The Patriotic Party (formerly called Workers' Party) consider the European Union as a front-runner of global imperialism.\nFounded on 26 August 2021 under the leadership of \u00dcmit \u00d6zda\u011f, Victory Party (Turkey) is a Turkish nationalist and anti-immigrant political party. It is represented by two deputies in the Turkish Grand National Assembly. \"The European Union does not want to negotiate with Turkey. We will not humiliate Turkey anymore.\" \u00d6zda\u011f said.\nUkraine.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are Opposition Platform \u2013 For Life, Opposition Bloc, Party of Shariy and Right Sector.\nThe far-right Ukrainian group Right Sector opposes joining the European Union. It regards the EU as an \"oppressor\" of European nations.\nIn the 2019 parliamentary election the Opposition Platform \u2013 For Life won 37 seats on the nationwide party list and 6 constituency seats.\nThe leader of the Party of Shariy Anatoly Shariy is one of the closest associates of Viktor Medvedchuk, whom Ukraine's special services suspect of financing terrorism.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe European Union, and Britain's place in relation to it, is one of the primary issues today dividing opinion among the British public, political parties, media and civil society.\nEuroscepticism has been an element in British politics ever since the inception of the European Economic Community (EEC), the predecessor to the EU, and its salience as an issue has fluctuated widely over the years. The European Communities membership referendum of 1975 took place in the context of Conservative and Liberal parties which were generally in favour of membership (in the 1971 House of Commons vote on whether the UK should join the European Economic Community, only 39 of the then 330 Conservative MPs had been opposed to membership), and a Labour party which was sharply divided. After the referendum, which gave a strong assent to continued membership, Euroscepticism was a strand of opinion characteristic of the Labour party; at the 1983 general election, for example, Labour campaigned on a promise to withdraw from the EEC. This opposition to membership faded quickly after the election of Neil Kinnock as leader of the party, and Euroscepticism gradually came to be less popular on the left of politics than on the right - though left-wing opposition to membership continues to this day. Current and recent supporters on the left of British politics include Frank Field, Graham Stringer, Ian Austin, John Mann, Tom Harris, Gisela Stuart, Austin Mitchell, Kate Hoey and George Galloway.\nWhen Margaret Thatcher came into power as the Prime Minister in 1979, she was as strongly in favour of membership as most Conservative MPs, having campaigned for \"yes\" in the 1975 referendum. By the time she left office, however, she had developed what at the time was a strongly Eurosceptic stance; she has been called the \"spiritual mother\" of Euroscepticism. She never argued for secession while Prime Minister, envisioning continued membership of a less integrationist EEC, and became one of the most significant Eurosceptic voices in the United Kingdom in the 1990s, influencing the Conservatives\u2019 view on the EU. In 2009 the Conservative Party actively campaigned against the Lisbon Treaty, which it believed would give away too much sovereignty to Brussels. Shadow Foreign Secretary William Hague stated that, should the treaty be in force by the time of an incoming Conservative government, he would \"not let matters rest there\".\nThe right-wing UK Independence Party (UKIP) was set up for the specific purpose of advocating for the UK unilaterally seceding the European Union (Brexit) from its foundation in 1993. This party initially had very little support from the UK population as a whole. It was initially eclipsed by the Referendum Party, which fought the 1997 general election on the single issue of a referendum to leave the EU. The party's main success was found in elections to the European Parliament, where they experienced a continuous rise in their support from 1999, when they came fourth and won their first seats. In 2004 they came third, becoming the first \"small\" party to overtake the Liberals in a national vote since Labour in the 1920s. In 2009 UKIP came second, and then, in 2014, they topped the poll, pushing the Conservatives into third for the first time in their history. UKIP also had some strong support locally in solidly working class areas, with 163 councillors elected to local authorities and gaining overall control in 2015 of Thanet District Council. \nHowever, UKIP \u2014 like most small parties in the UK \u2014 found it almost impossible to break into Westminster politics, only ever achieving one elected MP, in 2015. Accordingly, after the inconclusive general election result of 2010, resulting in a hung Parliament, the issue of EU membership remained low on the political priority agenda at Westminster \u2014 broadly speaking a non-issue. This changed with UKIP's victory in the 2014 European Parliament election, in the wake of which two Conservative MPs defected to UKIP. The party with the largest number of seats in the 2010 Parliament was the Conservatives, which was firstly deeply divided on the issue, being led by a pro-European leadership on the whole, but with a large number of very vociferous Eurosceptic backbenchers, and secondly concerned at UKIP's possible electoral threat to the party at the following election. The Conservative leader David Cameron promised a referendum on EU membership in the party's 2015 general election manifesto.\nBy 2015, support for the Liberal Democrats had shrunk considerably, a phenomenon widely attributed to a policy U-turn on university tuition fees. In the election, the Lib Dem vote collapsed, leading to an outright Conservative victory, to the surprise of many, as national polling had consistently predicted another hung Parliament. This majority meant that David Cameron's pledge now had to be fulfilled. In an effort to reduce Euroscepticism, Cameron sought and gained from the EU a renegotiation of some of the terms of Britain's EU membership, to a mixed response from the media and his party.\nFor the 23 June 2016 referendum on the EU membership, whilst the Conservatives had no official political policy position either way, its leader Cameron was avowedly in favour of remaining in the EU \u2014 though with the renegotiation of the terms of membership little political mileage was gained \u2014 and the party remained profoundly split, as it had been for many years.\nLabour Party policy officially supported remaining in the EU, although with long-standing Eurosceptic Jeremy Corbyn party leader, he and his Momentum supporters gave a lacklustre defence against secession. Since first being elected in 1984 as a stalwart adherent of Eurosceptic Tony Benn on the left wing of the party, Corbin had personally advocated withdrawal throughout his terms as a Labour MP, so he suggested early on in the campaign that he would willingly consider withdrawal contrary to official party policy. The Liberal Democrats were the most adamantly pro-EU of the main parties, and since the referendum, pro-Europeanism has been their main policy.\nThe referendum resulted in an overall vote to leave the EU, as opposed to remaining an EU member, by 52% to 48%, on a turnout of 72%. The vote was split between the constituent countries of the United Kingdom, with a majority in England and Wales voting to leave, and a majority in Scotland and Northern Ireland, as well as an overwhelming 96% in Gibraltar, a British Overseas Territory, voting to remain. As a result of the referendum, the UK Government notified the EU of its intention to withdraw on 29 March 2017 by invoking Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty.\nOn 12 April 2019, a new Eurosceptic party, the Brexit Party, was officially launched by the former UKIP leader Nigel Farage, to use the 2019 European Parliament election to put pressure on a Conservative government perceived to be failing to pursue Brexit with adequate enthusiasm or success. In the event, although overall pro-EU parties score a similar share of the vote to Eurosceptic parties, the Brexit Party topped the national poll by a large margin, with 32% of the vote. The Conservatives, on the other hand, suffered their lowest ever national vote share at 9%, with just 4 seats. This historic electoral defeat \u2013 along with an inability to navigate an agreeable route between a \"soft\" or \"hard\" Brexit in Parliament \u2013 led to Theresa May announcing the day after the election that she would step down as the Conservatives' leader and Prime Minister on 7 June. After the elections, the Eurosceptic Blue Collar Conservative grouping of Conservative MPs was formed.\nThe Conservatives' resounding defeat led them to elect a new leader who might gain votes back from the Brexit Party, by pursuing a \"harder\" Brexit more determinedly than Theresa May had done. Following the election of Boris Johnson as leader in July, the Conservatives' new Cabinet became strongly supportive of the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union. Its platform was changed to unequivocally support EU withdrawal, and there was a systematic campaign in preparation for the 2019 general election to enforce loyalty to this aim by deselecting all MPs and candidates from the party who refused to explicitly undertake to support it. The Conservatives fought the election on the slogan \"Get Brexit Done\", a slogan which attracted strong criticism from almost all the other parties in Parliament. The election resulted in the largest overall majority for the Conservatives since the 1980s, the highest percentage of the popular vote for any party since 1979, and significant losses for the opposition Labour and Liberal Democrats.\nA month later, on 23 January 2020, Parliament ratified a withdrawal agreement from the European Union, which was in turn ratified by the EU Parliament on 30 January. On 31 January, the United Kingdom officially left the European Union after 47 years. During a transition period until 31 December 2020, the UK still followed EU rules and continued free trade and free movement for people within the European Union.\nCounter-criticism.\nBen Chu, writing for \"The Independent\", argued against the left-wing notion that the EU is a neoliberal organization, pointing to \"high levels of social protection, state-owned rail companies, nationalised utilities and banks, various price controls and industrial interventions\".\nUnlike other left-wing critiques of the European Union\u2014which are more focused on failure to achieve a social Europe\u2014Hans Kundnani's book \"Eurowhiteness\" takes aim at the goals of European integration itself, as Kundani argues that the European Union reproduces the same failings of nationalism on a larger scale.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10039", "revid": "6369861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10039", "title": "Ermland", "text": ""}
{"id": "10041", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10041", "title": "European Article Numbering", "text": ""}
{"id": "10042", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10042", "title": "EAN", "text": ""}
{"id": "10043", "revid": "31339567", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10043", "title": "Estimator", "text": "Rule for calculating an estimate of a given quantity based on observed data\nIn statistics, an estimator is a rule for calculating an estimate of a given quantity based on observed data: thus the rule (the estimator), the quantity of interest (the estimand) and its result (the estimate) are distinguished. For example, the sample mean is a commonly used estimator of the population mean.\nThere are point and interval estimators. The point estimators yield single-valued results. This is in contrast to an interval estimator, where the result would be a range of plausible values. \"Single value\" does not necessarily mean \"single number\", but includes vector valued or function valued estimators.\n\"Estimation theory\" is concerned with the properties of estimators; that is, with defining properties that can be used to compare different estimators (different rules for creating estimates) for the same quantity, based on the same data. Such properties can be used to determine the best rules to use under given circumstances. However, in robust statistics, statistical theory goes on to consider the balance between having good properties, if tightly defined assumptions hold, and having worse properties that hold under wider conditions.\nBackground.\nAn \"estimator\" or \"point estimate\" is a statistic (that is, a function of the data) that is used to infer the value of an unknown parameter in a statistical model. A common way of phrasing it is \"the estimator is the method selected to obtain an estimate of an unknown parameter\". \nThe parameter being estimated is sometimes called the \"estimand\". It can be either finite-dimensional (in parametric and semi-parametric models), or infinite-dimensional (semi-parametric and non-parametric models). If the parameter is denoted formula_1 then the estimator is traditionally written by adding a circumflex over the symbol: formula_2. Being a function of the data, the estimator is itself a random variable; a particular realization of this random variable is called the \"estimate\". Sometimes the words \"estimator\" and \"estimate\" are used interchangeably.\nThe definition places virtually no restrictions on which functions of the data can be called the \"estimators\". The attractiveness of different estimators can be judged by looking at their properties, such as unbiasedness, mean square error, consistency, asymptotic distribution, etc. The construction and comparison of estimators are the subjects of the estimation theory. In the context of decision theory, an estimator is a type of decision rule, and its performance may be evaluated through the use of loss functions.\nWhen the word \"estimator\" is used without a qualifier, it usually refers to point estimation. The estimate in this case is a single point in the parameter space. There also exists another type of estimator: interval estimators, where the estimates are subsets of the parameter space.\nThe problem of density estimation arises in two applications. Firstly, in estimating the probability density functions of random variables and secondly in estimating the spectral density function of a time series. In these problems the estimates are functions that can be thought of as point estimates in an infinite dimensional space, and there are corresponding interval estimation problems.\nDefinition.\nSuppose a fixed \"parameter\" formula_3 needs to be estimated. Then an \"estimator\" is a function that maps the sample space to a set of \"sample estimates\". An estimator of formula_3 is usually denoted by the symbol formula_2. It is often convenient to express the theory using the algebra of random variables: thus if \"X\" is used to denote a random variable corresponding to the observed data, the estimator (itself treated as a random variable) is symbolised as a function of that random variable, formula_6. The estimate for a particular observed data value formula_7 (i.e. for formula_8) is then formula_9, which is a fixed value. Often an abbreviated notation is used in which formula_2 is interpreted directly as a random variable, but this can cause confusion.\nQuantified properties.\nThe following definitions and attributes are relevant.\nError.\nFor a given sample formula_11, the \"error\" of the estimator formula_2 is defined as\nformula_13\nwhere formula_14 is the parameter being estimated. The error, \"e\", depends not only on the estimator (the estimation formula or procedure), but also on the sample.\nMean squared error.\nThe mean squared error of formula_2 is defined as the expected value (probability-weighted average, over all samples) of the squared errors; that is,\nformula_16\nIt is used to indicate how far, on average, the collection of estimates are from the single parameter being estimated. Consider the following analogy. Suppose the parameter is the bull's-eye of a target, the estimator is the process of shooting arrows at the target, and the individual arrows are estimates (samples). Then high MSE means the average distance of the arrows from the bull's eye is high, and low MSE means the average distance from the bull's eye is low. The arrows may or may not be clustered. For example, even if all arrows hit the same point, yet grossly miss the target, the MSE is still relatively large. However, if the MSE is relatively low then the arrows are likely more highly clustered (than highly dispersed) around the target.\nSampling deviation.\nFor a given sample formula_11, the \"sampling deviation\" of the estimator formula_2 is defined as\nformula_19\nwhere formula_20 is the expected value of the estimator. The sampling deviation, \"d\", depends not only on the estimator, but also on the sample.\nVariance.\nThe variance of formula_2 is the expected value of the squared sampling deviations; that is, formula_22. It is used to indicate how far, on average, the collection of estimates are from the \"expected value\" of the estimates. (Note the difference between MSE and variance.) If the parameter is the bull's-eye of a target, and the arrows are estimates, then a relatively high variance means the arrows are dispersed, and a relatively low variance means the arrows are clustered. Even if the variance is low, the cluster of arrows may still be far off-target, and even if the variance is high, the diffuse collection of arrows may still be unbiased. Finally, even if all arrows grossly miss the target, if they nevertheless all hit the same point, the variance is zero.\nBias.\nThe bias of formula_2 is defined as formula_24. It is the distance between the average of the collection of estimates, and the single parameter being estimated. The bias of formula_2 is a function of the true value of formula_3 so saying that the bias of formula_2 is formula_28 means that for every formula_3 the bias of formula_2 is formula_28.\nThere are two kinds of estimators: biased estimators and unbiased estimators. Whether an estimator is biased or not can be identified by the relationship between formula_32 and 0:\nThe bias is also the expected value of the error, since formula_37. If the parameter is the bull's eye of a target and the arrows are estimates, then a relatively high absolute value for the bias means the average position of the arrows is off-target, and a relatively low absolute bias means the average position of the arrows is on target. They may be dispersed, or may be clustered. The relationship between bias and variance is analogous to the relationship between accuracy and precision.\nThe estimator formula_2 is an unbiased estimator of formula_3 if and only if formula_40. Bias is a property of the estimator, not of the estimate. Often, people refer to a \"biased estimate\" or an \"unbiased estimate\", but they really are talking about an \"estimate from a biased estimator\", or an \"estimate from an unbiased estimator\". Also, people often confuse the \"error\" of a single estimate with the \"bias\" of an estimator. That the error for one estimate is large, does not mean the estimator is biased. In fact, even if all estimates have astronomical absolute values for their errors, if the expected value of the error is zero, the estimator is unbiased. Also, an estimator's being biased does not preclude the error of an estimate from being zero in a particular instance. The ideal situation is to have an unbiased estimator with low variance, and also try to limit the number of samples where the error is extreme (that is, to have few outliers). Yet unbiasedness is not essential. Often, if just a little bias is permitted, then an estimator can be found with lower mean squared error and/or fewer outlier sample estimates.\nAn alternative to the version of \"unbiased\" above, is \"median-unbiased\", where the median of the distribution of estimates agrees with the true value; thus, in the long run half the estimates will be too low and half too high. While this applies immediately only to scalar-valued estimators, it can be extended to any measure of central tendency of a distribution: see median-unbiased estimators.\nIn a practical problem, formula_2 can always have functional relationship with formula_3. For example, if a genetic theory states there is a type of leaf (starchy green) that occurs with probability formula_43, with formula_44.\nThen, for formula_45 leaves, the random variable formula_46, or the number of starchy green leaves, can be modeled with a formula_47 distribution. The number can be used to express the following estimator for formula_3: formula_49. One can show that formula_2 is an unbiased estimator for formula_3:\nformula_52\nUnbiased.\nA desired property for estimators is the unbiased trait where an estimator is shown to have no systematic tendency to produce estimates larger or smaller than the true parameter. Additionally, unbiased estimators with smaller variances are preferred over larger variances because it will be closer to the \"true\" value of the parameter. The unbiased estimator with the smallest variance is known as the minimum-variance unbiased estimator (MVUE).\nTo find if your estimator is unbiased it is easy to follow along the equation formula_53, formula_2. With estimator \"T\" with and parameter of interest formula_3 solving the previous equation so it is shown as formula_56 the estimator is unbiased. Looking at the figure to the right despite formula_57 being the only unbiased estimator, if the distributions overlapped and were both centered around formula_3 then distribution formula_59 would actually be the preferred unbiased estimator.\nExpectation\nWhen looking at quantities in the interest of expectation for the model distribution there is an unbiased estimator which should satisfy the two equations below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVariance\nSimilarly, when looking at quantities in the interest of variance as the model distribution there is also an unbiased estimator that should satisfy the two equations below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNote we are dividing by \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 because if we divided with \"n\" we would obtain an estimator with a negative bias which would thus produce estimates that are too small for formula_60. It should also be mentioned that even though formula_61 is unbiased for formula_60 the reverse is not true.\nExample.\nConsider a random variable following a normal probability distribution formula_69, and a biased estimator of the mean formula_70 of that distribution \nformula_71\nwhere formula_72 follows a degenerate distribution, i.e. formula_73, such that \nformula_74\nformula_75\nformula_76\nwhere all the terms are zero except formula_77 using the Bienaym\u00e9 formula, and\nformula_78\nWe verify the relation between the mean square error, the variance and the bias. Below are illustrated the quantified properties of the estimation of the probability distribution mean, taking formula_79, formula_80 and formula_81. \nBehavioral properties.\nConsistency.\nA consistent estimator is an estimator whose sequence of estimates converge in probability to the quantity being estimated as the index (usually the sample size) grows without bound. In other words, increasing the sample size increases the probability of the estimator being close to the population parameter.\nMathematically, an estimator is a consistent estimator for parameter \"\u03b8\", if and only if for the sequence of estimates {\"tn\"; \"n\" \u2265 0}, and for all \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0, no matter how small, we have\nformula_82\nThe consistency defined above may be called weak consistency. The sequence is \"strongly consistent\", if it converges almost surely to the true value.\nAn estimator that converges to a \"multiple\" of a parameter can be made into a consistent estimator by multiplying the estimator by a scale factor, namely the true value divided by the asymptotic value of the estimator. This occurs frequently in estimation of scale parameters by measures of statistical dispersion.\nFisher consistency.\nAn estimator can be considered Fisher consistent as long as the estimator is the same functional of the empirical distribution function as the true distribution function. Following the formula:\nformula_83\nWhere formula_84 and formula_85 are the empirical distribution function and theoretical distribution function, respectively. \nAn easy example to see if some estimator is Fisher consistent is to check the consistency of mean and variance. For example, to check consistency for the mean formula_86 and to check for variance confirm that formula_87.\nAsymptotic normality.\nAn asymptotically normal estimator is a consistent estimator whose distribution around the true parameter \"\u03b8\" approaches a normal distribution with standard deviation shrinking in proportion to formula_88 as the sample size \"n\" grows. Using formula_89 to denote convergence in distribution, \"tn\" is asymptotically normal if\nformula_90\nfor some \"V\".\nIn this formulation \"V/n\" can be called the \"asymptotic variance\" of the estimator. However, some authors also call \"V\" the \"asymptotic variance\".\nNote that convergence will not necessarily have occurred for any finite \"n\", therefore this value is only an approximation to the true variance of the estimator, while in the limit the asymptotic variance (V/n) is simply zero. To be more specific, the distribution of the estimator \"tn\" converges weakly to a dirac delta function centered at formula_3.\nThe central limit theorem implies asymptotic normality of the sample mean formula_92 as an estimator of the true mean.\nMore generally, maximum likelihood estimators are asymptotically normal under fairly weak regularity conditions \u2014 see the asymptotics section of the maximum likelihood article. However, not all estimators are asymptotically normal; the simplest examples are found when the true value of a parameter lies on the boundary of the allowable parameter region.\nEfficiency.\nThe efficiency of an estimator is used to estimate the quantity of interest in a \"minimum error\" manner. In reality, there is not an explicit best estimator; there can only be a better estimator. Whether the efficiency of an estimator is better or not is based on the choice of a particular loss function, and it is reflected by two naturally desirable properties of estimators: to be unbiased formula_35 and have minimal mean squared error (MSE) formula_94. These cannot in general both be satisfied simultaneously: a biased estimator may have a lower mean squared error than any unbiased estimator (see estimator bias).\nThis equation relates the mean squared error with the estimator bias:\nformula_95\nThe first term represents the mean squared error; the second term represents the square of the estimator bias; and the third term represents the variance of the estimator. The quality of the estimator can be identified from the comparison between the variance, the square of the estimator bias, or the MSE. The variance of the good estimator (good efficiency) would be smaller than the variance of the bad estimator (bad efficiency). The square of an estimator bias with a good estimator would be smaller than the estimator bias with a bad estimator. The MSE of a good estimator would be smaller than the MSE of the bad estimator. Suppose there are two estimator, formula_96 is the good estimator and formula_97 is the bad estimator. The above relationship can be expressed by the following formulas.\nformula_98\nformula_99\nformula_100\nBesides using formula to identify the efficiency of the estimator, it can also be identified through the graph. If an estimator is efficient, in the frequency vs. value graph, there will be a curve with high frequency at the center and low frequency on the two sides. For example:\nIf an estimator is not efficient, the frequency vs. value graph, there will be a relatively more gentle curve.\nTo put it simply, the good estimator has a narrow curve, while the bad estimator has a large curve. Plotting these two curves on one graph with a shared \"y\"-axis, the difference becomes more obvious.\nAmong unbiased estimators, there often exists one with the lowest variance, called the minimum variance unbiased estimator (MVUE). In some cases an unbiased efficient estimator exists, which, in addition to having the lowest variance among unbiased estimators, satisfies the Cram\u00e9r\u2013Rao bound, which is an absolute lower bound on variance for statistics of a variable.\nConcerning such \"best unbiased estimators\", see also Cram\u00e9r\u2013Rao bound, Gauss\u2013Markov theorem, Lehmann\u2013Scheff\u00e9 theorem, Rao\u2013Blackwell theorem.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10045", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10045", "title": "Emerald", "text": "Green gemstone, a beryl variety\nEmerald is a gemstone and a variety of the mineral beryl (Be3Al2(SiO3)6) colored green by trace amounts of chromium or sometimes vanadium. Beryl has a hardness of 7.5\u20138 on the Mohs scale. Most emeralds have many inclusions, so their toughness (resistance to breakage) is classified as generally poor. Emerald is a cyclosilicate. It occurs mainly in association with quartz, muscovite, albite, schorl, microcline, fluorite, smoky quartz and elbaite.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"emerald\" is derived (via and ), from Vulgar Latin: \"esmaralda/esmaraldus\", a variant of Latin \"smaragdus\", which was via (sm\u00e1ragdos; \"green gem\"). The Greek word may have a Semitic, Sanskrit or Persian origin. According to \"Webster's Dictionary\" the term emerald was first used in the 14th century.\nProperties determining value.\nEmeralds, like all colored gemstones, are graded using four basic parameters known as \"the four \"C\"s\": \"color\", \"clarity,\" \"cut\" and \"carat weight\". Normally, in grading colored gemstones, color is by far the most important criterion. However, in the grading of emeralds, clarity is considered a close second. A fine emerald must possess not only a pure verdant green hue as described below, but also a high degree of transparency to be considered a top gemstone.\nThis member of the beryl family ranks among the traditional \"big four\" precious gems along with diamonds, rubies and sapphires.\nIn the 1960s, the American jewelry industry changed the definition of \"emerald\" to include the green vanadium-bearing beryl. As a result, \"vanadium emeralds\" purchased as emeralds in the United States are not recognized as such in the United Kingdom and Europe. In America, the distinction between traditional emeralds and the new vanadium kind is often reflected in the use of terms such as \"Colombian emerald\".\nColor.\nIn gemology, color is divided into three components: \"hue\", \"saturation\", and \"tone\". Emeralds occur in hues ranging from yellow-green to blue-green, with the primary hue necessarily being Dark green. Yellow and blue are the normal secondary hues found in emeralds. Only gems that are medium to dark in tone are considered emeralds; light-toned gems are known instead by the species name \"green beryl\". The finest emeralds are approximately 75% tone on a scale where 0% tone is colorless and 100% is opaque black. In addition, a fine emerald will be saturated and have a hue that is bright (vivid). Gray is the normal saturation modifier or mask found in emeralds; a grayish-green hue is a dull-green hue.\nClarity.\nEmeralds tend to have numerous inclusions and surface-breaking fissures. Unlike diamonds, where the loupe standard (i.e., 10\u00d7 magnification) is used to grade clarity, emeralds are graded by eye. Thus, if an emerald has no visible inclusions to the eye (assuming normal visual acuity) it is considered flawless. Stones that lack surface breaking fissures are extremely rare and therefore almost all emeralds are treated (\"oiled\", see below) to enhance the apparent clarity. The inclusions and fissures within an emerald are sometimes described as \"jardin\" (French for \"garden\"), because of their mossy appearance. Imperfections are unique for each emerald and can be used to identify a particular stone. Eye-clean stones of a vivid primary green hue (as described above), with no more than 15% of any secondary hue or combination (either blue or yellow) of a medium-dark tone, command the highest prices. The relative non-uniformity motivates the cutting of emeralds in cabochon form, rather than faceted shapes. Faceted emeralds are most commonly given an oval cut, or the signature emerald cut, a rectangular cut with facets around the top edge.\nTreatments.\nMost emeralds are oiled as part of the post-lapidary process, in order to fill in surface-reaching cracks so that clarity and stability are improved. Cedar oil, having a similar refractive index, is often used in this widely adopted practice. Other liquids, including synthetic oils and polymers with refractive indexes close to that of emeralds, such as \"Opticon\", are also used. The least expensive emeralds are often treated with epoxy resins, which are effective for filling stones with many fractures. These treatments are typically applied in a vacuum chamber under mild heat, to open the pores of the stone and allow the fracture-filling agent to be absorbed more effectively. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission requires the disclosure of this treatment when an oil-treated emerald is sold. The use of oil is traditional and largely accepted by the gem trade, although oil-treated emeralds are worth much less than untreated emeralds of similar quality. Untreated emeralds must also be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed, independent gemology laboratory. Other treatments, for example the use of green-tinted oil, are not acceptable in the trade. Gems are graded on a four-step scale; \"none\", \"minor\", \"moderate\" and \"highly\" enhanced. These categories reflect levels of enhancement, not \"clarity\". A gem graded \"none\" on the enhancement scale may still exhibit visible inclusions. Laboratories apply these criteria differently. Some gemologists consider the mere presence of oil or polymers to constitute enhancement. Others may ignore traces of oil if the presence of the material does not improve the look of the gemstone.\nEmerald mines.\nEmeralds in antiquity were mined in Ancient Egypt at locations on Mount Smaragdus since 1500 BC, and India and Austria since at least the 14th century AD. The Egyptian mines were exploited on an industrial scale by the Roman and Byzantine Empires, and later by Islamic conquerors. Mining in Egypt ceased with the discovery of the Colombian deposits. Today, only ruins remain in Egypt.\nColombia is by far the world's largest producer of emeralds, constituting 50\u201395% of the world production, with the number depending on the year, source and grade. Emerald production in Colombia has increased drastically in the last decade, increasing by 78% from 2000 to 2010. The three main emerald mining areas in Colombia are Muzo, Coscuez, and Chivor. Rare \"trapiche\" emeralds are found in Colombia, distinguished by ray-like spokes of dark impurities.\nZambia is the world's second biggest producer, with its Kafubu River area deposits (Kagem Mines) about southwest of Kitwe responsible for 20% of the world's production of gem-quality stones in 2004. In the first half of 2011, the Kagem Mines produced 3.74 tons of emeralds.\nEmeralds are found all over the world in countries such as Afghanistan, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, India, Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Russia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Tanzania, the United States, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. In the US, emeralds have been found in Connecticut, Montana, Nevada, North Carolina, and South Carolina. In 1998, emeralds were discovered in the Yukon Territory of Canada.\nOrigin determinations.\nSince the onset of concerns regarding diamond origins, research has been conducted to determine if the mining location could be determined for an emerald already in circulation. Traditional research used qualitative guidelines such as an emerald's color, style and quality of cutting, type of fracture filling, and the anthropological origins of the artifacts bearing the mineral to determine the emerald's mine location. More recent studies using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy methods have uncovered trace chemical element differences between emeralds, including ones mined in close proximity to one another. American gemologist David Cronin and his colleagues have extensively examined the chemical signatures of emeralds resulting from fluid dynamics and subtle precipitation mechanisms, and their research demonstrated the chemical homogeneity of emeralds from the same mining location and the statistical differences that exist between emeralds from different mining locations, including those between the three locations: Muzo, Coscuez, and Chivor, in Colombia, South America.\nSynthetic emerald.\nBoth hydrothermal and \"flux-growth\" synthetics have been produced, and a method has been developed for producing an emerald overgrowth on colorless beryl. The first commercially successful emerald synthesis process was that of Carroll Chatham, likely involving a lithium vanadate flux process, as Chatham's emeralds do not have any water and contain traces of vanadate, molybdenum and vanadium. The other large producer of flux emeralds was Pierre Gilson Sr., whose products have been on the market since 1964. Gilson's emeralds are usually grown on natural colorless beryl seeds, which are coated on both sides. Growth occurs at the rate of 1\u00a0mm per month, a typical seven-month growth run produces emerald crystals 7\u00a0mm thick.\nHydrothermal synthetic emeralds have been attributed to IG Farben, Nacken, Tairus, and others, but the first satisfactory commercial product was that of Johann Lechleitner of Innsbruck, Austria, which appeared on the market in the 1960s. These stones were initially sold under the names \"Emerita\" and \"Esmeralda\", and they were grown as a thin layer of emerald on top of natural colorless beryl stones. Later, from 1965 to 1970, the Linde Division of Union Carbide produced completely synthetic emeralds by hydrothermal synthesis. According to their patents (attributable to E.M. Flanigen), acidic conditions are essential to prevent the chromium (which is used as the colorant) from precipitating. Also, it is important that the silicon-containing nutrient be kept away from the other ingredients to prevent nucleation and confine growth to the seed crystals. Growth occurs by a diffusion-reaction process, assisted by convection. The largest producer of hydrothermal emeralds today is Tairus, which has succeeded in synthesizing emeralds with chemical composition similar to emeralds in alkaline deposits in Colombia, and whose products are thus known as \"Colombian created emeralds\" or \"Tairus created emeralds\". Luminescence in ultraviolet light is considered a supplementary test when making a natural versus synthetic determination, as many, but not all, natural emeralds are inert to ultraviolet light. Many synthetics are also UV inert.\nSynthetic emeralds are often referred to as \"created\", as their chemical and gemological composition is the same as their natural counterparts. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has very strict regulations as to what can and what cannot be called a \"synthetic\" stone. The FTC says: \"\u00a7\u00a023.23(c) It is unfair or deceptive to use the word \"laboratory-grown\", \"laboratory-created\", \"[manufacturer name]-created\", or \"synthetic\" with the name of any natural stone to describe any industry product unless such industry product has essentially the same optical, physical, and chemical properties as the stone named.\"\nHistorical and cultural references.\nThe virtue of the Emerald is to counteract poison. They say that if a venomous animal should look at it, it will become blinded. The gem also acts as a preservative against epilepsy; it cures leprosy, strengthens sight and memory, checks copulation, during which act it will break, if worn at the time on the finger.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10046", "revid": "2807487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10046", "title": "Erie Canal", "text": "Waterway in upstate New York, U.S.\nThe Erie Canal is a historic canal in upstate New York that runs east\u2013west between the Hudson River and Lake Erie. Completed in 1825, the canal was the first navigable waterway connecting the Atlantic Ocean to the upper Great Lakes above Niagara Falls, vastly reducing the costs of transporting people and goods across the Appalachians. The Erie Canal accelerated the settlement of the Great Lakes region, the westward expansion of the United States, and the economic ascendancy of New York state.\nA canal from the Hudson River to the Great Lakes was first proposed in the 1780s, but a formal survey was not conducted until 1808. The New York State Legislature authorized construction in 1817. Political opponents of the canal (referencing its lead supporter New York Governor DeWitt Clinton) denigrated the project as \"Clinton's Folly\" and \"Clinton's Big Ditch\". Nonetheless, the canal saw quick success upon opening on October 26, 1825, with toll revenue covering the state's construction debt within the first year of operation. The westward connection gave New York City a strong advantage over all other US ports and brought major growth to canal cities such as Albany, Utica, Syracuse, Rochester, and Buffalo.\nThe construction of the Erie Canal was a landmark civil engineering achievement in the early history of the United States. When built, the canal was the second-longest in the world after the Grand Canal in China. Initially wide and deep, the canal was expanded several times, most notably from 1905 to 1918 when the \"Barge Canal\" was built and over half the original route was abandoned. The modern canal measures long, wide, and deep. It has 35 locks, including the Waterford Flight, the steepest locks in the United States. When leaving the canal, boats must also traverse the Black Rock Lock to reach Lake Erie or the Troy Federal Lock to reach the tidal Hudson. The overall elevation difference is about .\nThe Erie's peak year was 1855, when 33,000 commercial shipments took place. It continued to be competitive with railroads until about 1902, when tolls were abolished. Commercial traffic declined heavily in the latter half of the 20th century due to competition from trucking via the newly developed Interstate Highway System and the 1959 opening of the larger St. Lawrence Seaway. The canal's last regularly scheduled hauler, the \"Day Peckinpaugh\", ended service in 1994.\nToday, the Erie Canal is mainly used by recreational watercraft. It connects the three other canals in the New York State Canal System: the Champlain, Oswego, and Cayuga\u2013Seneca. Some long-distance boaters take the Erie as part of the Great Loop. The canal has also become a tourist attraction in its own right\u2014numerous parks and museums are dedicated to its history. The New York State Canalway Trail is a popular cycling path that follows the canal across the state. In 2000, Congress designated the Erie Canalway National Heritage Corridor to protect and promote the system.\nAmbiguity in name.\nThe waterway today referred to as the Erie Canal is quite different from the nineteenth-century Erie Canal. More than half of the original Erie Canal was destroyed or abandoned during construction of the New York State Barge Canal in the early 20th century. The sections of the original route remaining in use were widened significantly, mostly west of Syracuse, with bridges rebuilt and locks replaced. It was called the Barge Canal at the time, but that name fell into disuse with the disappearance of commercial traffic and the increase of recreational travel in the later 20th century.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nBefore railroads, water transport was the most cost-effective way to ship bulk goods. A mule can only carry about but can draw a barge weighing as much as along a towpath. In total, a canal could cut transport costs by about 95 percent.\nIn the early years of the United States, transportation of goods between the coastal ports and the interior was slow and difficult. Close to the seacoast, rivers provided easy inland transport up to the fall line, since floating vessels encounter much less friction than land vehicles. However, the Appalachian Mountains were a great obstacle to further transportation or settlement, stretching from Maine to Alabama, with just five places where mule trains or wagon roads could be routed. Passengers and freight bound for the western parts of the country had to travel overland, a journey made more difficult by the rough condition of the roads. In 1800, it typically took 2\u00bd weeks to travel overland from New York to Cleveland, Ohio, () and 4 weeks to Detroit ().\nThe principal exportable product of the Ohio Valley was grain, which was a high-volume, low-priced commodity, bolstered by supplies from the coast. Frequently it was not worth the cost of transporting it to far-away population centers. This was a factor leading to farmers in the west turning their grains into whiskey for easier transport and higher sales, and later the Whiskey Rebellion. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, it became clear to coastal residents that the city or state that succeeded in developing a cheap, reliable route to the West would enjoy economic success, and the port at the seaward end of such a route would see business increase greatly. In time, projects were devised in Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and relatively deep into the coastal states.\nTopography.\nThe Mohawk River (a tributary of the Hudson River) rises near Lake Ontario and runs in a glacial meltwater channel just north of the Catskill range of the Appalachian Mountains, separating them from the geologically distinct Adirondacks to the north. The Mohawk and Hudson valleys form the only cut across the Appalachians north of Alabama. A navigable canal through the Mohawk Valley would allow an almost complete water route from New York City in the south to Lake Ontario and Lake Erie in the west. Via the canal and these lakes, other Great Lakes, and to a lesser degree, related rivers, a large part of the continent's interior (and many settlements) would be made well connected to the Eastern seaboard.\nConception.\nAmong the first attempts made by European colonists to improve upon the future state's navigable waterways was the construction in 1702 of the Wood Creek Carry, or Oneida Carry, a short portage road connecting Wood Creek to the Mohawk River near modern-day Rome, New York. However, the first documented instance of the idea of a canal to tie the East Coast to the new western settlements via New York's waterways was discussed as early as 1724: New York provincial official Cadwallader Colden made a passing reference (in a report on fur trading) to improving the natural waterways of western New York. Colden and subsequent figures in the history of the Erie Canal and its development would draw inspiration from other great works of the so-called \"canal age,\" including France's Canal du Midi and the Bridgewater Canal in England. The attempt in the 1780s by George Washington to build a canal from the tidewaters of the Potomac into the fledgling nation's interior was also well known to the planners of the Erie Canal.\nGouverneur Morris and Elkanah Watson were early proponents of a canal along the Mohawk River. Their efforts led to the creation of the \"Western and Northern Inland Lock Navigation Companies\" in 1792, which took the first steps to improve navigation on the Mohawk and construct a canal between the Mohawk and Lake Ontario, but it was soon discovered that private financing was insufficient. Christopher Colles, who was familiar with the Bridgewater Canal, surveyed the Mohawk Valley, and made a presentation to the New York state legislature in 1784, proposing a shorter canal from Lake Ontario. The proposal drew attention and some action but was never implemented.\nJesse Hawley had envisioned encouraging the growing of large quantities of grain on the western New York plains (then largely unsettled) for sale on the Eastern seaboard. However, he went bankrupt trying to ship grain to the coast. While in Canandaigua debtors' prison, Hawley began pressing for the construction of a canal along the Mohawk River valley. Support for a canal also came from Joseph Ellicott (agent for the Holland Land Company in Batavia). Ellicott realized that a canal would add value to the land he was selling in the western part of the state and served as one of the original Canal Commissioners.\nNew York legislators became interested in the possibility of building a canal across New York in the first decade of the 19th century. Shipping goods west from Albany was a costly and tedious affair; there was no railroad yet, and to cover the distance from Buffalo to New York City by stagecoach took two weeks. The problem was that the land rises about from the Hudson to Lake Erie. Locks at the time could handle up to of lift, so even with the heftiest cuttings and viaducts, fifty locks would be required along the canal. Such a canal would be expensive to build even with modern technology; in 1800, the expense was barely imaginable. President Thomas Jefferson called it \"little short of madness\" and rejected it.\nEventually, Hawley interested New York Governor DeWitt Clinton in the project. There was much opposition, and the project was ridiculed as \"Clinton's folly\" and \"Clinton's ditch\". In 1817, though, Clinton received approval from the legislature for $7 million for construction.\nConstruction.\nThe original canal was long, from Albany on the Hudson to Buffalo on Lake Erie. The channel was cut wide and deep, with removed soil piled on the downhill side to form a walkway known as a towpath. Its construction, through limestone and mountains, proved a daunting task. To move earth, animals pulled a \"slip scraper\" (similar to a bulldozer). The sides of the canal were lined with stone set in clay, and the bottom was also lined with clay. The Canal was built by Irish laborers and German stonemasons. All labor on the canal depended upon human and animal power or the force of water. Engineering techniques developed during its construction included the building of aqueducts to redirect water; one aqueduct was long to span of river. As the canal progressed, the crews and engineers working on the project developed expertise and became a skilled labor force.\nThe men who planned and oversaw construction were novices as surveyors and as engineers. There were no civil engineers in the United States. James Geddes and Benjamin Wright, who laid out the route, were judges whose experience in surveying was in settling boundary disputes. Geddes had only used a surveying instrument for a few hours before his work on the Canal. Canvass White was a 27-year-old amateur engineer who persuaded Clinton to let him go to Britain at his own expense to study the canal system there. Nathan Roberts was a mathematics teacher and land speculator. Yet these men \"carried the Erie Canal up the Niagara escarpment at Lockport, maneuvered it onto a towering embankment to cross over Irondequoit Creek, spanned the Genesee River on an awesome aqueduct, and carved a route for it out of the solid rock between Little Falls and Schenectady\u2014and all of those venturesome designs worked precisely as planned\".\nConstruction began on July 4, 1817, at Rome, New York. The first , from Rome to Utica, opened in 1819. At that rate, the canal would not be finished for 30 years. The main delays were caused by felling trees to clear a path through virgin forest and moving excavated soil, which took longer than expected, but the builders devised ways to solve these problems. To fell a tree, they threw rope over the top branches and winched it down. They pulled out the stumps with an innovative stump puller. Two huge wheels were mounted loose on the ends of an axle. A third wheel, slightly smaller than the others, was fixed to the center of the axle. A chain was wrapped around the axle and hooked to the stump. A rope was wrapped around the center wheel and hooked to a team of oxen. The mechanical advantage (torque) obtained ripped the stumps out of the soil. Soil to be moved was shoveled into large wheelbarrows that were dumped into mule-pulled carts. Using a scraper and a plow, a three-man team with oxen, horses and mules could build a mile in a year.\nThe remaining problem was finding labor; increased immigration helped fill the need. Many of the laborers working on the canal were Irish, who had recently come to the United States as a group of about 5,000. Most of them were Roman Catholic, a religion that raised much suspicion in early America because of its hierarchic structure, and many laborers on the canal suffered violent assault as the result of misjudgment and xenophobia.\nConstruction continued at an increased rate as new workers arrived. When the canal reached Montezuma Marsh (at the outlet of Cayuga Lake west of Syracuse), it was rumored that over 1,000 workers died of \"swamp fever\" (malaria), and construction was temporarily stopped. However, recent research has revealed that the death toll was likely much lower, as no contemporary reports mention significant worker mortality, and mass graves from the period have never been found in the area. Work continued on the downhill side towards the Hudson, and the crews worked on the section across the swampland when it froze in winter.\nThe middle section from Utica to Salina (Syracuse) was completed in 1820, and traffic on that section started up immediately. Expansion to the east and west proceeded simultaneously, and the whole eastern section, from Brockport to Albany, opened on September 10, 1823, to great fanfare. The Champlain Canal, a separate but connected north\u2013south route from Watervliet on the Hudson to Lake Champlain, opened on the same date.\nAfter Montezuma Marsh, the next difficulties were crossing Irondequoit Creek and the Genesee River near Rochester. The former ultimately required building the long \"Great Embankment\", to carry the canal at a height of above the level of the creek, which ran through a culvert underneath. The canal crossed the river on a stone aqueduct, long and wide, supported by 11 arches.\nIn 1823 construction reached the Niagara Escarpment, an wall of hard dolomitic limestone. The route followed the channel of a creek that had cut a ravine steeply down the escarpment. The construction and operation of two sets of five locks along a corridor soon gave rise to the community of Lockport. The lift-locks had a total lift of , exiting into a deeply cut channel. The final leg had to be cut deep through another limestone mass, the Onondaga ridge. Much of that section was blasted with black powder, and the inexperience of the crews often led to accidents, and sometimes to rocks falling on nearby homes.\nTwo villages competed to be the terminus: Black Rock, on the Niagara River, and Buffalo, at the eastern tip of Lake Erie. Buffalo expended great energy to widen and deepen Buffalo Creek to make it navigable and to create a harbor at its mouth. Buffalo won over Black Rock, and grew into a large city, eventually annexing its former rival.\nCompletion.\nIn 1824, before the canal was completed, a detailed \"Pocket Guide for the Tourist and Traveler, Along the Line of the Canals, and the Interior Commerce of the State of New York\", was published for the benefit of travelers and land speculators.\nThe entire canal was officially completed on October 26, 1825. The event was marked by a statewide \"Grand Celebration\", culminating in a series of cannon shots along the length of the canal and the Hudson, a 90-minute cannonade from Buffalo to New York City. A flotilla of boats, led by Governor Dewitt Clinton aboard \"Seneca Chief\", sailed from Buffalo to New York City over ten days. Clinton then ceremonially poured Lake Erie water into New York Harbor to mark the \"Wedding of the Waters\". On its return trip, \"Seneca Chief\" brought back a keg of Atlantic Ocean water, which was poured into Lake Erie by Buffalo's Judge Samuel Wilkeson, who would later become mayor.\nThe Erie Canal was thus completed in eight years at a total length of and cost $7.143 million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). It was acclaimed as an engineering marvel that united the country and helped New York City develop as an international trade center.\nProblems developed but were quickly solved. Leaks developed along the entire length of the canal, but these were sealed using cement that hardened underwater (hydraulic cement). Erosion on the clay bottom proved to be a problem and the speed was limited to .\nBranch canals.\nAdditional feeder canals soon extended the Erie Canal into a system. These included the Cayuga-Seneca Canal south to the Finger Lakes, the Oswego Canal from Three Rivers north to Lake Ontario at Oswego, and the Champlain Canal from Troy north to Lake Champlain. From 1833 to 1877, the short Crooked Lake Canal connected Keuka Lake and Seneca Lake. The Chemung Canal connected the south end of Seneca Lake to Elmira in 1833, and was an important route for Pennsylvania coal and timber into the canal system. The Chenango Canal in 1836 connected the Erie Canal at Utica to Binghamton and caused a business boom in the Chenango River valley. The Chenango and Chemung canals linked the Erie with the Susquehanna River system. The Black River Canal connected the Black River to the Erie Canal at Rome and remained in operation until the 1920s. The Genesee Valley Canal was run along the Genesee River to connect with the Allegheny River at Olean, but the Allegheny section, which would have connected to the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, was never built. The Genesee Valley Canal was later abandoned and became the route of the Genesee Valley Canal Railroad.\nFirst enlargement.\nThe original design planned for an annual tonnage of 1.5 million tons (1.36 million metric tons), but this was exceeded immediately. Such high levels of traffic along the canal caused increasing deterioration of the canal walls, requiring maintenance and improvement. Around 1833, many locks and aqueducts were found to be in need of replacing. An ambitious program to improve the canal began in 1834, partially as a result of the need for repairs to infrastructure, but mostly because of extreme crowding particularly on the eastern portion of the canal. During this massive series of construction projects, known as the First Enlargement, the canal was widened from and deepened from . Locks were widened, doubled, or rebuilt in new locations, and many new navigable aqueducts were constructed. The canal was straightened and slightly re-routed in some stretches, resulting in the abandonment of short segments of the original 1825 canal. The First Enlargement was declared to be completed in 1862 after economic struggles, with further minor enlargements in later decades.\nRailroad competition.\nThe Mohawk and Hudson Railroad opened in 1837, providing a bypass to the slowest part of the canal between Albany and Schenectady. Other railroads were soon chartered and built to continue the line west to Buffalo, and in 1842 a continuous line (which later became the New York Central Railroad and its Auburn Road in 1853) was open the whole way to Buffalo. As the railroad served the same general route as the canal, but provided for faster travel, passengers soon switched to it. However, as late as 1852, the canal carried thirteen times more freight tonnage than all the railroads in New York State combined. The New York, West Shore and Buffalo Railway was completed in 1884, as a route running closely parallel to both the canal and the New York Central Railroad. However, it went bankrupt and was acquired the next year by the New York Central.\nIn 1880s, the canal was struggling to remain competitive with the railroads. The NY State Legislature passed an amendment to the state constitution allowing for the end of toll on the canal in 1881 and 1882. In 1882, the amendment was approved by voters, and on January 1, 1883, the new amendment went into effect, ending the charging of tolls along the NY State canals.\nBarge Canal.\nIn a November 3, 1903 referendum, a majority of New Yorkers authorized an expansion of the canal at a cost of $101,000,000.\nIn 1905, construction of the New York State Barge Canal began, which was completed in 1918, at a cost of $96.7 million.\nThis new canal replaced much of the original route, leaving many abandoned sections (most notably between Syracuse and Rome). New digging and flood control technologies allowed engineers to canalize rivers that the original canal had sought to avoid, such as the Mohawk, Seneca, and Clyde rivers, and Oneida Lake. In sections that did not consist of canalized rivers (particularly between Rochester and Buffalo), the original Erie Canal channel was enlarged to wide and deep. The expansion allowed barges up to to use the Canal. The new Barge Canal required boats to be propelled by tugs or other mechanical means, as there was no longer a towpath along the system for animal power to tow barges. This expensive expansion project was politically unpopular in parts of the state not served by the canal. Following the opening of the barge canal, there was a resurgence in use for some industries and commercial shipping along the system peaked in 1951.\nCommercial decline.\nFreight traffic reached a total of 5.2 million short tons (4.7 million metric tons) by 1951. The growth of railroads and highways across the state, and the opening of the St. Lawrence Seaway in 1959, caused commercial traffic on the canal to decline dramatically during the second half of the 20th century. Since the 1990s, the canal system has been used primarily by recreational traffic.\nNew York State Canal System.\nIn 1992, the New York State Barge Canal was renamed the New York State Canal System (including the Erie, Cayuga-Seneca, Oswego, and Champlain canals) and placed under the newly created New York State Canal Corporation, a subsidiary of the New York State Thruway Authority. While part of the Thruway, the canal system was operated using money generated by Thruway tolls. In 2017, the New York State Canal Corporation was transferred from the New York State Thruway to the New York Power Authority.\nIn 2000, Congress designated the Erie Canalway National Heritage Corridor, covering of navigable water from Lake Champlain to the Capital Region and west to Buffalo. The area has a population of 2.7 million; about 75% of Central and Western New York's population lives within of the Erie Canal.\nThere were some 42 commercial shipments on the canal in 2008, compared to 15 such shipments in 2007 and more than 33,000 shipments in 1855, the canal's peak year. The new growth in commercial traffic is due to the rising cost of diesel fuel. Canal barges can carry a short ton of cargo on one gallon of diesel fuel, while a gallon allows a train to haul the same amount of cargo and a truck . Canal barges can carry loads up to , and are used to transport objects that would be too large for road or rail shipment. In 2012, the New York State Canal System as a whole was used to ship 42,000 tons of cargo.\nRoute.\nOriginal Canal.\nThe Erie made use of the favorable conditions of New York's unique topography, which provided that area with the only break in the Appalachians south of the St. Lawrence River. The Hudson is tidal to Troy, and Albany is west of the Appalachians. It allowed for east\u2013west navigation from the coast to the Great Lakes within US territory.\nThe canal began on the west side of the Hudson River at Albany, and ran north to Watervliet, where the Champlain Canal branched off. At Cohoes, it climbed the escarpment on the west side of the Hudson River\u201416 locks rising \u2014and then turned west along the south shore of the Mohawk River, crossing to the north side at Crescent and again to the south at Rexford. The canal continued west near the south shore of the Mohawk River all the way to Rome, where the Mohawk turns north.\nAt Rome, the canal continued west parallel to Wood Creek, which flows westward into Oneida Lake, and turned southwest and west cross-country to avoid the lake. From Canastota west, it ran roughly along the north (lower) edge of the Onondaga Escarpment, passing through Syracuse, Onondaga Lake, and Rochester. Before reaching Rochester, the canal uses a series of natural ridges to cross the deep valley of Irondequoit Creek. At Lockport the canal turned southwest to rise to the top of the Niagara Escarpment, using the ravine of Eighteen Mile Creek.\nThe canal continued south-southwest to Pendleton, where it turned west and southwest, mainly using the channel of Tonawanda Creek. From the Tonawanda south toward Buffalo, it ran just east of the Niagara River, where it reached its \"Western Terminus\" at Little Buffalo Creek (later it became the Commercial Slip), which discharged into the Buffalo River just above its confluence with Lake Erie. With Buffalo's re-excavation of the Commercial Slip, completed in 2008, the Canal's original terminus is now re-watered and again accessible by boats. With several miles of the Canal inland of this location still lying under 20th-century fill and urban construction, the effective western navigable terminus of the Erie Canal is found at Tonawanda.\nBarge Canal.\nThe new alignment began on the Hudson River at the border between Cohoes and Waterford, where it ran northwest with five locks (the so-called \"Waterford Flight\"), running into the Mohawk River east of Crescent. The Waterford Flight is claimed to be one of the steepest series of locks in the world.\nWhile the old Canal ran next to the Mohawk all the way to Rome, the new canal ran through the river, which was straightened or widened where necessary. At Ilion, the new canal left the river for good, but continued to run on a new alignment parallel to both the river and the old canal to Rome. From Rome, the new route continued almost due west, merging with Fish Creek just east of its entry into Oneida Lake.\nFrom Oneida Lake, the new canal ran west along the Oneida River, with cutoffs to shorten the route. At Three Rivers, the Oneida River turns northwest, and was deepened for the Oswego Canal to Lake Ontario. The new Erie Canal turned south there along the Seneca River, which turns west near Syracuse and continues west to a point in the Montezuma Marsh. There the Cayuga and Seneca Canal continued south with the Seneca River, and the new Erie Canal again ran parallel to the old canal along the bottom of the Niagara Escarpment, in some places running along the Clyde River, and in some places replacing the old canal. At Pittsford, southeast of Rochester, the canal turned west to run around the south side of Rochester, rather than through downtown. The canal crosses the Genesee River at the Genesee Valley Park, then rejoins the old path near North Gates.\nFrom there it was again roughly an upgrade to the original canal, running west to Lockport. This reach of from Henrietta to Lockport is called \"the 60\u2011mile level\" since there are no locks and the water level rises only over the entire segment. Diversions from and to adjacent natural streams along the way are used to maintain the canal's level. It runs southwest to Tonawanda, where the new alignment discharges into the Niagara River, which is navigable upstream to the New York Barge Canal's Black Rock Lock and thence to the Canal's original \"Western Terminus\" at Buffalo's Inner Harbor.\nOperations.\nFreight boats.\nCanal boats up to in draft were pulled by horses and mules walking on the towpath. The canal had one towpath, generally on the north side. When canal boats met, the boat with the right of way remained on the towpath side of the canal. The other boat steered toward the berm (or heelpath) side of the canal. The driver (or \"hoggee\", pronounced HO-gee) of the privileged boat kept his towpath team by the canalside edge of the towpath, while the hoggee of the other boat moved to the outside of the towpath and stopped his team. His towline would be unhitched from the horses, go slack, fall into the water and sink to the bottom, while his boat coasted with its remaining momentum. The privileged boat's team would step over the other boat's towline, with its horses pulling the boat over the sunken towline without stopping. Once clear, the other boat's team would continue on its way.\nPulled by teams of horses, canal boats moved slowly, but methodically, shrinking time and distance. Efficiently, the smooth, nonstop method of transportation cut the travel time between Albany and Buffalo nearly in half, moving by day and by night. Migrants took passage on freight boats, camping on deck or on top of crates.\nPassenger boats.\nPacket boats, serving passengers exclusively, reached speeds of up to and ran at much more frequent intervals than the cramped, bumpy stagecoach wagons. These boats, measuring up to long and wide, made ingenious use of space, accommodating up to 40 passengers at night and up to three times as many in the daytime. The best examples, furnished with carpeted floors, stuffed chairs, and mahogany tables stocked with books and current newspapers, served as sitting rooms during the days. At mealtimes, crews transformed the cabin into a dining room. Drawing a curtain across the width of the room divided the cabin into ladies' and gentlemen's sleeping quarters at night. Pull-down tiered beds folded from the walls, and additional cots could be hung from hooks in the ceiling. Some captains hired musicians and held dances.\nSunday closing debate.\nIn 1858, the New York State Legislature debated closing the locks of the Erie Canal on Sundays. However, George Jeremiah and Dwight Bacheller, two of the bill's opponents, argued that the state had no right to stop canal traffic on the grounds that the Erie Canal and its tributaries had ceased to be wards of the state. The canal at its inception had been imagined as an extension of nature, an artificial river where there had been none. The canal succeeded by sharing more in common with lakes and seas than it had with public roads. Jeremiah and Bacheller argued, successfully, that just as it was unthinkable to halt oceangoing navigation on Sunday, so it was with the canal.\nImpact.\nEconomic impact.\nThe Erie Canal greatly lowered the cost of shipping between the Midwest and the Northeast, bringing much lower food costs to Eastern cities and allowing the East to ship machinery and manufactured goods to the Midwest more economically. To give an example, the cost to transport a barrel of flour from Rochester to Albany dropped from $3 (before the canal) to 75\u00a2 on the canal. The canal also made an immense contribution to the wealth and importance of New York City, Buffalo and New York State. Its impact went much further, increasing trade throughout the nation by opening eastern and overseas markets to Midwestern farm products and by enabling migration to the West. The port of New York became essentially the Atlantic home port for all of the Midwest. Because of this vital connection and others to follow, such as the railroads, New York would become known as the \"Empire State\" or \"the great Empire State\".\nThe Erie Canal was an immediate success. Tolls collected on freight had already exceeded the state's construction debt in its first year of official operation. By 1828, import duties collected at the New York Customs House supported federal government operations and provided funds for all the expenses in Washington except the interest on the national debt. Additionally, New York State's initial loan for the original canal had been paid by 1837. Although it had been envisioned as primarily a commercial channel for freight boats, passengers also traveled on the canal's packet boats. In 1825 more than 40,000 passengers took advantage of the convenience and beauty of canal travel. The canal's steady flow of tourists, businessmen and settlers lent it to uses never imagined by its initial sponsors. Evangelical preachers made their circuits of the upstate region, and the canal served as the last leg of the Underground Railroad ferrying freedom seekers to Buffalo near the Canada\u2013US border. Aspiring merchants found that tourists were reliable customers. Vendors moved from boat to boat peddling items such as books, watches and fruit, while less scrupulous \"confidence men\" sold remedies for foot corns or passed off counterfeit bills. Tourists were carried along the \"northern tour,\" which ultimately led to the popular honeymoon destination Niagara Falls, just north of Buffalo.\nAs the canal brought travelers to New York City, it took business away from other ports such as Philadelphia and Baltimore. Those cities and their states started projects to compete with the Erie Canal. In Pennsylvania, the Main Line of Public Works was a combined canal and railroad running west from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh on the Ohio River, opened in 1834. In Maryland, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ran west to Wheeling, West Virginia, then a part of Virginia, also on the Ohio River, and was completed in 1853.\nThe canal played a major role in the growth of Standard Oil, as founder John D. Rockefeller used the canal as a cheaper form of transportation \u2013 in the summer months when it was not frozen \u2013 to get his refined oil from Cleveland to New York City. In the winter months his only options were the three trunk lines: the Erie Railroad, the New York Central Railroad, or the Pennsylvania Railroad.\nMigratory impact.\nNew ethnic Irish communities formed in some towns along its route after completion, as Irish immigrants were a large portion of the construction labor force. A plaque honoring the canal's construction is located in Battery Park in southern Manhattan.\nBecause so many immigrants traveled on the canal, many genealogists have sought copies of canal passenger lists. Apart from the years 1827\u20131829, canal boat operators were not required to record passenger names or report them to the New York government. Some passenger lists survive today in the New York State Archives, and other sources of traveler information are sometimes available.\nThe canal allowed Buffalo to grow from just 200 settlers in 1820 to more than 18,000 people by 1840. Immense population growth was seen across the Upstate NY cities that touched the Erie Canal within the first decade after the waterway's 1825 opening, including Albany, Syracuse, Rochester, and Lockport.\nCultural impact.\nThe Canal also helped bind the still-new nation closer to Britain and Europe. Repeal of Britain's Corn Law resulted in a huge increase in exports of Midwestern wheat to Britain. Trade between the United States and Canada also increased as a result of the repeal and a reciprocity (free-trade) agreement signed in 1854. Much of this trade flowed along the Erie.\nIts success also prompted imitation: a rash of canal-building followed. Also, the many technical hurdles that had to be overcome made heroes of those whose innovations made the canal possible. This led to an increased public esteem for practical education. Chicago, among other Great Lakes cities, recognized the importance of the canal to its economy, and two West Loop streets are named \"Canal\" and \"Clinton\" (for canal proponent DeWitt Clinton).\nConcern that erosion caused by logging in the Adirondacks could silt up the canal contributed to the creation in 1885 of another New York National Historic Landmark, the Adirondack Park.\nMany notable authors wrote about the canal, including Herman Melville, Frances Trollope, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Mark Twain, Samuel Hopkins Adams and the Marquis de Lafayette, and many tales and songs were written about life on the canal. The popular song \"Low Bridge, Everybody Down\" by Thomas S. Allen was written in 1905 to memorialize the canal's early heyday, when barges were pulled by mules rather than engines.\nConsisting of a massive stone aqueduct that carried boats over incredible cascades, Little Falls was one of the most popular stops for American and foreign tourists. This is shown in Scene 4 of William Dunlap's play \"A Trip to Niagara\", where he depicts the general preference of tourists to travel by canal so that they could experience a combination of artificial and natural sights. Canal travel was, for many, an opportunity to take in the sublime and commune with nature. The play also reflects the less enthusiastic view of some who saw movement on the canal as tedious.\nThe Erie Canal changed property law in New York. Most importantly, it expanded the government's right to take private property. Cases surrounding the newly built Erie Canal expanded condemnation theory to permit canal builders to appropriate private land and broadened the meaning of \"public use\" in the 5th Amendment to the US Constitution. The canal also had an impact on water access jurisprudence as well as nuisance law.\nThe canal today.\nToday, the Erie Canal is used primarily by recreational vessels, though it remains served by several commercial barge-towing companies.\nThe canal is open to small craft and some larger vessels from May through November each year. During winter, water is drained from parts of the canal for maintenance. The Champlain Canal, Lake Champlain, and the Chambly Canal, and Richelieu River in Canada form the Lakes to Locks Passage, making a tourist attraction of the former waterway linking eastern Canada to the Erie Canal. In 2006 recreational boating fees were suspended to attract more visitors.\nThe Erie Canal is a destination for tourists from all over the world, and has inspired guidebooks dedicated to exploration of the waterway. An Erie Canal Cruise company, based in Herkimer, operates from mid-May until mid-October with daily cruises. The cruise goes through the history of the canal and also takes passengers through Lock 18.\nAside from transportation, numerous businesses, farms, factories and communities alongside its banks still utilize the canal's waters for other purposes such as irrigation for farmland, hydroelectricity, research, industry, and even drinking. Use of the canal system has an estimated total economic impact of $6.2 billion annually.\nOld Erie Canal.\nToday, the reconfiguration of the canal created during the First Enlargement is commonly referred to as the \"Improved Erie Canal\" or the \"Old Erie Canal\", to distinguish it from the canal's modern-day course. Existing remains of the 1825 canal abandoned during the Enlargement are officially referred to today as \"Clinton's Ditch\" (which was also the popular nickname for the entire Erie Canal project during its original 1817\u20131825 construction).\nSections of the Old Erie Canal not used after 1918 are owned by New York State, or have been ceded to or purchased by counties or municipalities. Many stretches of the old canal have been filled in to create roads such as Erie Boulevard in Syracuse and Schenectady, and Broad Street and the Rochester Subway in Rochester. A 36\u2011mile (58\u00a0km) stretch of the old canal from the town of DeWitt, New York, east of Syracuse, to just outside Rome, New York, is preserved as the Old Erie Canal State Historic Park. In 1960 the Schoharie Crossing State Historic Site, a section of the canal in Montgomery County, was one of the first sites recognized as a National Historic Landmark.\nSome municipalities have preserved sections as town or county canal parks, or have plans to do so. Camillus Erie Canal Park preserves a stretch and has restored Nine Mile Creek Aqueduct, built in 1841 as part of the First Enlargement of the canal. In some communities, the old canal has refilled with overgrowth and debris. Proposals have been made to rehydrate the old canal through downtown Rochester or Syracuse as a tourist attraction. In Syracuse, the location of the old canal is represented by a reflecting pool in downtown's Clinton Square and the downtown hosts a canal barge and weigh lock structure, now dry. Buffalo's Commercial Slip is the restored and re-watered segment of the canal which formed its \"Western Terminus\".\nIn 2004, the administration of New York Governor George Pataki was criticized when officials of New York State Canal Corporation attempted to sell private development rights to large stretches of the Old Erie Canal to a single developer for $30,000, far less than the land was worth on the open market. After an investigation by the \"Syracuse Post-Standard\" newspaper, the Pataki administration nullified the deal.\nParks and museums.\nParks and museums related to the Old Erie Canal include (listed from east to west):\nRecords and research.\nRecords of the planning, funding, design, construction, and administration of the Erie Canal are vast and can be found in the New York State Archives. Except for two years (1827\u20131829), the State of New York did not require canal boat operators to maintain or submit passenger lists.\nLocks.\nThe following list of locks is provided for the current canal, from east to west. There are a total of 36 (35 numbered) locks on the Erie Canal.\nAll locks on the New York State Canal System are single-chamber; the dimensions are long and wide with a minimum depth of water over the miter sills at the upstream gates upon lift. They can accommodate a vessel up to long and wide. Overall sidewall height will vary by lock, ranging between depending on the lift and navigable stages. Lock E17 at Little Falls has the tallest sidewall height at .\nDistance is based on position markers from an interactive canal map provided online by the New York State Canal Corporation and may not exactly match specifications on signs posted along the canal. Mean surface elevations are comprised from a combination of older canal profiles and history books as well as specifications on signs posted along the canal. The margin of error should normally be within .\nThe Waterford Flight series of locks (comprising Locks E2 through E6) is one of the steepest in the world, lifting boats in less than .\n\"All surface elevations are approximate.\"\nThere is a natural rise between locks E33 and E34 as well as a natural rise between Lock E35 and the Niagara River.\nThere is no Lock E1 or Lock E31 on the Erie Canal. The place of \"Lock E1\" on the passage from the lower Hudson River to Lake Erie is taken by the Troy Federal Lock, located just north of Troy, New York, and is not part of the Erie Canal System proper. It is operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The Erie Canal officially begins at the confluence of the Hudson and Mohawk rivers at Waterford, New York.\nAlthough the original alignment of the Erie Canal through Buffalo has been filled in, travel by water is still possible from Buffalo via the Black Rock Lock in the Niagara River to the canal's modern western terminus in Tonawanda, and eastward to Albany. The Black Rock Lock is operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.\nOneida Lake lies between locks E22 and E23, and has a mean surface elevation of . Lake Erie has a mean surface elevation of .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10048", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10048", "title": "Ethanol", "text": "Organic compound (CH3CH2OH)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nEthanol (also called ethyl alcohol, grain alcohol, drinking alcohol, or simply alcohol) is an organic compound with the chemical formula . It is an alcohol, with its formula also written as , or EtOH, where Et is the pseudoelement symbol for ethyl. Ethanol is a volatile, flammable, colorless liquid with a pungent taste. As a psychoactive depressant, it is the active ingredient in alcoholic beverages, and the second most consumed drug globally behind caffeine.\nEthanol is naturally produced by the fermentation process of sugars by yeasts or via petrochemical processes such as ethylene hydration. Historically it was used as a general anesthetic, and has modern medical applications as an antiseptic, disinfectant, solvent for some medications, and antidote for methanol poisoning and ethylene glycol poisoning. It is used as a chemical solvent and in the synthesis of organic compounds, and as a fuel source for lamps, stoves, and internal combustion engines. Ethanol also can be dehydrated to make ethylene, an important chemical feedstock. As of 2023, world production of ethanol fuel was , coming mostly from the U.S. (51%) and Brazil (26%).\nThe term \"ethanol\", originates from the ethyl group coined in 1834 and was officially adopted in 1892, while \"alcohol\"\u2014now referring broadly to similar compounds\u2014originally described a powdered cosmetic and only later came to mean ethanol specifically. Ethanol occurs naturally as a byproduct of yeast metabolism in environments like overripe fruit and palm blossoms, during plant germination under anaerobic conditions, in interstellar space, in human breath, and in rare cases, is produced internally due to auto-brewery syndrome.\nEthanol has been used since ancient times as an intoxicant. Production through fermentation and distillation evolved over centuries across various cultures. Chemical identification and synthetic production began by the 19th century.\nName.\n\"Ethanol\" is the systematic name defined by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry for a compound consisting of an alkyl group with two carbon atoms (prefix \"eth-\"), having a single bond between them (infix \"-an-\") and an attached \u2212OH functional group (suffix \"-ol\").\nThe \"eth-\" prefix and the qualifier \"ethyl\" in \"ethyl alcohol\" originally came from the name \"ethyl\" assigned in 1834 to the group C2H5\u2212 by Justus Liebig. He coined the word from the German name \"Aether\" of the compound C2H5\u2212O\u2212C2H5 (commonly called \"ether\" in English, more specifically called \"diethyl ether\"). According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", \"Ethyl\" is a contraction of the Ancient Greek \u03b1\u1f30\u03b8\u03ae\u03c1 (', \"upper air\") and the Greek word \u1f55\u03bb\u03b7 (', \"wood, raw material\", hence \"matter, substance\"). \"Ethanol\" was coined as a result of a resolution on naming alcohols and phenols that was adopted at the International Conference on Chemical Nomenclature that was held in April 1892 in Geneva, Switzerland.\nThe term \"alcohol\" now refers to a wider class of substances in chemistry nomenclature, but in common parlance it remains the name of ethanol. It is a medieval loan from Arabic \"al-ku\u1e25l\", a powdered ore of antimony used since antiquity as a cosmetic, and retained that meaning in Middle Latin. The use of 'alcohol' for ethanol (in full, \"alcohol of wine\") was first recorded in 1753. Before the late 18th century the term \"alcohol\" generally referred to any sublimated substance.\nUses.\nRecreational drug.\nAs a central nervous system depressant, ethanol is one of the most commonly consumed psychoactive drugs. Despite alcohol's psychoactive, addictive, and carcinogenic properties, it is readily available and legal for sale in many countries. There are laws regulating the sale, exportation/importation, taxation, manufacturing, consumption, and possession of alcoholic beverages. The most common regulations are excise, and prohibition for minors.\nIn mammals, ethanol is primarily metabolized in the liver and stomach by ADH enzymes. These enzymes catalyze the oxidation of ethanol into acetaldehyde (ethanal):\nCH3CH2OH + NAD+ \u2192 CH3CHO + NADH + H+\nWhen present in significant concentrations, this metabolism of ethanol is additionally aided by the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2E1 in humans, while trace amounts are also metabolized by catalase. The resulting intermediate, acetaldehyde, is a known carcinogen, and poses significantly greater toxicity in humans than ethanol itself. Many of the symptoms typically associated with alcohol intoxication\u2014as well as many of the health hazards typically associated with the long-term consumption of ethanol\u2014can be attributed to acetaldehyde toxicity in humans.\nThe subsequent oxidation of acetaldehyde into acetate is performed by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) enzymes. A mutation in the ALDH2 gene that encodes for an inactive or dysfunctional form of this enzyme affects roughly 50% of east Asian populations, contributing to the characteristic alcohol flush reaction that can cause temporary reddening of the skin as well as a number of related, and often unpleasant, symptoms of acetaldehyde toxicity. This mutation is typically accompanied by another mutation in the ADH enzyme ADH1B in roughly 80% of east Asians, which improves the catalytic efficiency of converting ethanol into acetaldehyde.\nMedical.\nEthanol is the oldest known sedative, used as an oral general anesthetic during surgery in ancient Mesopotamia and in medieval times. Mild intoxication starts at a blood alcohol concentration of 0.05% and induces anesthetic coma at 0.4%. This use carries the high risk of deadly alcohol intoxication, pulmonary aspiration and vomiting, which led to use of alternatives in antiquity, such as opium and cannabis, and later diethyl ether, starting in the 1840s.\nEthanol is used as an antiseptic in medical wipes and hand sanitizer gels for its bactericidal and anti-fungal effects. Ethanol kills microorganisms by dissolving their membrane lipid bilayer and denaturing their proteins, and is effective against most bacteria, fungi and viruses. It is ineffective against bacterial spores, which can be treated with hydrogen peroxide.\nA solution of 70% ethanol is more effective than pure ethanol because ethanol relies on water molecules for optimal antimicrobial activity. Absolute ethanol may inactivate microbes without destroying them because the alcohol is unable to fully permeate the microbe's membrane. Ethanol can also be used as a disinfectant and antiseptic by inducing cell dehydration through disruption of the osmotic balance across the cell membrane, causing water to leave the cell, leading to cell death.\nEthanol may be administered as an antidote to ethylene glycol poisoning and methanol poisoning. It does so by acting as a competitive inhibitor against methanol and ethylene glycol for alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH). Though it has more side effects, ethanol is less expensive and more readily available than fomepizole in the role.\nEthanol is used to dissolve many water-insoluble medications and related compounds. Liquid preparations of pain medications, cough and cold medicines, and mouth washes, for example, may contain up to 25% ethanol and may need to be avoided in individuals with adverse reactions to ethanol such as alcohol-induced respiratory reactions. Ethanol is present mainly as an antimicrobial preservative in over 700 liquid preparations of medicine including acetaminophen, iron supplements, ranitidine, furosemide, mannitol, phenobarbital, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and over-the-counter cough medicine.\nSome medicinal solutions of ethanol are also known as tinctures.\nEnergy source.\nThe largest single use of ethanol is as an engine fuel and fuel additive. Brazil in particular relies heavily upon the use of ethanol as an engine fuel, due in part to its role as one of the world's leading producers of ethanol. Gasoline sold in Brazil contains at least 25% anhydrous ethanol. Hydrous ethanol (about 95% ethanol and 5% water) can be used as fuel in more than 90% of new gasoline-fueled cars sold in the country.\nThe US and many other countries primarily use E10 (10% ethanol, sometimes known as gasohol) and E85 (85% ethanol) ethanol/gasoline mixtures. Over time, it is believed that a material portion of the \u2248 per year market for gasoline will begin to be replaced with fuel ethanol.\nAustralian law limits the use of pure ethanol from sugarcane waste to 10% in automobiles. Older cars (and vintage cars designed to use a slower burning fuel) should have the engine valves upgraded or replaced.\nAccording to an industry advocacy group, ethanol as a fuel reduces harmful tailpipe emissions of carbon monoxide, particulate matter, oxides of nitrogen, and other ozone-forming pollutants. Argonne National Laboratory analyzed greenhouse gas emissions of many different engine and fuel combinations, and found that biodiesel/petrodiesel blend (B20) showed a reduction of 8%, conventional E85 ethanol blend a reduction of 17% and cellulosic ethanol 64%, compared with pure gasoline. Ethanol has a much greater research octane number (RON) than gasoline, meaning it is less prone to pre-ignition, allowing for better ignition advance which means more torque, and efficiency in addition to the lower carbon emissions.\nEthanol combustion in an internal combustion engine yields many of the products of incomplete combustion produced by gasoline and significantly larger amounts of formaldehyde and related species such as acetaldehyde. This leads to a significantly larger photochemical reactivity and more ground level ozone. This data has been assembled into The Clean Fuels Report comparison of fuel emissions and show that ethanol exhaust generates 2.14\u00a0times as much ozone as gasoline exhaust. When this is added into the custom \"Localized Pollution Index\" of The Clean Fuels Report, the local pollution of ethanol (pollution that contributes to smog) is rated 1.7, where gasoline is 1.0 and higher numbers signify greater pollution. The California Air Resources Board formalized this issue in 2008 by recognizing control standards for formaldehydes as an emissions control group, much like the conventional NOx and reactive organic gases (ROGs).\nMore than 20% of Brazilian cars are able to use 100% ethanol as fuel, which includes ethanol-only engines and flex-fuel engines. Flex-fuel engines in Brazil are able to work with all ethanol, all gasoline or any mixture of both. In the United States, flex-fuel vehicles can run on 0% to 85% ethanol (15% gasoline) since higher ethanol blends are not yet allowed or efficient. Brazil supports this fleet of ethanol-burning automobiles with large national infrastructure that produces ethanol from domestically grown sugarcane.\nEthanol's high miscibility with water makes it unsuitable for shipping through modern pipelines like liquid hydrocarbons. Mechanics have seen increased cases of damage to small engines (in particular, the carburetor) and attribute the damage to the increased water retention by ethanol in fuel.\nEthanol was commonly used as fuel in early bipropellant rocket (liquid-propelled) vehicles, in conjunction with an oxidizer such as liquid oxygen. The German A-4 ballistic rocket of World War\u00a0II (better known by its propaganda name V-2), which is credited as having begun the space age, used ethanol as the main constituent of \"B-Stoff\". Under such nomenclature, the ethanol was mixed with 25% water to reduce the combustion chamber temperature. The V-2's design team helped develop U.S. rockets following World War\u00a0II, including the ethanol-fueled Redstone rocket, which launched the first U.S. astronaut on suborbital spaceflight. Alcohols fell into general disuse as more energy-dense rocket fuels were developed, although ethanol was used in recent experimental lightweight rocket-powered racing aircraft.\nCommercial fuel cells operate on reformed natural gas, hydrogen or methanol. Ethanol is an attractive alternative due to its wide availability, low cost, high purity and low toxicity. There is a wide range of fuel cell concepts that have entered trials including direct-ethanol fuel cells, auto-thermal reforming systems and thermally integrated systems. The majority of work is being conducted at a research level although there are a number of organizations at the beginning of the commercialization of ethanol fuel cells.\nEthanol fireplaces can be used for home heating or for decoration. Ethanol can also be used as stove fuel for cooking.\nOther uses.\nEthanol is an important industrial ingredient with widespread uses as a precursor for other organic compounds such as ethyl halides, ethyl esters, diethyl ether, acetic acid, and ethyl amines. It is considered a universal solvent, as its molecular structure allows for the dissolving of both polar, hydrophilic and nonpolar, hydrophobic compounds. As ethanol also has a low boiling point, it is easy to remove from a solution that has been used to dissolve other compounds, making it a popular extracting agent for botanical oils. Cannabis oil extraction methods often use ethanol as an extraction solvent, and also as a post-processing solvent to remove oils, waxes, and chlorophyll from solution in a process known as winterization.\nEthanol is found in paints, tinctures, markers, personal care products such as mouthwashes, perfumes and deodorants, and wet specimen preservatives. Polysaccharides precipitate from aqueous solution in the presence of alcohol, and ethanol precipitation is used for this reason in the purification of DNA and RNA. Because of its low freezing point of and low toxicity, ethanol is sometimes used in laboratories (with dry ice or other coolants) as a cooling bath to keep vessels at temperatures below the freezing point of water. For the same reason, it is also used as the active fluid in alcohol thermometers.\nChemistry.\nEthanol is a 2-carbon alcohol. Its molecular formula is . The structure of the molecule of ethanol is (an ethyl group linked to a hydroxyl group), which indicates that the carbon of a methyl group () is attached to the carbon of a methylene group (), which is attached to the oxygen of a hydroxyl group (). It is a constitutional isomer of dimethyl ether. Ethanol is sometimes abbreviated as EtOH, using the common organic chemistry notation of representing the ethyl group () with Et.\nPhysical properties.\nEthanol is a volatile, colorless liquid that has a slight odor. It burns with a smokeless blue flame that is not always visible in normal light. The physical properties of ethanol stem primarily from the presence of its hydroxyl group and the shortness of its carbon chain. Ethanol's hydroxyl group is able to participate in hydrogen bonding, rendering it more viscous and less volatile than less polar organic compounds of similar molecular weight, such as propane. Ethanol's adiabatic flame temperature for combustion in air is 2082\u00a0\u00b0C or 3779\u00a0\u00b0F.\nEthanol is slightly more refractive than water, having a refractive index of 1.36242 (at \u03bb=589.3\u00a0nm and ). The triple point for ethanol is 150 \u00b1 20 K.\nSolvent properties.\nEthanol is a versatile solvent, miscible with water and with many organic solvents, including acetic acid, acetone, benzene, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, diethyl ether, ethylene glycol, glycerol, nitromethane, pyridine, and toluene. Its main use as a solvent is in making tincture of iodine, cough syrups, etc. It is also miscible with light aliphatic hydrocarbons, such as pentane and hexane, and with aliphatic chlorides such as trichloroethane and tetrachloroethylene.\nEthanol's miscibility with water contrasts with the immiscibility of longer-chain alcohols (five or more carbon atoms), whose water miscibility decreases sharply as the number of carbons increases. The miscibility of ethanol with alkanes is limited to alkanes up to undecane: mixtures with dodecane and higher alkanes show a miscibility gap below a certain temperature (about 13\u00a0\u00b0C for dodecane). The miscibility gap tends to get wider with higher alkanes, and the temperature for complete miscibility increases.\nEthanol-water mixtures have less volume than the sum of their individual components at the given fractions. Mixing equal volumes of ethanol and water results in only 1.92 volumes of mixture. Mixing ethanol and water is exothermic, with up to 777\u00a0J/mol being released at 298\u00a0K.\nHydrogen bonding causes pure ethanol to be hygroscopic to the extent that it readily absorbs water from the air. The polar nature of the hydroxyl group causes ethanol to dissolve many ionic compounds, notably sodium and potassium hydroxides, magnesium chloride, calcium chloride, ammonium chloride, ammonium bromide, and sodium bromide. Sodium and potassium chlorides are slightly soluble in ethanol. Because the ethanol molecule also has a nonpolar end, it will also dissolve nonpolar substances, including most essential oils and numerous flavoring, coloring, and medicinal agents.\nThe addition of even a few percent of ethanol to water sharply reduces the surface tension of water. This property partially explains the \"tears of wine\" phenomenon. When wine is swirled in a glass, ethanol evaporates quickly from the thin film of wine on the wall of the glass. As the wine's ethanol content decreases, its surface tension increases and the thin film \"beads up\" and runs down the glass in channels rather than as a smooth sheet.\nAzeotrope with water.\nAt atmospheric pressure, mixtures of ethanol and water form an azeotrope at about 89.4\u00a0mol% ethanol (95.6% ethanol by mass, 97% alcohol by volume), with a boiling point of . At lower pressure, the composition of the ethanol-water azeotrope shifts to more ethanol-rich mixtures. The minimum-pressure azeotrope has an ethanol fraction of 100% and a boiling point of , corresponding to a pressure of roughly 70\u00a0torr (9.333\u00a0kPa). Below this pressure, there is no azeotrope, and it is possible to distill absolute ethanol from an ethanol-water mixture.\nFlammability.\nAn ethanol\u2013water solution will catch fire if heated above a temperature called its flash point and an ignition source is then applied to it. For 20% alcohol by mass (about 25% by volume), this will occur at about . The flash point of pure ethanol is , but may be influenced very slightly by atmospheric composition such as pressure and humidity. Ethanol mixtures can ignite below average room temperature. Ethanol is considered a flammable liquid (Class 3 Hazardous Material) in concentrations above 2.35% by mass (3.0% by volume; 6 proof). Dishes using burning alcohol for culinary effects are called flamb\u00e9.\nNatural occurrence.\nEthanol is a byproduct of the metabolic process of yeast. As such, ethanol will be present in any yeast habitat. Ethanol can commonly be found in overripe fruit. Ethanol produced by symbiotic yeast can be found in bertam palm blossoms. Although some animal species, such as the pentailed treeshrew, exhibit ethanol-seeking behaviors, most show no interest or avoidance of food sources containing ethanol. Ethanol is also produced during the germination of many plants as a result of natural anaerobiosis.\nEthanol has been detected in outer space, forming an icy coating around dust grains in interstellar clouds.\nMinute quantity amounts (average 196 ppb) of endogenous ethanol and acetaldehyde were found in the exhaled breath of healthy volunteers. Auto-brewery syndrome, also known as gut fermentation syndrome, is a rare medical condition in which intoxicating quantities of ethanol are produced through endogenous fermentation within the digestive system.\nProduction.\nEthanol is produced both as a petrochemical, through the hydration of ethylene and, via biological processes, by fermenting sugars with yeast. Which process is more economical depends on prevailing prices of petroleum and grain feed stocks.\nSources.\nWorld production of ethanol in 2006 was , with 69% of the world supply coming from Brazil and the U.S. Brazilian ethanol is produced from sugarcane, which has relatively high yields (830% more fuel than the fossil fuels used to produce it) compared to some other energy crops. Sugarcane not only has a greater concentration of sucrose than corn (by about 30%), but is also much easier to extract. The bagasse generated by the process is not discarded, but burned by power plants to produce electricity. Bagasse burning accounts for around 9% of the electricity produced in Brazil.\nIn the 1970s most industrial ethanol in the U.S. was made as a petrochemical, but in the 1980s the U.S. introduced subsidies for corn-based ethanol. According to the Renewable Fuels Association, as of 30 October 2007, 131 grain ethanol bio-refineries in the U.S. have the capacity to produce of ethanol per year. An additional 72 construction projects underway (in the U.S.) can add of new capacity in the next 18 months.\nIn India ethanol is made from sugarcane. Sweet sorghum is another potential source of ethanol, and is suitable for growing in dryland conditions. The International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics is investigating the possibility of growing sorghum as a source of fuel, food, and animal feed in arid parts of Asia and Africa. Sweet sorghum has one-third the water requirement of sugarcane over the same time period. It also requires about 22% less water than corn. The world's first sweet sorghum ethanol distillery began commercial production in 2007 in Andhra Pradesh, India.\nEthanol has been produced in the laboratory by converting carbon dioxide via biological and electrochemical reactions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHydration.\nEthanol can be produced from petrochemical feed stocks, primarily by the acid-catalyzed hydration of ethylene. It is often referred to as synthetic ethanol.\nThe catalyst is most commonly phosphoric acid, adsorbed onto a porous support such as silica gel or diatomaceous earth. This catalyst was first used for large-scale ethanol production by the Shell Oil Company in 1947. The reaction is carried out in the presence of high pressure steam at where a 5:3 ethylene to steam ratio is maintained. This process was used on an industrial scale by Union Carbide Corporation and others. It is no longer practiced in the US as fermentation ethanol produced from corn is more economical.\nIn an older process, first practiced on the industrial scale in 1930 by Union Carbide but now almost entirely obsolete, ethylene was hydrated indirectly by reacting it with concentrated sulfuric acid to produce ethyl sulfate, which was hydrolyzed to yield ethanol and regenerate the sulfuric acid:\n\nFermentation.\nEthanol in alcoholic beverages and fuel is produced by fermentation. Certain species of yeast (e.g., \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\") metabolize sugar (namely polysaccharides), producing ethanol and carbon dioxide. The chemical equations below summarize the conversion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFermentation is the process of culturing yeast under favorable thermal conditions to produce alcohol. This process is carried out at around . Toxicity of ethanol to yeast limits the ethanol concentration obtainable by brewing; higher concentrations, therefore, are obtained by fortification or distillation. The most ethanol-tolerant yeast strains can survive up to approximately 18% ethanol by volume.\nTo produce ethanol from starchy materials such as cereals, the starch must first be converted into sugars. In brewing beer, this has traditionally been accomplished by allowing the grain to germinate, or malt, which produces the enzyme amylase. When the malted grain is mashed, the amylase converts the remaining starches into sugars.\nSugars for ethanol fermentation can be obtained from cellulose. Deployment of this technology could turn a number of cellulose-containing agricultural by-products, such as corncobs, straw, and sawdust, into renewable energy resources. Other agricultural residues such as sugarcane bagasse and energy crops such as switchgrass may also be fermentable sugar sources.\nTesting.\nBreweries and biofuel plants employ two methods for measuring ethanol concentration. Infrared ethanol sensors measure the vibrational frequency of dissolved ethanol using the C\u2212H band at 2900\u00a0cm\u22121. This method uses a relatively inexpensive solid-state sensor that compares the C\u2212H band with a reference band to calculate the ethanol content. The calculation makes use of the Beer\u2013Lambert law. Alternatively, by measuring the density of the starting material and the density of the product, using a hydrometer, the change in specific gravity during fermentation indicates the alcohol content. This inexpensive and indirect method has a long history in the beer brewing industry.\nPurification.\nEthylene hydration or brewing produces an ethanol\u2013water mixture. For most industrial and fuel uses, the ethanol must be purified. Fractional distillation at atmospheric pressure can concentrate ethanol to 95.6% by weight (89.5 mole%). This mixture is an azeotrope with a boiling point of , and \"cannot\" be further purified by distillation. Addition of an entraining agent, such as benzene, cyclohexane, or heptane, allows a new ternary azeotrope comprising the ethanol, water, and the entraining agent to be formed. This lower-boiling ternary azeotrope is removed preferentially, leading to water-free ethanol.\nApart from distillation, ethanol may be dried by addition of a desiccant, such as molecular sieves, cellulose, or cornmeal. The desiccants can be dried and reused. Molecular sieves can be used to selectively absorb the water from the 95.6% ethanol solution. Molecular sieves of pore-size 3\u00a0\u00c5, a type of zeolite, effectively sequester water molecules while excluding ethanol molecules. Heating the wet sieves drives out the water, allowing regeneration of their desiccant capability.\nMembranes can also be used to separate ethanol and water. Membrane-based separations are not subject to the limitations of the water-ethanol azeotrope because the separations are not based on vapor-liquid equilibria. Membranes are often used in the so-called hybrid membrane distillation process. This process uses a pre-concentration distillation column as the first separating step. The further separation is then accomplished with a membrane operated either in vapor permeation or pervaporation mode. Vapor permeation uses a vapor membrane feed and pervaporation uses a liquid membrane feed.\nA variety of other techniques have been discussed, including the following:\nGrades of ethanol.\nPure ethanol and alcoholic beverages are heavily taxed as psychoactive drugs, but ethanol has many uses that do not involve its consumption. To relieve the tax burden on these uses, most jurisdictions waive the tax when an agent has been added to the ethanol to render it unfit to drink. These include bittering agents such as denatonium benzoate and toxins such as methanol, naphtha, and pyridine. Products of this kind are called \"denatured alcohol.\"\nAbsolute or anhydrous alcohol refers to ethanol with a low water content. There are various grades with maximum water contents ranging from 1% to a few parts per million (ppm). If azeotropic distillation is used to remove water, it will contain trace amounts of the material separation agent (e.g. benzene). Absolute alcohol is not intended for human consumption. Absolute ethanol is used as a solvent for laboratory and industrial applications, where water will react with other chemicals, and as fuel alcohol. Spectroscopic ethanol is an absolute ethanol with a low absorbance in ultraviolet and visible light, fit for use as a solvent in ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy. Pure ethanol is classed as 200 proof in the US, equivalent to 175 degrees proof in the UK system. Rectified spirit, an azeotropic composition of 96% ethanol containing 4% water, is used instead of anhydrous ethanol for various purposes. Spirits of wine are about 94% ethanol (188 proof). The impurities are different from those in 95% (190 proof) laboratory ethanol.\nReactions.\nEthanol is classified as a primary alcohol, meaning that the carbon that its hydroxyl group attaches to has at least two hydrogen atoms attached to it as well. Many ethanol reactions occur at its hydroxyl group.\nEster formation.\nIn the presence of acid catalysts, ethanol reacts with carboxylic acids to produce ethyl esters and water:\nRCOOH + HOCH2CH3 \u2192 RCOOCH2CH3 + H2O\nThis reaction, which is conducted on large scale industrially, requires the removal of the water from the reaction mixture as it is formed. Esters react in the presence of an acid or base to give back the alcohol and a salt. This reaction is known as saponification because it is used in the preparation of soap. Ethanol can also form esters with inorganic acids. Diethyl sulfate and triethyl phosphate are prepared by treating ethanol with sulfur trioxide and phosphorus pentoxide respectively. Diethyl sulfate is a useful ethylating agent in organic synthesis. Ethyl nitrite, prepared from the reaction of ethanol with sodium nitrite and sulfuric acid, was formerly used as a diuretic.\nDehydration.\nIn the presence of acid catalysts, alcohols can be converted to alkenes such as ethanol to ethylene. Typically solid acids such as alumina are used.\nCH3CH2OH \u2192 H2C=CH2 + H2O\nSince water is removed from the same molecule, the reaction is known as intramolecular dehydration. Intramolecular dehydration of an alcohol requires a high temperature and the presence of an acid catalyst such as sulfuric acid. Ethylene produced from sugar-derived ethanol (primarily in Brazil) competes with ethylene produced from petrochemical feedstocks such as naphtha and ethane. At a lower temperature than that of intramolecular dehydration, intermolecular alcohol dehydration may occur producing a symmetrical ether. This is a condensation reaction. In the following example, diethyl ether is produced from ethanol:\n2 CH3CH2OH \u2192 CH3CH2OCH2CH3 + H2O\nCombustion.\nComplete combustion of ethanol forms carbon dioxide and water:\nC2H5OH (l) + 3 O2 (g) \u2192 2 CO2 (g) + 3 H2O (l); \u2212\u0394c\"H\" = 1371\u00a0kJ/mol = 29.8\u00a0kJ/g = 327\u00a0kcal/mol = 7.1\u00a0kcal/g\nC2H5OH (l) + 3 O2 (g) \u2192 2 CO2 (g) + 3 H2O (g); \u2212\u0394c\"H\" = 1236\u00a0kJ/mol = 26.8\u00a0kJ/g = 295.4\u00a0kcal/mol = 6.41 kcal/g\nSpecific heat = 2.44 kJ/(kg\u00b7K)\nAcid-base chemistry.\nEthanol is a neutral molecule and the pH of a solution of ethanol in water is nearly 7.00. Ethanol can be quantitatively converted to its conjugate base, the ethoxide ion (CH3CH2O\u2212), by reaction with an alkali metal such as sodium:\n2 CH3CH2OH + 2 Na \u2192 2 CH3CH2ONa + H2\nor a very strong base such as sodium hydride:\nCH3CH2OH + NaH \u2192 CH3CH2ONa + H2\nThe acidities of water and ethanol are nearly the same, as indicated by their pKa of 15.7 and 16 respectively. Thus, sodium ethoxide and sodium hydroxide exist in an equilibrium that is closely balanced:\nCH3CH2OH + NaOH \u21cc CH3CH2ONa + H2O\nHalogenation.\nEthanol is not used industrially as a precursor to ethyl halides, but the reactions are illustrative. Ethanol reacts with hydrogen halides to produce ethyl halides such as ethyl chloride and ethyl bromide via an SN2 reaction:\nCH3CH2OH + HCl \u2192 CH3CH2Cl + H2O\nHCl requires a catalyst such as zinc chloride.\nHBr requires refluxing with a sulfuric acid catalyst. Ethyl halides can, in principle, also be produced by treating ethanol with more specialized halogenating agents, such as thionyl chloride or phosphorus tribromide.\nCH3CH2OH + SOCl2 \u2192 CH3CH2Cl + SO2 + HCl\nUpon treatment with halogens in the presence of base, ethanol gives the corresponding haloform (CHX3, where X = Cl, Br, I). This conversion is called the haloform reaction.\nAn intermediate in the reaction with chlorine is the aldehyde called chloral, which forms chloral hydrate upon reaction with water:\n4 Cl2 + CH3CH2OH \u2192 CCl3CHO + 5 HCl\nCCl3CHO + H2O \u2192 CCl3C(OH)2H\nOxidation.\nEthanol can be oxidized to acetaldehyde and further oxidized to acetic acid, depending on the reagents and conditions. This oxidation is of no importance industrially, but in the human body, these oxidation reactions are catalyzed by the enzyme liver ADH. The oxidation product of ethanol, acetic acid, is a nutrient for humans, being a precursor to acetyl CoA, where the acetyl group can be spent as energy or used for biosynthesis.\nMetabolism.\nEthanol is similar to macronutrients such as proteins, fats, and carbohydrates in that it provides calories. When consumed and metabolized, it contributes 7\u00a0kilocalories per gram via ethanol metabolism.\nSafety.\nEthanol is very flammable and should not be used around an open flame. Atmospheric concentrations above one part per thousand are above the European Union occupational exposure limits.\nPure ethanol will irritate the skin and eyes. Nausea, vomiting, and intoxication are symptoms of ingestion. Long-term use by ingestion can result in serious liver damage. Globally, ethanol accounted for 1.8 million deaths in 2021.\nHistory.\nThe fermentation of sugar into ethanol is one of the earliest biotechnologies employed by humans. Ethanol has historically been identified variously as spirit of wine or ardent spirits, and as aqua vitae (Latin for \"water of life\") or aqua vita. The intoxicating effects of its consumption have been known since ancient times. Ethanol has been used by humans since prehistory as the intoxicating ingredient of alcoholic beverages. Dried residue on 9,000-year-old pottery found in China suggests that Neolithic people consumed alcoholic beverages.\nThe inflammable nature of the exhalations of wine was already known to ancient natural philosophers such as Aristotle (384\u2013322 BCE), Theophrastus (c.\u2009371\u2013287 BCE), and Pliny the Elder (23/24\u201379 CE). However, this did not immediately lead to the isolation of ethanol, despite the development of more advanced distillation techniques in second- and third-century Roman Egypt. An important recognition, first found in one of the writings attributed to J\u0101bir ibn \u1e24ayy\u0101n (ninth century CE), was that by adding salt to boiling wine, which increases the wine's relative volatility, the flammability of the resulting vapors may be enhanced. The distillation of wine is attested in Arabic works attributed to al-Kind\u012b (c.\u2009801\u2013873 CE) and to al-F\u0101r\u0101b\u012b (c.\u2009872\u2013950), and in the 28th book of al-Zahr\u0101w\u012b's (Latin: Abulcasis, 936\u20131013) \"Kit\u0101b al-Ta\u1e63r\u012bf\" (later translated into Latin as \"Liber servatoris\"). In the twelfth century, recipes for the production of \"aqua ardens\" (\"burning water\", i.e., ethanol) by distilling wine with salt started to appear in a number of Latin works, and by the end of the thirteenth century it had become a widely known substance among Western European chemists.\nThe works of Taddeo Alderotti (1223\u20131296) describe a method for concentrating ethanol involving repeated fractional distillation through a water-cooled still, by which an ethanol purity of 90% could be obtained. The medicinal properties of ethanol were studied by Arnald of Villanova (1240\u20131311 CE) and John of Rupescissa (c.\u20091310\u20131366), the latter of whom regarded it as a life-preserving substance able to prevent all diseases (the \"aqua vitae\" or \"water of life\", also called by John the \"quintessence\" of wine). In China, archaeological evidence indicates that the true distillation of alcohol began during the Jin (1115\u20131234) or Southern Song (1127\u20131279) dynasties. A still has been found at an archaeological site in Qinglong, Hebei, dating to the 12th century. In India, the true distillation of alcohol was introduced from the Middle East, and was in wide use in the Delhi Sultanate by the 14th century.\nIn 1796, German-Russian chemist Johann Tobias Lowitz obtained pure ethanol by mixing partially purified ethanol (the alcohol-water azeotrope) with an excess of anhydrous alkali and then distilling the mixture over low heat. French chemist Antoine Lavoisier described ethanol as a compound of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and in 1807 Nicolas-Th\u00e9odore de Saussure determined ethanol's chemical formula. Fifty years later, Archibald Scott Couper published the structural formula of ethanol, one of the first structural formulas determined.\nEthanol was first prepared synthetically in 1825 by Michael Faraday. He found that sulfuric acid could absorb large volumes of coal gas. He gave the resulting solution to Henry Hennell, a British chemist, who found in 1826 that it contained \"sulphovinic acid\" (ethyl hydrogen sulfate). In 1828, Hennell and the French chemist Georges-Simon Serullas independently discovered that sulphovinic acid could be decomposed into ethanol. Thus, in 1825 Faraday had unwittingly discovered that ethanol could be produced from ethylene (a component of coal gas) by acid-catalyzed hydration, a process similar to current industrial ethanol synthesis.\nEthanol was used as lamp fuel in the U.S. as early as 1840, but a tax levied on industrial alcohol during the Civil War made this use uneconomical. The tax was repealed in 1906. Use as an automotive fuel dates back to 1908, with the Ford Model T able to run on petrol (gasoline) or ethanol. It fuels some spirit lamps.\nEthanol intended for industrial use is often produced from ethylene. Ethanol has widespread use as a solvent of substances intended for human contact or consumption, including scents, flavorings, colorings, and medicines. In chemistry, it is both a solvent and a feedstock for the synthesis of other products. It has a long history as a fuel for heat and light, and more recently as a fuel for internal combustion engines.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10049", "revid": "144968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10049", "title": "Eric Clapton", "text": "English musician (born 1945)\nEric Patrick Clapton (born 30 March 1945) is an English rock and blues guitarist, singer, and songwriter. He is regarded as one of the most successful and influential guitarists in rock music. Clapton ranked second in \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" and fourth in Gibson's \"Top 50 Guitarists of All Time\". He was named number five in \"Time\" magazine's list of \"The 10 Best Electric Guitar Players\" in 2009.\nAfter playing in a number of different local bands, Clapton joined the Yardbirds from 1963 to 1965, and John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers from 1965 to 1966. After leaving Mayall, he formed the power trio Cream with drummer Ginger Baker and bassist/vocalist Jack Bruce, in which Clapton played sustained blues improvisations and \"arty, blues-based psychedelic pop\". After four successful albums, Cream broke up in November 1968. Clapton then formed the blues rock band Blind Faith with Baker, Steve Winwood, and Ric Grech, recording one album and performing on one tour before they broke up. Clapton then toured with Delaney &amp; Bonnie and recorded his first solo album in 1970, before forming Derek and the Dominos with Bobby Whitlock, Carl Radle and Jim Gordon. Like Blind Faith, the band only lasted one album, \"Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs\", which includes \"Layla\", one of Clapton's signature songs.\nClapton continued to record a number of successful solo albums and songs over the next several decades, including a 1974 cover of Bob Marley's \"I Shot the Sheriff\" (which helped reggae reach a mass market), the country-infused \"Slowhand\" album (1977) and the pop rock of 1986's \"August\". Following the death of his son Conor in 1991, Clapton's grief was expressed in the song \"Tears in Heaven\", which peaked at number two on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 and appeared on his \"Unplugged\" album. In 1996 he had another top-40 hit with the R&amp;B crossover \"Change the World\". In 1998, he released the Grammy award-winning \"My Father's Eyes\". Since 1999, he has recorded a number of traditional blues and blues rock albums and hosted the periodic Crossroads Guitar Festival. His latest studio album, \"Meanwhile\", was released in 2024.\nClapton has received 18 Grammy Awards as well as the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. In 2004, he was awarded a CBE for services to music. He has received four Ivor Novello Awards from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors, including the Lifetime Achievement Award. He is the only three-time inductee to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: once as a solo artist, and separately as a member of the Yardbirds and of Cream. In his solo career, he has sold 100 million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling musicians of all time. In 1998, Clapton, recovering from addiction himself, founded the Crossroads Centre on Antigua, a medical facility for those recovering from substance abuse.\nEarly life.\nClapton was born on 30 March 1945 in Ripley, Surrey, England, to 16-year-old Patricia Molly Clapton (1929\u20131999) and Edward Walter Fryer (1920\u20131985), a 25-year-old soldier from Montreal, Quebec. Fryer was drafted to war before Clapton's birth and then returned to Canada. Clapton grew up believing that his grandmother, Rose, and her second husband, Jack Clapp, Patricia's stepfather, were his parents, and that his mother was actually his older sister. The similarity in surnames gave rise to the erroneous belief that Clapton's real surname is Clapp (Reginald Cecil Clapton was the name of Rose's first husband, Eric Clapton's maternal grandfather). Years later, his mother married another Canadian soldier and moved to Germany, leaving Eric with his grandparents in Surrey.\nClapton received an acoustic Hoyer guitar, made in Germany, for his thirteenth birthday, but the inexpensive steel-stringed instrument was difficult to play and he briefly lost interest. Two years later he picked it up again and started playing consistently. He was influenced by blues music from an early age, and practised long hours learning the chords of blues music by playing along to the records. He preserved his practice sessions using his portable Grundig reel-to-reel tape recorder, listening to them over and over until he was satisfied.\nIn 1961, after leaving Hollyfield School in Surbiton, he studied at the Kingston College of Art but was expelled at the end of the academic year because his focus had remained on music rather than art. His guitar playing was sufficiently advanced that, by the age of 16, he was getting noticed. Around this time, he began busking around Kingston, Richmond, and the West End.\nIn 1962, he started performing as a duo with fellow blues enthusiast Dave Brock in pubs around Surrey. When he was 17, he joined his first band, an early British R&amp;B group, the Roosters, whose other guitarist was Tom McGuinness. He stayed with them from January until August 1963. In October of that year, he performed a seven-gig stint with Casey Jones and the Engineers.\nCareer.\nThe Yardbirds and the Bluesbreakers.\nIn October 1963, Clapton joined the Yardbirds, a rhythm and blues band, and stayed with them until March 1965. Synthesising influences from Chicago blues and leading blues guitarists such as Buddy Guy, Freddie King, and B.B. King, Clapton forged a distinctive style and rapidly became one of the most talked-about guitarists in the British music scene. The band initially played Chess/Checker/Vee-Jay blues numbers and began to attract a large cult following when they took over the Rolling Stones' residency at the Crawdaddy Club in Richmond, London. They toured England with American bluesman Sonny Boy Williamson II; a joint LP album, recorded in December 1963, was issued in 1965.\nYardbirds' rhythm guitarist, Chris Dreja, recalled that whenever Clapton broke a guitar string during a concert, he would stay on stage and replace it. The English audiences would wait out the delay by doing what is called a \"slow handclap\". Clapton's nickname of \"Slowhand\" came from Giorgio Gomelsky, a pun on the slow handclapping that ensued when Clapton stopped playing while he replaced a string. In December 1964, Clapton made his first appearance at the Royal Albert Hall in London, with the Yardbirds. Since then, Clapton has performed at the Hall over 200 times, and has stated that performing at the venue is like \"playing in my front room\".\nIn March 1965, Clapton and the Yardbirds had their first major hit, \"For Your Love\", written by songwriter Graham Gouldman, who also wrote hit songs for Herman's Hermits and the Hollies (and later achieved success of his own as a member of 10cc). In part because of its success, the Yardbirds elected to move toward a pop-orientated sound, much to the annoyance of Clapton, who was devoted to the blues and not commercial success. He left the Yardbirds on the day that \"For Your Love\" went public, a move that left the band without its lead guitarist and most accomplished member. Clapton suggested fellow guitarist Jimmy Page as his replacement, but Page declined out of loyalty to Clapton, putting Jeff Beck forward. Beck and Page played together in the Yardbirds for a while, but Beck, Page, and Clapton were never in the group together. They first appeared together in 1983 on the 12-date benefit tour for Action for Research into multiple sclerosis with the first date on 23 September at the Royal Albert Hall.\nClapton joined John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers in April 1965, only to quit a few months later. In June, Clapton was invited to jam with Jimmy Page, recording a number of tracks that were retroactively credited to The Immediate All-Stars. In the summer of 1965 he left for Greece with a band called the Glands, which included his old friend Ben Palmer on piano. After a car crash that killed the bassist and injured the guitarist of the Greek band the Juniors, on 17 October 1965 the surviving members played memorial shows in which Clapton played with the band. In October 1965 he rejoined John Mayall. In March 1966, while still a member of the Bluesbreakers, Clapton briefly collaborated on a side project with Jack Bruce and Steve Winwood among others, recording only a few tracks under the name Eric Clapton and the Powerhouse. During his second Bluesbreakers stint, Clapton gained a reputation as the best blues guitarist on the club circuit. Although Clapton gained fame for playing on the influential album, \"Blues Breakers \u2013 John Mayall \u2013 With Eric Clapton\", this album was not released until he had left the band for the last time in July 1966. The album itself is often called \"The Beano Album\" by fans because of its cover photograph showing Clapton reading the British children's comic \"The Beano\".\nHaving swapped his Fender Telecaster and Vox AC30 amplifier for a 1960 Gibson Les Paul Standard guitar and Marshall amplifier, Clapton's sound and playing inspired the famous slogan \"Clapton is God\", spray-painted by an unknown admirer on a wall in Islington, North London in 1967. The graffito was captured in a now-famous photograph, in which a dog is urinating on the wall. Clapton is reported to have been embarrassed by the slogan, saying in his \"The South Bank Show\" profile in 1987, \"I never accepted that I was the greatest guitar player in the world. I always \"wanted\" to be the greatest guitar player in the world, but that's an ideal, and I accept it as an ideal\".\nCream.\nClapton left the Bluesbreakers in July 1966 (replaced by Peter Green) and was invited by drummer Ginger Baker to play in his newly formed band Cream, one of the earliest supergroups, with Jack Bruce on bass (Bruce was previously of the Bluesbreakers, the Graham Bond Organisation and Manfred Mann). Before the formation of Cream, Clapton was not well known in the United States; he left the Yardbirds before \"For Your Love\" hit the US top ten, and had yet to perform there. During his time with Cream, Clapton began to develop as a singer, songwriter and guitarist, though Bruce took most of the lead vocals and wrote the majority of the material with lyricist Pete Brown. Cream's first gig was an unofficial performance at the Twisted Wheel Club in Manchester on 29 July 1966 before their full debut two nights later at the National Jazz and Blues Festival in Windsor. Cream established its enduring legend with the high-volume blues jamming and extended solos of their live shows.\nBy early 1967, fans of the emerging blues-rock sound in the UK had begun to portray Clapton as Britain's top guitarist; however, he found himself rivalled by the emergence of Jimi Hendrix, an acid rock-infused guitarist who used wailing feedback and effects pedals to create new sounds for the instrument. Hendrix attended a performance of the newly formed Cream at the Central London Polytechnic on 1 October 1966, during which he sat in on a double-timed version of \"Killing Floor\". Top UK stars, including Clapton, Pete Townshend and members of the Rolling Stones and the Beatles, avidly attended Hendrix's early club performances. Hendrix's arrival had an immediate and major effect on the next phase of Clapton's career.\nClapton first visited the United States while touring with Cream. In March 1967, Cream performed a nine-show stand at the RKO Theater in New York. Clapton's 1964 painted Gibson SG guitar \u2013 The Fool \u2013 a \"psychedelic fantasy\", according to Clapton, made its debut at the RKO Theater. Clapton used the guitar for most of Cream's recordings after \"Fresh Cream\", particularly on \"Disraeli Gears\", until the band broke up in 1968. One of the world's best-known guitars, it symbolises the psychedelic era. They recorded \"Disraeli Gears\" in New York from 11 to 15 May 1967. Cream's repertoire varied from hard rock (\"I Feel Free\") to lengthy blues-based instrumental jams (\"Spoonful\"). \"Disraeli Gears\" contained Clapton's searing guitar lines, Bruce's soaring vocals and prominent, fluid bass playing, and Baker's powerful, polyrhythmic jazz-influenced drumming. Together, Cream's talents secured them as an influential power trio. Clapton's voice can be heard on Frank Zappa's album \"We're Only in It for the Money\", on the tracks \"Are You Hung Up?\" and \"Nasal Retentive Calliope Music\".\nIn 28 months, Cream had become a commercial success, selling millions of records and playing throughout the US and Europe. They redefined the instrumentalist's role in rock and were one of the first blues-rock bands to emphasise musical virtuosity and lengthy jazz-style improvisation sessions. Their US hit singles include \"Sunshine of Your Love\" (No. 5, 1968), \"White Room\" (No. 6, 1968) and \"Crossroads\" (No. 28, 1969) \u2013 a live version of Robert Johnson's \"Cross Road Blues\". Though Cream were hailed as one of the greatest groups of its day, and the adulation of Clapton as a guitar legend reached new heights, the supergroup was short-lived. Drug and alcohol use escalated tension between the three members, and conflicts between Bruce and Baker eventually led to Cream's demise. A strongly critical \"Rolling Stone\" review of a concert of the group's second headlining US tour was another significant factor in the trio's demise, and it affected Clapton profoundly. Clapton has also credited \"Music from Big Pink\", the debut album of The Band, and its revolutionary Americana sound as influencing his decision to leave Cream.\nCream's farewell album, \"Goodbye\", comprising live performances recorded at The Forum, Los Angeles, on 19 October 1968, was released shortly after Cream disbanded. It also spawned the studio single \"Badge\", co-written by Clapton and George Harrison (Clapton had met and become close friends with Harrison after the Beatles shared a bill with the Clapton-era Yardbirds at the London Palladium). In 1968, Clapton played the lead guitar solo on Harrison's \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\", from the Beatles' self-titled double album (also known as the \"White Album\"). Harrison's debut solo album, \"Wonderwall Music\" (1968), became the first of many Harrison solo records to include Clapton on guitar. Clapton went largely uncredited for his contributions to Harrison's albums due to contractual restraints, and Harrison was credited as \"L'Angelo Misterioso\" for his contributions to the song \"Badge\" on \"Goodbye\". The pair often played live together as each other's guest. A year after Harrison's death in 2001, Clapton was musical director for the Concert for George.\nIn January 1969, when the Beatles were recording and filming what became \"Let It Be\", tensions became so acute that Harrison quit the group for several days, prompting John Lennon to suggest they complete the project with Clapton if Harrison did not return. Michael Lindsay-Hogg, television director of the recording sessions for \"Let It Be\", later recalled: \"I was there when John mentioned Clapton \u2013 but that wasn't going to happen. Would Eric have become a Beatle? No. Paul [McCartney] didn't want to go there. He didn't want them to break up. Then George came back.\" Clapton was on good terms with all four of the Beatles; in December 1968 he had played with Lennon at \"The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus\" as part of the one-off group the Dirty Mac.\nCream briefly reunited in 1993 to perform at the ceremony inducting them into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. A full reunion took place in May 2005, with Clapton, Bruce and Baker playing four sold-out concerts at London's Royal Albert Hall, and three shows at New York's Madison Square Garden that October. Recordings from the London shows, \"Royal Albert Hall London May 2-3-5-6, 2005\", were released on CD, LP and DVD in late 2005.\nBlind Faith.\nClapton's next group, Blind Faith, formed in 1969, was composed of Cream drummer Ginger Baker, Steve Winwood of Traffic, and Ric Grech of Family, and yielded one LP and one arena-circuit tour. The supergroup debuted before 100,000 fans in London's Hyde Park on 7 June 1969. They performed several dates in Scandinavia and began a sold-out American tour in July before their only album was released. The LP \"Blind Faith\" consisted of just six songs, one of them the hit \"Can't Find My Way Home\". Another, \"Presence of the Lord\", is the first song credited solely to Clapton. The album's jacket image of a topless pubescent girl was deemed controversial in the US and was replaced by a photograph of the band. Blind Faith dissolved after less than seven months.\nDelaney &amp; Bonnie and first solo album.\nClapton subsequently toured as a sideman for an act that had opened for Blind Faith, Delaney and Bonnie and Friends. He also performed as a member of Lennon's Plastic Ono Band at the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival in September 1969, a recording from which was released as the album \"Live Peace in Toronto 1969\". On 30 September, Clapton played lead guitar on Lennon's second solo single, \"Cold Turkey\". On 15 December that year, Clapton performed with Lennon, Harrison and others as the Plastic Ono Supergroup at a fundraiser for UNICEF in London.\nDelaney Bramlett encouraged Clapton in his singing and writing. Using the Bramletts' backing group and an all-star cast of session players (including Leon Russell and Stephen Stills), Clapton recorded his first solo album during two brief tour hiatuses, titled \"Eric Clapton\". Delaney Bramlett co-wrote six of the songs with Clapton, also producing the LP, and Bonnie Bramlett co-wrote \"Let It Rain\". The album yielded the unexpected US No.\u00a018 hit, J. J. Cale's \"After Midnight\". Clapton also worked with much of Delaney and Bonnie's band to record George Harrison's \"All Things Must Pass\" in spring 1970.\nDuring this period, Clapton also recorded with artists such as Dr. John, Leon Russell, Billy Preston, Ringo Starr and Dave Mason. With Chicago blues artist Howlin' Wolf, he recorded \"The London Howlin' Wolf Sessions\", that also included long-time Wolf guitarist Hubert Sumlin, Winwood, Starr, and members of the Rolling Stones. Despite the superstar line-up, critic Cub Koda noted: \"Even Eric Clapton, who usually welcomes any chance to play with one of his idols, has criticized this album repeatedly in interviews, which speaks volumes in and of itself.\" Other noted recordings from this period include Clapton's guitar work on \"Go Back Home\" from Stephen Stills' self-titled first solo album.\nDerek and the Dominos.\nWith the intention of counteracting the \"star\" cult faction that had begun to form around him, Clapton assembled a new band composed of Delaney and Bonnie's former rhythm section, Bobby Whitlock as keyboardist and vocalist, Carl Radle as the bassist, and drummer Jim Gordon, with Clapton playing guitar. It was his intention to show that he need not fill a starring role, and functioned well as a member of an ensemble. During this period, Clapton was increasingly influenced by The Band and their 1968 album \"Music from Big Pink\", saying: \"What I appreciated about the Band was that they were more concerned with songs and singing. They would have three- and four-part harmonies, and the guitar was put back into perspective as being accompaniment. That suited me well, because I had gotten so tired of the virtuosity \u2013 or \"pseudo\"-virtuosity \u2013 thing of long, boring guitar solos just because they were expected. The Band brought things back into perspective. The priority was the song.\"\nThe band was originally called \"Eric Clapton and Friends\". The eventual name was a fluke that occurred when the band's provisional name of \"Del and the Dynamos\" was misread as Derek and the Dominos. Clapton's biography states that Tony Ashton of Ashton, Gardner and Dyke told Clapton to call the band \"Del and the Dominos\", since \"Del\" was his nickname for Eric Clapton. Del and Eric were combined and the final name became \"Derek and the Dominos\".\nClapton's close friendship with George Harrison brought him into contact with Harrison's wife, Pattie Boyd, with whom he became deeply infatuated. When she spurned his advances, Clapton's unrequited affections prompted most of the material for the Dominos' album \"Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs\" (1970). Heavily blues-influenced, the album features the twin lead guitars of Clapton and Duane Allman, with Allman's slide guitar as a key ingredient of the sound. Working at Criteria Studios in Miami with Atlantic Records producer Tom Dowd, who had worked with Clapton on Cream's \"Disraeli Gears\", the band recorded a double album.\nThe album contained the hit love song \"Layla\", inspired by the classical poet of Persian literature, Nizami Ganjavi's \"The Story of Layla and Majnun\", a copy of which Ian Dallas had given to Clapton. The book moved Clapton profoundly, as it was the tale of a young man who fell hopelessly in love with a beautiful, unavailable woman and went crazy because he could not marry her. The two parts of \"Layla\" were recorded in separate sessions: the opening guitar section was recorded first, and for the second section, laid down a few weeks later, drummer Jim Gordon played the piano part for the melody, which he claimed to have written (though Bobby Whitlock stated that Rita Coolidge wrote it).\nThe \"Layla\" LP was actually recorded by a five-piece version of the group, thanks to the unforeseen inclusion of guitarist Duane Allman of the Allman Brothers Band. A few days into the Layla sessions, Dowd \u2013 who was also producing the Allmans \u2013 invited Clapton to an Allman Brothers outdoor concert in Miami. The two guitarists met first on stage, then played all night in the studio, and became friends. Duane first added his slide guitar to \"Tell the Truth\" and \"Nobody Knows You When You're Down and Out\". In four days, the five-piece Dominos recorded \"Key to the Highway\", \"Have You Ever Loved a Woman\" (a blues standard popularised by Freddie King and others) and \"Why Does Love Got to be So Sad?\" In September, Duane briefly left the sessions for gigs with his own band, and the four-piece Dominos recorded \"I Looked Away\", \"Bell Bottom Blues\" and \"Keep on Growing\". Allman returned to record \"I Am Yours\", \"Anyday\" and \"It's Too Late\". On 9 September, they recorded Hendrix's \"Little Wing\" and the title track. The following day, the final track, \"It's Too Late\", was recorded.\nTragedy dogged the group throughout its brief career. During the sessions, Clapton was devastated by news of the death of Jimi Hendrix; eight days previously the band had cut a cover of \"Little Wing\" as a tribute. On 17 September 1970, one day before Hendrix's death, Clapton had purchased a left-handed Fender Stratocaster that he had planned to give to Hendrix as a birthday gift. Adding to Clapton's woes, \"Layla\" received only lukewarm reviews upon release. The shaken group undertook a US tour without Allman, who had returned to the Allman Brothers Band. Despite Clapton's later admission that the tour took place amid a blizzard of drugs and alcohol, it resulted in the live double album \"In Concert\".\nRecording of a second Dominos studio album was underway when a clash of egos took place and Clapton walked out, thus disbanding the group. Allman was killed in a motorcycle accident on 29 October 1971. Clapton wrote later in his autobiography that he and Allman were inseparable during the \"Layla\" sessions in Florida; he talked about Allman as the \"musical brother I'd never had but wished I did\". Although Radle remained Clapton's bass player until the summer of 1979 (Radle died in May 1980 from the effects of alcohol and narcotics), it was not until 2003 that Clapton and Whitlock appeared together again; Clapton guested on Whitlock's appearance on the \"Later with Jools Holland\" show. Another tragic footnote to the Dominos story was the fate of drummer Jim Gordon, who had undiagnosed schizophrenia and years later murdered his mother during a psychotic episode. Gordon was confined to 16-years-to-life imprisonment, later being moved to a mental institution, where he remained for the rest of his life.\nPersonal problems and early solo success.\nClapton's career successes in the 1970s were in stark contrast with the struggles he coped with in his personal life, which was troubled by romantic longings and drug and alcohol addiction. Still infatuated with Boyd and torn by his friendship with Harrison, he withdrew from recording and touring to isolation in his Surrey residence as the Dominos broke up. He nursed a heroin addiction, which resulted in a lengthy career hiatus interrupted only by performing at Harrison's Concert for Bangladesh benefit shows in New York in August 1971; there, he passed out on stage, was revived, and managed to finish his performance. In January 1973, the Who's Pete Townshend organised a comeback concert for Clapton at London's Rainbow Theatre, titled the \"Rainbow Concert\", to help Clapton kick his addiction. Clapton returned the favour by playing \"The Preacher\" in Ken Russell's film version of the Who's \"Tommy\" in 1975. His appearance in the film (performing \"Eyesight to the Blind\") is notable as he is clearly wearing a fake beard in some shots, the result of deciding to shave off his real beard after the initial takes in an attempt to force the director to remove his earlier scene from the film and leave the set.\nIn 1974, Clapton started living with Boyd (they would not marry until 1979) and was no longer using heroin (although he gradually began to drink heavily). He assembled a low-key touring band that included Radle, Miami guitarist George Terry, keyboardist Dick Sims (who died in 2011), drummer Jamie Oldaker, and vocalists Yvonne Elliman and Marcy Levy (also known as Marcella Detroit). With this band Clapton recorded \"461 Ocean Boulevard\" (1974), an album with an emphasis on more compact songs and fewer guitar solos; the cover version of \"I Shot the Sheriff\" was Clapton's first number one hit. The 1975 album \"There's One in Every Crowd\" continued this trend. The album's original title, \"The World's Greatest Guitar Player (There's One in Every Crowd)\", was changed before pressing, as it was felt its ironic intention would be misunderstood. The band toured the world and subsequently released the 1975 live LP \"E. C. Was Here\". Clapton continued to release albums and toured regularly. Highlights of the period include \"No Reason to Cry\" (a collaboration with Bob Dylan and The Band); \"Slowhand\", which contained \"Wonderful Tonight\" and a second J. J. Cale cover, \"Cocaine\". In 1976, he performed as one of a string of notable guests at the farewell performance of The Band, filmed in a Martin Scorsese documentary titled \"The Last Waltz\".\nContinued success.\nIn 1981, Clapton was invited by producer Martin Lewis to appear at the Amnesty International benefit The Secret Policeman's Other Ball in London. Clapton accepted the invitation and teamed up with Jeff Beck to perform a series of duets \u2013 reportedly their first ever billed stage collaboration. Three of the performances were released on the album of the show, and one of the songs appeared in the film. The performances at London's Drury Lane theatre heralded a return to form and prominence for Clapton in the new decade. Many factors had influenced Clapton's comeback, including his \"deepening commitment to Christianity\", to which he had converted prior to his heroin addiction.\nAfter calling his manager and admitting he was an alcoholic, Clapton flew to Minneapolis\u2013Saint Paul in January 1982 and checked in at Hazelden Treatment Center, located in Center City, Minnesota. On the flight over, Clapton indulged in a large number of drinks, for fear he would never be able to drink again. Clapton wrote in his autobiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the lowest moments of my life, the only reason I didn't commit suicide was that I knew I wouldn't be able to drink any more if I was dead. It was the only thing I thought was worth living for, and the idea that people were about to try and remove me from alcohol was so terrible that I drank and drank and drank, and they had to practically carry me into the clinic.\nAfter being discharged, it was recommended by doctors of Hazelden that Clapton not partake in any activities that would act as triggers for his alcoholism or stress. Nonetheless, Clapton would go back to the Hazelden Treatment Center in November 1987. He has stayed sober ever since. A few months after his discharge from his first rehab, Clapton began working on his next album, against doctors' orders. Working with Tom Dowd, he produced what he thought as his \"most forced\" album to date, \"Money and Cigarettes\". Clapton chose the name of the album \"because that's all I saw myself having left\" after his first rehabilitation from alcoholism.\nIn 1984, he performed on former Pink Floyd member Roger Waters' solo album \"The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking\", and participated in the supporting tour. Since then Waters and Clapton have had a close relationship. In 2005, they performed together for the Tsunami Relief Fund. In 2006, they performed at the Highclere Castle in aid of the Countryside Alliance and played two set pieces of \"Wish You Were Here\" and \"Comfortably Numb\". Clapton, now a regular charity performer, played at the Live Aid concert at John F. Kennedy Stadium in Philadelphia on 13 July 1985, playing with Phil Collins, Tim Renwick, Chris Stainton, Jamie Oldaker, Marcy Levy, Shaun Murphy and Donald 'Duck' Dunn. When offered a slot close to peak viewing hours, he was apparently flattered. His album output continued in the 1980s, including two produced with Phil Collins, 1985's \"Behind the Sun\", which produced the hits \"Forever Man\" and \"She's Waiting\", and 1986's \"August\".\n\"August\" was suffused with Collins's trademark drum and horn sound, and became Clapton's biggest seller in the UK to date, matching his highest chart position, number 3. The album's first track, the hit \"It's in the Way That You Use It\", appeared in the Tom Cruise\u2013Paul Newman film \"The Color of Money\". The songs \"Tearing Us Apart\" (with Tina Turner) and \"Miss You\" continued Clapton's more angry sound. This rebound kicked off Clapton's two-year period of touring with Collins and their \"August\" collaborators, bassist Nathan East and keyboard player/songwriter Greg Phillinganes. While on tour for \"August\", two concert videos were recorded of the four-man band: \"Eric Clapton Live from Montreux\" and \"Eric Clapton and Friends\". Clapton later remade \"After Midnight\" as a single and a promotional track for the Michelob beer brand, which had also used earlier songs by Collins and Steve Winwood. Clapton won a British Academy Television Award for his collaboration with Michael Kamen on the score for the 1985 BBC television thriller series \"Edge of Darkness\". At the 1987 Brit Awards in London, Clapton was awarded the prize for Outstanding Contribution to Music. In 1987, he played on George Harrison's album \"Cloud Nine\", contributing guitar to \"Cloud 9\", \"That's What It Takes\", \"Devil's Radio\" and \"Wreck of the Hesperus\".\nClapton also got together with the Bee Gees for charity. The supergroup called itself the Bunburys, and recorded a charity album with the proceeds going to the Bunbury Cricket Club in Cheshire, which plays exhibition cricket matches to raise money for nonprofit organisations in England. The Bunburys recorded three songs for \"The Bunbury Tails\": \"We're the Bunburys\", \"Bunbury Afternoon\" and \"Fight (No Matter How Long)\". The last song also appeared on \"The 1988 Summer Olympics Album\" and went to No. 8 on the rock music chart. Clapton played at the cricket club's 25th anniversary celebrations in 2011, which were held at London's Grosvenor House Hotel. In 1988, he played with Dire Straits and Elton John at the Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute at Wembley Stadium and the Prince's Trust rock gala at the Royal Albert Hall. In 1989, Clapton released \"Journeyman\", an album that covered a wide range of styles, including blues, jazz, soul and pop. Collaborators included George Harrison, Phil Collins, Daryl Hall, Chaka Khan, Mick Jones, David Sanborn and Robert Cray. The song \"Bad Love\" was released as a single and later won the Grammy Award for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance.\nSon's death, \"Tears in Heaven\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI remember putting the phone down and calmly walking from my hotel [in N.Y.C.] to that place as if nothing happened. And I walked past the street and, this is a terrible thing of shame for me, which I\u2019ll never, ever perhaps recover from and seeing that, seeing a crowd of people and a paramedic van and knowing that he was there [trying to be resuscitated] and walking by, I\u2019ll punish myself forever about why didn\u2019t I run? Why didn\u2019t I go to see him? \u2026 the truth is I couldn\u2019t. I was so frightened.\n Eric Clapton, as quoted by Emma Kershaw of \"People\" (3 February 2025)\nThe 1990s brought a series of 32 concerts to the Royal Albert Hall, such as the 24 Nights series of concerts that took place around January through February 1990, and February to March 1991. On 30 June 1990, Dire Straits, Clapton and Elton John made a guest appearance in the Nordoff-Robbins charity show held at Knebworth in England. On 27 August 1990, fellow blues guitarist Stevie Ray Vaughan, who was touring with Clapton, and three members of their road crew were killed in a helicopter crash between concerts. Then, on 20 March 1991, Clapton's four-year-old son, Conor, died after falling from the 53rd-floor window of his mother's friend's New York City apartment at 117 East 57th Street. Clapton was staying at a nearby hotel at the time of his son's death, and was preparing to pick him up for lunch and a visit to the Central Park Zoo. He was informed of the incident through a hysterical phone call by Lory Del Santo, Conor's mother. Once comprehending what was happening, he described feeling like he \"went off the edge of the world,\" and promptly arrived at the scene, feeling \"like [he] had walked into someone else\u2019s life.\" The first person to offer condolences towards Clapton was friend and fellow guitarist Keith Richards, who himself had lost his young son Tara in 1976. Conor's funeral took place on 28 March at St Mary Magdalene's Church in Clapton's home village in Ripley, Surrey, with Conor buried in the church graveyard. After his son's death Clapton began attending AA meetings. In 1991, Clapton appeared on Richie Sambora's album, \"Stranger in This Town\", in a song dedicated to him, called \"Mr. Bluesman\". He contributed guitar and vocals to \"Runaway Train\", a duet with Elton John on the latter's \"The One\" album the following year.\nClapton's grief was expressed in the song \"Tears in Heaven\", which was co-written by Will Jennings. At the 35th Annual Grammy Awards, Clapton received six Grammys for the single \"Tears in Heaven\" and his \"Unplugged\" album, for which Clapton performed live in front of a small audience on 16 January 1992 at Bray Film Studios in Windsor, Berkshire, England. The album reached number one on the \"Billboard\" 200, and is certified Diamond by the RIAA for selling over 10 million copies in the US. It reached number two in the UK Albums Chart and is certified four times platinum in the UK. On 9 September 1992, Clapton performed \"Tears in Heaven\" at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards, and won the award for Best Male Video.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI almost subconsciously used music for myself as a healing agent, and lo and behold, it worked\u00a0... I have got a great deal of happiness and a great deal of healing from music.\n\u2014Clapton on the healing process in writing \"Tears in Heaven\".\nIn 1992, Clapton received the Ivor Novello Award for Lifetime Achievement from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors. In October 1992 Clapton was among the dozens of artists performing at Bob Dylan's 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration. Recorded at Madison Square Garden in New York City, the live two-disk CD/DVD captured a show full of celebrities performing classic Dylan songs, with Clapton playing the lead on a nearly 7-minute version of Dylan's \"Knockin' on Heaven's Door\" as part of the finale. While Clapton played acoustic guitar on \"Unplugged\", his 1994 album \"From the Cradle\" contained new versions of old blues standards, highlighted by his electric guitar playing. In 1995, Clapton for the first and only time appeared on a UK No. 1 single, collaborating with Cher, Chrissie Hynde, and Neneh Cherry on a solo to a cover of \"Love Can Build a Bridge\" released in aid of the British charity telethon Comic Relief.\nOn 12 September 1996 Clapton played a party for Armani at New York City's Lexington Armory with Greg Phillinganes, Nathan East and Steve Gadd. Sheryl Crow appeared on one number, performing \"Tearing Us Apart\", a track from \"August\", which was first performed by Tina Turner during the Prince's Trust All-Star Rock show in 1986. It was Clapton's sole US appearance that year, following the open-air concert held at Hyde Park. The concert was taped and the footage was released both on VHS video cassette and later, on DVD. \nClapton's 1996 recording of the Wayne Kirkpatrick/Gordon Kennedy/Tommy Sims tune \"Change the World\" (on the soundtrack of the film \"Phenomenon\") won the Grammy Award for Song of the Year in 1997, the same year he recorded \"Retail Therapy\" (an album of electronic music with Simon Climie under the pseudonym TDF). On 15 September 1997, Clapton appeared at the \"Music for Montserrat\" concert at the Royal Albert Hall, London, performing \"Layla\" and \"Same Old Blues\" before finishing with \"Hey Jude\" alongside fellow English artists Paul McCartney, Elton John, Phil Collins, Mark Knopfler and Sting. That autumn, Clapton released the album \"Pilgrim\", the first record containing new material for almost a decade.\nIn 1996, Clapton had a relationship with singer-songwriter Sheryl Crow. They remain friends, and Clapton appeared as a guest on Crow's Central Park Concert. The duo performed a Cream hit single, \"White Room\". Later, Clapton and Crow performed an alternate version of \"Tulsa Time\" with other guitar legends at the Crossroads Guitar Festival in June 2007 as well as Robert Johnson's blues classic \"Crossroads\" at London's Hyde Park in August 2008 with John Mayer and Robert Randolph.\nAt the 41st Annual Grammy Awards on 24 February 1999, Clapton received his third Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance, for his song \"My Father's Eyes\". In October 1999, the compilation album, \"\", was released, which contained a new song, \"Blue Eyes Blue\", that also appears in soundtrack for the film, \"Runaway Bride\". Clapton finished the twentieth century with collaborations with Carlos Santana and B.B. King. Clapton looked up to King and had always wanted to make an album with him, while King said of Clapton, \"I admire the man. I think he's No. 1 in rock 'n' roll as a guitarist and No. 1 as a great person.\"\nCollaboration albums.\nClapton released the album \"Reptile\" in March 2001. One month after the 11 September attacks, Clapton appeared at the Concert for New York City, performing alongside Buddy Guy. An event marking the Golden Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II in June 2002, Clapton performed \"Layla\" and \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\" at the Party at the Palace concert in the grounds of Buckingham Palace. On 29 November 2002, the Concert for George was held at the Royal Albert Hall, a tribute to George Harrison, who had died a year earlier of lung cancer. Clapton was a performer and the musical director. The concert included Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Jeff Lynne, Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, Ravi Shankar, Gary Brooker, Billy Preston, Joe Brown and Dhani Harrison. In 2004, Clapton released two albums of covers of songs by bluesman Robert Johnson, \"Me and Mr. Johnson\" and \"Sessions for Robert J\". Guitarist Doyle Bramhall II worked on the album with Clapton (after opening Clapton's 2001 tour with his band Smokestack) and joined him on his 2004 tour. In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Clapton No.\u00a053 on their list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\". Other media appearances include the Toots &amp; the Maytals Grammy award-winning album \"True Love\", where he played guitar on the track \"Pressure Drop\".\nOn 22 January 2005, Clapton performed in the Tsunami Relief Concert held at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff, in aid of the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In May 2005, Clapton, Jack Bruce, and Ginger Baker reunited as Cream for a series of concerts at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Concert recordings were released on CD and DVD. Later, Cream performed in New York at Madison Square Garden. Clapton's first album of new original material in nearly five years, \"Back Home\", was released on Reprise Records on 30 August.\nA collaboration with guitarist J. J. Cale, \"The Road to Escondido\", was released on 7 November 2006, featuring Derek Trucks and Billy Preston (Preston had also been a part of Clapton's 2004 touring band). He invited Trucks to join his band for his 2006\u20132007 world tour. Bramhall remained, giving Clapton three elite guitarists in his band, allowing him to revisit many Derek and the Dominos songs that he hadn't played in decades. Trucks became the third member of the Allman Brothers Band to tour supporting Clapton, the second being pianist/keyboardist Chuck Leavell, who appeared on the \"MTV Unplugged\" album and the \"24 Nights\" performances at the Royal Albert Hall, London in 1990 and 1991, as well as Clapton's 1992 US tour.\nOn 20 May 2006, Clapton performed with Queen drummer Roger Taylor and former Pink Floyd bassist/songwriter Roger Waters at Highclere Castle, Hampshire, in support of the Countryside Alliance, which promotes issues relating to the British countryside. On 13 August 2006, Clapton made a guest appearance at the Bob Dylan concert in Columbus, Ohio, playing guitar on three songs in Jimmie Vaughan's opening act. The chemistry between Trucks and Clapton convinced him to invite the Derek Trucks Band to open for Clapton's set at his 2007 Crossroads Guitar Festival. Trucks remained on set and performed with Clapton's band throughout his performances. The rights to Clapton's official memoirs, written by Christopher Simon Sykes and published in 2007, were sold at the 2005 Frankfurt Book Fair for US$4 million.\nIn 2007, Clapton learned more about his father, a Canadian soldier who left the UK after the war. Although Clapton's grandparents eventually told him the truth about his parentage, he only knew that his father's name was Edward Fryer. This was a source of disquiet for Clapton, as witnessed by his 1998 song \"My Father's Eyes\". A Montreal journalist named Michael Woloschuk researched Canadian Armed Forces service records and tracked down members of Fryer's family, and finally pieced together the story. He learned that Clapton's father was Edward Walter Fryer, born 21 March 1920, in Montreal and died 15 May 1985 in Newmarket, Ontario. Fryer was a musician (piano and saxophone) and a lifelong drifter who was married several times, had several children, and apparently never knew that he was the father of Eric Clapton. Clapton thanked Woloschuk in an encounter at Macdonald\u2013Cartier Airport, in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.\nOn 26 February 2008, it was reported that Clapton had been invited to play a concert in North Korea by government officials. Clapton agreed in principle and suggested it take place in 2009. Kristen Foster, a spokesperson for Clapton, said that he regularly received offers to play abroad and that there had been no agreement for him to play in North Korea. In February 2008, Clapton performed with his long-time friend Steve Winwood at Madison Square Garden and guested on his recorded single, \"Dirty City\", on Winwood's album \"Nine Lives\". The two former Blind Faith bandmates met again for a series of 14 concerts throughout the United States in June 2009. Clapton's 2008 Summer Tour began on 3 May at the Ford Amphitheatre, Tampa, Florida, and then moved to Canada, Ireland, England, Norway, Iceland, Denmark, Poland, Germany, and Monaco. On 28 June 2008, he headlined Saturday night for Hard Rock Calling 2008 in London's Hyde Park (previously Hyde Park Calling) with support from Sheryl Crow and John Mayer.\nIn March 2009, the Allman Brothers Band (amongst many notable guests) celebrated their 40th year, dedicating their string of concerts to the late Duane Allman on their annual run at the Beacon Theatre. Eric Clapton was one of the performers, with drummer Butch Trucks remarking that the performance was not the typical Allman Brothers experience, given the number and musical styles of the guests who were invited to perform. Songs like \"In Memory of Elizabeth Reed\" were punctuated with others, including \"The Weight\", with Levon Helm; Johnny Winter sitting in on Hendrix's \"Red House\"; and \"Layla\". On 4 May 2009 Clapton appeared at the Royal Albert Hall, playing \"Further on Up the Road\" with Joe Bonamassa.\nClapton was scheduled to perform at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 25th anniversary concert in Madison Square Garden on 30 October 2009, but cancelled due to gallstone surgery. Van Morrison (who also cancelled) said in an interview that he and Clapton were to do a \"couple of songs\", but that they would do something else together at \"some other stage of the game\".\n\"Clapton\", \"Old Sock\", \"I Still Do\", and \"Happy Xmas\".\nClapton performed a two-night show with Jeff Beck at the O2 Arena in London on 13\u201314 February 2010. The two former Yardbirds extended their 2010 tour with stops at Madison Square Garden, the Air Canada Centre in Toronto, and the Bell Centre in Montreal. Clapton performed a series of concerts in 11 cities throughout the United States from 25 February to 13 March 2010, including Roger Daltrey as opening act. His third European tour with Steve Winwood began on 18 May and ended 13 June, including Tom Norris as opening act. He then began a short North American tour lasting from 26 June to 3 July, starting with his third Crossroads Guitar Festival on 26 June at Toyota Park in Bridgeview, Illinois. Clapton released a new studio album, \"Clapton\", on 27 September 2010 in the United Kingdom and 28 September 2010 in the United States. On 17 November 2010, Clapton performed as guest on the Prince's Trust rock gala held at the Royal Albert Hall, supported by the house band for the evening, which included Jools Holland, Midge Ure and Mark King.\nOn 24 June 2011, Clapton was in concert with Pino Daniele in Cava de' Tirreni stadium before performing a series of concerts in South America from 6 to 16 October 2011. He spent November and December 2011 touring Japan with Steve Winwood, playing 13 shows in various cities throughout the country. On 24 February 2012 Clapton, Keith Richards, Gary Clark Jr., Derek Trucks, Doyle Bramhall II, Kim Wilson and other artists performed together in the Howlin' For Hubert Tribute concert held at the Apollo Theater of New York City honouring blues guitarist Hubert Sumlin who died at age 80 on 4 December 2011. On 29 November 2012, Clapton joined the Rolling Stones at London's O2 Arena during the band's second of five arena dates celebrating their 50th anniversary. On 12 December, Clapton performed The Concert for Sandy Relief at Madison Square Garden, broadcast live via television, radio, cinemas and the Internet across six continents. In January 2013, Surfdog Records announced a signed deal with Clapton for the release of his forthcoming album \"Old Sock\" on 12 March. On 8 April 2013, Eric and Hard Rock International launched the limited-edition Eric Clapton Artist Spotlight merchandise programme benefiting Crossroads Centre Antigua. Clapton toured the US and Europe from 14 March to 19 June 2013 to celebrate 50 years as a professional musician. On 28 February 2013, Clapton announced his intention to stop touring in 2015 due to hassles with travel.\nOn 15 October 2013, Clapton's popular \"Unplugged\" album and concert DVD were re-released, titled \"Unplugged: Expanded &amp; Remastered.\" The album includes the original 14 tracks, remastered, as well as 6 additional tracks, including 2 versions of \"My Father's Eyes\". The DVD includes a restored version of the concert, as well as over 60 minutes of unseen footage from the rehearsal. On 13 and 14 November 2013, Clapton headlined the final two evenings of the \"Baloise Session\", an annual indoor music festival in Basel, Switzerland. On 20 November 2013, Warner Bros released Crossroads Guitar Festival 2013 in CD/DVD/Blu-ray. On 30 April 2014, Clapton announced the release of \"\" as an homage to J. J. Cale who died on 26 July 2013. This tribute album is named after the 1972 single \"Call Me the Breeze\" and comprises 16 Cale songs performed by Clapton, Mark Knopfler, John Mayer, Willie Nelson, Tom Petty and others. \nOn 21 June 2014, Clapton abruptly walked off stage during a concert at the Glasgow Hydro. Although he did return to perform one final song, thousands of fans were upset by the lack of explanation from Clapton or the venue and booed after the concert ended around 40 minutes before advertised to finish. Both Clapton and the venue apologised the next day, blaming 'technical difficulties' for making sound conditions 'unbearable' for Clapton on stage. A week later he confirmed his retirement plans, attributing his decision to the road being \"unbearable\" in addition to \"odd ailments\" that may force him to put down his guitar permanently. In a 2016 interview with \"Classic Rock\" magazine, Clapton said that he had been diagnosed with peripheral neuropathy in 2013, a condition involving damage to peripheral nerves that typically causes stabbing, burning, or tingling pain in the arms and legs.\nClapton performed two shows at Madison Square Garden in New York on 1 and 3 May 2015 followed by a 7-night residency at London's Royal Albert Hall from 14 to 23 May 2015 to celebrate his 70th birthday on 30 March. The shows also mark 50 years since Clapton first played at the Royal Albert Hall \u2013 his debut was on 7 December 1964 when he performed as part of the Yardbirds for the BBC's \"Top Beat Show\". The concert film, \"Slowhand at 70 \u2013 Live at the Royal Albert Hall\", was released by Eagle Rock Entertainment on 13 November 2015 on DVD, CD, Blu-ray and LP. The 2-night concerts in the US marked the 46th anniversary since Clapton, with Cream, opened the \"new\" Madison Square Garden on 2 November 1968. Clapton has performed more times at Madison Square Garden than any other US venue, a total of 45 times. On 20 May 2016, Clapton released his twenty-third studio album \"I Still Do\". On 30 September 2016 the live-album \"Live in San Diego\" was released. \nIn August 2018, Clapton announced that he had recorded his twenty-fourth studio album, \"Happy Xmas\", which consists of blues-tinged interpretations of Christmas songs, with the album released on 12 October. Between April and September 2019, he played 17 concerts in Japan, Europe and the Southwestern United States. He returned to the road in September 2021, playing eight shows in the southern United States. In May 2022, Clapton announced a run of seven US concerts in September with Jimmie Vaughan. In May 2023, Clapton performed at the Jeff Beck tribute concerts held at the Royal Albert Hall, sharing the stage with Rod Stewart, Ronnie Wood, Kirk Hammett and Johnny Depp among others. In 2024, Clapton contributed guitar to a re-release of Mark Knopfler's \"\" in aid of the Teenage Cancer Trust.\n\"Meanwhile\".\nIn May 2024, Clapton revealed in an interview with \"The Real Music Observer\" that he was working on a new studio album, titled \"Meanwhile\", with the hopes of releasing it in the fall of that year.\nInfluences.\nClapton cites Muddy Waters, Freddie King, B.B. King, Albert King, Buddy Guy, and Hubert Sumlin as guitar-playing influences. In his 2007 autobiography, Clapton refers to Muddy Waters as \"the father figure I never really had\". Until his death in 1983, Waters was a part of Clapton's life. \"When I got to know Muddy, unfortunately, my drinking career was in full sway.\" In 2000, Clapton collaborated with B.B. King on their album \"Riding with the King\". The music video for the title track shows Clapton as the chauffeur, with one of his idols in the back seat.\nClapton has said that blues musician Robert Johnson is his single most important influence. In 2004, Clapton released \"Sessions for Robert Johnson\", containing covers of Johnson's songs using electric and acoustic guitars. In an essay for the 1990 boxed set of Johnson's recordings, Clapton wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Robert Johnson to me is the most important blues musician who ever lived\". He was true, absolutely, to his own vision, and as deep as I have gotten into the music over the last 30 years, \"I have never found anything more deeply soulful than Robert Johnson. His music remains the most powerful cry that I think you can find in the human voice, really\" ... it seemed to echo something I had always felt. [italics in original]\nClapton also singled out Buddy Holly as an influence. \"The \"Chirping\" Crickets\" was the first album Clapton ever bought; he later saw Holly on \"Sunday Night at the London Palladium\". In his autobiography, Clapton recounts the first time he saw Holly and his Fender, saying, \"I thought I'd died and gone to heaven\u00a0... it was like seeing an instrument from outer space and I said to myself: 'That's the future \u2013 that's what I want.'\" In the 2017 documentary film, \"\", Clapton cites Bismillah Khan as an influence, adding that \"I wanted my guitar to sound like his reed instrument.\" In the same documentary he also cited harmonica player Little Walter as an influence: \"The sound he made with the harmonica playing through an amplifier. It was thick and fat and very melodic.\"\nLegacy.\nClapton has been referred to as one of the most important and influential guitarists of all time. Clapton is the only three-time inductee to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame: once as a solo artist, and separately as a member of the Yardbirds and Cream. He ranked second in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\" and fourth in \"Gibson's\" Top 50 Guitarists of All Time.\nIn 2011, \"The Guardian\" attributed the creation of the cult of the guitar hero to Clapton, ranking it number seven on their list of the 50 key events in rock music history;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing is more central to rock mythology than the cult of the lead guitarist. And no one did more to create that cult than Eric Clapton. He had already been a member of the Yardbirds before joining John Mayall's Bluesbreakers, the clearing house for guitarists, in April 1965. His two stints with Mayall saw his reputation grow to the extent that a famous graffito captured the popular appraisal of him among rock fans: \"Clapton is God\".\nElias Leight of \"Rolling Stone\" writes that Clapton \"influenced recording techniques as well as guitar-playing technique\". During recording sessions with John Mayall's group, Clapton was frustrated by technicians \"that just came up to your amp with the microphone and just stuck it two inches away from the front of the amplifier. It seemed to me that if you wanted to get the atmosphere we were getting in the clubs, you needed it to sound like you were in the audience 10 feet away, not three inches\". Clapton then moved the microphones, with Pink Floyd's Roger Waters stating, \"That changed everything. Before Eric, guitar playing in England had been Hank Marvin of the Shadows, very simple, not much technique. Suddenly we heard something completely different. The records sounded unlike anything we had heard before.\"\nIn 2012, Clapton was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his artwork \u2013 the Beatles' \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\" album cover \u2013 to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires to mark his 80th birthday. Indelibly linked to the Royal Albert Hall in London, a venue he has played at more than any other in his 50-year plus career, Clapton was inducted into the Royal Albert Hall's Walk of Fame in 2018, making him one of the first eleven recipients of a star on the walk, thus joining Muhammad Ali, Winston Churchill, the Suffragettes, and Albert Einstein, among others who were viewed as \"key players\" in the building's history.\nRobert Christgau, in a dissenting appraisal of Clapton's legacy, writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A promiscuous sideman whose monklike aura has never diminished his extravagant appetites, Clapton likes to get paid, and he's amassed a discography that for an artist of his caliber is remarkably undistinguished. In his self-protective self-deprecation he often attributes this to his own laziness or his need for a catalyst, but it's also guitar hero's disease: like many other guys whose hand-ear coordination is off the curve, he's a casual tunesmith and a corny lyricist, and his band concepts are chronically hit-or-miss.Due to Clapton's impact in the music industry, he has also been mentioned in several songs. In \"She's Leaving You\", MJ Lenderman sings, \"Believe that Clapton is the second coming\", a reference to \"Clapton is God\". Phoebe Bridgers mentions Clapton in \"Moon Song\", with the lyrics \"We hate 'Tears in Heaven' / But it's sad that his baby died\", a reference to the death of Clapton's child, Conor. However, the original lyric, which she sometimes performs live, is \"We hate Eric Clapton\" instead of \"We hate 'Tears in Heaven'.\" She has said the lyric is because he is \"a famous racist\" and makes \"extremely mediocre music\".\nGuitars.\nLike Hank Marvin, the Beatles and Jimi Hendrix, Clapton exerted a crucial and widespread influence in popularising particular models of electric guitar. With the Yardbirds, Clapton played a Fender Telecaster, a Fender Jazzmaster, a double-cutaway Gretsch 6120, and a 1964 Cherry-Red Gibson ES-335. He became exclusively a Gibson player for a period beginning in mid-1965, when he purchased a used sunburst Gibson Les Paul guitar from a guitar store in London. Clapton commented on the slim profile of the neck, which would indicate it was a 1960 model.\nEarly during his stint in Cream, Clapton's first Les Paul Standard was stolen. He continued to play Les Pauls exclusively with Cream (one bought from Andy Summers was almost identical to the stolen guitar) until 1967, when he acquired his most famous guitar in this period, a 1964 Gibson SG, dubbed \"the Fool\". Clapton used both the Les Paul and the SG to create his self-described \"woman tone\". He explained in a 1967 interview, \"I am playing more smoothly now. I'm developing what I call my 'woman tone.' It's a sweet sound, something like the solo on 'I Feel Free'.\" Writer Michael Dregni describes it as \"thick yet piercing, overdriven yet smooth, distorted yet creamy\". The tone is achieved by a combination of tone control settings on the guitars and Clapton's Marshall JTM45 amplifier. \"Vintage Guitar\" magazine identifies \"the opening riff and solo of 'Sunshine of Your Love' are arguably the best illustrations of full-blown woman tone\". Clapton's \"Fool\" acquired its name from its distinctive psychedelic paint job, created by the visual art collective also known as the Fool (just before Cream's first US appearance in 1967, Clapton's SG, Bruce's Fender VI, and Baker's drum head were all repainted in psychedelic designs).\nIn 1968, Clapton bought a Gibson Firebird and started using the 1964 Cherry-Red Gibson ES-335 again. The aforementioned 1964 ES-335 had a storied career. Clapton used it at the last Cream show in November 1968 as well as with Blind Faith, played it sparingly for slide pieces in the 1970s, used it on \"Hard Times\" from \"Journeyman\", the Hyde Park live concert of 1996, and the \"From the Cradle\" sessions and tour of 1994\u201395. It was sold for US$847,500 at a 2004 auction. Gibson produced a limited run of 250 \"Crossroads 335\" replicas. The 335 was only the second electric guitar Clapton bought.\nIn July 1968 Clapton gave George Harrison a 1957 'goldtop' Gibson Les Paul that been refinished with a red colour, nicknamed Lucy. The following September, Clapton played the guitar on the Beatles' recording of \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\". Lucy was stolen from Harrison, though later tracked down and returned to him \u2013 he lent it to Clapton for his 1973 comeback concert at the Rainbow. His SG \"The Fool\" found its way into the hands of George Harrison's friend Jackie Lomax, who subsequently sold it to musician Todd Rundgren for US$500 in 1972. Rundgren restored the guitar and nicknamed it \"Sunny\", after \"Sunshine of Your Love\". He retained it until 2000, when he sold it at an auction for US$150,000. At the 1969 Blind Faith concert in Hyde Park, London Clapton played a Fender Custom Telecaster, which was fitted with \"Brownie\"'s neck.\nIn late 1969 Clapton made the switch to the Fender Stratocaster. \"I had a lot of influences when I took up the Strat. First there was Buddy Holly, and Buddy Guy. Hank Marvin was the first well known person over here in England who was using one, but that wasn't really my kind of music. Steve Winwood had so much credibility, and when he started playing one, I thought, oh, if he can do it, I can do it\". The first\u2014used during the recording of \"Eric Clapton\"\u2014was \"Brownie\", which in 1973 became the backup to the most famous of all Clapton's guitars, \"Blackie\". In November 1970 Eric bought six Fender Stratocasters from the Sho-bud guitar shop in Nashville, Tennessee while on tour with the Dominos. He gave one each to George Harrison, Steve Winwood, and Pete Townshend. His first Stratocaster, Brownie, was purchased on 7 May 1967 and made its debut in 1970 on his first solo album, in concert with Derek and the Dominos as well on the album Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs. \nClapton assembled the best components of the remaining three to create \"Blackie\", which was his favourite stage guitar until its retirement in 1985. It was first played live 13 January 1973 at the Rainbow Concert. Clapton called the 1956/57 Strat a \"mongrel\". On 24 June 2004, Clapton sold \"Blackie\" at Christie's Auction House, New York, for US$959,500 to raise funds for his Crossroads Centre for drug and alcohol addictions. \"Brownie\" is now on display at the Experience Music Project. The Fender Custom Shop has since produced a limited run of 275 'Blackie' replicas, correct in every detail right down to the 'Duck Brothers' flight case, and artificially aged using Fender's \"Relic\" process to simulate years of hard wear. One was presented to Clapton upon the model's release and was used for three numbers during a concert at the Royal Albert Hall on 17 May 2006. In 1979, Clapton gave his signed Fender Lead II guitar to the Hard Rock Cafe in London to designate his favourite bar stool. Pete Townshend also donated his own Gibson Les Paul guitar, with a note attached: \"Mine's as good as his! Love, Pete\".\nSignature guitars in Clapton's honour are made by Fender and C.F. Martin &amp; Company. In 1988, Fender introduced his signature Eric Clapton Stratocaster. Several signature-model 000-sized acoustic guitars made by Martin. The first, of these, introduced in 1995, was a limited edition 000-42EC Eric Clapton signature model with a production run of 461. For the single \"Change the World\" (1996) and the album \"Pilgrim\" (1998) he used a Martin 000-28 EC Eric Clapton signature model, which he subsequently gave to guitarist Paul Wassif. His 1939 000-42 Martin that he played on the \"Unplugged\" album sold for US$791,500 at auction. Clapton uses Ernie Ball Slinky and Super Slinky strings, gauge .10 to.46. His guitar technician for over thirty years was Lee Dickson.\nOther media appearances.\nClapton appeared in the movie version of \"Tommy\", the first full-length rock opera, written by the Who. In the movie version, Clapton appeared as the Preacher, performing Sonny Boy Williamson's song, \"Eyesight to the Blind\". He appeared in \"Blues Brothers 2000\" as one of the Louisiana Gator Boys. In addition to being in the band, he had a small speaking role. Clapton has appeared in an advertisement for the Mercedes-Benz G-Wagen. In March 2007 Clapton appeared in an advertisement for RealNetwork's Rhapsody online music service. In 2010, Clapton started appearing as a spokesman for T-Mobile, advertising their MyTouch Fender cell phone. Clapton also appeared in the 2011 BBC documentary \"Reggae Got Soul: The Story of Toots and the Maytals\", which was described as \"The untold story of one of the most influential artists ever to come out of Jamaica.\"\nWhen asked to describe God by their minister, the characters Eric Forman and Steven Hyde both drew an image of Clapton in the episode \"Holy Crap!\" of season two of \"That '70s Show\".\nClapton appeared on the BBC's \"Top Gear\" in 2013, during Series 19 Episode 4 and was involved in testing the new Kia Ceed. He was called upon to test the Ceed's auxiliary input, which he tested by plugging in one of his guitars and playing several bars of his most famous hits. He was introduced by \"Top Gear\" host Jeremy Clarkson as a \"local guitarist\".\nIn 2017, a documentary film titled \"Eric Clapton: Life in 12 Bars\" was directed by Lili Fini Zanuck. Clapton wrote the film score for Zanuck's 1991 film \"Rush\" and the two remained friends. In an interview for BBC News, Zanuck said that Clapton only agreed to participate if she directed it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think this got made because Eric was in the right mood. He's an incredibly private man and despite his immense success, he's never cared if he got any publicity at all, he just loves his music... I think it might be something to do with his age, as he turned 70 a couple of years ago. He said to me, \"I didn't want it to be done after I was dead and for it to be wrong.\" Maybe he thought his time had come to lay it all out on the table.\"Nothing but the Blues\" is a 1995 documentary film about Clapton's musical journey and his love for the blues. Martin Scorsese was one of the executive producers.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nClapton's partner from the late 1960s to 1974 was Alice Ormsby-Gore, a British aristocrat. They were together for three years and were both addicted to heroin. He briefly dated funk singer Betty Davis. \nClapton became friends with George Harrison in the late 1960s and they began writing and recording music together. Clapton fell in love with Pattie Boyd, who was married to Harrison at this time. Harrison and Boyd divorced in 1977 and she married Clapton on 27 March 1979, in Tucson, Arizona. Their marriage was marred by his infidelities and domestic violence. During a 1999 interview with \"The Sunday Times\", Clapton admitted to raping and abusing her when they were married and he was a \"full-blown\" alcoholic who felt entitled to sex. In 1984, while recording \"Behind the Sun\", Clapton began a relationship with Yvonne Kelly, the manager of AIR Studios Montserrat. Although both were married to other partners at the time, they had a daughter named Ruth Kelly Clapton in January 1985. Ruth's existence was kept from the public until the media realised she was his child in 1991.\nClapton and Boyd tried unsuccessfully to have children, even trying in vitro fertilisation in 1984, but were faced instead with miscarriages. He had an affair with Italian model Lory Del Santo, who gave birth to their son, Conor, on 21 August 1986. Clapton and Boyd later divorced in 1989 after she was \"utterly devastated\" by his confession to impregnating Del Santo during this affair. Conor died on 20 March 1991 at the age of four after falling out of an open bedroom window on the 53rd floor of the Galleria apartment building in Manhattan.\nIn 1998, Clapton, then 53, met 22-year-old administrative assistant Melia McEnery in Columbus, Ohio, at a party given for him after a performance. He quietly dated her for a year, and went public with the relationship in 1999. They married on 1 January 2002 at St Mary Magdalene Church in Clapton's birthplace, Ripley. They have three daughters.\nHealth.\nClapton gave up alcohol and other recreational drugs in 1982, after a period of addiction. A former heavy cigarette smoker, Clapton quit smoking in 1994.\nPolitical opinions.\n\"Keep Britain White\".\nOn 5 August 1976, Clapton spoke out against increasing immigration during a concert in Birmingham. Visibly intoxicated on stage, Clapton voiced his support for the right-wing British politician Enoch Powell. He addressed the audience as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Do we have any foreigners in the audience tonight? If so, please put up your hands. So where are you? Well wherever you all are, I think you should all just leave. Not just leave the hall, leave our country. I don't want you here, in the room or in my country. Listen to me, man! I think we should vote for Enoch Powell. Enoch's our man. I think Enoch's right, I think we should send them all back. Stop Britain from becoming a black colony. Get the foreigners out. Get the wogs out. Get the coons out. Keep Britain white. I used to be into dope, now I'm into racism. It's much heavier, man. Fucking wogs, man. Fucking Saudis taking over London. Bastard wogs. Britain is becoming overcrowded and Enoch will stop it and send them all back. The black wogs and coons and Arabs and fucking Jamaicans don't belong here, we don't want them here. This is England, this is a white country, we don't want any black wogs and coons living here. We need to make clear to them they are not welcome. England is for white people, man. This is Great Britain, a white country, what is happening to us, for fuck's sake? Throw the wogs out! Keep Britain white!\n\"Keep Britain White\" was, at the time, a slogan of the far-right National Front (NF). This incident, along with some controversial remarks made around the same time by David Bowie, were the main catalysts for the creation of Rock Against Racism, with a concert on 30 April 1978.\nIn an interview from October 1976 with \"Sounds\" magazine, Clapton said that he did not \"know much about politics\" and said of his immigration speech that \"I just don't know what came over me that night. It must have been something that happened in the day but it came out in this garbled thing.\" In a 2004 interview with \"Uncut\", Clapton referred to Enoch Powell as \"outrageously brave.\" He said that the UK was \"inviting people in as cheap labour and then putting them in ghettos.\" In 2004, Clapton told an interviewer for \"Scotland on Sunday\", \"There's no way I could be a racist. It would make no sense.\" In his 2007 autobiography, Clapton said he was \"deliberately oblivious\" to racial conflict. In a December 2007 interview with Melvyn Bragg on \"The South Bank Show\", Clapton said he was not a racist but still believed Powell's comments were relevant.\nIn 2018 Clapton stated he was \"disgusted\" with himself for his \"chauvinistic\" and \"fascistic\" comments on stage. He added: \"I sabotaged everything I got involved with. I was so ashamed of who I was, a kind of semi-racist, which didn't make sense. Half of my friends were black, I dated a black woman, and I championed black music.\"\nOpposition to fox-hunting ban.\nClapton supports the Countryside Alliance, which promotes field sports and issues relating to the British countryside. He has played in concerts to raise funds for the organisation and publicly opposed the Labour Party's ban on fox hunting with the Hunting Act 2004. A spokesperson for Clapton said, \"Eric supports the Countryside Alliance. He does not hunt himself, but does enjoy rural pursuits such as fishing and shooting. He supports the Alliance's pursuit to scrap the ban on the basis that he disagrees with the state's interference with people's private pursuits.\"\nCOVID-19.\nIn November 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Clapton and Van Morrison collaborated on an anti-mask, anti-lockdown single entitled \"Stand and Deliver\", the profits from which were donated to Morrison's Lockdown Financial Hardship Fund. Morrison's stance was criticised by Northern Ireland Health Minister Robin Swann. In July 2021, Clapton wrote that he would \"not perform on any stage where there is a discriminated audience present\", in response to Boris Johnson mandating that concert attendees be vaccinated. Clapton had by then taken both doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine and said he had had severe reactions to both injections. Whether the symptoms he reported were actually vaccine-related was called into question by an NBC News editorial, given that Clapton previously reported suffering the same symptoms as early as 2013 due to nerve damage.\nIn August 2021, Clapton released the single \"This Has Gotta Stop\" and an accompanying music video. It was described as a protest song against COVID-19 lockdowns, vaccinations, and contains lyrical and visual statements against what Clapton sees as the erosion of civil liberties as the result of lockdown policies. Clapton tested positive for COVID-19 in May 2022, causing him to cancel some concerts in his tour schedule.\nGaza war.\nIn November 2023, during the Gaza war, Clapton released a song titled \"Voice of a Child,\" along with a video featuring images of destruction in the Gaza Strip. In December 2023, Clapton organized a charity concert to raise funds for children in the Gaza Strip. During the event, he played a guitar painted with the colors of the Palestinian flag.\nAssets and philanthropy.\nWealth and assets.\nIn 2009, \"Surrey Life Magazine\" ranked Clapton as number 17 in their list of richest Surrey residents, estimating his fortune at \u00a3120\u00a0million in assets. This was a combination of income, property, a \u00a39\u00a0million yacht, \"Va Bene\" (previously owned by Bernie Ecclestone), his back music catalogue, his touring income, and his holding company Marshbrook Ltd, which had earned him \u00a3110\u00a0million since 1989. In 2003, he purchased a 50% share of gentleman's outfitters Cordings Piccadilly. At the time, owner Noll Uloth was trying to save the shop from closure and contacted Clapton, his \"best client\"; within five minutes, Clapton replied with \"I can't let this happen\".\nCar collection.\nSince the 1970s, Clapton has considered himself a \"car enthusiast\" and has often stated his passion for the Ferrari brand. Clapton owns or has owned a range of Ferraris, and when asked about his Ferrari collection in 1989, he said he liked the touring cars the company produces for road use and commented \"if I had more space and if I had been wise I would have a huge collection by now and I would be a multi-multi-millionaire\". In 2010, he explained that for him \"Ferrari has always been the number one car\" to own and drive, and that he always supported Ferrari on the road and in Formula One motor racing.\nIn 2012, Ferrari honoured Clapton with the one-off special project car, the Ferrari SP12 EC. In July 2013 Clapton displayed it at the Goodwood Festival of Speed in England in the Michelin Supercar Run. In 2014, Clapton explained that Ferrari is still his favourite car brand. Among the other vehicles Clapton owns or has owned are a vintage Mini Cooper Radford that was a gift from George Harrison.\nCharitable work.\nIn 1993, Clapton was appointed a director of Clouds House, a UK treatment centre for drug and alcohol dependence, and was a member of the board until 1997. He also served on the board of directors for The Chemical Dependency Centre from 1994 until 1999. The two charities subsequently merged to become Action on Addiction in 2007.\nIn 1998, Clapton established the Crossroads Centre in Antigua to help others to overcome addiction to drugs and alcohol. He has remained active in its management oversight and fundraising to the present day. He organised the Crossroads Guitar Festival in 1999, 2004, 2007, 2010, 2013, 2019 and 2023 to raise funds for the centre. In 1999, Clapton auctioned off some of his guitar collection and raised more than US$5\u00a0million for continued support of the Crossroads Centre. A second guitar auction, which included the \"Cream\" of Clapton's collection, as well as guitars donated by famous friends, was held on 24 June 2004 at Christie's and raised US$7,438,624. His Lowden acoustic guitar sold for US$41,825. \nIn 2011, Clapton sold over 150 items at a New York auction, with the proceeds going to the Crossroads Centre. Items sold included his guitar from the Cream reunion tour in 2005, speaker cabinets used in the early 1970s from his days with Derek and the Dominos, and guitars from Jeff Beck, J. J. Cale, and Joe Bonamassa. In March 2011, Clapton raised more than \u00a31.3\u00a0million when he auctioned off 138 lots, consisting of 75 guitars and 55 amps from his personal collection, including a 1948 Gibson hollow body guitar; a Gianni Versace suit from his 1990 concert at the Royal Albert Hall; and a replica of his famous Fender Stratocaster known as \"Blackie\", which fetched more than $30,000. All proceeds went to Crossroads.\nClapton has performed at \"The Secret Policeman's Ball\", a benefit show co-founded by Monty Python member John Cleese on behalf of Amnesty International. He made his first appearance at the show, held in London's Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in 1981, and subsequently became an activist. Clapton has collaborated with The Prince's Trust, the leading UK youth charity, which provides training, personal development, business start up support, mentoring, and advice. He has performed at the charity's rock concert numerous times since the 1980s, most recently in 2010. In 2008, he donated a song to Aid Still Required's CD to assist with the restoration of Southeast Asia after the devastation inflicted by the 2004 tsunami.\nFootball.\nClapton is a fan of English football club West Bromwich Albion. In 1982, he performed a concert before West Brom player John Wile's testimonial game at The Hawthorns. It has been reported that the club rejected his offer to invest cash in the club around this time. In the late 1970s Clapton positioned a West Brom scarf on the back cover of his album, \"Backless\". In the 1978\u201379 season Clapton sponsored West Brom's UEFA Cup home game against Turkish club Galatasaray.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "10051", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10051", "title": "Electronic Data Systems Corp.", "text": ""}
{"id": "10053", "revid": "8377723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10053", "title": "E2", "text": "E2, e2, E02, E.II, e2 or E-2 may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "10055", "revid": "2945238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10055", "title": "Etiology", "text": "Study of causation, or origination\nEtiology (; alternatively spelled aetiology or \u00e6tiology) is the study of causation or origination. The word is derived from the Greek word \"()\", meaning \"giving a reason for\" (from \" ' ()\"\u00a0'cause' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'study of'). More completely, etiology is the study of the causes, origins, or reasons behind the way that things are, or the way they function, or it can refer to the causes themselves. The word is commonly used in medicine (pertaining to causes of disease or illness) and in philosophy, but also in physics, biology, psychology, political science, geography, cosmology, spatial analysis and theology in reference to the causes or origins of various phenomena.\nIn the past, when many physical phenomena were not well understood or when histories were not recorded, myths often arose to provide etiologies. Thus, an etiological myth, or origin myth, is a myth that has arisen, been told over time or written to explain the origins of various social or natural phenomena. For example, Virgil's \"Aeneid\" is a national myth written to explain and glorify the origins of the Roman Empire. In theology, many religions have creation myths explaining the origins of the world or its relationship to believers.\nMedicine.\nIn medicine, the etiology of an illness or condition refers to the frequent studies to determine one or more factors that come together to cause it. Relatedly, when disease is widespread, epidemiological studies investigate what associated factors, such as location, sex, exposure to chemicals, and many others, make a population more or less likely to have an illness, condition, or disease, thus helping determine its etiology. Sometimes determining etiology is an imprecise process. In the past, the etiology of a common sailor's disease, scurvy, was long unknown. When large, ocean-going ships were built, sailors began to put to sea for long periods of time, and often lacked fresh fruit and vegetables. Without knowing the precise cause, Captain James Cook suspected scurvy was caused by the lack of vegetables in the diet. Based on his suspicion, he forced his crew to eat sauerkraut, a cabbage preparation, every day, and based upon the positive outcomes, he inferred that it prevented scurvy, even though he did not know precisely why. It took about another two hundred years to discover the precise etiology: the lack of vitamin C in a sailor's diet.\nThe following are examples of intrinsic factors:\nMythology.\nAn etiological myth, or origin myth, is a myth intended to explain the origins of cult practices, natural phenomena, proper names and the like. For example, the name Delphi and its associated deity, \"Apollon Delphinios\", are explained in the Homeric Hymn which tells of how Apollo, in the shape of a dolphin (), propelled Cretans over the seas to make them his priests. While Delphi is actually related to the word \"\" ('womb'), many etiological myths are similarly based on folk etymology (the term \"Amazon\", for example). In the \"Aeneid\" (published c.\u200917\u00a0BC), Virgil claims the descent of Augustus Caesar's Julian clan from the hero Aeneas through his son Ascanius, also called Iulus. The story of Prometheus' sacrifice trick at Mecone in Hesiod's \"Theogony\" relates how Prometheus tricked Zeus into choosing the bones and fat of the first sacrificial animal rather than the meat to justify why, after a sacrifice, the Greeks offered the bones wrapped in fat to the gods while keeping the meat for themselves. In Ovid's \"Pyramus and Thisbe\", the origin of the color of mulberries is explained, as the white berries become stained red from the blood gushing forth from their double suicide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10057", "revid": "478073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10057", "title": "Ehime-Maru", "text": ""}
{"id": "10058", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10058", "title": "Epistles", "text": ""}
{"id": "10061", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10061", "title": "Epistle to Ephesians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10062", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10062", "title": "Epistle to the Phillipians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10063", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10063", "title": "Epistle to Philippians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10065", "revid": "40740552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10065", "title": "Empirical formula", "text": "Simplest whole number ratio of atoms present in a compound\nIn chemistry, the empirical formula of a chemical compound is the simplest whole number ratio of atoms present in a compound. A simple example of this concept is that the empirical formula of sulfur monoxide, or SO, is simply SO, as is the empirical formula of disulfur dioxide, S2O2. Thus, sulfur monoxide and disulfur dioxide, both compounds of sulfur and oxygen, have the same empirical formula. However, their molecular formulas, which express the number of atoms in each molecule of a chemical compound, are not the same.\nAn empirical formula makes no mention of the arrangement or number of atoms. It is standard for many ionic compounds, like calcium chloride (CaCl2), and for macromolecules, such as silicon dioxide (SiO2).\nThe molecular formula, on the other hand, shows the number of each type of atom in a molecule. The structural formula shows the arrangement of the molecule. It is also possible for different types of compounds to have equal empirical formulas.\nIn the early days of chemistry, information regarding the composition of compounds came from elemental analysis, which gives information about the relative amounts of elements present in a compound, which can be written as percentages or mole ratios. However, chemists were not able to determine the exact amounts of these elements and were only able to know their ratios, hence the name \"empirical formula\". Since ionic compounds are extended networks of anions and cations, all formulas of ionic compounds are empirical.\nCalculation example.\nA chemical analysis of a sample of methyl acetate provides the following elemental data: 48.64% carbon (C), 8.16% hydrogen (H), and 43.20% oxygen (O). For the purposes of determining empirical formulas, it's assumed that we have 100 grams of the compound. If this is the case, the percentages will be equal to the mass of each element in grams.\nStep 1: Change each percentage to an expression of the mass of each element in grams. That is, 48.64% C becomes 48.64 g C, 8.16% H becomes 8.16 g H, and 43.20% O becomes 43.20 g O.\nStep 2: Convert the amount of each element in grams to its amount in moles\nformula_1\nformula_2\nformula_3\nStep 3: Divide each of the resulting values by the smallest of these values (2.7)\nformula_4\nformula_5\nformula_6\nStep 4: If necessary, multiply these numbers by integers in order to get whole numbers; if an operation is done to one of the numbers, it must be done to all of them.\nformula_7\nformula_8\nformula_9\nThus, the empirical formula of methyl acetate is \n. This formula also happens to be methyl acetate's molecular formula.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10066", "revid": "805471158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10066", "title": "Episcopalians", "text": ""}
{"id": "10067", "revid": "49369052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10067", "title": "Episcopal polity", "text": "Hierarchical form of church governance\nAn episcopal polity, also known as episcopalianism, is a hierarchical form of church governance in which the chief local authorities are called bishops. The word \"bishop\" here is derived via the British Latin and Vulgar Latin term \"*ebiscopus\"/\"*biscopus\", from grc \" \"\u1f10\u03c0\u03af\u03c3\u03ba\u03bf\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2\" (ep\u00edskopos)\"\u00a0'overseer'. It is the structure used by many of the major Christian Churches and denominations, such as the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Church of the East, Anabaptist, Lutheran, and Anglican churches or denominations, and other churches founded independently from these lineages. Many Methodist denominations have a form of episcopal polity known as connexionalism.\nHistory.\nChurches with an episcopal polity are governed by bishops, practising their authorities in the dioceses and conferences or synods. Their leadership is both sacramental and constitutional; as well as performing ordinations, confirmations, and consecrations, the bishop supervises the clergy within a local jurisdiction and is the representative both to secular structures and within the hierarchy of the church. \nBishops are considered to derive their authority from an unbroken, personal apostolic succession from the Twelve Apostles of Jesus. Bishops with such authority are said to represent the historical episcopate or historic episcopate. Churches with this type of government usually believe that the Church requires episcopal government as described in the New Testament (see http:// and http://). In some systems, bishops may be subject in limited ways to bishops holding a higher office (variously called archbishops, metropolitans, or patriarchs, depending upon the tradition). They also meet in councils or synods. These gatherings, subject to presidency by higher ranking bishops, usually make important decisions, though the synod or council may also be purely advisory.\nFor much of the written history of institutional Christianity, episcopal government was the only known form of church organization. This changed at the Reformation. Many Protestant churches are now organized by either congregational or presbyterian church polities, both descended from the writings of John Calvin, a Protestant reformer working and writing independently following the break with the Catholic Church precipitated by The Ninety-Five Theses of Martin Luther. However, some people have disputed the episcopal polity before the reformation, such as Aerius of Sebaste in the 4th century.\nOverview of episcopal churches.\nThe definition of the word \"episcopal\" has variation among Christian traditions. There are subtle differences in governmental principles among episcopal churches at the present time. To some extent the separation of episcopal churches can be traced to these differences in ecclesiology, that is, their theological understanding of church and church governance. For some, \"episcopal churches\" are churches that use a hierarchy of bishops who identify as being in an unbroken, personal apostolic succession.\n\"Episcopal\" is also commonly used to distinguish between the various organizational structures of denominations. For instance, \"Presbyterian\" (, presb\u00fdteros) is used to describe a church governed by a hierarchy of assemblies of elected elders, referred to as presbyterian polity. Similarly, \"episcopal\" is used to describe a church governed by bishops. Self-governed local congregations, governed neither by elders nor bishops, are usually described as \"congregational\".\nMore specifically, the capitalized appellation \"Episcopal\" is applied to several churches historically based within Anglicanism (\"Episcopalianism\"), including those still in communion with the Church of England.\nUsing these definitions, examples of specific episcopal churches include:\nSome Lutheran churches practice congregational polity or a form of presbyterian polity. Others, including the Church of Sweden, practice episcopal polity; the Church of Sweden also counts its bishops among the historic episcopate. This is also the case with some American Lutheran churches, such as the Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church, Lutheran Orthodox Church, Lutheran Church - International, and the Lutheran Episcopal Communion.\nMany Methodist churches (the United Methodist Church, among others) retain the form and function of episcopal polity, although in a modified form, called connexionalism. Since all trace their ordinations to an Anglican priest, John Wesley, it is generally considered that their bishops do not share in apostolic succession. However, United Methodists affirm that their bishops share in the historic episcopate.\nFormation.\nThe Apostle Paul in the Epistle to the Philippians, Clement of Rome and the \"Didache\" when talking about the ecclesial system of governance, mention \u201cbishops and deacons\u201d, without the word \u201cpresbyter\u201d, which has been argued by some to show that there was no presbyter-bishop distinction yet in the first century.\nIgnatius of Antioch, writing in already the early second century, makes a clear distinction of bishops and presbyters, meaning that his letters show that an episcopal system was already in existence by his time. However, Bart Erhman sees it as significant that Ignatius never mentioned a bishop in Rome. Later, Tertullian also very clearly distinguishes the presbyters and bishops as a separate office, Irenaeus made lists of the succession of bishops, though such lists made by the early Church Fathers are highly contradictory. By the second century, it appears that the episcopal system had become the majority, universal view among Christians.\nEven schismatic sects such as the Novatians and Donatists would also use the episcopal framework, except for Aerius of Sebaste, who contested the system and began his own sect.\nJerome stated that churches were originally governed by a group of presbyters, only later electing bishops to suppress schisms.\nCatholic Church.\nThe Catholic Church has an episcopate, with the Pope, who is the Bishop of Rome, at the top. The Catholic Church considers juridical oversight over the Church is not a power derived from human beings, but strictly from the authority of Christ, which was given to his twelve apostles. The See of Rome, as the unbroken line of apostolic authority descending from Saint Peter the Apostle (the \u201cPrince and Head of the Apostles\u201d), is a visible sign and \"locus\" of communion among the College of Bishops, and therefore also of local churches around the world. In communion with these churches and their bishops, the Pope has all legitimate juridical and infallible teaching authority over the whole Church. This authority given by Christ to Saint Peter and the apostles is transmitted from one generation to the next by the power of the Holy Spirit, through the laying on of hands from the Apostles to the bishops, in unbroken succession.\nEastern Orthodox Church.\nThe conciliar idea of episcopal government continues in the Eastern Orthodox Church. In Eastern Orthodoxy, all autocephalous primates are seen as collectively gathering around Christ, with other archbishops and bishops gathering around them, and so forth. There is no single primate with exclusive authority comparable to the Pope in Rome. However, the Patriarch of Constantinople (now Istanbul) is seen as the , the \"first among equals\" of the autocephalous churches of Eastern Orthodoxy.\nOriental Orthodox churches.\nThe Oriental Orthodox Churches affirm the ideas of apostolic succession and episcopal government. Within each national Church, the bishops form a holy synod to which even the Patriarch is subject. The Syriac Orthodox Church traces its apostolic succession to St. Peter and recognises Antioch as the original See of St. Peter. The Armenian Apostolic Church traces its lineage to the Apostle Bartholomew. The Indian Orthodox Church traces its lineage to the Apostle Thomas. The Ethiopian Orthodox Church received its lines of succession (Frumentius) through the Coptic Orthodox Church in the fifth century.\nBoth the Greek and Coptic Orthodox Churches each recognise their own Pope of Alexandria (Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria and All Africa, and Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria respectively), both of whom trace their apostolic succession back to the figure Mark the Evangelist. There are official, ongoing efforts in recent times to heal this ancient breach. Already, the two recognize each other's baptisms, chrismations, and marriages, making intermarriage much easier.\nChurch of the East.\nHistorically, the Church of the East has traced its episcopal succession to St. Thomas the Apostle. Currently the bishops of the Assyrian Church of the East continue to maintain its apostolic succession.\nLutheran Churches.\nLutheran Churches, such as the Batak Christian Protestant Church, Church of Sweden and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya, maintain apostolic succession. In countries such as Sweden, Catholic bishops became Lutheran bishops during the Reformation, continuing the ancient lines of apostolic succession.\nThrough Swedish missionary work and the establishment of Lutheran Churches in various countries, such as in Kenya, apostolic succession was continued in those denominations, such as in the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Tanzania, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Southern Africa, Tamil Evangelical Lutheran Church, Evangelical Lutheran Church in Malaysia, and Evangelical Lutheran Church in Zimbabwe, among others.\nThe Lutheran Church - International, a Confessional Lutheran denomination of Evangelical Catholic churchmanship has an episcopal polity, with its clergy being ordained in lines of apostolic succession.\nAnglican Communion.\nAnglicanism is a Reformation tradition that lays claim to the historic episcopate through apostolic succession in terms comparable to the various Roman Catholic, Orthodox, and certain Lutheran Communions. Anglicans assert unbroken episcopal succession in and through the Church of England back to St. Augustine of Canterbury and to the first century Roman province of Britannia. While some Celtic Christian practices were changed at the Synod of Whitby, the church in the British Isles was under papal authority from earliest times.\nThe legislation of Henry VIII effectively establishing the independence of the Church of England from Rome did not alter its constitutional or pastoral structures. Royal supremacy was exercised through the extant legal structures of the church, whose leaders were bishops. Episcopacy was thus seen as a given of the Reformed \"Ecclesia Anglicana\", and a foundation in the institution's appeal to ancient and apostolic legitimacy. What did change was that bishops were now seen to be ministers of the Crown for the spiritual government of its subjects. The influence of Richard Hooker was crucial to an evolution in this understanding in which bishops came to be seen in their more traditional role as ones who delegate to the presbyterate inherited powers, act as pastors to presbyters, and holding a particular teaching office with respect to the wider church.\nAnglican opinion has differed as to the way in which episcopal government is \"de jure divino\" (by the Divine Right of Kings). On the one hand, the seventeenth century divine, John Cosin, held that episcopal authority is \"jure divino\", but that it stemmed from \"apostolic practice and the customs of the Church ... [not] absolute precept that either Christ or His Apostles gave about it\" (a view maintained also by Hooker). In contrast, Lancelot Andrewes and others held that episcopal government is derived from Christ via the apostles. Regardless, both parties viewed the episcopacy as bearing the apostolic function of oversight which both includes, and derives from, the power of ordination, and is normative for the governance of the church. The practice of apostolic succession both ensures the legitimacy of the church's mission and establishes the unity, communion, and continuity of the local church with the universal church. This formulation, in turn, laid the groundwork for an independent view of the church as a \"sacred society\" distinct from civil society, which was so crucial for the development of local churches as non-established entities outside England, and gave direct rise to the Catholic Revival and disestablishmentarianism within England.\nFunctionally, Anglican episcopal authority is expressed synodically, although individual provinces may accord their primate with more or less authority to act independently. Called variously \"synods\", \"councils\", or \"conventions\", they meet under episcopal chairmanship. In many jurisdictions, conciliar resolutions that have been passed require episcopal assent or consent to take force. Seen in this way, Anglicans often speak of \"the bishop-in-synod\" as the force and authority of episcopal governance. Such conciliar authority extends to the standard areas of doctrine, discipline, and worship, but in these regards is limited by Anglicanism's tradition of the limits of authority. Those limits are expressed in Article XXI of the Thirty-Nine Articles of Religion, ratified in 1571 (significantly, just as the Council of Trent was drawing to a close), which held that \"General Councils ... may err, and sometimes have erred ... wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of holy Scripture.\" Hence, Anglican jurisdictions have traditionally been conservative in their approach to either innovative doctrinal development or in encompassing actions of the church as doctrinal (see \"lex orandi, lex credendi\").\nAnglican synodical government, though varied in expression, is characteristically representative. Provinces of the Anglican Communion, their ecclesiastical provinces and dioceses are governed by councils consisting not only of bishops, but also representatives of the presbyterate and laity.\nThere is no international juridical authority in Anglicanism, although the tradition's common experience of episcopacy, symbolised by the historical link with the See of Canterbury, along with a common and complex liturgical tradition, has provided a measure of unity. This has been reinforced by the Lambeth Conferences of Anglican Communion bishops, which first met in 1867. These conferences, though they propose and pass resolutions, are strictly consultative, and the intent of the resolutions is to provide guideposts for Anglican jurisdictions\u2014not direction. The Conferences also express the function of the episcopate to demonstrate the ecumenical and catholic nature of the church.\nThe Scottish Episcopal Church traces its history back to the origins of Christianity in Scotland. Following the 1560 Scottish Reformation the Church of Scotland was initially run by Superintendents, episcopal governance was restored in 1572, but episcopalianism alternated with periods when the Kirk was under presbyterian control until the 1711 Act allowed formation of the independent non-established Scottish Episcopal Church. The Nonjuring schism led to the British Government imposing penal laws against the church. In 1784 the Scottish church appointed Samuel Seabury as first bishop of the American Episcopal Church, beginning the worldwide Anglican Communion of churches, and in 1792 the penal laws were abolished. The church accepted the articles of the Church of England in 1804. \nThe spread of increasingly democratic forms of representative governance has its origin in the formation of the first General Conventions of the American Episcopal Church in the 1780s, which established a \"House of Bishops\" and a \"House of Deputies\". In many jurisdictions, there is also a third, clerical House. Resolutions may be voted on jointly or by each House, in the latter case requiring passage in all Houses to be adopted by the particular council.\nChurches that are members of the Anglican Communion are episcopal churches in polity, and some are named \"Episcopal\". However, some churches that self-identify as Anglican do not belong to the Anglican Communion, and not all episcopally-governed churches are Anglican. The Roman Catholic Church, the Old Catholic Churches (in full communion with, but not members of, the Anglican Communion), and the Eastern Orthodox churches are recognized, and also their bishops, by Anglicans.\nMethodist churches.\nA number of Methodist churches often use episcopal polity for historical as well as practical reasons, albeit to limited use. Methodists often use the term \"connexionalism\" or \"connexional polity\" in addition to \"episcopal\". Nevertheless, the powers of the Methodist episcopacy can be relatively strong and wide-reaching compared to traditional conceptions of episcopal polity. \nIn the Free Methodist Church, bishops are elected.\nIn the United Methodist Church, bishops are elected for life, can serve up to two terms in a specific conference (three if special permission is given), are responsible for ordaining and appointing clergy to pastor churches, perform many administrative duties, preside at the annual sessions of the regional Conferences and at the quadrennial meeting of the worldwide General Conference, have authority for teaching and leading the church on matters of social and doctrinal import, and serve to represent the denomination in ecumenical gatherings. United Methodist bishops in the United States serve in their appointed conferences, being moved to a new \"Episcopal Area\" after 8 (or 12) years, until their mandated retirement at the end of the quadrennium following their sixty-sixth birthday.\nThe Methodist Church in Great Britain holds that all ordained ministers are equal in terms of spirituality. However, for practical management lines are drawn into President of Conference, Chair of District, Superintendent Minister, Minister. However, all are ministers. The Fellowship of Independent Methodist Churches is non-episcopal. Similarly, the Congregational Methodist Church has a congregational polity.\nAnabaptist Churches.\nMost Anabaptist churches of the plain dress tradition follow an episcopal system, at least in name. Congregational governance is strongly emphasized, and each congregation elects its pastor. Bishops enforce inter-congregational unity and may discipline pastors for breaking from traditional norms.\nOther Protestant churches.\nThe Reformed Church of Hungary and Lutheran churches in continental Europe may sometimes be called \u201cepiscopal\u201d. In these latter cases, the form of government is not radically different from the presbyterian form, except that their councils of bishops have hierarchical jurisdiction over the local ruling bodies to a greater extent than in most Presbyterian and other Reformed churches. As mentioned, the Lutheran Church in Sweden and Finland (along with Lutheran Churches established in various parts of the world by missionaries from these denominations) are exceptions, claiming apostolic succession in a pattern somewhat like the Anglican churches. Otherwise, forms of polity are not mandated in the Lutheran churches, as it is not regarded as having doctrinal significance. Old World Lutheranism, for historical reasons, has tended to adopt Erastian theories of episcopal authority (by which church authority is to a limited extent sanctioned by secular government). In the United States, Lutheran churches tend to adopt a form of government that grants congregations more independence, but ultimately has an episcopal structure. A small minority of Episcopal Baptists exists.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nAlthough it never uses the term, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (informally known as the LDS Church) is episcopal, rather than presbyterian or congregational, in the sense that it has a strict hierarchy of leadership from the local bishop/branch president up to a single prophet/president, believed to be personally authorized and guided by Jesus Christ. Local congregations (branches, wards, and stakes) have \"de jure\" boundaries by which members are allocated, and membership records are centralized. This system developed gradually from a more presbyterian polity (Joseph Smith's original title in 1830 was \"First Elder\") for pragmatic and doctrinal reasons, reaching a full episcopacy during the Nauvoo period (1839\u20131846).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10068", "revid": "48031188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10068", "title": "Episcopal", "text": "Episcopal may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10070", "revid": "1314850111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10070", "title": "East Slavic languages", "text": "Language family\nThe East Slavic languages constitute one of three regional subgroups of the Slavic languages, distinct from the West and South Slavic languages. East Slavic languages are currently spoken natively throughout Eastern Europe, and eastwards to Siberia and the Russian Far East. In part due to the large historical influence of the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union, the Russian language is also spoken as a lingua franca in many regions of the Caucasus and Central Asia. Of the three Slavic branches, East Slavic is the most spoken, with the number of native speakers larger than the Western and Southern branches combined.\nThe common consensus is that Belarusian, Russian and Ukrainian are the extant East Slavic languages. Some linguists also consider Rusyn a separate language, although it is sometimes considered a dialect of Ukrainian.\nThe modern East Slavic languages descend from a common predecessor spoken in Kievan Rus' from the 9th to 13th centuries, which later evolved into Ruthenian, the chancery language of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the Dnieper river valley, and into medieval Russian in the Volga river valley, the language of the Russian principalities including the Grand Duchy of Moscow.\nAll these languages use the Cyrillic script, but with particular modifications. Belarusian and Ukrainian, which are descendants of Ruthenian, have a tradition of using Latin-based alphabets\u2014the Belarusian Lacinka and the Ukrainian Latynka alphabets, respectively (also Rusyn uses Latin in some regions, e.g. in Slovakia).\nClassification.\nModern East Slavic languages include Belarusian, Russian and Ukrainian. The Rusyn language is sometimes considered the fourth living language of the group, its status as an independent language being the subject of scientific debate.\nDistinctive features.\nVocabulary.\nThe East Slavic territory exhibits a linguistic continuum with many transitional dialects. Between Belarusian and Ukrainian there is the Polesian dialect, which shares features from both languages. East Polesian is a transitional variety between Belarusian and Ukrainian on one hand, and between South Russian and Ukrainian on the other hand. At the same time, Belarusian and Southern Russian form a continuous area, making it virtually impossible to draw a line between the two languages. Central or Middle Russian (with its Moscow sub-dialect), the transitional step between the North and the South, became a base for the Russian literary standard. Northern Russian with its predecessor, the Old Novgorod dialect, has many original and archaic features.\nRuthenian, the ancestor of modern Belarusian and Ukrainian, was the official language of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania as \"Chancery Slavonic\" until the end of the 17th century when it was gradually replaced by the Polish language. It was also the native language of the Cossack Hetmanate until the end of the 18th century, when the Ukrainian state completely became part of the Russian Empire in 1764. The Constitution of Pylyp Orlyk from 1710 is one of the most important written sources of the Ruthenian language. Due to the influence of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth over many centuries, Belarusian and Ukrainian have been influenced in several respects by Polish, a Lechitic West Slavic language. As a result of the long Polish-Lithuanian rule, these languages had been less exposed to Church Slavonic, featuring therefore less Church Slavonicisms than the modern Russian language, for example:\nAdditionally, the original East Slavic phonetic form was kept in many words in Ukrainian and Belarusian, for example:\nIn general, Ukrainian and Belarusian are also closer to other Western European languages, especially to German (via Polish). At the same time Russian was being heavily influenced by Church Slavonic (South Slavic language), but also by the Turkic and Uralic languages. For example:\nWhat's more, all three languages do also have false friends, that sometimes can lead to (big) misunderstandings. For example, Ukrainian \u043e\u0440\u0430\u0442\u0438 (\"oraty\") \u2014 \"to plow\" and Russian \u043e\u0440\u0430\u0442\u044c (\"orat\u0301\") \u2014 \"to scream\", or Ukrainian \u043f\u043e\u043c\u0456\u0442\u0438\u0442\u0438 (\"pomityty\") \u2014 \"to notice\" and Russian \u043f\u043e\u043c\u0435\u0442\u0438\u0442\u044c (\"pometit\u0301\") \u2014 \"to mark\".\nOrthography.\nAlphabet.\nThe alphabets of the East Slavic languages are all written in the Cyrillic script, however each of them has their own letters and pronunciations. Russian and Ukrainian have 33 letters, while Belarusian has 32. Additionally, Belarusian and Ukrainian use the apostrophe (') for the hard sign, which has the same function as the letter \u042a in Russian.\nSome letters, that are not included in the alphabet of a language, can be written as digraphs. For example, the sound values of the letter \u0401, which doesn't exist in the Ukrainian alphabet, can be written as \u0419\u041e (\u042c\u041e after consonants), while the letter \u0429 in Russian and Ukrainian corresponds to \u0428\u0427 in Belarusian (compare Belarusian \u043f\u043b\u043e\u0448\u0447\u0430 and Ukrainian \u043f\u043b\u043e\u0449\u0430 (\"area\")).\nThere are also different rules of usage for certain letters, e.g. the soft sign (\u042c) cannot be written after the letter \u0426 in Russian, because the consonant /ts\u02b2/ does not exist in the Russian language, while in Ukrainian and especially Belarusian, on the contrary, it is relatively common (Ukrainian \u0446\u044c etymologically corresponds to Russian and Belarusian \u0446; Belarusian \u0446\u044c etymologically corresponds to Russian and Ukrainian \u0442\u044c). Moreover, the letter \u0429 in standard Russian is always pronounced softly (palatalization).\nStandard Ukrainian, unlike all the other Slavic languages (excl. Serbo-Croatian), does not exhibit final devoicing. Nevertheless, this rule is not that clear when listening to colloquial Ukrainian. It's one of the typical deviations that occur in the Ukrainian spoken language.\nDifferent sound values of letters.\nBesides the differences of the alphabets, some letters represent different sounds depending on the language. For example, the letter \u0418 (romanized as \"I\" for Russian and \"Y\" for Ukrainian) in Russian is mostly pronounced as (identical with the Ukrainian \u0406), while in Ukrainian it's mostly pronounced as (very similar to the Russian \u042b). Other examples:\nRepresentation of vowel reduction.\nVowel reduction occurs in standard Russian and Belarusian, but the Russian orthography does not reflect it, whereas the Belarusian orthography does. For example: Russian [kot] \"tomcat\", [k\u0250\u02c8t\u0268] \"tomcats\"; Belarusian [kot] \"tomcat\", [ka\u02c8t\u0268] \"tomcats\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nInfluence of Church Slavonic.\nAfter the conversion of the East Slavic region to Christianity the people used service books borrowed from Bulgaria, which were written in Old Church Slavonic (a South Slavic language). The Church Slavonic language was strictly used only in text, while the colloquial language of the Bulgarians was communicated in its spoken form.\nThroughout the Middle Ages (and in some way up to the present day) there existed a duality between the Church Slavonic language used as some kind of 'higher' register (not only) in religious texts and the popular tongue used as a 'lower' register for secular texts. It has been suggested to describe this situation as \"diglossia\", although there do exist mixed texts where it is sometimes very hard to determine why a given author used a popular or a Church Slavonic form in a given context. Church Slavonic was a major factor in the evolution of modern Russian, where there still exists a \"high stratum\" of words that were imported from this language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10071", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10071", "title": "Elizabeth Gracen", "text": "American actress (born 1961)\nElizabeth Ward Gracen (born Elizabeth Grace Ward, April 3, 1961) is an American actress and beauty pageant contestant who won the title of Miss America in 1982.\nEarly life and education.\nElizabeth Grace Ward was born on April 3, 1961, in Ozark, Arkansas, the daughter of Patricia Hampe, a nurse, and Jimmy Young Ward, a poultry worker. She was raised in Booneville, Arkansas. The family later moved to Russellville, Arkansas, where Ward dated University of Arkansas trainer Mike Walker and graduated from Russellville High School in 1979. She was a junior accounting major at Arkansas Tech University at the time she entered the Miss America contest. Instead of returning to Arkansas Tech, she used her Miss America scholarship money to study acting at HB Studios in New York City.\nCareer.\nPageants and modeling.\nGracen won the titles of Miss Arkansas in 1981 and Miss America in 1982. After her yearlong work as Miss America, she enrolled in acting classes then relocated to California to pursue a film and television career.\nGracen posed nude for \"Playboy\" magazine's May 1992 issue.\nActing.\nGracen made her professional feature film debut in \"Three for the Road\" with Charlie Sheen. Her film credits also include a featured role in \"Marked for Death\", opposite Steven Seagal, \"Pass The Ammo\" with Tim Curry, and the CBS feature \"83 Hours Till Dawn\" with Peter Strauss and Robert Urich. Gracen starred in \"Lower Level\" and \"Discretion Assured\" with Michael York.\nOn television, Gracen has appeared in Shelley Duvall's \"Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\", Sidney Sheldon's \"The Sands of Time,\" and \"The\" \"Death of the Incredible Hulk\". She also appeared with a starring role in the series \"Extreme\" for NBC and the syndicated series \"Renegade\" and \"Queen of Swords\".\nGracen's best-known acting role has been as the recurring character Amanda, a 1,200-year-old immortal, in the series ' and its spin-off series '.\nIn December 1999, Gracen filed for bankruptcy protection. After few television guest roles, and a supporting role in the made-for-television movie \"Interceptor Force 2\", she took a long leave of absence from acting, beginning in 2002. Gracen began doing voiceover work for Blue Hours Productions, which has revived the classic radio anthology \"Suspense\", airing on Sirius XM. In 2012, Gracen did a character voice-over in the Malaysian animated science fiction film \"\".\nDirecting, producing, and writing.\nIn 2012, Gracen formed Flapper Films. In 2014, she starred in \"Coherence\", a sci-fi indie thriller. In January 2016, Gracen established Flapper Press and self-published \"Shalilly\", a young adult fantasy novel.\nGracen made her directorial debut with a documentary short, \"The Damn Deal\", about three young drag queens from Arkansas who compete in female impersonator beauty pageants.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and family.\nGracen married Jon Birmingham in 1982, and they divorced in 1984.\nIn 1989, while filming \"\", she met actor Brendan Hughes, and they married soon after. They divorced in 1994.\nGracen married Adam Murphy, and they have a daughter.\nAffair with Bill Clinton.\nAccording to Gracen, some time in 1983, she had a one-night stand with future President Bill Clinton when he was Governor of Arkansas. She was married at the time, as was he.\nIn 1992, rumors swirled that Gracen had had an affair with Clinton. At first, Gracen dismissed this claim (as requested by Clinton's campaign manager Mickey Kantor); however, in spring 1998 Gracen recanted her six-year-old denial and stated she had a one-night stand with Clinton in 1983. Gracen stated that \"What I did was wrong, and I feel very, very bad about it now. My behavior was inappropriate -- that's just the bottom line\" and publicly apologized to Hillary Clinton.\nAfter her claim, Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr, who was investigating Clinton in the Paula Jones lawsuit, issued a subpoena to have her testify to her claim in court. However, Gracen eluded the subpoena and was at one point able to avoid it because \"\" was being filmed outside of the US. Paula Jones's legal team was also unable to track down Gracen because she had made unscheduled trips to Las Vegas and the Caribbean.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10072", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10072", "title": "Elizabeth Gracen/Filmography", "text": ""}
{"id": "10073", "revid": "24841344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10073", "title": "Epicurus", "text": "Ancient Greek philosopher, founder of Epicureanism\nEpicurus (, ; ; 341\u2013270 BC) was an ancient Greek philosopher who founded Epicureanism, a highly influential school of philosophy; it asserted that philosophy's purpose is to attain as well as to help others attain tranquil lives, characterized by freedom from fear and the absence of pain. \nEpicurus advocated that people were best able to pursue philosophy by living a self-sufficient life surrounded by friends; he and his followers were known for eating simple meals and discussing a wide range of philosophical subjects at \"The Garden\", the school he established in Athens. Epicurus taught that although the gods exist, they have no involvement in human affairs. Like the earlier philosopher Democritus, Epicurus claimed that all occurrences in the natural world are ultimately the result of tiny, invisible particles known as \"atoms\" moving and interacting in empty space, though Epicurus also deviated from Democritus by proposing the idea of atomic \"swerve\", which holds that atoms may deviate from their expected course, thus permitting humans to possess free will in an otherwise deterministic universe.\nOf the over 300 works said to have been written by Epicurus about various subjects, the vast majority have been lost. Only a few letters and a collection of quotes\u2014the \"Principal Doctrines\"\u2014have survived intact, along with several fragments of his other writings, such as his major work \"On Nature\"; most knowledge about his philosophy is due to later authors.\nEpicureanism reached the height of its popularity during the late years of the Roman Republic, but by late antiquity, it had died out. Throughout the Middle Ages, Epicurus was popularly, though inaccurately, remembered as a patron of drunkards, whoremongers, and gluttons. His teachings gradually became more widely known in the fifteenth century with the rediscovery of important texts, but his ideas did not become acceptable until the seventeenth century, when the French Catholic priest Pierre Gassendi revived a modified version of them, which was promoted by other writers, including Walter Charleton and Robert Boyle. His influence grew considerably during and after the Enlightenment, impacting the ideas of major thinkers, including John Locke and Karl Marx.\nLife.\nUpbringing and influences.\nEpicurus was born in the Athenian settlement on the Aegean island of Samos in February 341\u00a0BC. His parents, Neocles and Chaerestrate, were both Athenian-born, and his father was an Athenian citizen. Epicurus grew up during the final years of the Greek Classical Period. Plato had died seven years before Epicurus was born and Epicurus was seven years old when Alexander the Great crossed the Hellespont into Persia. As a child, Epicurus would have received a typical ancient Greek education. Epicurus is known to have studied under the instruction of a Samian Platonist named Pamphilus, probably for about four years. His \"Letter of Menoeceus\" and surviving fragments of his other writings strongly suggest that he had extensive training in rhetoric. After the death of Alexander the Great, Perdiccas expelled the Athenian settlers on Samos to Colophon, on the coast of what is now Turkey. Epicurus joined his family there after the completion of his military service. He studied under Nausiphanes, who followed the teachings of Democritus.\nEpicurus's teachings were heavily influenced by those of earlier philosophers, particularly Democritus. Nonetheless, Epicurus differed from his predecessors on several key points of determinism and vehemently denied having been influenced by any previous philosophers, whom he denounced as \"confused\". Instead, he insisted that he had been \"self-taught\".\nAccording to DeWitt, Epicurus's teachings also show influences from the contemporary philosophical school of Cynicism. The Cynic philosopher Diogenes of Sinope was still alive when Epicurus would have been in Athens for his required military training and it is possible they may have met. Diogenes's pupil Crates of Thebes (c. 365 \u2013 c. 285 BC) was a close contemporary of Epicurus. Epicurus agreed with the Cynics' quest for honesty, but rejected their \"insolence and vulgarity\", instead teaching that honesty must be coupled with courtesy and kindness. Epicurus shared this view with his contemporary, the comic playwright Menander.\nEpicurus's \"Letter to Menoeceus\", possibly an early work of his, is written in an eloquent style similar to that of the Athenian rhetorician Isocrates (436\u2013338 BC), but, for his later works, he seems to have adopted the bald, intellectual style of the mathematician Euclid. Epicurus's epistemology also bears an unacknowledged debt to the later writings of Aristotle (384\u2013322 BC), who rejected the Platonic idea of hypostatic Reason and instead relied on nature and empirical evidence for knowledge about the universe. During Epicurus's formative years, Greek knowledge about the rest of the world was rapidly expanding due to the Hellenization of the Near East and the rise of Hellenistic kingdoms. Epicurus's philosophy was consequently more universal in its outlook than those of his predecessors, since it took cognizance of non-Greek peoples as well as Greeks. He may have had access to the now-lost writings of the historian and ethnographer Megasthenes, who wrote during the reign of Seleucus I Nicator (ruled 305\u2013281 BC).\nTeaching career.\nDuring Epicurus's lifetime, Platonism was the dominant philosophy in higher education. Epicurus's opposition to Platonism formed a large part of his thought. Over half of the forty Principal Doctrines of Epicureanism are flat contradictions of Platonism. In around 311 BC, Epicurus, when he was around thirty years old, began teaching in Mytilene. Around this time, Zeno of Citium, the founder of Stoicism, arrived in Athens, at the age of about twenty-one, but Zeno did not begin teaching what would become Stoicism for another twenty years. Although later texts, such as the writings of the first-century BC Roman orator Cicero, portray Epicureanism and Stoicism as rivals, this rivalry seems to have only emerged after Epicurus's death.\nEpicurus's teachings caused strife in Mytilene and he was forced to leave. He then founded a school in Lampsacus before returning to Athens in c. 306 BC, where he remained until his death. There he founded The Garden (\u03ba\u1fc6\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2), a school named for the garden he owned that served as the school's meeting place, about halfway between the locations of two other schools of philosophy, the Stoa and the Academy. \nPhilodemus of Gadara lists four \"guides\" (hoi kath\u0113gemones) of the first generation of the Garden who worked to establish its fundamental principles: Metrodorus, Hermarchus, Polyaneus, and Epicurus himself. Other disciples of Epicurus whose doctrines are known include Colotes, whose work \"On the Impossibility of Living According to the Doctrines of Other Philosophers\" was disputed in two extant works by Plutarch, and Carneiscus, whose work criticizing the peripatetic conception of friendship survives in a fragmentary state. Other students include Idomeneus, Pythocles, and Epicurus's three brothers: Neocles, Chaeridemus, and Aristobulus. The Garden also welcomed many female students during Epicurus's tenure, including Themista, Batis, Boidion, Demetria, Hedeia, Leontion, Mammarion, and Nikidion. \nDuring the first generation, Epicurus and the other members of The Garden practiced a communal lifestyle, with the assets of all the members held in common, and no rigid hierarchy between teachers and students. They shared celebrations, festivals, banquets and funerals. Several rites that were celebrated at different times of the year: an annual funeral rite established by Epicurus in memory of his brothers and parents, two rites established for Epicurus himself; an annual one on his birthday (the 20th of Gamelion month) and one celebrated on the 20th of every other month in honor of both Epicurus and Metrodorus, another day dedicated to the memory of his brothers in the month of Poseidon, and another one for Polyaenus in the month of Metageitneon.\nDeath.\nDiogenes La\u00ebrtius records that, according to Epicurus's successor Hermarchus, Epicurus died a slow and painful death in 270\u00a0BC at the age of seventy-two from a stone blockage of his urinary tract. Despite being in immense pain, Epicurus is said to have remained cheerful and to have continued to teach until the very end. Possible insights into Epicurus's death may be offered by the extremely brief \"Epistle to Idomeneus\", included by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius in Book X of his \"Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers\". The authenticity of this letter is uncertain; it may be a later pro-Epicurean forgery intended to counter the large number of forged epistles in Epicurus's name portraying him unfavorably.\nI have written this letter to you on a happy day to me, which is also the last day of my life. For I have been attacked by a painful inability to urinate, and also dysentery, so violent that nothing can be added to the violence of my sufferings. But the cheerfulness of my mind, which comes from the recollection of all my philosophical contemplation, counterbalances all these afflictions. And I beg you to take care of the children of Metrodorus, in a manner worthy of the devotion shown by the young man to me, and to philosophy.\nIf authentic, this letter would support the idea that Epicurus was able to remain joyful to the end, even in the midst of his suffering. It would also indicate that he maintained a special concern for the well-being of children.\nPhilosophy.\nPhysics.\nEpicurus believed in an eternal universe, where anything that comes into being must come from something that exists, all that is destroyed does not cease to exist, but all that exists always will. He held that this universe consists of two things; matter and void. Matter is made up of atoms, tiny bodies that are unable to be broken down into smaller parts, that only have the unchanging qualities of shape, size, and weight. There are an infinite number of these atoms, though only a finite number of types, and an infinite amount of void. Because of the infinite supply of atoms, there are an infinite number of worlds, each separated from each other by vast areas of void, some of which could be vastly different from our own.\nThe atoms are in constant motion through the void, moving in one of four different ways. They can collide with each other, either bouncing back, or joining together and vibrating to maintain the overall shape of the larger object. When not prevented by other atoms, all atoms naturally move at the same speed downwards in relation to the rest of the world, though they must also occasionally \"swerve\" randomly out of their usual path; without the swerving motion, atoms would never collide with each other from their parallel trajectory downwards. Epicurus argued that the swerve, which was absent in Democritus' earlier atomic theory, was also what accounted for humanity's free will; if it were not for the swerve, humans would be subject to a never-ending chain of cause and effect.\nEpicurus also believed that senses relied on atoms; which were constantly being emitted from every object. Atoms themselves, which only had size, shape, and weight, did not possess the qualities perceived by the senses, such as redness, but instead would cause the observer to experience them in their mind. Because atoms moved sufficiently quickly, this would be experienced as a continuous sensation of vision.\nEpistemology.\nEpicurus considered sense perception to be the foundation of knowledge. Although he had explained perception in terms of his atomic theory, he also designed his theory of knowledge to be independent of atomism, because he intended it to serve as justification for his philosophy of nature. Since Epicurus believed that sense perceptions were the basis of our knowledge, errors can only arise in how we judge those perceptions; although the senses sometimes receive contradictory information, they are the only means by which we receive information from the external world, and, recognizing the limits of our senses, it is necessary to use reason (\"dianoia\") in order to organize the information we receive and determine whether our sense-organs are functioning correctly. However, reason still ultimately depends on the senses; Epicurus did not believe in the existence of abstract objects such as Plato's Theory of Forms that are derived entirely from thought.\nCriteria of truth.\nIn order to make judgements about the information we receive from our senses, Epicurus proposed three criteria of truth constituting the method through which we gain knowledge: sensations (\"aisth\u00easis\"), preconceptions (\"prolepsis\"), and feelings (\"path\u00ea\"). \nSensations are the first and main criterion of truth for Epicureans; when judgments about things are formed, they can be verified or corrected through further closer examination, which eventually allows the observer to obtain \"clear vision\" (\"enargeia\"), a sensation of an object that is unchanged by further judgments or opinions and is a clear and direct perception of that object. \nPreconceptions, Epicurus's second criterion of truth, are the concepts of what different things are that are formed in a person's mind through prior sense data. They are the background knowledge required for learning, allowing an observer to make judgments about perceived phenomena. When a word that relates to the preconception is used, these preconceptions are brought by the mind into the person's thoughts. \nEpicurus's third criterion of truth are \"choices and avoidances\" which are the feelings of pleasure and pain that determine our actions. If something is pleasurable, we pursue it, and if something is painful, we avoid it. They are analogous to sensations in that they are a means of perception, but they perceive our internal state as opposed to external things.\nPrinciple of Multiple Explanations.\nEpicurus applied his theory of knowledge to his understanding of nature; for understanding natural phenomena, we cannot rely on direct sense impressions alone, but must rely on inferences based on preconceptions. Hypotheses about phenomena that cannot be directly observed must be tested via relation to known observable facts, from which they are considered either contested or non-contested; a hypothesis that is not observable can be accepted as true if it is not contested by any explanations or observable phenomena.\nHowever, a hypothesis can still be contested by other explanations without being directly \"contradicted\" by observable phenomena, so long as it is inconsistent with other potential explanations for how similar phenomena that can be closely observed are produced. For example, with the existence of atoms and void, Epicurus argues that there are no other possible explanations for the world we observe, so we must accept them as true. On the other hand, for various meteorological and cosmological phenomena, such as thunder and lightning or the waxing and waning of the moon and the motions of the stars, Epicurus produces several different possible explanations for the causes underlying the observed phenomena. Since none of the multiple explanations proposed can be verified or falsified, we must list them all and consider each of them to be possible, and cannot accept any of them as true.\nAlthough Epicurus conceded that it may not be feasible to exhaustively list all possible causes, he believed it is still preferable to list several, rather than one, as becoming fixated on one possible explanation for all phenomena allows for the possibility of mythology and divine intervention as explanations, despite the fact that these have never been directly observed.\nEpilogism.\nIn addition to deductions based on the criteria of truth and inference of explanations based on observation, Epicurus also used a proof-free method of philosophical argumentation which he called \"Epilogism\" (), often translated as \"appraisal\" or \"assessment,\" which was intended to provide insight via reflection when neither observation nor preconceptions about a given phenomenon could provide a consistent answer. For example, Epicurus claimed that although we do not have a preconception of time as an independent object, we nonetheless speak of having \"a lot of time\" or \"little time\" and we can arrive at a better understanding of how we conceive of time falling into discrete periods by reflecting on what we mean when we say \"a lot of time.\" Epicurus also argued that we can arrive at insight on the relations between pleasure and pain, desire, and happiness through an assessment of our own sense experience, preconceptions and feelings beyond what we already know from them alone.\nEthics.\nEpicurus was a hedonist, meaning he taught that what is pleasurable is morally good and what is painful is morally evil. For his ethical system he redefined \"pleasure\" as the absence of suffering and taught that all humans should seek to attain the state of \"ataraxia\", meaning \"untroubledness\", a state in which the person is completely free from all pain or suffering.\nEpicureans had a very specific understanding of what the greatest pleasure was, and the focus of their ethics was on the avoidance of pain rather than seeking out pleasure. As evidence for this, Epicureans say that nature seems to command us to avoid pain, and they point out that all animals try to avoid pain as much as possible.\nEpicureanism divided pleasure into two broad categories: \"pleasures of the body\" and \"pleasures of the mind\". \"Pleasures of the body\" involve sensations of the body, such as the act of eating delicious food or of being in a state of comfort free from pain, and exist only in the present. One can only experience pleasures of the body in the moment, meaning they only exist as a person is experiencing them. \"Pleasures of the mind\" involve mental processes and states; feelings of joy, the lack of fear, and pleasant memories are all examples of pleasures of the mind. These pleasures of the mind exist not only in the present, but also in the past and future, since memory of a past pleasant experience or the expectation of some potentially pleasing future can both be pleasurable experiences. Because of this, the pleasures of the mind are considered to be greater than those of the body. Emphasis was placed on pleasures of the mind rather than on physical pleasures.\nThe Epicureans further divided each of these types of pleasures into two categories: \"kinetic pleasure\" and \"katastematic pleasure\". \"Kinetic pleasure\" is the physical or mental pleasures that involve action or change. Eating delicious food, as well as fulfilling desires and removing pain, which is itself considered a pleasurable act, are all examples of kinetic pleasure in the physical sense. According to Epicurus, feelings of joy would be an example of mental kinetic pleasure. \"Katastematic pleasure\" is the pleasure one feels while in a state without pain. Like kinetic pleasures, katastematic pleasures can also be physical, such as the state of not being thirsty, or mental, such as freedom from a state of fear. While the pursuit of pleasure formed the focal point of the philosophy, this was largely directed to the \"katastematic pleasures\" of minimizing pain, anxiety and suffering. From this understanding, Epicureans concluded that the greatest pleasure a person could reach was the absence of pain, aponia, and lack of disturbance of mind, ataraxia, and, therefore, the ultimate goal then of Epicurean ethics was to reach a state of \"aponia\" and \"ataraxia\".\nIn order to do this an Epicurean had to control their desires, because desire itself was seen as painful. Not only will controlling one's desires bring about \"aponia\", as one will rarely suffer from not being physically satisfied, but controlling one's desires will also help to bring about \"ataraxia\" because one will not be anxious about becoming discomforted since one would have so few desires anyway. The Epicureans divide desires into three classes: natural and necessary, natural but not necessary, and vain and empty:\nIf one follows only natural and necessary desires, then, according to Epicurus, one would be able to reach \"aponia\" and \"ataraxia\" and thereby the highest form of happiness. Unnecessary and, especially, artificially produced desires were to be suppressed.\nPolitics.\nEpicurus laid great emphasis on developing friendships as the basis of a satisfying life. The avoidance or freedom from hardship and fear is ideal to the Epicureans. While this avoidance or freedom could conceivably be achieved through political means, Epicurus insisted that involvement in politics would not release one from fear and he advised against a life of politics. Epicurus also discouraged contributing to political society by starting a family, as the benefits of a wife and children are outweighed by the trouble brought about by having a family. Instead Epicurus encouraged a formation of a community of friends outside the traditional political state. This community of virtuous friends would focus on internal affairs and justice. However, Epicureanism is adaptable to circumstance as is the Epicurean approach to politics. The same approaches will not always work in protection from pain and fear. In some situations it will be more beneficial to have a family and in other situations it will be more beneficial to participate in politics. It is ultimately up to the Epicurean to analyse their circumstance and take whatever action befits the situation.\nEpicurus was also an early thinker to develop the notion of justice as a social contract, and in part attempts to address issues with the society described in Plato's \"Republic\". The social contract theory established by Epicureanism is based on mutual agreement, not divine decree. He defined justice as an agreement made by people not to harm each other. The point of living in a society with laws and punishments is to be protected from harm so that one is free to pursue happiness. Because of this, laws that do not contribute to promoting human happiness are not just. He gave his own unique version of the ethic of reciprocity, which differs from other formulations by emphasizing minimizing harm and maximizing happiness for oneself and others.\nThe Epicurean understanding of justice was inherently self-interested. Justice was deemed good because it was seen as mutually beneficial. Individuals would not act unjustly even if the act was initially unnoticed because of possibly being caught and punished. Both punishment and fear of punishment would cause a person disturbance and prevent them from being happy. \nEpicurean ideas on politics disagree with other philosophical traditions, namely the Stoic, Platonist and Aristotelian traditions. To Epicureans all our social relations are a matter of how we perceive each other, of customs and traditions. No one is inherently of higher value or meant to dominate another. That is because there is no metaphysical basis for the superiority of one kind of person, all people are made of the same atomic material and are thus naturally equal. Epicureans also discourage political participation and other involvement in politics. However Epicureans are not apolitical; it is possible that some political association could be seen as beneficial by some Epicureans. Some political associations could lead to certain benefits to the individual that would help to maximize pleasure and avoid physical or mental distress.\nTheology.\nEpicurus does not deny the existence of the gods; rather he denies their involvement in the world. According to Epicureanism, the gods do not interfere with human lives or the rest of the universe in any way \u2013 thus, it shuns the idea that frightening weather events are divine retribution. One of the fears the Epicurean ought to be freed from is fear relating to the actions of the gods.\nThe manner in which the Epicurean gods exist is still disputed. Some scholars say that Epicureanism believes that the gods exist outside the mind as material objects (the realist position), while others assert that the gods only exist in our minds as ideals (the idealist position). The realist position holds that Epicureans understand the gods as existing as physical and immortal beings made of atoms that reside somewhere in reality. However, the gods are completely separate from the rest of reality; they are uninterested in it, play no role in it, and remain completely undisturbed by it. Instead, the gods live in what is called the \"metakosmia\", or the space between worlds. Contrarily, the idealist (sometimes called the \"non-realist position\" to avoid confusion) position holds that the gods are just idealized forms of the best human life, and it is thought that the gods were emblematic of the life one should aspire towards. While a scholarly consensus has yet to be reached, the realist position remains the prevailing viewpoint at this time.\nEpicurean paradox.\nThe Epicurean paradox is a version of the problem of evil. Lactantius attributes this trilemma to Epicurus in \"De Ira Dei\", 13, 20-21:\nGod, he says, either wishes to take away evils, and is unable; or He is able, and is unwilling; or He is neither willing nor able, or He is both willing and able. If He is willing and is unable, He is feeble, which is not in accordance with the character of God; if He is able and unwilling, He is envious, which is equally at variance with God; if He is neither willing nor able, He is both envious and feeble, and therefore not God; if He is both willing and able, which alone is suitable to God, from what source then are evils? Or why does He not remove them?\nAlthough no extant writings of Epicurus contain this argument, it is possible that some form of this argument may have been found in his lost treatise \"On the Gods\". However, since Epicurus did believe in the existence of gods, if he really did make some form of this argument, it would have been an argument against divine providence, the idea that the gods interfere in the world.\nDeath.\nEpicurus rejected immortality. Epicureans believe in the soul, but Epicureanism suggests that the soul is mortal and material, just like the body. Epicurus rejected any possibility of an afterlife, while still contending that one need not fear death: \"Death is nothing to us; for that which is dissolved, is without sensation, and that which lacks sensation is nothing to us.\" From this doctrine arose the Epicurean Epitaph: \"Non fui, fui, non sum, non curo\" (\"I was not; I have been; I am not; I do not mind.\"), which is inscribed on the gravestones of his followers and seen on many ancient gravestones of the Roman Empire.\nWorks.\nEpicurus was an extremely prolific writer who wrote around 300 treatises on a variety of subjects. Known titles of works of Epicurus include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough more original writings of Epicurus have survived to the present day than of any other Hellenistic Greek philosopher, the vast majority of everything he wrote has still been lost. The only surviving complete works by Epicurus are the \"Principal Doctrines\" (\u039a\u03cd\u03c1\u03b9\u03b1\u03b9 \u0394\u03cc\u03be\u03b1\u03b9) and a few letters which summarize Epicurean doctrines. Numerous fragments of Epicurus's lost thirty-seven volume treatise \"On Nature\" have also been found among the charred papyrus fragments at the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum.\n\"On Nature\".\n\"On Nature\" () is Epicurus's main philosophical work, a treatise in 37 books. The work is not preserved intact, however, many parts have been discovered among the Herculaneum papyri, a collection of papyrus scrolls carbonized by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD, which were discovered at an Epicurean villa in Herculaneum:\n\"Canon\".\n\"Canon\" ( lit. \"Rule\") was Epicurus's principal work on epistemology, the theory of knowledge, which was intended to serve as a justification for his philosophy of nature.\nAlthough this work has not survived, a brief summary of its contents has been preserved by Diogenes Laertius, which can be compared with other testimonies of Epicurus's epistemology in order to reconstruct an outline of its contents. The title, which was likely taken from a similar work, \"Canons\", written by Democritus, is a reference to a mason's rule, the straightedge instrument used as a standard to determine the straightness of beams and walls, which was a metaphor for the criteria of truth set out in the work, which were intended to be used as a standard to assess the truth of other beliefs.\n\"Principal Doctrines\".\nThe Principal Doctrines are forty authoritative conclusions set up as official doctrines by Epicurus. Some of the Principal Doctrines are organized into groups and are meant to be studied together. The first four doctrines make up the Tetrapharmakos (Four Cures). Doctrines 5-21 and 26-30 discuss other topics in ethics, 22-25 deal with epistemology, and 31-40 explain the Epicurean doctrines on justice and societal relations. \nTetrapharmakos.\n\"Tetrapharmakos\" (), or \"The four-part cure\", is a basic guideline as to how to live the happiest possible life, based on the first four of the doctrines. These are short recommendations to avoid anxiety or existential dread. The name \"tetrapharmakon\" comes from a compound of four drugs (wax, tallow, pitch and resin); used metaphorically by Roman-era Epicureans to refer to the four remedies for healing the soul.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Don't fear god,Don't worry about death;What is good is easy to get, andWhat is terrible is easy to endure.\u2014\u200a\nLetters of Epicurus.\nA collection of at least 24 of Epicurus's letters organized by date circulated in antiquity, referred to by Philodemus, the majority of which are lost. Three letters of Epicurus are preserved by Diogenes Laertius in his \"Life of Epicurus\": the \"Letter to Herodotus\" and the \"Letter to Pythocles\", Epicurus summarizes his philosophy on nature and, in the \"Letter to Menoeceus\", he summarizes his moral teachings. Another letter is preserved by Diogenes of Oenoanda, the \"Letter to Mother\", which discusses overcoming fears with an understanding of natural science as a means of attaining happiness.\n\"Letter to Herodotus\".\nEpicurus's \"Letter to Herodotus\" was written as an introduction to Epicurean philosophy and method of studying nature. It is divided into three parts: the first deals with physical principles, the second deals with compound structures that are formed from the motions of atoms within the void, and the third deals with the purposes for studying nature. \n\"Letter to Pythocles\".\nEpicurus's \"Letter to Pythocles\" deals with meteorological and astronomical phenomena, arguing that the knowledge of learning such things has no purpose other than the attainment of ataraxia. After discussing methodology, Epicurus moves on to cosmology, including the stars and the movement of the sun and moon, and then weather patterns, concluding with other astronomical topics. Epicurus's authorship of this letter has occasionally been contested. \n\"Letter to Menoeceus\".\nEpicurus's \"Letter to Menoeceus\" is a summary of his ethical teachings. It addresses theology, the hierarchies of desires, how to weigh choices and avoidances in order to achieve net pleasure and self-sufficiency, and then concludes with a discussion of phronesis and the Epicurean sage in terms of the tetrapharmakos.\n\"Letter to Mother\".\nEpicurus's \"Letter to Mother\" is a letter addressed to Epicurus's mother, reassuring her that the disturbing dreams that she had about him do not reflect reality and asking her to stop sending him supplies and money rather than saving it for herself, as he is already well supported by his friends. As a means of combating her superstitions about dreams, he describes the mechanics of dreams from a scientific perspective, comparing a vision in a dream to the process of how images formed in the mind from ordinary sight. Epicurus then discusses incremental progress towards happiness, and how doing so allows a philosopher to emulate the gods, not by becoming immortal, but by experiencing what it feels like to be a god during one's mortal life, by attaining the long-term stability associated with ataraxia.\nThe majority of scholars attribute this letter to Epicurus himself, on the basis of a comparison with doctrines in other fragments of his writing, other independent characterizations of his mother as a superstitious person, and a linguistic analysis of the use of accurate terminology from his own time period. However, it has also been suggested that the letter was written by Diogenes of Oenoanda, who preserved the letter, or that the letter is part of a lost epistolary novel written by a later author, such as the collection of letters attributed to the Platonist philosopher Chion of Heraclea.\n\"Vatican Sayings\".\nIn 1888, another collection of eighty-one Epicurean sayings was discovered in a manuscript in the Vatican Library, now commonly referred to as the \"Vatican Sayings\", which repeats many of the \"Principal Doctrines\" and likely preserves the views of Epicurus and some of his immediate followers.\nLegacy.\nAncient Epicureanism.\nAfter Epicurus's death, his follower Hermarchus had succeeded him as the scholarch of the Garden in Athens. Hermarchus' successor, Polystratus (died c.\u2009220 BC), probably never knew Epicurus himself; one work by him survives criticizing philosophers who have contempt for public opinion. The next two heads of the school were Dionysius of Lamptrai (died c.\u2009200), about whom little is known, and Basilides (died c.\u2009175). Epicurus's doctrines seem to have become rather popular in Asia Minor in the 2nd century BC; before becoming head of the school in Athens, Basilides appears to have originally studied under an Epicurean community in Syria, where he collaborated with the mathematicians Apollonius of Perga and Hypsicles, and taught Philonides of Laodicea, a mathematician and Epicurean philosopher who was a member of the Seleucid court of Antiochus IV Epiphanes and Demetrius I Soter.\nThere were also several divisions within the school early on; even in Epicurus's lifetime, Timocrates of Lampsacus, the brother of his closest disciple Metrodorus, had left the school and published several tracts critical of Epicureanism. During the 2nd and 1st centuries BC, dissident sects of Epicureans established themselves in Cos and Rhodes who broke with the scholarchs of the Garden. While these Epicureans still considered the works of Epicurus and his closest followers to be authoritative, disputes arose about the interpretation of the works; determining which works were genuine, textual criticism of corrupt or contradictory passages, and clarification of difficult passages, which occasionally seemed to present errors.\nAfter Basilides, there is a gap in the historical record; the next known head of the Garden in Athens was Apollodorus, nicknamed \"the tyrant of the Garden\" who served as head from roughly the middle of the second century BC until 110 BC; though he apparently wrote over 400 books, only traces of a life of Epicurus and a few other works survive. Another Epicurean writing at the same time whose works are more thoroughly preserved is Demetrius Lacon (c.\u2009150-75 BCE), who taught at an Epicurean school in Miletus. Demetrius wrote works not only on traditional Epicurean subjects such as cosmology, theology, and ethics, but also mathematics, poetry, and rhetoric, testifying to the expanding interests of the school, as well as philological works defending the orthodox readings and interpretations of the works of Epicurus. He was followed in this approach by Zeno of Sidon (c.\u2009150-75 BCE), who took over as the next head of the Athenian school. Both Zeno and Demetrius seem to have been in communication with important figures in Rome, and Zeno's most prominent pupil, Philodemus, left to establish a school there. During Zeno's tenure, Athens' role in the First Mithridatic war (88-86 BC), and Sulla's subsequent reconquest of the city in 86 BC, plunged all of the philosophical schools in Athens into crisis; after Zeno's death, the next two heads of the Garden, Phaedrus (died c.\u200970 BC) and Patro (died after c.\u200951 BC), both returned to Athens from Rome, where they had fled during the war, to head the school, and the middle of the 1st century BCE last evidence for the Athenian Garden's existence.\nIn Rome, the first Epicureans to attempt to spread their doctrines there, Alcaeus and Philiscus, had been expelled from the city in 155 BC, while the earliest Epicurean writers in Latin, Amafinius, Catius, and Rabirus, mostly drew the ire of Cicero for their ethical shortcomings and poor prose. However, three Epicurean philosophers in the 1st century BC, Philodemus, Lucretius, and Siro, did much to establish Epicurus's reputation in Italy, even as it began to decline in Athens. Philodemus, a student of Zeno of Sidon, attracted a wealthy patron, Calpurnius Piso the father-in-law of Julius Caesar, and founded a school that was intended to be a continuation of the Epicurean Garden in Athens, circulating the works of his predecessors and writing treatises on the whole scope of Epicurean philosophy, many of which have been found at the Villa of the Papyri. Lucretius, a poet who seems to have read Epicurus's works outside the Epicurean school tradition, wrote \"De rerum natura\", a long didactic poem in Latin dactylic hexameter verse, which is still extant, that explained Epicurus's natural philosophy to a Roman audience, covering roughly the first 15 books of Epicurus's \"On Nature\". Meanwhile, Siro established another school in Italy where he instructed a circle of Roman poets in Epicureanism, which included Virgil.\nIn the first and second centuries AD, Epicureanism gradually began to decline as it failed to compete with Stoicism, which had an ethical system more in line with traditional Roman values. Prominent critics of his philosophy include prominent authors such as the Roman Stoic Seneca the Younger (c. 4 BC \u2013 AD 65) and the Greek Middle Platonist Plutarch (c. 46 \u2013 c. 120). Some time in the 2nd century CE, an otherwise an unknown Epicurean philosopher, Diogenes of Oenoanda, attempted to preserve the doctrines of his school in an enormous wall inscription in Lycia that originally spanned 260 square meters and contained several treatises totalling over 25000 words of writing, roughly a third of which has been preserved.\nDuring the third century AD, Christianity rapidly expanded throughout the Roman Empire. Of all the Greek philosophical schools, Epicureanism was the one most at odds with the new Christian teachings, since Epicureans believed that the soul was mortal, denied the existence of an afterlife, denied that the divine had any active role in human life, and advocated pleasure as the foremost goal of human existence. As such, Christian writers such as Justin Martyr (c. 100\u2013c. 165 AD), Athenagoras of Athens (c. 133\u2013c. 190), Tertullian (c. 155\u2013c. 240), and Clement of Alexandria (c. 150\u2013c. 215), Arnobius (died c. 330), and Lactantius (c. 250-c.325) all singled it out for the most vitriolic criticism. \nBy the early fifth century AD, Epicureanism was virtually extinct. The Christian Church Father Augustine of Hippo (354\u2013430 AD) declared, \"its ashes are so cold that not a single spark can be struck from them.\"\nMiddle Ages.\nWhile Plato and Aristotle enjoyed a privileged place in Christian philosophy throughout the Middle Ages, Epicurus, whose ideas could less easily be adapted to suit a Christian worldview, was not held in such esteem. Information about Epicurus's teachings was available, through Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\", quotations of it found in medieval Latin grammars and \"florilegia\" and encyclopedias, such as Isidore of Seville's \"Etymologiae\" (seventh century) and Hrabanus Maurus's \"De universo\" (ninth century), but there is little evidence that these teachings were systematically studied or comprehended.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Epicurus frequently appeared in popular culture as a gatekeeper to the Garden of Delights, the \"proprietor of the kitchen, the tavern, and the brothel.\" He appears in this guise in Martianus Capella's \"Marriage of Mercury and Philology\" (fifth century), John of Salisbury's \"Policraticus\" (1159), John Gower's \"Mirour de l'Omme\", and Geoffrey Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\". Epicurus and his followers also appear in Dante Alighieri's \"Inferno\" in the Sixth Circle of Hell, where they are imprisoned in flaming coffins for having believed that the soul dies with the body.\nIn Medieval Jewish philosophy, several philosophers discussed Epicurean doctrines. Although the first apparent reference to Epicurus in Rabbinic literature appears much earlier, the term \"epikoros\", cited in the Mishnah, meaning \"a heretic,\" earlier uses of the term do not show any knowledge of specific Epicurean doctrines. However, in the 10th through 12th centuries, Abraham ibn Ezra, Abraham ibn Daud, and Judah Halevi reference specific Epicurean doctrines, such as the treatment of pleasure as the only good and the eternity of the world, which they were likely introduced to via Arabic translations of the works of the Aristotelian commentator Alexander of Aphrodisias. A much fuller discussion of Epicurean doctrines, however, is given by Maimonides in \"The Guide to the Perplexed\", where he compares Epicurean atomism to the atomistic doctrines of Saadia Gaon and other philosophers of the Jewish Kalam school, which Maimonides believed were ultimately derived from Epicurus, and may derive from earlier encounters between Rabbinic Judaism and Epicurean literature during Late antiquity.\nRenaissance.\nIn 1417, Poggio Bracciolini discovered a copy of Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\" in a monastery near Lake Constance, which contained a comprehensive account of Epicurus's teachings. The first scholarly dissertation on Epicurus, \"De voluptate\" (\"On Pleasure\") by the Italian Humanist and Catholic priest Lorenzo Valla was published in 1431. In the treatise, Valla presented the treatise a discussion on the nature of the highest good between an Epicurean, a Stoic, and a Christian. Although Valla's dialogue ultimately rejects Epicureanism, by presenting an Epicurean as a member of the dispute, Valla lent Epicureanism credibility as a philosophy that deserved to be taken seriously. Francesco Zabarella (1360\u20131417), Francesco Filelfo (1398\u20131481), Cristoforo Landino (1424\u20131498), and Leonardo Bruni (c. 1370\u20131444) also gave Epicureanism a fairer analysis than it had traditionally received. \nNonetheless, \"Epicureanism\" remained a pejorative, synonymous with extreme egoistic pleasure-seeking, rather than a name of a philosophical school. Even liberal religious skeptics who might have been expected to take an interest in Epicureanism evidently did not; \u00c9tienne Dolet (1509\u20131546) only mentions Epicurus once in all his writings and Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais (between 1483 and 1494\u20131553) never mentions him at all. Although Michel de Montaigne (1533\u20131592) quoted 450 lines of Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\" in his \"Essays\", his interest in Lucretius, however, seems to have been primarily literary and he is ambiguous about his feelings on Lucretius's Epicurean worldview.\nRevival.\nThe French Catholic priest and scholar Pierre Gassendi (1592\u20131655) published several books expounding Epicureanism that exerted a profound influence on later writings about Epicurus. However, he modified some of Epicurus's doctrines in order to make them more palatable for a Christian audience; for example, by stating that atoms were not eternal, uncreated, and infinite in number, instead contending that an extremely large but finite number of atoms were created by God at creation. Gassendi's version of Epicurus's teachings became popular among some members of English scientific circles, who treated Epicurean atomism as a starting point for their own idiosyncratic theories. To orthodox thinkers, however, Epicureanism was still regarded as immoral and heretical until Walter Charleton (1619\u20131707) provided the English public with readily available descriptions of Epicurus's philosophy and assured orthodox Christians that Epicureanism was no threat to their beliefs. The Royal Society, chartered in 1662, advanced Epicurean atomism; one of its most prolific defenders of atomism was the chemist Robert Boyle (1627\u20131691). John Locke (1632\u20131704) also adapted Gassendi's modified version of Epicurus's epistemology, which became highly influential on English empiricism.\nEpicureanism was also beginning to lose its associations with indiscriminate and insatiable gluttony, which had been characteristic of its reputation ever since antiquity. Instead, the word \"epicure\" began to refer to a person with extremely refined taste in food, for example, \"such an epicure was Potiphar\u2014to please his tooth and pamper his flesh with delicacies\" from William Whately's \"Prototypes\" (1646).\nAround the same time, the Epicurean injunction to \"live in obscurity\" was beginning to gain popularity as well. In 1685, Sir William Temple (1628\u20131699) abandoned a promising career as a diplomat and instead retired to his garden, devoting himself to writing essays on Epicurus's moral teachings. That same year, John Dryden translated the celebrated lines from Book II of Lucretius's \"On the Nature of Things\": \"'Tis pleasant, safely to behold from shore / The rowling ship, and hear the Tempest roar.\"\nModern.\nIn 19th century Britain, Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart Mill, and Henry Sidgwick adapted Epicurus's psychological hedonism to their own ethical theories of Utilitarianism, which sought to maximize overall happiness. Although Epicurus himself, unlike the Utilitarians, did not promote the idea of pursuing happiness as a general ethical goal, these philosophers drew on Epicurus explanations of happiness (Eudaimonia) in terms of the relations between pleasures and pains for insight into their own ethical theories.\nIn his doctoral thesis, \"The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature\", Karl Marx (1818\u20131883) interpreted Democritus as a rationalist skeptic, whose epistemology was inherently contradictory, but saw Epicurus as a dogmatic empiricist, whose worldview is internally consistent and practically applicable.\nThe British poet Alfred Tennyson (1809\u20131892) praised \"the sober majesties / of settled, sweet, Epicurean life\" in his 1868 poem \"Lucretius\". Epicurus's ethical teachings also had an indirect impact on the philosophy of Utilitarianism in England during the nineteenth century. \nFriedrich Nietzsche once noted: \"Even today many educated people think that the victory of Christianity over Greek philosophy is a proof of the superior truth of the former \u2013 although in this case it was only the coarser and more violent that conquered the more spiritual and delicate. So far as superior truth is concerned, it is enough to observe that the awakening sciences have allied themselves point by point with the philosophy of Epicurus, but point by point rejected Christianity.\"\nAcademic interest in Epicurus and other Hellenistic philosophers increased over the course of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, with an unprecedented number of monographs, articles, abstracts, and conference papers being published on the subject. The texts from the library of Philodemus of Gadara in the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum, first discovered between 1750 and 1765, are being deciphered, translated, and published by scholars part of the Philodemus Translation Project, funded by the United States National Endowment for the Humanities, and part of the Centro per lo Studio dei Papiri Ercolanesi in Naples. Epicurus's popular appeal among non-scholars is difficult to gauge, but it seems to be relatively comparable to the appeal of more traditionally popular ancient Greek philosophical subjects such as Stoicism, Aristotle, and Plato.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary source texts.\nEpicurea.\nThe Epicurea is a collection of texts, fragments, and testimonies by Epicurus that was collected by Hermann Usener in 1887. This work features a collection of writings by Epicurus that explain the values and beliefs of Ancient Epicurian philosophy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10074", "revid": "50861159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10074", "title": "Epitaph", "text": "Inscription on a tombstone\nAn epitaph (from grc \" ' (epit\u00e1phios)\"\u00a0'a funeral oration'; from \" ' (epi-)\"\u00a0'at, over' and \" \"\" (t\u00e1phos)\"\u00a0'tomb') is a short text honoring a deceased person. Strictly speaking, it refers to text that is inscribed on a tombstone or plaque, but it may also be used in a figurative sense. Some epitaphs are specified by the person themselves before their death, while others are chosen by those responsible for the burial. An epitaph may be written in prose or in verse.\nMost epitaphs are brief records of the family, and perhaps the career, of the deceased, often with a common expression of love or respect\u2014for example, \"beloved father of ...\"\u2014but others are more ambitious. From the Renaissance to the 19th century in Western culture, epitaphs for notable people became increasingly lengthy and pompous descriptions of their family origins, career, virtues and immediate family, often in Latin. Notably, the Laudatio Turiae, the longest known Ancient Roman epitaph, exceeds almost all of these at 180 lines; it celebrates the virtues of an honored wife (sometimes identified, but not generally accepted, as the Wife of consul Quintus Lucretius Vespillo).\nSome are quotes from holy texts, or aphorisms. One approach of many epitaphs is to \"speak\" to the reader and warn them about their own mortality. A wry trick of others is to request the reader to get off their resting place, inasmuch as the reader would have to be standing on the ground above the coffin to read the inscription. Some record achievements (e.g., past politicians note the years of their terms of office). Nearly all (excepting those where this is impossible by definition, such as the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier) note name, year or date of birth, and date of death. Many list family members and the relationship of the deceased to them (for example, \"Father / Mother / Son / Daughter of\").\nLinguistic distinctions.\nIn English, and in accordance with the word's etymology, the word \"epitaph\" refers to a \"textual\" commemoration of a person, which may or may not be inscribed on a monument. In many European languages, however, the meaning of the word (or its close equivalent) has broadened to mean the monument itself, specifically a mural monument or plaque erected in a church, often close to, but not directly over, a person's place of burial. Examples include German '; Dutch '; Hungarian '; Polish '; Danish '; Swedish '; and Estonian \"\".\nHistory.\nThe history of epitaphs extends as far back as the ancient Egyptians and have differed in delivery. The ancient Greeks utilised emotive expression, written in elegiac verse, later in prose. Ancient Romans' use of epitaphs was more blunt and uniform, typically detailing facts of the deceased \u2013 as did the earliest epitaphs in English churches. \"May the earth lie light upon thee\" was a common inscription for them. Due to the influence of Roman occupiers, the dominant language of epitaphs was Latin, evidenced by the oldest existing epitaphs in Britain. French and English came into fashion around the 13th and 14th centuries, respectively.\nBy the 16th century, epitaphs had become more literary in nature and those written in verse were involved in trade. In America and Britain, comedic epitaphs are common in the form of acrostics, palindromes, riddles, and puns on names and professions \u2013 Robert Burns, the most prolific pre-Romantic epitaphist, wrote 35 pieces, them being largely satirical. The rate of literary epitaphs has been historically overshadowed by \"popular sepulchral inscriptions which are produced in countless numbers at all time\"; \"strictly literary\" epitaphs were most present during the start of the Romantic period.\nThe Lake Poets have been credited with providing success to epitaph-writing adjacent to that of poetry significance \u2013 Robert Southey, in focusing simultaneously upon transience and eternity, contributed substantially. General interest for epitaphs was waning at the cusp of the 19th century, in contrast to a considerable burgeoning intellectual interest. Critical essays had been published before on the matter, possibly contributing towards its flourishing in the latter half of the 18th century. Epitaphs never became a major poetic form and, according to Romantic scholar Ernest Bernhardt-Kabisch, they had \"virtually disappeared\" by 1810. \"The art of the epitaph was largely lost in the 20th century\", wrote the \"Encyclopedia Britannica\".\nFormat.\nSarcophagi and coffins were the choice of ancient Egyptians for epitaphs; brasses was the prominent format for a significant period of time. Epitaphs upon stone monuments became a common feature by the Elizabethan era.\nIn England.\nMedieval era.\nStock phrases or standard elements present in epitaphs on mediaeval church monuments and ledger stones in England include:\nNotable examples.\nPoets, playwrights and other writers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is my father's crime against me, which I myself committed against none.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here lies One whose Name was writ in Water\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200aJoseph Conrad\n, in \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Homo sum! the adventurer\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Against you I will fling myself, unvanquished and unyielding, O Death!\u2014\u200a\nStatesmen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oh God (Devanagari: \"\u0939\u0947 \u0930\u093e\u092e\")\nMathematicians.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nSoldiers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nEntertainers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And the beat goes on.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That's all folks!\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let 'er rip\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nActivists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Free at last, Free at last,&lt;br&gt;Thank God Almighty&lt;br&gt;I'm Free at last.\u2014\u200a\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nIn music.\nIn a more figurative sense, the term may be used for music composed in memory of the deceased. Igor Stravinsky composed in 1958 \"Epitaphium\" for flute, clarinet and harp. In 1967 Krzysztof Meyer called his Symphony No. 2 for choir and orchestra \"Epitaphium Stanis\u0142aw Wiechowicz in memoriam\". Jeffrey Lewis composed \"Epitaphium \u2013 Children of the Sun\" for narrator, chamber choir, piano, flute, clarinet and percussion. In 1969, King Crimson released the song Epitaph, giving a reference to epitaphs within the song. Bronius Kutavi\u010dius composed in 1998 \"Epitaphium temporum pereunti\". Valentin Silvestrov composed in 1999 \"Epitaph L.B.\" (\u0415\u043f\u0456\u0442\u0430\u0444\u0456\u044f \u041b.\u0411.) for viola (or cello) and piano. In 2007 Graham Waterhouse composed \"Epitaphium\" for string trio as a tribute to the memory of his father William Waterhouse. The South African poet Gert Vlok Nel wrote an (originally) untitled song, which appeared on his first music album \"Beaufort-Wes se Beautiful Woorde\" as \"Epitaph\", because his producer Eckard Potgieter told him that the song sounded like an epitaph. David Bowie's final album, \"Blackstar\", released in 2016, is generally seen as his musical epitaph, with singles \"Blackstar\" and \"Lazarus\" often singled out.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10075", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10075", "title": "Epigram", "text": "Brief memorable statement\nAn epigram is a brief, interesting, memorable, sometimes surprising or satirical statement. The word derives from the Greek (, \"inscription\", from [], \"to write on, to inscribe\"). This literary device has been practiced for over two millennia.\nThe presence of wit or sarcasm tends to distinguish non-poetic epigrams from aphorisms and adages, which typically do not show those qualities.\nAncient Greek.\nThe Greek tradition of epigrams began as poems inscribed on votive offerings at sanctuaries \u2013 including statues of athletes \u2013 and on funerary monuments, for example \"Go tell it to the Spartans, passersby...\". These original epigrams did the same job as a short prose text might have done, but in verse. Epigram became a literary genre in the Hellenistic period, probably developing out of scholarly collections of inscriptional epigrams.\nThough modern epigrams are usually thought of as very short, Greek literary epigram was not always as short as later examples, and the divide between \"epigram\" and \"elegy\" is sometimes indistinct (they share a characteristic metre, elegiac couplets). In the classical period, the clear distinction between them was that epigrams were inscribed and meant to be read, while elegies were recited and meant to be heard. Some elegies could be quite short, but only public epigrams were longer than ten lines. All the same, the origin of epigram in inscription exerted a residual pressure to keep things concise, even when they were recited in Hellenistic times. Many of the characteristic types of literary epigram look back to inscriptional contexts, particularly funerary epigram, which in the Hellenistic era becomes a literary exercise. Many \"sympotic\" epigrams combine sympotic and funerary elements\u00a0\u2013 they tell their readers (or listeners) to drink and live for today because life is short. Generally, any theme found in classical elegies could be and were adapted for later literary epigrams.\nHellenistic epigrams are also thought of as having a \"point\"\u00a0\u2013 that is, the poem ends in a punchline or satirical twist. By no means do all Greek epigrams behave this way; many are simply descriptive, but Meleager of Gadara and Philippus of Thessalonica, the first comprehensive anthologists, preferred the short and witty epigram. Since their collections helped form knowledge of the genre in Rome and then later throughout Europe, Epigram came to be associated with 'point', especially because the European epigram tradition takes the Latin poet Martial as its principal model; he copied and adapted Greek models (particularly the contemporary poets Lucillius and Nicarchus) selectively and in the process redefined the genre, aligning it with the indigenous Roman tradition of \"satura\", hexameter satire, as practised by (among others) his contemporary Juvenal. Greek epigram was actually much more diverse, as the Milan Papyrus now indicates.\nA major source for Greek literary epigram is the \"Greek Anthology\", a compilation from the 10th century AD based on older collections, including those of Meleager and Philippus. It contains epigrams ranging from the Hellenistic period through the Imperial period and Late Antiquity into the compiler's own Byzantine era \u2013 a thousand years of short elegiac texts on every topic under the sun. The \"Anthology\" includes one book of Christian epigrams as well as one book of erotic and amorous homosexual epigrams called the (, \"The Boyish Muse\").\nAncient Roman.\nRoman epigrams owe much to their Greek predecessors and contemporaries. Roman epigrams, however, were often more satirical than Greek ones, and at times used obscene language for effect. Latin epigrams could be composed as inscriptions or graffiti, such as this one from Pompeii, which exists in several versions and seems from its inexact meter to have been composed by a less educated person. Its content makes it clear how popular such poems were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, in the literary world, epigrams were most often gifts to patrons or entertaining verse to be published, not inscriptions. Many Roman writers seem to have composed epigrams, including Domitius Marsus, whose collection \"Cicuta\" (now lost) was named after the poisonous plant \"Cicuta\" for its biting wit, and Lucan, more famous for his epic \"Pharsalia\". Authors whose epigrams survive include Catullus, who wrote both invectives and love epigrams \u2013 his poem\u00a085 is one of the latter.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMartial, however, is considered to be the master of the Latin epigram. His technique relied heavily on the satirical poem with a joke in the last line, thus drawing him closer to the modern idea of epigram as a genre. Here he defines his genre against a (probably fictional) critic (in the latter half of 2.77):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPoets known for their epigrams whose work has been lost include Cornificia.\nEnglish.\nIn early English literature the short couplet poem was dominated by the poetic epigram and proverb, especially in the translations of the Bible and the Greek and Roman poets.\nTwo successive lines of verse that rhyme with each other are known as a couplet. Since 1600, the couplet has been featured as a part of the longer sonnet form, most notably in William Shakespeare's sonnets. Sonnet 76 is an example. The two-line poetic form as a closed couplet was also used by William Blake in his poem \"Auguries of Innocence\", and also by Byron in his poem \"Don Juan\", by John Gay in his fables, and by Alexander Pope in his \"An Essay on Man\".\nThe first work of English literature penned in North America was Robert Hayman's \"Quodlibets, Lately Come Over from New Britaniola, Old Newfoundland\", which is a collection of over 300\u00a0epigrams, many of which do not conform to the two-line rule or trend. While the collection was written between 1618\u20131628 in what is now Harbour Grace, Newfoundland, it was published shortly after his return to Britain. \nIn Victorian times, the epigram couplet was often used by the prolific American poet Emily Dickinson. Her poem No.\u00a01534 is a typical example of her eleven poetic epigrams. The novelist George Eliot also included couplets throughout her writings. Her best example is in her sequenced sonnet poem entitled \"Brother and Sister\" in which each of the eleven sequenced sonnets ends with a couplet. In her sonnets, the preceding lead-in-line, to the couplet ending of each, could be thought of as a title for the couplet, as is shown in Sonnet VIII of the sequence.\nDuring the early 20th century, the rhymed epigram couplet form developed into a fixed verse image form, with an integral title as the third line. Adelaide Crapsey codified the couplet form into a two-line rhymed verse of ten syllables per line with her image couplet poem \"On Seeing Weather-Beaten Trees\", first published in 1915.\nBy the 1930s, the five-line cinquain verse form became widely known in the poetry of the Scottish poet William Soutar. These were originally labelled epigrams but later identified as image cinquains in the style of Adelaide Crapsey.\nJ. V. Cunningham was also a noted writer of epigrams (a medium suited to a \"short-breathed\" person).\nPoetic epigrams.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nEpigram about John Milton (many poets commented on Milton, including Dryden):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nEpigram about Charles II of England:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10076", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10076", "title": "El Cid", "text": "Castilian warlord and Prince of Valencia from 1094 to 1099\nRodrigo D\u00edaz de Vivar (c.\u20091043 \u2013 10 July 1099) was a Castilian knight and ruler in medieval Spain. Fighting with both Christian and Muslim armies during his lifetime, he earned the Arabic honorific (\"the Lord\" or \"the Master\"), which would evolve into El \u00c7id (, ), and the Spanish honorific El Campeador (\"the Champion\"). He was born in Vivar, a village near the city of Burgos.\nAs the head of his loyal knights, he came to dominate the Levante of the Iberian Peninsula at the end of the 11th century. He reclaimed the Taifa of Valencia from Moorish control for a brief period, ruling the Principality of Valencia from 17 June 1094 until his death in 1099. His wife, Jimena D\u00edaz, inherited the city and maintained it until 1102 when it was reconquered by the Moors.\nD\u00edaz de Vivar became well known for his service in the armies of both Christian and Muslim rulers. After his death, El Cid became Spain's most celebrated national hero and the protagonist of the most significant medieval Spanish epic poem, , which presents him as the ideal medieval knight: strong, valiant, loyal, just, and pious.\nThere are various theories on his family history, which remains uncertain; however, he was the grandfather of Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez de Pamplona, King of Navarre, who was the first son of his daughter Cristina Rodr\u00edguez. To this day, El Cid remains a popular Spanish folk hero and national icon, with his life and deeds remembered in popular culture.\nSummary.\nBorn a member of the minor nobility, El Cid was brought up at the court of Ferdinand the Great and served Ferdinand's son, Sancho II of Le\u00f3n and Castile. He rose to become the commander and royal standard-bearer (\"armiger regis\") of Castile upon Sancho's ascension in 1065. El Cid went on to lead the Castilian military campaigns against Sancho's brothers, Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Garc\u00eda II of Galicia, as well as in the Muslim kingdoms in al-Andalus. He became renowned for his military prowess in these campaigns, which helped expand the territory of the Crown of Castile at the expense of the Muslims and Sancho's brothers' kingdoms.\nWhen conspirators murdered Sancho in 1072, El Cid found himself in a difficult situation. Since Sancho was childless, the throne passed to his brother Alfonso, whom El Cid had helped remove from power. Although El Cid continued to serve the sovereign, he lost his ranking in the new court, which treated him suspiciously and kept him at arm's length. Finally, in 1081, he was exiled.\nEl Cid found work fighting for the Muslim rulers of Zaragoza, whom he defended from its traditional enemy, Aragon. While in exile, he regained his reputation as a strategist and formidable military leader. He was repeatedly victorious in battle against the Muslim rulers of L\u00e9rida and their Christian allies, as well as against a large Christian army under King Sancho Ram\u00edrez of Aragon. In 1086, an expeditionary army of North African Almoravids inflicted a severe defeat to Castile, compelling Alfonso to overcome the resentment he harboured against El Cid. The terms for El Cid's return to Christian service must have been attractive enough since El Cid soon found himself fighting for his former lord. Over the next several years, however, El Cid set his sights on the kingdom city of Valencia, operating more or less independently of Alfonso while politically supporting the Banu Hud and other Muslim dynasties opposed to the Almoravids. He gradually increased his control over Valencia; the Islamic ruler, Yahya al-Qadir, became his tributary in 1092. When the Almoravids instigated an uprising that resulted in the death of al-Qadir, El Cid responded by laying siege to the city. Valencia finally fell in 1094, and El Cid established an independent principality on the Mediterranean coast of Iberia. He ruled over a pluralistic society with the popular support of Christians and Muslims alike.\nEl Cid's final years were spent fighting the Almoravid Berbers. He inflicted upon them their first major defeat in 1094, on the plains of Caurte, outside Valencia, and continued opposing them until his death. Although El Cid remained undefeated in Valencia, Diego Rodr\u00edguez, his only son and heir, died fighting against the Almoravids in the service of Alfonso in 1097. After El Cid died in 1099, his wife, Jimena D\u00edaz, succeeded him as ruler of Valencia, but she was eventually forced to surrender the principality to the Almoravids in 1102.\nTitle.\nThe name \"El Cid\" () is a modern Spanish denomination composed of the article \"el\" meaning \"the\" and \"Cid\", which derives from the Old Castilian loan word \"\u00c7id\" borrowed from the dialectal Arabic word \u0633\u064a\u062f \"s\u00eedi\" or sayyid, which means \"lord\" or \"master\". The Mozarabs or the Arabs that served in his ranks may have addressed him in this way, which the Christians may have transliterated and adopted. It has been conjectured that he received the honorific title and respectful treatment of contemporaries in Zaragoza because of his victories in the service of the King of the Taifa of Zaragoza between 1081 and 1086; however, he more likely received the epithet after his conquest of Valencia in 1094.\nHistorians have not found contemporary records referring to Rodrigo as \"Cid\". Arab sources use instead \"Rudriq\", \"Ludriq al-Kanbiyatur\" or \"al-Qanbiyatur\" (\"Rodrigo el Campeador\"). The title appears for the first time as in the , composed between 1147 and 1149.\nThe cognomen \"Campeador\" derives from Latin \"campi doctor\", literally meaning \"teacher of the field\", but translatable as \"master of the battlefield\". He probably gained it during the campaigns of King Sancho II of Castile against his brothers, kings Alfonso VI of Le\u00f3n and Garc\u00eda II of Galicia. While his contemporaries left no historical sources that would have addressed him as \"Cid\", they left plenty of Christian and Arab records, some even signed documents with his autograph, addressing him as \"Campeador\", which prove that he used the Christian cognomen himself. Arabic sources from the late 11th century and early 12th century call him (), (), also preceded by or , which are Arabized forms of his title and name, respectively.\nThe combination of \"Cid Campeador\" is documented from 1195 in (\"The Lineage of Rodrigo D\u00edaz\") in Navarro-Aragonese, which form part of the written as ; and in .\nLife and career.\nOrigins.\nEl Cid was born Rodrigo D\u00edaz circa 1043 in Vivar, also known as Castillona de Bivar, a small town about ten kilometers (or six miles) north of Burgos, the capital of Castile. His father, Diego La\u00ednez, was a courtier, bureaucrat, and cavalryman who had fought in several battles. Despite the fact that El Cid's mother's family was aristocratic, in later years, the peasants would consider him one of their own. However, his relatives were not major court officials; documents show that El Cid's paternal grandfather, La\u00edn, confirmed only five documents of Ferdinand I's; his maternal grandfather, Rodrigo \u00c1lvarez, certified only two of Sancho II's; and El Cid's father confirmed only one.\nService under Sancho II.\nAs a young man in 1057, El Cid fought against the Moorish stronghold of Zaragoza, making its emir al-Muqtadir a vassal of Sancho. In the spring of 1063, El Cid fought in the Battle of Graus, where Ferdinand's half-brother, Ramiro I of Aragon, was laying siege to the Moorish town of Graus, which was fought on Zaragozan lands in the valley of the river Cinca. Al-Muqtadir, accompanied by Castilian troops including El Cid, fought against the Aragonese. The party slew Ramiro I, setting the Aragonese army on the run, and emerged victorious. One legend has said that during the conflict, El Cid killed an Aragonese knight in single combat, thereby receiving the honorific title \"Campeador\".\nWhen Ferdinand died, Sancho continued to enlarge his territory, conquering both Christian strongholds and the Moorish cities of Zamora and Badajoz. When Sancho learned that Alfonso was planning on overthrowing him in order to gain his territory, Sancho sent Cid to bring Alfonso back so that Sancho could speak to him.\nService under Alfonso VI.\nSancho was assassinated in 1072, during a siege of his sister's town of Zamora. Since Sancho died unmarried and childless, all of his power passed to his brother Alfonso who, almost immediately, returned from exile in Toledo and took his seat as king of Castile and Le\u00f3n. He was, however, deeply suspected of having been involved in Sancho's murder. According to the 11th century epic poem \"Cantar de mio Cid\", the Castilian nobility led by El Cid and a dozen \"oath-helpers\" forced Alfonso to swear publicly on holy relics multiple times in front of Santa Gadea (Saint Agatha) Church in Burgos that he did not participate in the plot to kill his brother. This is not mentioned in the more reliable 12th century chronicle \"Historia Roderici\", however. El Cid's position as \"armiger regis\" was taken away and given to his enemy, Count Garc\u00eda Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez.\nIn 1079, El Cid was sent by Alfonso VI to Seville to the court of al-Mutamid to collect the \"parias\" owed by that \"taifa\" to Le\u00f3n\u2013Castile. While he was there Granada, assisted by other Castilian knights, attacked Seville, and El Cid and his forces repulsed the Christian and Grenadine attackers at the Battle of Cabra, in the (probably mistaken) belief that he was defending the king's tributary. During the aftermath of this battle the Muslim troops under El Cid's command would hail him as Sayyidi. Count Garc\u00eda Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez and the other Castilian leaders were taken captive and held for three days before being released.\nExile.\nIn the Battle of Cabra (1079), El Cid rallied his troops and turned the battle into a rout of Emir Abdullah of Granada and his ally Garc\u00eda Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez. This unauthorized expedition into Granada, however, greatly angered Alfonso and May 8, 1080, was the last time El Cid confirmed a document in King Alfonso's court. The most likely reason was El Cid's incursion into Toledo, which happened to be under the control of Alfonso's vassal, Yahya Al-Qadir. Alfonso's anger over El Cid's unsanctioned incursion into his vassal's territory would lead him to exile the knight.\nThis is the generally accepted reason for the exile of El Cid, although several others are plausible and indeed may have been contributing factors to the exile: jealous nobles turning Alfonso against El Cid through court intrigue, and Alfonso's own personal animosity towards El Cid. The song of El Cid and subsequent tales state that Alfonso's and his court's animosity toward Rodrigo was the primary reason the expulsion of the knights from Le\u00f3n, as well as a possible misappropriation of some of the tribute from Seville by El Cid.\nAt first he went to Barcelona, where Berenguer Ramon II refused his offer of service.\nMoorish service.\nThe exile was not the end of El Cid, either physically or as an important figure. After being rejected by Berenguer Ramon II, El Cid journeyed to the Taifa of Zaragoza, where he received a warmer welcome. In 1081, El Cid went on to offer his services to the king of Zaragoza, Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud, and served both him and his successor, al-Musta'in II. He was given the title \"El Cid\" (\"The Master\") and served as a leading figure in a diverse Moorish force consisting of Muwallads, Berbers, Arabs, and Malians within the respective Taifa.\nAccording to Moorish accounts:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Andalusi Knights found El Cid their foe ill, thirsty and exiled from the court of Alfonso, he was presented before the elderly Yusuf al-Mu'taman ibn Hud and accepted command of the forces of the Taifa of Zaragoza as their Master.\nIn his \"History of Medieval Spain\" (Cornell University Press, 1975), Joseph F. O'Callaghan writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That kingdom was divided between al-Mutamin (1081\u20131085) who ruled Zaragoza proper, and his brother al-Mundhir, who ruled L\u00e9rida and Tortosa. El Cid entered al-Mutamin's service and successfully defended Zaragoza against the assaults of al-Mundhir, Sancho I of Arag\u00f3n, and Ramon Berenguer II, whom he held captive briefly in 1082.\nIn 1082, the army of the Taifa of Zaragoza under El Cid defeated the Taifa of Lleida at the Battle of Almenar. In 1084, he defeated the Aragonese at the Battle of Morella near Tortosa, but in autumn the Castilians started a loose siege of Toledo and later the next year the Christians captured Salamanca, a stronghold of the Taifa of Toledo.\nIn 1086, the Almoravid invasion of the Iberian Peninsula, through and around Gibraltar, began. The Almoravids, a Berber dynasty from North Africa, led by Yusuf ibn Tashfin, were asked to help defend the divided Moors from Alfonso. The Almoravid army, joined by that of several Taifas, including Badajoz, M\u00e1laga, Granada, Tortosa and Seville, defeated a combined army of Le\u00f3n, Arag\u00f3n, and Castile at the Battle of Sagrajas.\nIn 1087, Raymond of Burgundy and his Christian allies attempted to weaken the Taifa of Zaragoza's northernmost stronghold by initiating the Siege of Tudela and Alfonso captured Aledo, Murcia, blocking the route between the Taifas in the eastern and western Iberian Peninsula.\nRecall from exile.\nTerrified after his crushing defeat, Alfonso recalled El Cid, rewarding him lavishly with lands and lordships, such as the fortress of Gormaz. In the year 1087 Alfonso sent him to negotiate with the emboldened Taifa kingdoms.\nEl Cid returned to Alfonso, but now he had his own plans. He only stayed a short while and then returned to Zaragoza. El Cid was content to let the Almoravid armies and the armies of Alfonso fight without his help, even when there was a chance that the Almoravids might defeat Alfonso and take over all of Alfonso's lands. El Cid chose not to fight because he was hoping that both armies would weaken themselves. \nConquest of Valencia.\nAround this time, El Cid, with a combined Christian and Moorish army, began maneuvering in order to create his own fief in the Moorish Mediterranean coastal city of Valencia. Several obstacles lay in his way. First was Berenguer Ramon II, who ruled nearby Barcelona. In May 1090, El Cid defeated and captured Berenguer in the Battle of T\u00e9bar (nowadays Pinar de T\u00e9var, near Monroyo, Teruel). Berenguer was later released and his nephew Ramon Berenguer III married El Cid's youngest daughter Maria to ward against future conflicts.\nAlong the way to Valencia, El Cid also conquered other towns, many of which were near Valencia, such as El Puig and Quart de Poblet.\nEl Cid gradually came to have more influence in Valencia, then ruled by Yahya al-Qadir, of the Hawwara Berber Dhulnunid dynasty. In October 1092 an uprising occurred in Valencia, inspired by the city's chief judge Ibn Jahhaf and the Almoravids. El Cid began a siege of Valencia. A December 1093 attempt to break the siege failed. By the time the siege ended in May 1094, El Cid had carved out his own principality on the coast of the Mediterranean. Officially, El Cid ruled in the name of Alfonso; in practice, El Cid was fully independent. The city was both Christian and Muslim, and both Moors and Christians served in the army and as administrators. Jerome of P\u00e9rigord was made bishop.\nDeath.\nEl Cid and his wife Jimena D\u00edaz lived peacefully in Valencia until the Almoravids besieged the city. \nBut he defeated them and died 5 years later, on July 10, 1099.\nAfterward Valencia was captured by Mazdali on May 5, 1102. Jimena fled to Burgos, Castile, in 1101. She rode into the town with her retinue and the body of El Cid. Originally buried in Castile in the monastery of San Pedro de Carde\u00f1a, his body now lies at the center of Burgos Cathedral.\nLegend of posthumous victory.\nAfter his demise, but still during the siege of Valencia, legend holds that Jimena ordered that the corpse of El Cid be fitted with his armor and set on his horse, Babieca, to bolster the morale of his troops. In several variations of the story, the dead Rodrigo and his knights win a thundering charge against Valencia's besiegers, resulting in a war-is-lost-but-battle-is-won catharsis for generations of Christian Spaniards to follow. It is believed that the legend originated shortly after Jimena entered Burgos, and that it is derived from the manner in which Jimena's procession rode into the city, i.e. alongside her deceased husband.\nWarrior and general.\nBattle tactics.\nDuring his campaigns, El Cid often ordered that books by classic Roman and Greek authors on military themes be read aloud to him and his troops, for both entertainment and inspiration before battle. El Cid's army had a novel approach to planning strategy as well, holding what might be called \"brainstorming\" sessions before each battle to discuss tactics. They frequently used unexpected strategies, engaging in what modern generals would call psychological warfare\u2014waiting for the enemy to be paralyzed with terror and then attacking them suddenly; distracting the enemy with a small group of soldiers, etc. (El Cid used this distraction in capturing the town of Castej\u00f3n as depicted in \"Cantar de mio Cid\" (\"The Song of my Cid\").) El Cid accepted or included suggestions from his troops. In \"The Song\" the man who served him as his closest adviser was his vassal and kinsman \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez \"Minaya\" (meaning \"My brother\", a compound word of Spanish possessive \"Mi\" (My) and \"Anaia\", the basque word for \"brother\"), although the historical \u00c1lvar F\u00e1\u00f1ez remained in Castile with Alfonso VI.\nBabieca.\nBabieca, or Bavieca, was El Cid's warhorse. Several stories exist about El Cid and Babieca. One well-known legend about El Cid describes how he acquired the stallion. According to this story, Rodrigo's godfather, Pedro El Grande, was a monk at a Carthusian monastery. Pedro's coming-of-age gift to El Cid was his pick of a horse from an Andalusian herd. El Cid picked a horse that his godfather thought was a weak, poor choice, causing the monk to exclaim \"Babieca!\" (stupid!). Hence, it became the name of El Cid's horse. Another legend states that in a competition of battle to become King Sancho's \"Campeador\", or champion, a knight on horseback wished to challenge El Cid. The King wished a fair fight and gave El Cid his finest horse, Babieca, or Bavieca. This version says Babieca was raised in the royal stables of Seville and was a highly trained and loyal war horse, not a foolish stallion. The name in this instance could suggest that the horse came from the Babia region in Le\u00f3n, Spain. In the poem \"Carmen Campidoctoris\", Babieca appears as a gift from \"a barbarian\" to El Cid, so its name could also be derived from \"Barbieca\", or \"horse of the barbarian\".\nRegardless, Babieca became a great warhorse, famous to the Christians, feared by El Cid's enemies, and loved by El Cid, who allegedly requested that Babieca be buried with him in the monastery of San Pedro de Carde\u00f1a. Babieca is mentioned in several tales and historical documents about El Cid, including \"The Lay of El Cid\".\nSwords.\nA weapon traditionally identified as El Cid's sword, Tizona, used to be displayed in the Army Museum (Museo del Ej\u00e9rcito) in Toledo. In 1999, a small sample of the blade underwent metallurgical analysis which confirmed that the blade was made in Moorish C\u00f3rdoba in the eleventh century and contained amounts of Damascus steel.\nIn 2007, the Autonomous Community of Castile and Le\u00f3n bought the sword for \u20ac1.6 million, and it is currently on display at the Museum of Burgos.\nEl Cid also had a sword called Colada.\nWife and children.\nEl Cid married Jimena D\u00edaz, who was said to be part of an aristocratic family from Asturias, in the mid-1070s. The \"Historia Roderici\" calls her a daughter of a Count Diego Fern\u00e1ndez de Oviedo. Tradition states that when El Cid first laid eyes on her, he was enamoured of her great beauty. El Cid and Jimena had two daughters, Cristina and Mar\u00eda, and a son. The latter, Diego Rodr\u00edguez, was killed while fighting against the invading Muslim Almoravids from North Africa at the Battle of Consuegra in 1097. El Cid's daughters Cristina Rodr\u00edguez and Mar\u00eda both married into noble families. Cristina married Ramiro, Lord of Monz\u00f3n and grandson of Garc\u00eda S\u00e1nchez III of Navarre.\nHer own son, El Cid's grandson, would be elevated to the throne of Navarre as King Garc\u00eda Ram\u00edrez. The other daughter, Mar\u00eda (also known as Sol), is said first to have married a prince of Aragon, presumably the son of Peter I, and she later married Ramon Berenguer III, count of Barcelona. Both the poem and the chronicle may state a previous marriage to the infantes de Carri\u00f3n; however, these marriages are not a historical fact and are an important element in the construction of the poem.\nIn literature, music, video games, and film.\nThe figure of El Cid has been the source for many literary works, beginning with the \"Cantar de mio Cid\", an epic poem from the 12th century which gives a partly-fictionalized account of his life, and was one of the early chivalric romances. This poem, along with similar later works such as the \"Mocedades de Rodrigo\", contributed to portray El Cid as a chivalric hero of the Reconquista, making him a legendary figure in Spain. El Cid is one of the few examples of knight errantry formally recognized by the priest in Miguel de Cervantes's \"Don Quixote\" (1605\u20131615).\nIn the early 17th century, the Spanish writer Guill\u00e9n de Castro wrote a play called \"Las Mocedades del Cid\", on which French playwright Pierre Corneille based one of his most famous tragicomedies, \"Le Cid\". He was also a popular source of inspiration for Spanish writers of the Romantic period, such as Juan Eugenio Hartzenbusch, who wrote \"La Jura de Santa Gadea\", or Jos\u00e9 Zorrilla, who wrote a long poem called \"La Leyenda del Cid\". In 2019, Arturo P\u00e9rez-Reverte published the novel entitled \"Sidi: Un relato de frontera\".\nHerman Melville references El Cid when introducing the character of Samoa in Chapter 21 of \"Mardi\" (1849): \"He alighted about six paces from where we stood, and balancing his weapon, eyed us bravely as the Cid\".\nIn 1929, Chilean writer Vicente Huidobro published his poetic novel \"M\u00edo Cid Campeador. Haza\u00f1a.\" This work, together with other novels (and plays) he published between 1929 and 1939, defied the traditional realistic style of the early 20th century Chilean novel. The English version was published in 1931.\nGeorges Bizet worked on \"Don Rodrigue\" in 1873 that was set aside and never completed. Jules Massenet wrote an opera, \"Le Cid\", in 1885, based on Corneille's play of the same name. Claude Debussy began work in 1890 on an opera, \"Rodrigue et Chim\u00e8ne\", which he abandoned as unsuitable for his temperament; it was orchestrated for performance by Edison Denisov circa 1993.\nEl Cid is portrayed by American actor Charlton Heston in a 1961 epic film of the same name directed by Anthony Mann, where the character of Do\u00f1a Ximena is portrayed by Italian actress Sophia Loren. In 2020, Amazon Prime Video premiered a Spanish TV series with Jaime Lorente starring as \"El Cid\".\nIn 1979, Crack, one of the most prominent progressive rock bands from Spain, released their first and only album \"Si Todo Hiciera Crack\" including \"Marchando una del Cid\", a song based on the epic legend of El Cid.\nIn 1980, \"Ruy, the Little Cid\" was an animated series based on El Cid's childhood made by Nippon Animation.\nEl Cid was described to inspire Ferny about his Spanish heritage in \"The Legend of Raloo\", episode 16 of season 1 of \"Jakers! The Adventures of Piggley Winks\" in 2004.\nIn the second \"Age of Empires\" video game installment, \" expansion pack, there is a campaign starring El Cid Campeador.\nIn both the first and second \" games, El Cid appears as a powerful independent general in the castle of Valencia.\nIn 2003, the Spanish animated film \"\" was released.\n\"The Ministry of Time\", a Spanish science fiction television series, portrayed El Cid in season 2, episode 1.\nEl Cid is a playable character in the Mobile/PC Game Rise of Kingdoms.\nEl Cid is a playable character in \"Crusader Kings II\" and Crusader Kings III in start dates corresponding to his historical rule over Valencia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10078", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10078", "title": "Enjambment", "text": "Incomplete syntax at the end of a line in poetry\nIn poetry, enjambment (; from the French \"enjamber\") is incomplete syntax at the end of a line; the meaning 'runs over' or 'steps over' from one poetic line to the next, without punctuation. Lines without enjambment are end-stopped. The origin of the word is credited to the French word \"enjamber\", which means 'to straddle or encroach'.\nIn reading, the delay of meaning creates a tension that is released when the word or phrase that completes the syntax is encountered (called the rejet); the tension arises from the \"mixed message\" produced both by the pause of the line-end, and the suggestion to continue provided by the incomplete meaning. In spite of the apparent contradiction between rhyme, which heightens closure, and enjambment, which delays it, the technique is compatible with rhymed verse. Even in couplets, the closed or heroic couplet was a late development; older is the open couplet, where rhyme and enjambed lines co-exist.\nEnjambment has a long history in poetry. Homer used the technique, and it is the norm for alliterative verse where rhyme is unknown. In the 32nd Psalm of the Hebrew Bible enjambment is unusually conspicuous. It was used extensively in England by Elizabethan poets for dramatic and narrative verses, before giving way to closed couplets. The example of John Milton in \"Paradise Lost\" laid the foundation for its subsequent use by the English Romantic poets; in its preface he identified it as one of the chief features of his verse: \"sense variously drawn out from one verse into another\".\nExamples.\nThe start of \"The Waste Land\" by T. S. Eliot, with only lines 4 and 7 end-stopped:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;April is the cruellest month, breeding\nLilacs out of the dead land, mixing\nMemory and desire, stirring\nDull roots with spring rain.\nWinter kept us warm, covering\nEarth in forgetful snow, feeding\nA little life with dried tubers.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThese lines from Shakespeare's \"The Winter's Tale\" (\"c.\" 1611) are heavily enjambed (meaning enjambment is used):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;I am not prone to weeping, as our sex\nCommonly are; the want of which vain dew\nPerchance shall dry your pities; but I have\nThat honourable grief lodged here which burns\nWorse than tears drown.&lt;/poem&gt;\nMeaning flows as the lines progress, and the reader's eye is forced to go on to the next sentence. It can also make the reader feel uncomfortable or the poem feel like \"flow-of-thought\" with a sensation of urgency or disorder. In contrast, the following lines from \"Romeo and Juliet\" (\"c.\" 1595) are completely end-stopped:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;A glooming peace this morning with it brings.\nThe sun for sorrow will not show his head.\nGo hence, to have more talk of these sad things.\nSome shall be pardon'd, and some punish\u00e8d.&lt;/poem&gt;\nEach line is formally correspondent with a unit of thought\u2014in this case, a clause of a sentence. End-stopping is more frequent in early Shakespeare: as his style developed, the proportion of enjambment in his plays increased. Scholars such as Goswin K\u00f6nig and A. C. Bradley have estimated approximate dates of undated works of Shakespeare by studying the frequency of enjambment.\n\"Endymion\" by John Keats, lines 2\u20134:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Its loveliness increases; it will never\nPass into nothingness; but still will keep\nA bower quiet for us...&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe song \"One Night In Bangkok\", from the musical \"Chess\", written by Tim Rice and Bj\u00f6rn Ulvaeus, includes examples such as :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;The creme de la creme of the chess world in a\nShow with everything but Yul Brynner\nThis grips me more than would a\nMuddy old river or reclining Buddha&lt;/poem&gt;\nClosely related to enjambment is the technique of \"broken rhyme\" or \"split rhyme\" which involves the splitting of an individual word, typically to allow a rhyme with one or more syllables of the split word. In English verse, broken rhyme is used almost exclusively in light verse, such as to form a word that rhymes with \"orange\", as in this example by Willard Espy, in his poem \"The Unrhymable Word: Orange\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;The four eng-\nineers\nWore orange\nbrassieres.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe clapping game \"Miss Susie\" uses the break \"... Hell / -o operator\" to allude to the taboo word \"Hell\", then replaces it with the innocuous \"Hello\". Similarly, the Spanish-language song \"La Camisa Negra\" leads the listener to imagine an obscenity before the next verse completes the word more innocently.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10080", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10080", "title": "European Convention on Nationality", "text": "1997 Council of Europe treaty\nThe European Convention on Nationality (E.T.S. No. 166) was signed in Strasbourg on 6 November 1997. It is a comprehensive convention of the Council of Europe dealing with the law of nationality. The convention is open for signature by the member States of the Council of Europe and the non-member States which have participated in its elaboration and for accession by other non-member States. The Convention came into force on 1 March 2000 after ratification by 3 countries. As of 2021[ [update]], the convention has been signed by 29 countries and ratified by 21 of those countries.\nProvisions.\nArticle 4(d) provides that neither marriage nor dissolution of marriage shall automatically affect the nationality of either spouse, nor shall a change of nationality by one spouse during marriage automatically affect the nationality of their spouse. Common practice among states at the beginning of the 20th century was that a woman was to have the nationality of her husband; i.e., upon marrying a foreigner the wife would automatically acquire the nationality of her husband, and lose her previous nationality. Even after the nationality of a married woman was no longer dependent on the nationality of her husband, legal provisions were still retained which automatically naturalised married women, and sometimes married men as well. This led to a number of problems, such as loss of the spouses' original nationality, the spouse losing the right to consular assistance (since consular assistance cannot be provided to nationals under the jurisdiction of a foreign state of which they are also nationals), and becoming subject to military service obligations. Article 4d addresses this situation.\nArticle 5 provides that no discrimination shall exist in a state's internal nationality law on the grounds of \"sex, religion, race, colour or national or ethnic origin\". It also provides that a state shall not discriminate amongst its nationals on the basis of whether they hold their nationality by birth or acquired it subsequently.\nArticle 6 relates to the acquisition of nationality. It provides for nationality to be acquired at birth by descent from either parent to those born within the territory of the state. (States may exclude partially or fully children born abroad). It also provides for nationality by virtue of birth in the territory of state; however, states may limit this to only children who would be otherwise stateless. It requires the possibility of naturalisation, and provides that the period of residence required for eligibility cannot be more than ten years lawful and habitual residence. It also requires to \"facilitate\" the acquisition of nationality by certain persons, including spouses of nationals, children of its nationals born abroad, children one of whose parents has acquired the nationality, children adopted by a national, persons lawfully and habitually resident for a period before the age of eighteen, and stateless persons and refugees lawfully and habitually resident on its territory.\nArticle 7 regulates the involuntary loss of nationality. It provides that states may deprive their nationals of their nationality in only the cases of voluntary acquisition of another nationality, fraud or failure to provide relevant information when acquiring nationality, voluntary military service in a foreign military force, or adoption as a child by foreign nationals. It also provides for the possibility of loss of nationality for nationals habitually residing abroad. Finally, it provides loss of nationality for \"conduct seriously prejudicial to the vital interests of the State Party\".\nArticle 8 provides nationals with the right to renounce their nationality, providing they do not thereby become stateless. States may however restrict this right with respect to nationals residing abroad.\nStatus.\nAs of 2014[ [update]], the following countries have signed or ratified the convention:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10081", "revid": "47578690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10081", "title": "English orthography", "text": "Norms for writing the English language\nEnglish orthography comprises the set of rules used when writing the English language, allowing readers and writers to associate written graphemes with the sounds of spoken English, as well as other features of the language. English's orthography includes norms for spelling, hyphenation, capitalisation, word breaks, emphasis, and punctuation.\nAs with the orthographies of most other world languages, written English is broadly standardised. This standardisation began to develop when movable type spread to England in the late 15th century. However, unlike with most languages, there are multiple ways to spell every phoneme, and most letters also represent multiple pronunciations depending on their position in a word and the context.\nThis is partly due to the large number of words that have been loaned from a large number of other languages throughout the history of English, without successful attempts at complete spelling reforms, and partly due to accidents of history, such as some of the earliest mass-produced English publications being typeset by highly trained, multilingual printing compositors, who occasionally used a spelling pattern more typical for another language. For example, the word \"ghost\" was spelled in Middle English, until the Flemish spelling pattern was unintentionally substituted, and happened to be accepted. Most of the spelling conventions in Modern English were derived from the phonemic spelling of a variety of Middle English, and generally do not reflect the sound changes that have occurred since the late 15th century (such as the Great Vowel Shift).\nDespite the various English dialects spoken from country to country and within different regions of the same country, there are only slight regional variations in English orthography, the two most recognised variations being British and American spelling, and its overall uniformity helps facilitate international communication. On the other hand, it also adds to the discrepancy between the way English is written and spoken in any given location.\nFunction of letters.\nPhonemic representation.\nLetters in English orthography positioned at one location\nwithin a specific word usually represent a particular phoneme. For example, \"at\" consists of 2 letters \u27e8a\u27e9 and \u27e8t\u27e9, which represent and , respectively.\nSequences of letters may perform this role as well as single letters. Thus, in \"thrash\" , the digraph \u27e8th\u27e9 (two letters) represents . In \"hatch\" , the trigraph \u27e8tch\u27e9 represents .\nLess commonly, a single letter can represent multiple successive sounds. The most common example is \u27e8x\u27e9, which normally represents the consonant cluster (for example, in \"tax\" ).\nThe same letter (or sequence of letters) may be pronounced differently when occurring in different positions within a word. For instance, \u27e8gh\u27e9 represents at the end of some words (\"tough\" ) but not in others (\"plough\" ). At the beginning of syllables, \u27e8gh\u27e9 is pronounced , as in \"ghost\" . Conversely, \u27e8gh\u27e9 is never pronounced in syllable onsets other than in inflected forms, and is almost never pronounced in syllable codas (the proper name \"Pittsburgh\" is an exception).\nSome words contain silent letters, which do not represent any sound in modern English pronunciation. Examples include the \u27e8l\u27e9 in \"talk\", \"half\", \"calf\", etc., the \u27e8w\u27e9 in \"two\" and \"sword\", \u27e8gh\u27e9 as mentioned above in numerous words such as \"though\", \"daughter\", \"night\", \"brought\", and the commonly encountered silent \u27e8e\u27e9 (discussed further below).\nWord origin.\nAnother type of spelling characteristic is related to word origin. For example, when representing a vowel, \u27e8y\u27e9 represents the sound in some words borrowed from Greek (reflecting an original upsilon), whereas the letter usually representing this sound in non-Greek words is the letter \u27e8i\u27e9. Thus, \"myth\" is of Greek origin, while \"pith\" is a Germanic word. However, a large number of Germanic words have \u27e8y\u27e9 in word-final position.\nSome other examples are \u27e8ph\u27e9 pronounced (which is most commonly \u27e8f\u27e9), and \u27e8ch\u27e9 pronounced (which is most commonly \u27e8c\u27e9 or \u27e8k\u27e9). The use of these spellings for these sounds often marks words that have been borrowed from Greek.\nSome researchers, such as Brengelman (1970), have suggested that, in addition to this marking of word origin, these spellings indicate a more formal level of style or register in a given text, although Rollings (2004) finds this point to be exaggerated as there would be many exceptions where a word with one of these spellings, such as \u27e8ph\u27e9 for (like \"telephone\"), could occur in an informal text.\nHomophone differentiation.\nSpelling may also be useful to distinguish in written language between homophones (words with the same pronunciation but different meanings), and thus resolve potential ambiguities that would arise otherwise. However in most cases the reason for the difference is historical, and it was not introduced to resolve ambiguity.\nNevertheless, many homophones remain that are unresolved by spelling (for example, the word \"bay\" has at least five fundamentally different meanings).\nMarking sound changes in other letters.\nSome letters in English provide information about the pronunciation of other letters in the word. Rollings (2004) uses the term \"markers\" for such letters. Letters may mark different types of information.\n\u27e8e\u27e9 often marks an altered pronunciation of a preceding vowel. In the pair \"mat\" and \"mate\", the \u27e8a\u27e9 of \"mat\" has the value , whereas the \u27e8a\u27e9 of \"mate\" is marked by the \u27e8e\u27e9 as having the value . In this context, the \u27e8e\u27e9 is not pronounced, and is referred to as a \"silent e\".\nAlso, \u27e8e\u27e9 in \"once\" indicates that the preceding \u27e8c\u27e9 is pronounced , rather than the more common value of \u27e8c\u27e9 in word-final position as the sound , such as in \"attic\" .\nA single letter may even fill multiple pronunciation-marking roles simultaneously. For example, in the word \"ace\", \u27e8e\u27e9 marks not only the change of \u27e8a\u27e9 from to , but also of \u27e8c\u27e9 from to . In the word \"vague\", \u27e8e\u27e9 marks the long \u27e8a\u27e9 sound, but \u27e8u\u27e9 keeps the \u27e8g\u27e9 hard rather than soft.\nDoubled consonants usually indicate that the preceding vowel is pronounced short. For example, the doubled \u27e8t\u27e9 in \"batted\" indicates that the \u27e8a\u27e9 is pronounced , while the single \u27e8t\u27e9 of \"bated\" gives . Doubled consonants only indicate any lengthening or gemination of the consonant sound itself when they come from different morphemes, as with the \u27e8nn\u27e9 in \"unnamed\" (\"un\"+\"named\").\nMultiple functionality.\nAny given letters may have dual functions. For example, \u27e8u\u27e9 in \"statue\" has a sound-representing function (representing the sound ) and a pronunciation-marking function (marking the \u27e8t\u27e9 as having the value opposed to the value ).\nUnderlying representation.\nLike many other alphabetic orthographies, English spelling does not represent non-contrastive phonetic sounds (that is, minor differences in pronunciation which are not used to distinguish between different words).\nAlthough the letter \u27e8t\u27e9 is pronounced by most speakers with aspiration at the beginning of words, this is never indicated in the spelling, and, indeed, this phonetic detail is probably not noticeable to the average native speaker not trained in phonetics.\nHowever, unlike some orthographies, English orthography often represents a very abstract underlying representation (or morphophonemic form) of English words.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; [T]he postulated underlying forms are systematically related to the conventional orthography ... and are, as is well known, related to the underlying forms of a much earlier historical stage of the language. There has, in other words, been little change in lexical representation since Middle English, and, consequently, we would expect ... that lexical representation would differ very little from dialect to dialect in Modern English ... [and] that conventional orthography is probably fairly close to optimal for all modern English dialects, as well as for the attested dialects of the past several hundred years.\nIn these cases, a given morpheme (i.e., a component of a word) has a fixed spelling even though it is pronounced differently in different words. An example is the past tense suffix -\u27e8ed\u27e9, which may be pronounced variously as , , or (for example, \"pay\" , \"payed\" , \"hate\" , \"hated\" ). As it happens, these different pronunciations of -\u27e8ed\u27e9 can be predicted by a few phonological rules, but that is not the reason why its spelling is fixed.\nAnother example involves the vowel differences (with accompanying stress pattern changes) in several related words. For instance, \"photographer\" is derived from \"photograph\" by adding the derivational suffix -\u27e8er\u27e9. When this suffix is added, the vowel pronunciations change largely owing to the moveable stress:\nOther examples of this type are the -\u27e8ity\u27e9 suffix (as in \"agile\" vs. \"agility\", \"acid\" vs. \"acidity\", \"divine\" vs. \"divinity\", \"sane\" vs. \"sanity\"). See also: Trisyllabic laxing.\nAnother example includes words like \"mean\" and \"meant\" , where \u27e8ea\u27e9 is pronounced differently in the two related words. Thus, again, the orthography uses only a single spelling that corresponds to the single morphemic form rather than to the surface phonological form.\nEnglish orthography does not always provide an underlying representation; sometimes it provides an intermediate representation between the underlying form and the surface pronunciation. This is the case with the spelling of the regular plural morpheme, which is written as either -\u27e8s\u27e9 (as in \"tat, tats\" and \"hat, hats\") or -\u27e8es\u27e9 (as in \"glass, glasses\"). Here, the spelling -\u27e8s\u27e9 is pronounced either or (depending on the environment, e.g., \"tats\" and \"tails\" ) while -\u27e8es\u27e9 is usually pronounced (e.g. \"classes\" ). Thus, there are two different spellings that correspond to the single underlying representation || of the plural suffix and the three surface forms. The spelling indicates the insertion of before the in the spelling -\u27e8es\u27e9, but does not indicate the devoiced distinctly from the unaffected in the spelling -\u27e8s\u27e9.\nThe abstract representation of words as indicated by the orthography can be considered advantageous since it makes etymological relationships more apparent to English readers. This makes writing English more complex, but arguably makes reading English more efficient. However, very abstract underlying representations, such as that of Chomsky &amp; Halle (1968) or of underspecification theories, are sometimes considered too abstract to accurately reflect the communicative competence of native speakers. Followers of these arguments believe the less abstract surface forms are more \"psychologically real\" and thus more useful in terms of pedagogy.\nDiacritics.\nSome English words can be written with diacritics; these are mostly loanwords, usually from French. As vocabulary becomes naturalised, there is an increasing tendency to omit the accent marks, even in formal writing. For example, \"r\u00f4le\" and \"h\u00f4tel\" originally had accents when they were borrowed into English, but now the accents are almost never used. The words were originally considered foreign\u2014and some people considered that English alternatives were preferable\u2014but today their foreign origin is largely forgotten. Words most likely to retain the accent are those atypical of English morphology and therefore still perceived as slightly foreign. For example, \"caf\u00e9\" and \"p\u00e2t\u00e9\" both have a pronounced final \u27e8e\u27e9, which would otherwise be silent under the normal English pronunciation rules. Moreover, in \"p\u00e2t\u00e9\", the acute accent is helpful to distinguish it from \"pate\".\nFurther examples of words sometimes retaining diacritics when used in English are: \"\u00e5ngstr\u00f6m\"\u2014partly because its symbol is \u27e8\u00c5\u27e9\u2014\"appliqu\u00e9\", \"attach\u00e9\", \"blas\u00e9\", \"bric-\u00e0-brac\", \"Br\u00f6tchen\", \"clich\u00e9\", \"cr\u00e8me\", \"cr\u00eape\", \"fianc\u00e9(e)\", \"flamb\u00e9\", \"jalape\u00f1o\", \"na\u00efve\", \"na\u00efvet\u00e9\", \"n\u00e9(e)\", \"papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9\", \"pass\u00e9\", \"pi\u00f1ata\", \"prot\u00e9g\u00e9\", \"r\u00e9sum\u00e9\", \"risqu\u00e9\", and \"voil\u00e0\". Italics, with appropriate accents, are generally applied to foreign terms that are uncommonly used in or have not been assimilated into English: for example, \"adi\u00f3s\", \"belles-lettres\", \"cr\u00e8me br\u00fbl\u00e9e\", \"pi\u00e8ce de r\u00e9sistance\", \"raison d'\u00eatre\", and \"vis-\u00e0-vis\".\nIt was formerly common in American English to use a diaeresis to indicate a hiatus, e.g. \"co\u00f6perate\", \"da\u00efs\", and \"re\u00eblect\". \"The New Yorker\" and \"Technology Review\" magazines still use it for this purpose, even as general use became much rarer. Instead, modern orthography generally prefers no mark (\"cooperate\") or a hyphen (\"co-operate\") for a hiatus between two morphemes in a compound word. By contrast, use of diaereses in monomorphemic loanwords such as \"na\u00efve\" and \"No\u00ebl\" remains relatively common.\nIn poetry and performance arts, accent marks are occasionally used to indicate typically unstressed syllables that should be stressed when read for dramatic or prosodic effect. This is frequently seen with the \"-ed\" suffix in archaic and pseudoarchaic writing, e.g. \"curs\u00e8d\" indicates the \u27e8e\u27e9 should be fully pronounced. The grave being to indicate that an ordinarily silent or elided syllable is pronounced (\"warn\u00e8d\", \"parl\u00ecament\").\nLigatures.\nIn certain older texts (typically British), the use of the ligatures \u27e8\u00e6\u27e9 and \u27e8\u0153\u27e9 is common in words such as \"arch\u00e6ology\", \"diarrh\u0153a\", and \"encyclop\u00e6dia\", all of Latin or Greek origin. Nowadays, the ligatures have been generally replaced by the digraphs \u27e8ae\u27e9 and \u27e8oe\u27e9 (\"encyclopaedia\", \"diarrhoea\") in British English or just \u27e8e\u27e9 (\"encyclopedia\", \"diarrhea\") in American English, though both spell some words with only \u27e8e\u27e9 (\"economy\", \"ecology\") and others with \u27e8ae\u27e9 and \u27e8oe\u27e9 (\"paean\", \"amoeba\", \"oedipal\", \"Caesar\"). In some cases, usage may vary; for instance, both \"encyclopedia\" and \"encyclopaedia\" are current in the UK.\nPhonic irregularities.\nPartly because English has never had any official regulating authority for spelling, such as the Spanish , the French , the German \"Council for German Orthography\", the Danish \"Sprogn\u00e6vn\", and the Thai Royal Society, English spelling is considered irregular and complex compared to that of other languages. Although French, Danish, and Thai, among other languages, present a similar degree of difficulty when \"encoding\" (writing), English is more difficult when \"decoding\" (reading), as there are clearly many more possible pronunciations of a group of letters. For example, in French, (as in \"true\", but short), can be spelled \u27e8ou, ous, out, oux\u27e9 (\"ou\", \"nous\", \"tout\", \"choux\"), but the pronunciation of each of those sequences is always the same. However, in English, while can be spelled in up to 24 different ways, including \u27e8oo, u, ui, ue, o, oe, ou, ough\u27e9 (\"spook\", \"truth\", \"suit\", \"blues\", \"to\", \"shoe\", \"group\", \"through\") (see Sound-to-spelling correspondences below), all of these spellings have other pronunciations as well (e.g., \"foot\", \"us\", \"build\", \"bluest\", \"so\", \"toe\", \"grout\", \"plough\", \"sew\"). Thus, in unfamiliar words and proper nouns, the pronunciation of some sequences, \u27e8ough\u27e9 being the prime example, is unpredictable even for educated native speakers.\nSpelling irregularities.\nAttempts to regularise or reform the spelling of English have usually failed. However, Noah Webster promoted more phonetic spellings in the United States, such as \"flavor\" for British \"flavour\", \"fiber\" for \"fibre\", \"defense\" for \"defence\", \"analyze\" for \"analyse\", \"catalog\" for \"catalogue\", and so forth. These spellings already existed as alternatives, but Webster's dictionaries helped standardise them in the United States. (See American and British English spelling differences for details.)\nBesides the quirks the English spelling system has inherited from its past, there are other irregularities in spelling that make it tricky to learn. English contains, depending on dialect, 24\u201327 consonant phonemes and 13\u201320 vowels. However, there are only 26 letters in the modern English alphabet, so there is not a one-to-one correspondence between letters and sounds. Many sounds are spelled using different letters or multiple letters, and for those words whose pronunciation is predictable from the spelling, the sounds denoted by the letters depend on the surrounding letters. For example, \u27e8th\u27e9 represents two different sounds (the voiced and voiceless dental fricatives) (see Pronunciation of English \"th\"), and the voiceless alveolar sibilant can be represented by \u27e8s\u27e9 or \u27e8c\u27e9.\nIt is, however, not (solely) the shortage of letters which makes English spelling irregular. Its irregularities are caused mainly by the use of many different spellings for some of its sounds, such as and (\"too, \"true, \"shoe, \"flew, \"through; \"sleeve\", \"leave\", even\", \"seize\", \"siege\"; \"stole, \"coal\", \"bowl\", \"roll\", old\", \"mould\"), and the use of identical sequences for spelling different sounds (over\", oven\", \"move\").\nFurthermore, English no longer makes any attempt to anglicise the spellings of loanwords, but preserves the foreign spellings, even when they do not follow English spelling conventions like the Polish \u27e8cz\u27e9 in \"Czech\" (rather than \"*Check\") or the Norwegian \u27e8fj\u27e9 in \"fjord\" (although \"fiord\" was formerly the most common spelling). In early Middle English, until roughly 1400, most imports from French were respelled according to English rules (e.g. \"bataille\"\u2013\"battle\", \"bouton\"\u2013\"button\", but not \"double\", or \"trouble\"). Instead of loans being respelled to conform to English spelling standards, sometimes the pronunciation changes as a result of pressure from the spelling, e.g. \"ski\", adopted from Norwegian in the mid-18th century. It used to be pronounced , similar to the Norwegian pronunciation, but the increasing popularity of the sport after the mid-20th century helped the pronunciation replace it.\nThere was also a period when the spelling of a small number of words was altered to make them conform to their perceived etymological origins. For example, \u27e8b\u27e9 was added to \"debt\" (originally \"dette\") to link it to the Latin , and \u27e8s\u27e9 in \"island\" to link it to Latin instead of its true origin, the Old English word \"\u012b\u0121land\". \u27e8p\u27e9 in \"ptarmigan\" has no etymological justification whatsoever, only seeking to show Greek origin despite being a Gaelic word.\nThe spelling of English continues to evolve. Many loanwords come from languages where the pronunciation of vowels corresponds to the way they were pronounced in Old English, which is similar to the Italian or Spanish pronunciation of the vowels, and is the value the vowel symbols \u27e8a, e, i, o, u\u27e9 have in the International Phonetic Alphabet. As a result, there is a somewhat regular system of pronouncing \"foreign\" words in English, and some borrowed words have had their spelling changed to conform to this system. For example, \"Hindu\" used to be spelled \"Hindoo\", and the name \"Maria\" used to be pronounced like the name \"Mariah\", but was changed to conform to this system. This only further complicates the spelling, however. On the one hand, words that retained anglicised spellings may be misread in a hyperforeign way. On the other hand, words that are respelled in a 'foreign' way may be misread as if they are English words, e.g. \"Muslim\" was formerly spelled \"Mooslim\" because of its original pronunciation.\nCommercial advertisers have also had an effect on English spelling. They introduced new or simplified spellings like \"lite\" instead of \"light\", \"thru\" instead of \"through\", and \"rucsac\" instead of \"rucksack\". The spellings of personal names have also been a source of spelling innovations: diminutive versions of women's names that sound the same as men's names have been spelled differently: \"Nikki\" and \"Nicky\", \"Toni\" and \"Tony\", \"Jo\" and \"Joe\". The differentiation in between names that are spelled differently but have the same phonetic sound may come from modernisation or different countries of origin. For example, \"Isabelle\" and \"Isabel\" sound the same but are spelled differently; these versions are from France and Spain respectively.\nAs an example of the irregular nature of English spelling, \u27e8ou\u27e9 can be pronounced (depending on vowel mergers) in as many as nine different ways: in \"out\", in \"soul\", in \"soup\", in \"touch\", in \"could\", in \"four\", in \"journal\", in \"cough\", and in \"famous\" (See Spelling-to-sound correspondences). In the other direction, can be spelled in at least 18~21 different ways: \"be (\"cede), \"ski (\"machine), \"bologna\u00a0, \"algae, \"quay, \"beach\", \"bee, \"deceit\", \"people\", \"key, \"keyed\", \"field\" (\"hygiene), \"amoeba\", \"chamois\"\u00a0, \"dengue\u00a0, \"beguine\", \"guyot\", and ynambu\" (See Sound-to-spelling correspondences). (These examples assume a more-or-less standard non-regional British English accent. Other accents will vary.)\nSometimes everyday speakers of English change counterintuitive spellings, with the new spellings usually not judged to be entirely correct. However, such forms may gain acceptance if used enough. An example is the word \"miniscule\", which still competes with its original spelling of \"minuscule\", though this might also be because of analogy with the word \"mini\".\nHistory.\nInconsistencies and irregularities in English pronunciation and spelling have gradually increased in number throughout the history of the English language. There are a number of contributing factors. First, gradual changes in pronunciation, such as the Great Vowel Shift, account for a tremendous number of irregularities. Second, more recent loan words generally carry their original spellings, which are often not phonetic in English; this includes romanized words from languages written using non-Latin scripts.\nThe regular spelling system of Old English was swept away by the Norman Conquest, and English itself was supplanted in some spheres by Norman French for three centuries, eventually emerging with its spelling much influenced by French. English had also borrowed large numbers of words from French, and kept their French spellings. The spelling of Middle English is very irregular and inconsistent, with the same word being spelled in different ways, sometimes even in the same sentence. However, these were generally much better guides to the then-pronunciation than modern English spelling is.\nFor example, , normally written \u27e8u\u27e9, is spelled with an \u27e8o\u27e9 in \"done\", \"some\", \"love\", etc., due to Norman spelling conventions which prohibited writing \u27e8u\u27e9 before \u27e8m, n, v\u27e9 due to the graphical confusion that would result. (\u27e8n, u, v\u27e9 were written identically with two minims in Norman handwriting; \u27e8w\u27e9 was written as two \u27e8u\u27e9 letters; \u27e8m\u27e9 was written with three minims, hence \u27e8mm\u27e9 looked like \u27e8vun, nvu, uvu\u27e9, etc.). Similarly, spelling conventions also prohibited final \u27e8v\u27e9. Hence the identical spellings of the three different vowel sounds in \"love\", \"move\", and \"cove\" are due to ambiguity in the Middle English spelling system, not sound change.\nIn 1417, Henry V began using English, which had no standardised spelling, for official correspondence instead of Latin or French which had standardised spelling, e.g. Latin had one spelling for \"right\" (\"rectus\"), Old French as used in English law had six and Middle English had 77. This motivated writers to standardise English spelling, an effort which lasted about 500 years.\nThere was also a series of linguistic sound changes towards the end of this period, including the Great Vowel Shift, which resulted in the \u27e8a\u27e9 in \"make\", for example, changing from a pure vowel to a diphthong. These changes for the most part did not detract from the rule-governed nature of the spelling system; but, in some cases, they introduced confusing inconsistencies, like the well-known example of the many pronunciations of \u27e8ough\u27e9 (\"tough\", \"through\", \"though\", \"cough\", \"plough\", etc.). Most of these changes happened before the arrival of printing in England. However, the arrival of the modern printing press in 1476 froze the current system, rather than providing the impetus for a realignment of spelling with pronunciation. Furthermore, it introduced further inconsistencies, partly because of the use of typesetters trained abroad, particularly in the Low Countries. For example, the \u27e8h\u27e9 in \"ghost\" was influenced by Flemish. The addition and deletion of a silent \"e\" at the ends of words was also sometimes used to make the right-hand margin line up more neatly.\nBy the time dictionaries were introduced in the mid-17th century, the spelling system of English had started to stabilise. By the 19th century, most words had set spellings, though it took some time before they diffused throughout the English-speaking world. In \"The Mill on the Floss\" (1860), English novelist George Eliot satirised the attitude of the English rural gentry of the 1820s towards orthography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Tulliver did not willingly write a letter, and found the relation between spoken and written language, briefly known as spelling, one of the most puzzling things in this puzzling world. Nevertheless, like all fervid writing, the task was done in less time than usual, and if the spelling differed from Mrs. Glegg's,\u2013why, she belonged, like himself, to a generation with whom spelling was a matter of private judgment.\nThe modern English spelling system, with its national variants, spread together with the expansion of public education later in the 19th century.\n\u27e8ough\u27e9 words.\nThe tetragraph \u27e8ough\u27e9 can be pronounced in at least ten different ways, six of which are illustrated in the construct, \"Though the tough cough and hiccough plough him through\", which is quoted by Robert A. Heinlein in \"The Door into Summer\" to illustrate the difficulties facing automated speech transcription and reading. \"Ough\" itself is a word, an exclamation of disgust similar to \"ugh\", though rarely known or used. The following are typical pronunciations of this string of letters:\nThe following pronunciations are found in uncommon single words:\nThe place name Loughborough uses two different pronunciations of \u27e8ough\u27e9: the first \u27e8ough\u27e9 has the sound as in \"cuff and the second rhymes with \"thorough.\nSpelling-to-sound correspondences.\nNotes:\nConsonants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVowels.\nIn a generative approach to English spelling, Rollings (2004) identifies twenty main orthographic vowels of stressed syllables that are grouped into four main categories: \"Lax\", \"Tense\", \"Heavy\", \"Tense-R\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor instance, \u27e8a\u27e9 can represent the lax vowel , tense , heavy , or tense-r . Heavy and tense-r vowels are the respective lax and tense counterparts followed by \u27e8r\u27e9.\nTense vowels are distinguished from lax vowels with a \"silent\" \u27e8e\u27e9 that is added at the end of words. Thus, \u27e8a\u27e9 in \"hat\" is lax , but when \u27e8e\u27e9 is added in the word \"hate\" \u27e8a\u27e9 is tense . Heavy and tense-r vowels follow a similar pattern, e.g. \u27e8ar\u27e9 in \"car\" is heavy , \u27e8ar\u27e9 followed by silent \u27e8e\u27e9 in \"care\" is . \u27e8u\u27e9 represents two different vowel patterns, one being , the other . There is no distinction between heavy and tense-r \u27e8o\u27e9, and \u27e8u\u27e9 in the pattern does not have a heavy vowel.\nBesides silent \u27e8e\u27e9, another strategy for indicating tense and tense-r vowels is the addition of another orthographic vowel forming a digraph. In this case, the first vowel is usually the main vowel while the second vowel is the \"marking\" vowel. For example, \"man\" has a lax \u27e8a\u27e9 (), but the addition of \u27e8i\u27e9 (as the digraph \u27e8ai\u27e9) in \"main\" marks the \u27e8a\u27e9 as tense (). These two strategies produce words that are spelled differently but pronounced identically, which helps differentiate words that would otherwise be homonyms, as in \"mane\" (silent \u27e8e\u27e9 strategy), \"main\" (digraph strategy) and \"Maine\" (both strategies).\nBesides the 20 basic vowel spellings, has a reduced vowel category (representing the sounds ) and a miscellaneous category (representing the sounds and +V, +V, V+V).\nCombinations of vowel letters excluding those followed by \u27e8r\u27e9.\nTo reduce dialectal difficulties, the sound values given here correspond to the conventions at . This table includes \u27e8h, w, y\u27e9 when they represent vowel sounds. If no information is given, it is assumed that the vowel is in a stressed syllable.\nDeriving the pronunciation of an English word from its spelling requires not only a careful knowledge of the rules given below (many of which are not explicitly known even by native speakers: speakers merely learn the spelling of a word along with its pronunciation) and their many exceptions, but also:\nThe pronunciation of vowel letters when followed by \u27e8r\u27e9 is covered in a separate table below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCombinations of other consonant and vowel letters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSound-to-spelling correspondences.\nThe following table shows for each sound the various spelling patterns used to denote it, starting with the prototypical pattern(s) followed by others in alphabetical order. Some of these patterns are very rare or unique (such as \u27e8gh\u27e9 for , \u27e8ph\u27e9 for , \u27e8i\u27e9 for ). An ellipsis (\u27e8\u2026\u27e9) stands for an intervening consonant.\nConsonants.\nArranged in the order of the IPA consonant tables.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVowels.\nNasal vowels used by some speakers in words of French origin such as \"enceinte\" (), are not included.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVowels followed by \u27e8r\u27e9.\nNasal vowels used by some speakers in words of French origin such as \"enceinte\" (), are not included.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrthographies of English-related languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10083", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10083", "title": "\u00c6thelred the Unready", "text": "King of England (r. 978\u20131013, 1014\u20131016)\n\u00c6thelred II c.968 \u2013 23 April 1016), known as \u00c6thelred the Unready, was King of the English from March 978 to December 1013 and again from February 1014 until his death in April 1016. He was the son of King Edgar (reigned 959\u2013975) and Queen \u00c6lfthryth. \u00c6thelred came to the throne after the assassination of his older half-brother, King Edward the Martyr, a crime which deeply shocked people. The epithet \"Unready\" is a pun on his name in Old English, (noble) and (counsel).\nShortly after \u00c6thelred's accession Viking attacks resumed after a generation of peace. Minor raids in the 980s escalated to large scale attacks from the 990s, and as the English were rarely victorious in battle the king and his advisers resorted to giving the Vikings tribute to leave England, payments which are often (incorrectly) called Danegeld. In the 1000s increasingly destructive raids by Viking armies wore down English resistance, and in December 1013 King Swein Forkbeard of Denmark conquered England. \u00c6thelred fled to Normandy, but when Swein died in February 1014 he was able to return to the throne and drive out Swein's son Cnut. In early 1015 civil war broke out when \u00c6thelred's favourite Eadric Streona murdered close allies of \u00c6thelred's oldest surviving son, Edmund Ironside. Cnut returned soon afterwards and Edmund and \u00c6thelred tried to unite against him, but they were hampered by suspicion between them, Eadric's treachery and \u00c6thelred's poor health. He died in April 1016 and Edmund carried on the war until he died in December 1016 and Cnut became king of all England.\n\u00c6thelred was only nine to twelve years old when he became king, and during his minority the country was governed by his father's leading advisers, including his mother. When he came of age in the mid-980s, he rejected these advisers and adopted new ones, who persuaded him to grant them property at the expense of the church. By the early 990s he had come to regret the course he had followed and to see the Viking raids as God's punishment for his persecution of the church. The 990s and early 1000s was the most successful period of his reign, when his advisers were of high calibre and there were major cultural achievements in Latin and Old English literature. Failure in war continued, and in 1002 he ordered the St Brice's Day massacre of Danes, which is seen by historians as a sign of his increasing paranoia, which culminated in the rise of Eadric Streona in about 1009.\n\u00c6thelred was seen as a bad king by historians after the Norman Conquest, and in the later Middle Ages he acquired his epithet \"the Unready\". This view was endorsed by historians until the late twentieth century, when a new generation reassessed his record and argued that although his reign ended catastrophically there were significant achievements in the 990s and early 1000s.\nPrimary sources.\nThe principal narrative sources for \u00c6thelred's reign are manuscripts C, D and E of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" (\"ASC C\", \"ASC D\" and \"ASC E\"), which are all based on a version written, probably in London, between 1016 and 1023, after \u00c6thelred's death and the Danish Viking conquest of England. These versions of the \"Chronicle\" attribute the defeat to English incompetence and cowardice, which is blamed on \u00c6thelred's lieutenants rather than on the king himself. Since the 1970s historians have become increasingly sceptical of the reliability of this account, seeing it as biased by knowledge of the disastrous outcome of \u00c6thelred's reign. Levi Roach comments in his biography of \u00c6thelred that \"foreknowledge of the eventual English defeat haunts [the chronicler's] writing at every turn\", while to Simon Keynes \"he was like a dead man conducting his own post-mortem\". The only year in \u00c6thelred's reign for which two independent annals survive, the contemporary \"ASC A\" as well as the later \"ASC C\", is 1001. \"ASC A\" states that at Pinhoe in Devon local officials gathered together what forces they could and were overwhelmed by a Viking army, whereas according to \"ASC C\" an immense English army ran away without putting up a fight. In Keynes's view, the contrast shows the bias in the account written in hindsight. \nHistorians writing after the Norman Conquest, such as William of Malmesbury, condemned \u00c6thelred as a disastrous king. By contrast, Scandinavian skaldic poetry, written in honour of Viking heroes, depicts \u00c6thelred in a favourable light. The Icelandic poet Gunnlaugr ormstunga visited \u00c6thelred's court in the early 1000s and recited a praise poem describing him as a \"generous and dauntless prince\". But skaldic poetry has been less influential in forming \u00c6thelred's reputation.\nAnglo-Saxon kings held periodic meetings of lay and ecclesiastical magnates of the witan (king's council). Charters (grants of land or privileges by the king) were issued at these meetings, and lists of witnesses (or attesters) to charters provide evidence of the names and status of the men (almost never women) at the meetings. However, the lists are often shortened, particularly if they are later copies. Charters usually only survive if they have been preserved in the libraries of religious houses, and so there is a bias against those in favour of laymen. Many charters are fraudulent, but some eighty-four survive from \u00c6thelred's reign which are considered authentic, enough to be a representative sample. Ten are originals, with the rest being copies which may have been altered in error or to suit the interests of the copyist's religious house. Most are dated, but few show the place of issue, and very little information is available about where \u00c6thelred and his court were at any particular time. Law codes, coins and contemporary literary productions are also important sources.\nBackground.\nIn the ninth century, Anglo-Saxon England came under increasing attack from Viking raids, culminating with an invasion by the Great Heathen Army in 865. By 878, the Vikings had overrun the kingdoms of Northumbria, East Anglia, and Mercia, and nearly conquered Wessex, but in that year the West Saxons achieved a decisive victory at the Battle of Edington under King Alfred the Great (871\u2013899). Over the next fifty years, the West Saxons and Mercians gradually conquered the Viking-ruled areas, and in 927 Alfred's grandson \u00c6thelstan (reigned 924\u2013939) became the first king of all England when he conquered Northumbria. He was succeeded by his half-brother and \u00c6thelred's grandfather, Edmund (reigned 939\u2013946), who almost immediately lost control of the north to the Vikings, but recovered full control of England by 944. He was killed in a brawl with an outlaw, and as his sons Eadwig and Edgar were infants, their uncle Eadred (reigned 946\u2013955) became king. Like Edmund, Eadred inherited the kingship of the whole of England and soon lost it when the magnates of York (southern Northumbria) accepted a Viking king, but he recovered it when they expelled King Erik Bloodaxe in 954.\nEadred's key advisers included Dunstan, Abbot of Glastonbury and future Archbishop of Canterbury. Eadred, who suffered from ill health, was in his early thirties when he died, and Eadwig (reigned 955\u2013959) succeeded at the age of around fifteen. He was the first king since the early ninth century not to face the threat of imminent foreign invasion, and England remained free from Viking attacks until early in \u00c6thelred's reign. Eadwig died only four years later, and was succeeded by \u00c6thelred's father Edgar (reigned 959\u2013975). Eadwig had appointed \u00c6lfhere to be ealdorman of Mercia, and he became the premier layman, a status he retained until his death in 983. His rise was at the expense of the family of the East Anglian magnates, and his rivalry with \u00c6thelwine, Ealdorman of East Anglia, disrupted the country after Edgar's death. \nEaldormen were the second rank of the lay aristocracy below the king. They governed large areas as the king's local representatives and led local levies in battle. Thegns were the third rank, who owned substantial land and played an important administrative and military role. \nThe monastic Benedictine reform movement reached its peak in Edgar's reign under the leadership of Dunstan, Oswald, Archbishop of York, and \u00c6thelwold, Bishop of Winchester. It became dominant with strong support from Edgar, earning him high praise by monastic writers. He was a strong, indeed overbearing ruler, and he enriched Benedictine monasteries at the expense of lay landowners and secular (non-monastic) religious institutions. \u00c6thelwold was the most active and ruthless of the Benedictine leaders in securing land to support his monasteries, in some cases driving out secular clergy in favour of monks.\nName.\nThe elements in \u00c6thelred's name in Old English are \"\u00c6thel\" (noble) and \"r\u00e6d\" (counsel). His byname \"unr\u00e6d\" is described by Roach as \"his immortal epithet\", a pun which changed his name from \"good counsel\" to \"ill counsel\". The term is not recorded in the Anglo-Saxon period or by Anglo-Norman historians, and is first recorded in the early thirteenth century. The noun \"unr\u00e6d\" fell into disuse in the later Middle Ages and the epithet changed to the adjective \"unredi\", which led to his being called \"\u00c6thelred the Unready\".\nChildhood.\n\u00c6thelred was the younger son of King Edgar and \u00c6lfthryth. She was the daughter of Ordgar, ealdorman of Devon, and widow of \u00c6thelwold, Ealdorman of East Anglia, who died in 962. Edgar and \u00c6lfthryth married in 964. Very little is known of \u00c6thelred's early life, not even when he was born. The royal family attested the New Minster Charter in 966, including \u00c6thelred's elder brother Edmund, but not \u00c6thelred, and so he cannot have been born then. This is confirmed by a will in the same year or soon afterwards, which made a bequest to an unnamed \"\u00e6theling\" (son of a king), and did not mention any other king's son. Both sons are listed in a genealogical tract of 969, and so \u00c6thelred must have been born between 966 and 969, probably in 968. Edmund died in 971, but \u00c6thelred also had an elder half-brother, the future King Edward the Martyr. The medievalist Cyril Hart describes Edward as \"of doubtful legitimacy\", but most historians think that his mother \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d was a wife of Edgar. She was the first of Edgar's three consorts, and by the second one, Wulfthryth, he had a daughter Edith, who was venerated as a saint after her death in her early twenties.\nThere is evidence that \u00c6lfthryth's sons may have ranked above their elder half-brother, but it is controversial. Edmund is described in attestations to the New Minster Charter as \"legitimus prefati regis filius\" (legitimate son of the aforementioned king), and listed above Edward, who is \"eodem rege ... procreatus\" (begotten by the same king). \u00c6lfthryth is \"legitima prefati regis coniunx\" (legitimate wife of the king). The cross next to Edward's name is the only one for the royal family not filled in with gold. However, historians think that the charter was drawn up by \u00c6thelwold, who was a close ally of \u00c6lfthryth. The historian Barbara Yorke sees the denial of Edward's legitimacy as \"opportunist special pleading\" by \u00c6thelwold. Dunstan appears to have been one of Edward's supporters, and a genealogy created at his Glastonbury Abbey in 969 gives Edward precedence over Edmund and \u00c6thelred. \n\u00c6thelred's father, King Edgar, was only thirty-two when he died in July 975, and his death was probably unexpected. The succession to the throne was disputed. Both boys were probably too young to play an active role in the contest, and were figureheads for the opposing factions. \u00c6thelred's cause was led by his mother and his supporters included Bishop \u00c6thelwold and \u00c6lfhere of Mercia, while Edward's claim was defended by Dunstan, \u00c6thelwine of East Anglia, and Byrhtnoth, Ealdorman of Essex. In the view of the historian Sean Miller, the cause of the dispute probably lay in rival family alliances rather than which candidate had the best claim to the throne, but Frank Stenton suggests that opposition to Edward, a youth given to frequent outbursts of rage, was probably opposed partly because he \"offended many important persons by his intolerable violence of speech and behaviour.\" The two sides quickly agreed that Edward would be king, while \u00c6thelred received all the lands which were allocated to \u00e6thelings, including some which had been granted by Edgar to Abingdon Abbey, and which were taken back by force. When he became king, \u00c6thelred retained the \u00e6thelings' lands and also acquired those allocated to the king.\nEdward reigned for only three years, and it was a period of political turmoil. The nobility seized the opportunity given by Edgar's death to recover their lost estates. The conflict was seen in the past by historians as a dispute between supporters and opponents of the monasteries, but this is no longer widely accepted. According to Hart: \"The presence of supporters of church reform in both factions indicates that the conflict between them depended as much on issues of land ownership and local power as on ecclesiastical legitimacy. Adherents of both Edward and \u00c6thelred can be seen appropriating, or recovering, monastic lands\". Rivalries and conflicts between different factions of the aristocracy were also important causes of instability. \u00c6lfthryth and \u00c6thelred maintained their alliance with \u00c6thelwold during Edward's reign, and they visited his Ely Abbey. They were probably both \"persona non grata\" at Edward's court.\nDeath of King Edward the Martyr.\nEdward was killed on his arrival to visit \u00c6lfthryth and \u00c6thelred at Corfe in Dorset on 18 March 978. The monastic hagiographer Byrhtferth gives an account of Edward's death in his \"Life of St Oswald\", written around 1000. He wrote that Edward came \"seeking the consolations of brotherly love\", and was murdered on his arrival by \u00c6thelred's thegns. Edward's thegns took his body to the house of a churl, and the next day he was buried. A year later, Ealdorman \u00c6lfhere came with a great train and had Edward's body exhumed and taken away for honourable burial. \"ASC D\", which dates to the second half of the eleventh century or the early twelfth, states that Edward was initially buried at Wareham and translated in the following year by \u00c6lfhere to Shaftesbury.\n\u00c6lfthryth is blamed for Edward's death by post-Conquest chroniclers and some modern historians, but other historians are sceptical. No one was punished for the murder, and no perpetrator is named in pre-Conquest sources. Roach comments that contemporaries seem to have been as uncertain as modern historians who was responsible. Some historians think that Edward was killed by \u00c6thelred's partisans in the hope of personal advantage, but Ann Williams suggests in her biography of \u00c6thelred that Edward's death may have been the accidental result of an affray between the violent and unstable young king and one or more of the noblemen attendant on \u00c6thelred.\nReign.\n\u00c6thelred's early reign.\nThe manner of Edward's death deeply troubled contemporaries. Roach comments: \"Medieval kings were felt to be touched by divinity; not only had they been chosen by God, but like bishops they were anointed into their office with holy oil ... To kill a king was, therefore, more than a crime \u2013 it was a sin of the first order.\" \u00c6thelred may have started his reign in a weak position both as a beneficiary of the murder and because he was at most twelve years old. It was over a year before he was crowned, and some historians see this as evidence of resistance among the magnates to his succession, but others argue that a long interval between accession and coronation was normal. According to \"ASC D\", \"he was consecrated king at Kingston with much rejoicing by the councillors of the English people\". Byrhtferth states that \"there was great joy at his consecration\", and describes the king as \"a young man in respect of years, elegant in his manners, with an attractive face and handsome appearance\". Williams sees these descriptions as reflecting \"relief at a crisis passed\".\nThe most influential magnates during \u00c6thelred's minority had previously been his father's leading counsellors. \u00c6lfthryth, \u00c6thelwold and \u00c6lfhere, who had been \u00c6thelred's chief supporters in the succession dispute when Edgar died, now acted as his regents, while Edward's chief supporters also attested \u00c6thelred's early charters and the attacks on the monasteries were halted, suggesting a successful effort to restore unity in the ruling elite. \u00c6lfthryth became even more powerful as a mother than she had been as a wife, and she often attested \u00c6thelred's early charters immediately after the king, whereas in her husband's reign she had witnessed after the archbishops and bishops.\nAfter the death of \u00c6thelwold in August 984, \u00c6thelred dismissed his regents, including \u00c6lfthryth, who did not attest his charters between August 984 and the summer of 993. The historian George Molyneaux observes that \"\u00c6thelwold's power had been such that only his death enabled \u00c6thelred to escape maternal tutelage\". Under the influence of new advisers, he carried through policies which involved encroachment on church privileges and the proportion of grants to laymen rather than churchmen increased. The king ravaged the diocese of Rochester and gave some of its land to a royal retainer, while Ealdorman \u00c6lfric of Hampshire was able to buy the abbacy of Abingdon for his brother. In 985 his namesake, Ealdorman \u00c6lfric Cild of Mercia, was exiled charged with treason, the details of which are not known.\nRenewal of Viking raids 980-991.\nAfter a generation of peace, Viking attacks resumed with small scale raids in 980 and 982, commencing what is sometimes called the \"Second Viking Age in England\". In 988, the thegns of Devon defeated a force of invading Vikings in a bloody battle. The small-scale raids in the 980s would probably not have been considered worth recording if they had not been followed by major attacks, and in Stenton's view, their chief significance is that they brought England for the first time into diplomatic contact with Normandy as a result of the Normans allowing Danish raiders to use their ports. This led to a dispute which was mediated by an envoy of Pope John XV, who arranged a treaty agreed on 1 March 991 under which both parties agreed not to harbour each other's enemies. This interpretation of the treaty has been accepted by most scholars, but Jenny Benham argues that the raids were too small scale to cause an international dispute. She also argues that they were directed against the south-west, so they are more likely to have been carried out by Vikings based in Ireland and the Irish Sea who would not have used Normandy as a base. She suggests that the treaty was concerned with attacks on pilgrims and merchants. The view that the raids in the 980s were probably launched by Vikings based around the Irish Sea is supported by Peter Sawyer.\nIn August 991 a much larger Danish fleet than any of the raiders of the 980s ravaged Ipswich. It then made its way around the coast to the estuary of the River Blackwater near Maldon, where it occupied Northey Island. Byrhtnoth led a local militia to give the invaders battle. The result was a crushing defeat for the English and the death of Byrhtnoth. After he fell, most of his army fled, but a group of his thegns fought to the death rather than desert their lord, and their loyalty and heroism inspired one of the most famous Old English poems, \"The Battle of Maldon\".\nEngland begins paying tributes 991-994.\nByrhtnoth was the second most senior ealdorman, and Roach comments that his defeat and death \"sent shockwaves throughout the realm\". The king and his counsellors decided, on the recommendation of Sigeric, Archbishop of Canterbury, to give a tribute to the Danes of 10,000 pounds to leave England, \"because of the great terror they were causing along the coast\" according to \"ASC C\". In 992 the English unsuccessfully attempted to defeat the Danes at sea, and in 993 a Viking army ravaged the north-east coast. In 994 the Viking army was led by the future king of Norway Olaf Tryggvason and Swein Forkbeard, the king of Denmark. They attacked the south-east and several local leaders entered into agreements to buy peace in their areas. This was followed by a formal treaty entered into by the king later in the year. The English paid 16,000 pounds in return for a promise that the Vikings would cease harrying. King \u00c6thelred sponsored the confirmation of Olaf Tryggvason, who had probably earlier been baptised. After receiving gifts, Olaf promised \"that he would never come back to England in hostility.\" He kept his promise, leaving to establish himself as king of Norway and never returning, and some Vikings entered King \u00c6thelred's service as mercenaries.\n\u00c6thelred changes course.\nBy 993 \u00c6thelred had changed course and disowned his attacks on the church. No charters survive from 991 and 992, suggesting that the ordinary business of government was put on hold during the crisis following Byrhtnoth's defeat, and when they resume their tone is very different from those of the period when \u00c6thelred had rejected his father's counsellors. In Roach's view: \"The king clearly saw recent misfortunes as divine justice and in doing so he tacitly accepted the teachings of the reformers.\" His mother enjoyed renewed status. Her eldest grandson, \u00c6thelstan, states in his will that she brought him up, and she probably brought up other grandsons before her death around 1000 as she usually attested the same charters as they did. Her brother Ordwulf became one of \u00c6thelred's leading advisers.\nIn Charter S 876 of 993, \u00c6thelred declared that \u00c6thelwold's death had deprived the country of one \"whose industry and pastoral care administered not only to my interest but also to that of all inhabitants of the country\". The charter is one of the grandest in appearance to survive as an original from the Anglo-Saxon period, reflecting its political importance. It was issued at a meeting of the witan at Winchester, and \u00c6thelred declared that he had summoned the meeting \"in order to be free of the terrible curse as quickly as possible\". He attributed his own conduct \"partly on account of the ignorance of my youth ... and partly on account of the abhorrent greed of certain of those men who ought to administer to my interest\". He particularly blamed \u00c6lfric of Hampshire and the late Wulfgar, Bishop of Ramsbury. In the same year \u00c6thelred had \u00c6lfric's son blinded. \u00c6lfric was twice accused in \"ASC C\" of treachery in battles against the Danes, but it is uncertain whether the charges are justified. The allegations did not halt his rise in status, and he attested charters as the premier ealdorman between around 998 and the rise to dominance of Eadric Streona ten years later. \u00c6lfric died fighting against the Danes in the Battle of Assandun in 1016.\nIn Charter S 893 of 998 \u00c6thelred restored property which he had taken from St Andrew's Church, Rochester, and declared:\nNow, however, because I have reached a mature age thanks to merciful heavenly kindness, I have decided to amend my childhood deeds. Therefore, encouraged by the grace of the Lord, I am reconsidering whatever I have unjustly done, encouraged then with wicked instigation against the sacred apostle of God; now, fully before God, with tearful contrition of my heart, I repent and restore freely that which rightly belongs to this place, hoping to receive the tears of my repentance and to be loosened from the fetters of my earlier ignorance by Him, Who does not desire the death of a sinner, but rather that he convert and live.\nThis is one of a number of charters in favour of religious houses by which \u00c6thelred hoped to gain divine favour which would merit victory over his enemies. In 998 he gave Wulfsige, Bishop of Sherborne, permission to convert his church's community of secular clergy into a monastic one, and bishops and abbots became more prominent as charter signatories. In the mid to late 980s only three or four abbots attested, but from 990 there were often ten or more, and \u00c6thelred made many grants to the Church in the late 990s and early 1000s.\nCult of King Edward the Martyr.\nThere was a tradition in Anglo-Saxon England of venerating murdered kings as saints, especially if they were young, and the circumstances of Edward's death made it almost inevitable that he would be revered. But there is little evidence of a cult before around 990, when miracles were first reported at his grave, just when Viking attacks were increasing. \u00c6thelred took the lead in promoting his half-brother's cult, and in the mid-990s he founded Cholsey Abbey, which was dedicated to Edward. In 1001 his remains were translated for a second time on \u00c6thelred's orders, this time to a more prominent place in Shaftesbury Abbey. \u00c6thelred encouraged his sons to support the cult, and \u00c6thelstan, who died two years before his father, left six pounds to \"St Edward and Shaftesbury\" in his will. \u00c6thelred also promoted the cult of his half-sister Edith.\nViking raids 997-1002.\nIn 997 Danish raids resumed. In that year a Viking army harried Cornwall, Devon, western Somerset and south Wales, in 998 Dorset, and in 999 Kent. The only year thereafter when England was free of raids was 1000, when the Viking fleet left England for Normandy. \u00c6thelred led an army to ravage Cumberland and his navy attacked the Isle of Man, probably in response to raids by the king of Strathclyde and Norse (Norwegian) Vikings based in Ireland and the islands of the Irish Sea. \nIn 1001 a Danish fleet \u2013 perhaps the same fleet which left in 1000 \u2013 ravaged in Hampshire and Devon, though the English mounted a successful defence at Exeter. In the spring of 1002, the English bought peace for 24,000 pounds. According to William of Jumi\u00e8ges, writing in the 1050s, in around 1002 an English fleet launched an attack on the Cotentin peninsula in Normandy. This may have been a response to Norman harbouring of the Vikings, although William is not reliable on dating. The disputes between \u00c6thelred and Richard II, Duke of Normandy were settled by negotiations which resulted in the marriage of Richard's sister Emma to \u00c6thelred in 1002. This was the first marriage of an English king to a foreign bride since the 850s. It is not known whether \u00c6thelred's first wife had died or was set aside. Emma had a high status at court and attested charters in a prominent position.\nSt Brice's Day massacre of 1002.\n\"ASC C\" states that \u00c6thelred ordered the massacre of all Danish men in England on 13 November 1002, St Brice's Day, \"because the king had been informed that they would treacherously deprive him, and then all his councillors, of life, and possess this kingdom afterwards\". It is very unlikely that there was a massacre of the whole Scandinavian population. It may have been directed at recent immigrants, who were suspect because of the conduct of mercenaries who took service with the English and then deserted back to the Viking side, such as the Danish chieftain Pallig. The order was probably popular, and there is evidence that it was carried out in Oxford. In 1004 \u00c6thelred renewed the charter of the Oxford church of St Frideswide, which had been burnt down when Danes in the town had taken refuge in it during the massacre. However, the slaughter was limited even in this region, as shortly afterwards \u00c6thelred granted land to Toti the Dane at Beckley and Horton in Oxfordshire. Roach comments that \"even if restricted in scope, these attacks speak unmistakably of desperation and paranoia, both of which were to be very much in evidence in \u00c6thelred's later years. They show that the king was starting to chase shadows, and he was unlikely to stop there.\"\nDecline 1003 to 1012.\nSwein returned to England in 1003, after an absence of nearly ten years, most of which he had spent fighting, and finally defeating, Olaf Tryggvason's challenge to his position in Norway. William of Malmesbury attributed his reappearance to a desire to avenge the murder of his sister Gunhilde on the order of Eadric Streona in the St Brice's Day massacre, and this is accepted by Stenton. Other historians are sceptical, as William is the only source for Gunhilde's existence and Eadric did not become prominent until several years later. In 1003 Swein sacked Exeter and burnt Wilton. In 1004 he burnt Norwich and sacked Thetford. He was then challenged by an army led by an East Anglian nobleman, Ulfcytel. The Danes were victorious, but they suffered heavy losses and said that \"they never met worst fighting amongst the English than that which Ulfcytel dealt them\". The Danish army left England in 1005, probably because Britain and the Continent suffered from a severe famine in that year. \nIn 1005 and 1006 \u00c6thelred carried through changes at court described by historians as a \"palace revolution\". In about 1006 King Malcolm II of Scotland attacked Durham and was defeated by Uhtred, the son of the elderly Waltheof, ealdorman of Bamburgh in north Northumbria. \u00c6thelred then appointed Uhtred ealdorman of Bamburgh, even though his father was still alive, and made him the ealdorman of the whole of Northumbria by adding York after its ealdorman, \u00c6lfhelm, was murdered by Eadric Streona with the approval of the king. The three leading thegns since the 990s left the court at this time. \u00c6thelm\u00e6r and Ordwulf (\u00c6thelred's uncle) retired to monasteries, and Wulfgeat had his land confiscated. Eadric Streona started his rise to become the most powerful of \u00c6thelred's counsellors around this time and he was probably behind these changes. Roach thinks that \u00c6thelred concluded that if he was not to blame for the failures then they must be the fault of his advisers, and the changes were part of an attempt to gain the support of God against the Danes by a moral cleansing of the court. Eadric Streona and his allies were able to take advantage of \u00c6thelred's growing paranoia to rise rapidly in power. Nevertheless, many magnates kept their positions, including two ealdormen.\nIn 1006, according to \"ASC C\", \"the great fleet came to Sandwich, and did just as they were accustomed, ravaged, burnt and slew as they went\". For the first time a national army of Wessex and Mercia was called up, but it achieved nothing. As winter approached the Danes retreated to the Isle of Wight, but they then launched a surprise winter attack and defeated the main English army near Reading. In 1007 they were bought off with a tribute of 36,000 pounds, and for the next two years England was free from attack. In 1008, a fleet of warships was built and assembled at Sandwich, but a dispute broke out among the magnates. A Sussex noble, Wulfnoth, was accused by Eadric's brother Brihtric of unknown crimes, and Wulfnoth deserted with twenty ships to ravage the south coast. Brihtric chased after him with eighty ships, but they were wrecked in a storm. The king and his council decided not to risk the weakened fleet in a general action and the remaining ships were sailed to London. \nTo Stenton: \"The history of England in the next generation was really determined between 1009 and 1012 ... the ignominious collapse of the English defence caused a loss of morale which was irreparable.\" In August 1009 a Danish army led by Thorkell the Tall and his brother Hemming landed at Sandwich. It was the most formidable force to invade England since \u00c6thelred became king. It went to Canterbury, which made terms and then East Kent, which paid 3000 pounds for a truce. London defeated several attacks. In May 1010 the Vikings defeated Ulfcytel in the Battle of Ringmere and went on to burn Thetford and Cambridge. By this stage English resistance had disintegrated and in 1011 the Danish army was able to move around at will. In September 1011 the Vikings seized Canterbury and captured Archbishop \u00c6lfheah. The English agreed a tribute of 48,000 pounds, and the Vikings demanded an additional ransom for the archbishop, but he refused and in April 1012 he was murdered by drunken Vikings, in spite of Thorkell's attempts to protect him. Shortly afterwards the tribute was paid and the army dispersed, apart from Thorkell's personal following of forty-five ships, which entered \u00c6thelred's service. They were probably paid by the institution of a new tax called the \"heregeld\" (army tax), which was the basis of the post-Conquest tax called Danegeld.\nDefeat and exile 1013.\nIn August 1013 Swein Forkbeard launched an invasion of England with a large fleet. This was different from previous attacks because he intended from the start to conquer England and make himself king. He landed at Sandwich in Kent, but immediately sailed round East Anglia to Gainsborough, perhaps because the south was too strongly guarded by the fleets of Thorkell and \u00c6thelred. Swein received the submission of Northumbria and the Five Boroughs of the north Midlands. He then marched south and Oxford and Winchester quickly surrendered, but London, which was defended by \u00c6thelred and Thorkell, stood firm and inflicted heavy losses on the Danes. Swein then went to Bath where he received the submission of the south-west. With almost the whole country under his control, the Londoners accepted his rule and \u00c6thelred sent his wife Emma to her brother in Normandy, followed by her children. \u00c6thelred celebrated Christmas on the Isle of Wight before joining his wife in exile.\n\u00c6thelred's second reign 1014 to 1016.\nThe situation changed suddenly when Swein died on 3 February 1014. The Danish army immediately elected his son Cnut as king, but the leading English magnates seized the opportunity to return to their traditional allegiance in what Keynes calls \"a sign of a basic sense of loyalty to a consecrated king\". According to \"ASC C\":\nThen all the councillors who were in England, ecclesiastical and lay, determined to send for King \u00c6thelred, and they said that no lord was dearer to them than their natural lord if he would govern them more justly than he did before. Then the king sent his son Edward hither with his messengers and bade them greet all his people, and said that he would be a gracious lord to them, and reform all the things which they hated; and all the things that had been said and done against him should be forgiven, on condition that they all unanimously turned to him without treachery. And complete friendship was then established with oath and pledge on both sides, and they pronounced every Danish king an outlaw from England for ever.\nThese pledges could only have been imposed on \u00c6thelred because his rule was seen as both unjust and a military failure, and Molyneaux sees the ability of the magnates to act collectively in the king's absence as \"an illustration of the coherence of the English kingdom\". Stenton comments that the terms \"are of great constitutional interest as the first recorded pact between an English king and his subjects\". \u00c6thelred returned to England and went to London, the one place which had been consistently loyal to him in recent years. In late April he went north and drove Cnut out of the country. Before he left, Cnut ordered the hands, nose and ears of his hostages to be cut off. Thorkell's army was at Greenwich and \u00c6thelred raised a tax of 21,000 pounds to pay it off. \n\u00c6thelred's oldest son \u00c6thelstan died in June 1014. His will survives and the main beneficiary was his oldest surviving brother, the future King Edmund Ironside, who received estates and the sword of the famous Mercian king Offa. \u00c6thelstan also made a bequest to Sigeferth, a leading north Midlands thegn and an opponent of Eadric Streona. The will suggests that \u00c6thelred's elder sons were probably allied with a party opposed to Eadric. The principal magnates of the Five Boroughs, Sigeferth and his brother Morcar, had surrendered to Swein in 1013 and returned to their traditional allegiance when he died. In early 1015 Eadric had them murdered, almost certainly on the order of \u00c6thelred, who seized their lands and confined Sigeferth's widow Ealdgyth in Malmesbury Abbey. The killings destabilised the restored regime and Williams describes them as \"a serious error of judgement\" by \u00c6thelred. It was an attack on close friends of the \u00e6thelings and on key figures in the crown's fragile hold on northern England. Edmund promptly rescued Ealdgyth without the king's permission and married her. By September he had marched north, taken possession of the brothers' lands and accepted the submission of the people of the area.\nEdmund was now in revolt against his father, but the situation changed when Cnut reappeared and ravaged in Wessex. \u00c6thelred was sick, but efforts were made to unite the English against the invasion. Eadric Streona raised an army in the south and Edmund in the north, but Eadric then defected with forty ships and Wessex submitted to Cnut. In December 1015 Edmund raised a new army, but they refused to march without the support of the king and the Londoners. Edmund raised another army after Christmas, and persuaded \u00c6thelred to join them, but the suspicion between father and son was too great and \u00c6thelred soon left, fearing treachery. Edmund then persuaded Uhtred of Northumbria to join him. They ravaged the territories loyal to Cnut, who retaliated by ravaging the north. When Uhtred's own lands were threatened, he submitted to Cnut, who executed him. Edmund had to abandon the north and joined his father in London, where \u00c6thelred died on 23 April 1016.\nLegislation.\nThere are between ten and twelve surviving law codes or parts of codes from \u00c6thelred's reign, more than any other Anglo-Saxon king and the most before Edward I (1272\u20131307). They were issued in two periods, firstly between about 993 and 997, and secondly between about 1008 and 1014. In the view of Keynes, the 990s \"may have seen some of the finest legislation ever produced by the Anglo-Saxon kings\", while Wormald writes: \"It is hard not to be impressed by the panache with which draftsmen were by now handling legal material.\" Meetings of the \"witan\" in 997 produced two related law codes, named after the places where they were approved: \"I \u00c6thelred\" (the Woodstock code) and \"III \u00c6thelred\" (the Wantage code). The Woodstock code applied to areas under English law, whereas the Wantage Code applied to the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw. Wormald comments that the provisions and vocabulary of the Wantage Code are so thoroughly Scandinavian that it could not have been drawn up by a West Saxon, and its author must have been an expert on Danelaw usage. However, in the view of the legal historian John Hudson the code is \"best interpreted as the English king imposing measures at least some of which resembled those applied elsewhere in the kingdom\". Edgar decreed in the early 970s that Danish areas should be governed by the laws they thought best, but the term Danelaw (\"Dena lage\") was first used in \"VI \u00c6thelred\" in 1008. \n\u00c6thelred's early codes were mainly concerned with secular law, whereas the later ones, written by Wulfstan, Archbishop of York, were ecclesiastical. He was a political theorist whose \"Institutes of Polity\" advised the king of his responsibilities for the proper government of the kingdom, although Keynes comments that \"his advice was more notable for its ideology than valuable for its practicality\". Wulfstan's codes included \"VII \u00c6thelred\", which dates to 1009, and \"VIII \u00c6thelred\", which was issued after the king's return to England in 1014. Wormald observes that the \"intense, almost pleading, tone of \u00c6thelred's later codes was once seen as yet another sign of his government's flailing inadequacy. Yet ... it is hardly less evident in Cnut's laws\". \"[Wulfstan's] was the language of the preacher, not the lawyer.\" Some historians have complained that Wulfstan's codes are a mixture of homilies and laws, but Martin Ryan argues that this is anachronistic because in the later Anglo-Saxon period they were seen as part of a continuum rather than separate categories. Wulfstan did not distinguish between sins and crimes. Wormald describes the codes of the last years of \u00c6thelred's reign and the first decade of Cnut's as the \"last phase of Old English law\".\nAdministration.\nMajor decisions, such as the election of kings, archbishops and bishops, the adoption of law codes, the approval of charters granting land and the settlement of disputes, were taken by ecclesiastical and lay magnates at meetings of the witan, and \u00c6thelred often recorded that he was acting after taking counsel with his great men. Many charters were drafted by officials of a central writing office which was part of the \u00c6thelred's royal household. The office also sent out \u00c6thelred's instructions in writing and by oral messages, accompanied by his seal as proof of authenticity. Keynes comments that \"one should not underestimate the degree of sophistication in the management of private and official business during \u00c6thelred's reign\". London became a key administrative, financial and military centre under \u00c6thelred. It offered the stoutest resistance of any area to the Vikings and became his main base during the later stages of the war. \nThere were several types of reeve, royal officials who carried out local administrative duties, and the most important, the shire-reeve or sheriff, is first recorded in \u00c6thelred's reign. The shire-reeve was the king's representative in the shire and his duties included collecting money due to the king, arranging meetings of local courts and organising military forces. \u00c6thelred appears to have tried to prevent the disputes which disrupted Edward's reign by leaving ealdormanry positions vacant and relying more on reeves. Out of five ealdormen who died or were removed from office between 978 and 1002 who had grown sons, none were succeeded by their sons (except one later) and no son was given any official position. However, \u00c6thelred's manipulation of royal patronage could create tensions among ambitious men seeking the favour of the king. For most of his reign ealdormen witnessed charters in order of the dates of their appointment, with the longest serving first: \u00c6lfhere of Mercia was senior from 978 to 983, \u00c6thelwine of East Anglia from 983 to 992, \u00c6thelweard of the Western Provinces from 992 to 998, and \u00c6lfric of Hampshire from 999 to 1009x1012. This means that they are an uncertain guide to who was the most influential. From 1009x1012 this pattern was broken: thereafter there was no fixed order apart from Eadric Streona always attesting first even though he was not the longest serving, indicating his rise to dominance. \nMolyneaux argues that administrative reforms around the time of Edgar unified England and made it the single political entity which \u00c6thelred inherited. This increased the power of kings to impose controls on the mass of the people by measures such as laws and coinage reforms, and their dealings became more routine and impersonal. By contrast, royal power over the aristocracy remained personal, dependent on patronage and coercion, such as dismissal from office, expropriation of land, blinding and execution. \u00c6thelred's arbitrary dealings with his magnates and his heavy taxation in support of unsuccessful wars led to increasing efforts to impose restraints on his arbitrary power, which culminated in the pledges \u00c6thelred had to give on his return from exile in 1014. Another important factor was that the concern among religious thinkers that kings should be required to rule justly became stronger in this period. \nBetween a quarter and a third of all surviving records of lawsuits in the Anglo-Saxon period date to \u00c6thelred's reign. Contributory factors were the high number of forfeitures and the monasteries' efforts to hold on to the lands granted to them by Edgar. Like other kings, \u00c6thelred was sometimes unable to enforce his orders in the face of resistance by powerful nobles, as in the case of a man called Wulfbald, who held on to estates he had seized illegally in spite of repeated royal orders to surrender them. \u00c6thelred was able to recover the estates after Wulfbald died, but only after his widow's men had killed a thegn and fifteen of his companions.\nLaw codes and sermons demanding piety, lawful and moral conduct, charity to the poor and payment of church dues were an important part of the English efforts to assuage God's wrath and thus save the country from the Vikings. The sermons and law codes of Wulfstan were a dominant influence. Roach comments that his \"Sermo Lupi ad Anglos\" (Sermon of the Wolf to the English) is \"in a sense a more impassioned version of the kind of ideas ... expressed in charters, letters and legal ordinances since the 990s: the archbishop sees the Vikings above all as a moral threat, which can only be confronted (if it is to be confronted at all) by a return to pious ways. That the king felt similarly stands to reason\".\nLate Anglo-Saxon kings such as \u00c6thelred commanded great wealth. They were able to raise vast sums through taxation and periodic reminting of the coinage, and they owned large royal estates, mainly in Wessex and south-west Mercia. The total amount paid in tribute to Viking armies was extremely high, particularly compared with the amounts that later medieval English kings were able to raise. Most historians accept their accuracy, but John Gillingham argues that they are impossibly high.\n\u00c6thelred had close contacts with the Continent. Lavelle writes: \"The kingdom of the English did not exist in isolation in a forgotten corner of Christendom. By the end of the tenth century, politically, culturally and economically, England was 'at the heart of Europe', and it had been for some centuries.\" The treaty with Normandy in 991, \u00c6thelred's marriage to Emma and his exile in Normandy in 1013\u20131014, show that relations with Normandy were particularly important. According to the eleventh-century chronicler Ralph Glaber \u00c6thelred sent gifts to King Robert II of France and asked for his assistance.\nCoinage.\nEdgar had carried through a major overhaul of the coinage, with a single design based on dies supplied from one centre, replacing the old system of local designs. Coins had the king's name and his stylised head on the obverse and the name of the moneyer and town of issue on the reverse. \u00c6thelred carried on this system. He and his advisers applied the principle of frequent recoinages more effectively than it had been in the past, helping to create a system which was influential on the European coinages of the central Middle Ages. The standard of purity of the silver was high, apart from occasional localised debasement later in the reign.\nThe numismatist Rory Naismith summarises \u00c6thelred's coinage:\n\u00c6thelred's reign, from the institution of the \"Hand\" types onwards, is at the heart of the late Anglo-Saxon coinage system. It saw the fullest development of systematic recoinage, as well as several anomalous types which shed light on the workings of the currency more generally. Yet these small types also emphasise the fact that \u00c6thelred's coinage was still a complex and evolving entity. Its impressive sequence of type-changes only came into being after a period of trial and improvement, especially in the early part of the reign.\n\"Hand\" types, which have an image of the hand of God on the reverse, were minted in the 980s. The \"Crux\" type, which has a cross in the inner circle on the reverse, was produced in much greater quantities from the late 980s to the mid-990s, and it may have been produced in the context of \u00c6thelred's repentance for his youthful misdeeds. It is the first late Anglo-Saxon type to be found on a large scale in hoards in Scandinavia, and much of it may have been taken there as part of tribute, although this has been questioned as there are even more German coins and few Viking raids have been recorded on Germany. The \"Long Cross\" type, with a cross which extends into the outer circle, was minted from the late 990s to the late 1000s. The rare \"Helmet\" type, which has a helmeted bust of the king on the obverse, was minted from around 1003. It may be intended to portray the king taking the fight to the Vikings. The very rare \"Agnus Dei\" type, which portrays the Lamb of God on the obverse instead of the king, probably dates to the crisis of 1009. The final issue was the \"Last Small Cross\" type, the production of which commenced around 1009 and continued briefly into Cnut's reign.\nAchievements.\nKeynes comments that although \u00c6thelred's reign saw military failures and payments of tribute, \"a case could be made for regarding the 990s in particular as a period when the internal affairs of \u00c6thelred's kingdom prospered, under the guidance of the king acting with the assistance and advice of a group of distinguished ecclesiastics and laymen\". Keynes concludes from his study of charter witness lists that \"one cannot avoid the impression that during the 990s and early 1000s the king was surrounded by men of considerable calibre, many of whom turn out to have been closely associated with the advancement of the monastic cause\". Williams states that \"\u00c6thelred's leading ecclesiastics were a close-knit group, committed in varying ways to the ideals of the monastic reform movement\". \u00c6thelred's appointments to the post of Archbishop of Canterbury were all experienced reformist leaders, \u00c6thelgar, Sigeric, \u00c6lfric, \u00c6lfheah and Lyfing, and according to the historian Frank Barlow the bishops inherited by Cnut \"seem to have been more than respectable\". The turn of the century saw a revival in the monastic reform movement after the decline in Edward's reign and the early part of \u00c6thelred's; in addition to the restoration of land to monasteries, new ones were established and existing ones received new endowments. Keynes comments: \"One might even consider the possibility that the period was one of the most prosperous for the advancement of the ecclesiastical cause before the Norman Conquest.\" On the other hand, Barlow and John Blair see the period as one when the reform movement lost momentum before gradually declining in the period leading up to the Conquest.\nAt the beginning of the eleventh century, a number of monks, described by the historian of religion David Knowles as \"small perhaps but influential\", embarked on missionary activity in Norway and Sweden, and many of those who went to Sweden were martyred. \nThe period was one of cultural achievements. Some of the finest Anglo-Saxon illuminated manuscripts date to the period around 1000, and there were also major works of Old English and Anglo-Latin literature, especially those by \u00c6lfric of Eynsham, who is described by the scholar of Latin philology Claudio Leonardi as \"the highest pinnacle of Benedictine reform and Anglo-Latin literature\".\nBurial.\n\u00c6thelred was buried in the choir of Old St Paul's Cathedral, London. The tomb (portrayed right), which dates to the mid-twelfth century, was destroyed along with the cathedral in the Great Fire of London in 1666. A modern monument in the crypt lists important graves lost including that of \u00c6thelred. \u00c6thelred was the first king to be buried there since S\u00e6bbi of Essex in the seventh century.\nAftermath.\nAfter \u00c6thelred's death Edmund was chosen by the Londoners as king and Cnut was elected at Southampton. Following inconclusive battles at Penselwood in Somerset and Sherston in Wiltshire, Edmund lifted the Danish siege of London and then defeated the Danes at Brentford and Otford. He pursued Cnut into Kent and Eadric Streona defected back to him. On 18 October 1016 Edmund was defeated at the Battle of Assandun with heavy losses, including many leading men, after Eadric and his men fled the field. Edmund and Cnut then agreed to divide the kingdom with Edmund taking the lands south of the Thames and Cnut those north. Edmund died on 30 November and Cnut became undisputed king of England.\nReputation.\nIn the nineteenth century, historians dismissed \u00c6thelred as a bad man and an incompetent king, and this view was endorsed by leading historians in the early and middle twentieth-century. In Stenton's \"Anglo-Saxon England\", which is described by Keynes as \"magisterial and massively authoritative\", the English defeat is attributed to \u00c6thelred personally:\nMuch that has brought the condemnation of historians on King \u00c6thelred may well be due in the last resort to the circumstances under which he became king. Throughout his reign he behaved like a man who is never sure of himself. His ineffectiveness in war, which is very remarkable in a man of his line, his acts of spasmodic violence, and the air of mistrust which overhangs his relations with his nobles, are signs of a trouble which lies deeper than mere incapacity for government. They suggest the reaction of a weak king to the consciousness that he had come to power through what his subjects regarded as the worst crime committed among the English peoples since their first coming to Britain.\nOpinion began to change in the 1970s, particularly as a result of PhD dissertations and subsequent publications by Keynes and Stafford. They argue that, although \u00c6thelred was finally unsuccessful, he was not incompetent and there were important political and administrative developments in his reign. Stafford argues that his reign \"is not a time of total failure and treachery; for the first twenty-five years or more \u00c6thelred's reign follows normal tenth-century patterns\". She defends \u00c6thelred: \"during this long reign the resistance of the English king and kingdom to the Vikings was protracted and often successful, military collapse, when it came, late. England took the brunt of a renewal of Viking raiding not necessarily because it was weak but because it was a desirable prize ... it was the wealth of the English kingdom which attracted\". Keynes comments \"\u00c6thelred's misfortune as a ruler was owed not so much to any supposed defects of his imagined character, as to a combination of circumstances which anyone would have found difficult to control\". In Keynes's view:\nThere were, it is true, always some who were both prepared and able to exploit a situation in their own interests, whether by persuading the king in his youth to appropriate property from religious houses, or latterly by perpetrating cowardly and treacherous acts for self-preservation at critical times, when the security of the country was seriously threatened and when the outcome of events was in the balance; and there can be no doubt that the closing years witnessed a military collapse that is as damning as it is understandable. But none of this should be allowed to detract from or overshadow the positive and enduring achievements of \u00c6thelred's government, particularly in the last decade of the tenth and early years of the eleventh century, and it should not be forgotten that favourable conditions were created in this period for a remarkable flowering of intellectual activity and material culture. \nSome historians are not convinced. Miller comments that in view of his early domination by bad councillors and later by Eadric Streona his nickname \"unr\u00e6d\" seems well-deserved, and Cyril Hart disputes Keynes's assessment:\nHowever at the end of the day we are left with the undoubted fact that under \u00c6thelred's rule a great and wealthy kingdom succumbed completely to the ravages of a comparatively small number of ruthlessly determined warriors. The repeated treachery in high places, the craven attempts at bribery and appeasement, the incompetent bungling of the generals in charge of the English forces, the lack of a national will to resist the invaders, are all evidence of a devastating failure of initiative, management and sense of purpose at the top. It was not a single catastrophic error, nor was it a run of bad luck, that brought the country to its knees. Those were the days when a king was expected to lead his nation, and this \u00c6thelred failed conspicuously to do.\nThe military historian Richard Abels sees the payments of tribute as \"expensive and ultimately futile appeasement\", but does think that \u00c6thelred was following grand strategy. He courted the dukes of Normandy in order to close their ports to Viking ships, and paid off some Norwegian Vikings and recruited others to defend his kingdom against attack by Danes. He also recruited Danish mercenaries. In Abels's view, \u00c6thelred's policy of divide and rule was sensible. He undertook a programme of creating new fortified boroughs, refurbishing the defences of old ones, and strengthening the navy. Ultimately these measures failed, partly owing to the strength of the Viking armies and partly because of the \"treachery and incompetence of the men whom \u00c6thelred appointed to lead his armies\". The tributes are often held up as displaying the weakness and incompetence of \u00c6thelred's government, but Keynes points out that \"the policy had been adopted in the past by Alfred the Great, Charles the Bald, and many others, and in certain circumstances may have seemed the best available way of protecting the people against loss of life, shelter, livestock, and crops. Though undeniably burdensome, it constituted a measure for which the king could rely on widespread support.\" \nThree academic biographies of \u00c6thelred have been published in the twenty-first century, by Ann Williams, Ryan Lavelle and Levi Roach, and they have continued the partial rehabilitation of his reputation. In Lavelle's view, \u00c6thelred had major achievements in the 990s, and his rule was moderately successful, but he lived too long: \"Had he died in the early years of the eleventh century, then we might well remember a king of some competence\". Williams writes:\nThe failures of \u00c6thelred's kingship were political failures, an inability to control and direct the tensions and rivalries which arose between the royal councillors as they jockeyed for power. \u00c6thelred's apparent inability to hold aloof from such conflicts may to some extent justify his reputation as \"unr\u00e6d\", though other aspects of his government show him amenable to good counsel as well as bad. Yet the first half of his reign can show successes as well as failures, and only in the last decade did matters go fatally awry. In a kingdom less focused on its king, his personal failings would have been less disastrous, but though England at the turn of the tenth and eleventh centuries was already a 'united kingdom', its unity was centred on and symbolized by the person of its king.\nRoach comments that the picture in \u00c6thelred's last years \"is one of failure, but not of an inevitable or unmitigated one, and as elsewhere \u00c6thelred's ongoing efforts to combat these threats deserve a sympathetic hearing\". \"\u00c6thelred certainly measures up better to contemporary expectations of rule than his popular image would lead us to believe\". \"Indeed, despite his later reputation for inactivity, \u00c6thelred was more than willing to apply himself when called for and it is above all variety which characterises his response to the Scandinavian threat\". Lavelle observes that in his last years, his authority was collapsing, but he \"simply proceeded with his appointed task of governing an ever-decreasing realm; the king could still muster his reserves of energy and surprise onlookers\".\nRoach does think that \u00c6thelred is fairly criticised for his excessive support for and reliance on favourites, especially at the beginning and end of his rule. This may lie behind the demand for more just rule when he returned from exile after Swein's death. Roach describes \u00c6thelred's life as a tragedy:\na tale of a ruler who despite energetic \u2013 and at times resourceful \u2013 efforts could not succeed in bringing his nation the \"peace and victory\"...they so desperately desired. Whether an Alfred the Great or a Charlemagne would have fared better in his shoes is an interesting question, but ultimately beside the point. What we can say is that \u00c6thelred's reign was too long, too complex and too dynamic to dismiss him as \"incompetent\" or even \"unready\"; he deserves better, and so do we. \u00c6thelred may not have been a great or even a good king, but he was not a hopeless one, and the \"Chronicle's\" own epitaph perhaps best sums up his reign: \"he held the kingdom with great toil and hardship for the length of his life\".\nMarriages and children.\n\u00c6thelred probably married his first wife in the mid-980s as his oldest four sons (\u00c6thelstan, Ecgberht, Edmund, Eadred) attest a charter dated 993. The fifth son, Eadwig, first attests in 997 and the sixth, Edgar, in 1001. They were named after \u00c6thelred's recent predecessors, in historical order of their reigns, apart from Ecgberht, who interrupts the sequence, and his immediate predecessor, Edward the Martyr. Judging by the dates of their marriages, \u00c6thelred's daughters by his first wife, \u00c6lfgifu and Eadgyth, were born by the early 990s. His first wife is not recorded until after the Norman Conquest, and the information about her is limited and contradictory. According to the twelfth-century chronicler John of Worcester she was \u00c6lfgifu, daughter of Ealdorman \u00c6thelberht, but there was no ealdorman with that name. Another post-Conquest writer, Ailred of Rievaulx, does not name her, but states that her father was Thored, ealdorman of York, who did exist. Ailred served for a period in the household of King David I of Scotland, who was a descendant of \u00c6thelred and his first wife, so he may have had access to reliable information. Combining these two sources, she may have been \u00c6lfgifu, daughter of Thored. Williams comments that she seems to have been completely eclipsed by \u00c6lfthryth, her mother-in-law. \nKnown children of \u00c6thelred and \u00c6lfgifu.\nIt is possible that John of Worcester and Ailred of Rievaulx were referring to different wives, and therefore that \u00c6thelred married twice before wedding Emma. This suggestion is dismissed by Williams and Keynes, but is considered likely by Stafford.\nKnown children of \u00c6thelred and Emma.\nIn 1002 \u00c6thelred married Emma, sister of Richard II, Duke of Normandy. Their children were:\nOther possible daughters.\nMost authorities only recognise three daughters, but some list another two as possible. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10085", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10085", "title": "Edward Elgar", "text": "English composer (1857\u20131934)\nSir Edward William Elgar, 1st Baronet, (; 2 June 1857 \u2013 23 February 1934) was an English composer, many of whose works have entered the British and international classical concert repertoire. Among his best-known compositions are orchestral works including the \"Enigma Variations\", the \"Pomp and Circumstance Marches\", concertos for violin and cello, and two symphonies. He also composed choral works, including \"The Dream of Gerontius\", chamber music and songs. He was appointed Master of the King's Musick in 1924.\nAlthough Elgar is often regarded as a typically English composer, most of his musical influences were not from England but from continental Europe. He felt himself to be an outsider, not only musically, but socially. In musical circles dominated by academics, he was a self-taught composer; in Protestant Britain, his Roman Catholicism was regarded with suspicion in some quarters; and in the class-conscious society of Victorian and Edwardian Britain, he was acutely sensitive about his humble origins even after he achieved recognition. He nevertheless married the daughter of a senior British Army officer. She inspired him both musically and socially, but he struggled to achieve success until his forties, when after a series of moderately successful works his \"Enigma Variations\" (1899) became immediately popular in Britain and overseas. He followed the Variations with a choral work, \"The Dream of Gerontius\" (1900), based on a Roman Catholic text that caused some disquiet in the Anglican establishment in Britain, but it became, and has remained, a core repertory work in Britain and elsewhere. His later full-length religious choral works were well received but have not entered the regular repertory.\nIn his fifties, Elgar composed a symphony and a violin concerto that were immensely successful. His second symphony and his cello concerto did not gain immediate public popularity and took many years to achieve a regular place in the concert repertory of British orchestras. Elgar's music came, in his later years, to be seen as appealing chiefly to British audiences. His stock remained low for a generation after his death. It began to revive significantly in the 1960s, helped by new recordings of his works. Some of his works have, in recent years, been taken up again internationally, but the music continues to be played more in Britain than elsewhere.\nElgar has been described as the first composer to take the gramophone seriously. Between 1914 and 1925, he conducted a series of acoustic recordings of his works. The introduction of the moving-coil microphone in 1923 made far more accurate sound reproduction possible, and Elgar made new recordings of most of his major orchestral works and excerpts from \"The Dream of Gerontius\".\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nEdward Elgar was born in the small village of Lower Broadheath, near Worcester, England, on 2 June 1857. His father, William Henry Elgar (1821\u20131906), was raised in Dover and had been apprenticed to a London music publisher. In 1841 William moved to Worcester, where he worked as a piano tuner and set up a shop selling sheet music and musical instruments. In 1848 he married Ann Greening (1822\u20131902), daughter of a farm worker.\nEdward was the fourth of their seven children. Ann Elgar had converted to Roman Catholicism shortly before Edward's birth, and he was baptised and brought up as a Roman Catholic, to the disapproval of his father. William Elgar was a violinist of professional standard and held the post of organist of St George's Roman Catholic Church, Worcester, from 1846 to 1885. At his instigation, masses by Cherubini and Hummel were first heard at the Three Choirs Festival by the orchestra in which he played the violin.\nAll the Elgar children received a musical upbringing. By the age of eight, Elgar was taking piano and violin lessons, and his father, who tuned the pianos at many grand houses in Worcestershire, would sometimes take him along, giving him the chance to display his skill to important local figures.\nElgar's mother was interested in the arts and encouraged his musical development. He inherited from her a discerning taste for literature and a passionate love of the countryside. His friend and biographer W. H. \"Billy\" Reed wrote that Elgar's early surroundings had an influence that \"permeated all his work and gave to his whole life that subtle but none the less true and sturdy English quality\". He began composing at an early age; for a play written and acted by the Elgar children when he was about ten, he wrote music that forty years later he rearranged with only minor changes and orchestrated as the suites titled \"The Wand of Youth\".\nUntil he was fifteen, Elgar received a general education at Littleton (now Lyttleton) House school, near Worcester. His only formal musical training beyond piano and violin lessons from local teachers consisted of more advanced violin studies with Adolf Pollitzer, during brief visits to London in 1877\u201378. Elgar said, \"my first music was learnt in the Cathedral\u00a0... from books borrowed from the music library, when I was eight, nine or ten.\" He worked through manuals of instruction on organ playing and read every book he could find on the theory of music. He later said that he had been most helped by Hubert Parry's articles in the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\".\nElgar began to learn German, in the hope of going to the Leipzig Conservatory for further musical studies, but his father could not afford to send him. Years later, a profile in \"The Musical Times\" considered that his failure to get to Leipzig was fortunate for Elgar's musical development: \"Thus the budding composer escaped the dogmatism of the schools.\" However, it was a disappointment to Elgar that on leaving school in 1872 he went not to Leipzig but to the office of a local solicitor as a clerk. He did not find an office career congenial, and for fulfilment he turned not only to music but to literature, becoming a voracious reader. Around this time, he made his first public appearances as a violinist and organist.\nAfter a few months, Elgar left the solicitor to embark on a musical career, giving piano and violin lessons and working occasionally in his father's shop. He was an active member of the Worcester Glee club, along with his father, and he accompanied singers, played the violin, composed and arranged works, and conducted for the first time. Pollitzer believed that, as a violinist, Elgar had the potential to be one of the leading soloists in the country, but Elgar himself, having heard leading virtuosi at London concerts, felt his own violin playing lacked a full enough tone, and he abandoned his ambitions to be a soloist. At twenty-two he took up the post of conductor of the attendants' band at the Worcester and County Lunatic Asylum in Powick, from Worcester. The band consisted of: piccolo, flute, clarinet, two cornets, euphonium, three or four first and a similar number of second violins, occasional viola, cello, double bass and piano. Elgar coached the players and wrote and arranged their music, including quadrilles and polkas, for the unusual combination of instruments. \"The Musical Times\" wrote, \"This practical experience proved to be of the greatest value to the young musician.\u00a0... He acquired a practical knowledge of the capabilities of these different instruments.\u00a0... He thereby got to know intimately the tone colour, the ins and outs of these and many other instruments.\" He held the post for five years, from 1879, travelling to Powick once a week. Another post he held in his early days was professor of the violin at the Worcester College for the Blind Sons of Gentlemen.\nAlthough rather solitary and introspective by nature, Elgar thrived in Worcester's musical circles. He played in the violins at the Worcester and Birmingham Festivals, and one great experience was to play Dvo\u0159\u00e1k's Symphony No. 6 and \"Stabat Mater\" under the composer's baton. Elgar regularly played the bassoon in a wind quintet, alongside his brother Frank, an oboist (and conductor who ran his own wind band). Elgar arranged numerous pieces by Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, and others for the quintet, honing his arranging and compositional skills.\nIn his first trips abroad, Elgar visited Paris in 1880 and Leipzig in 1882. He heard Saint-Sa\u00ebns play the organ at the Madeleine and attended concerts by first-rate orchestras. In 1882 he wrote, \"I got pretty well dosed with Schumann (my ideal!), Brahms, Rubinstein &amp; Wagner, so had no cause to complain.\" In Leipzig he visited a friend, Helen Weaver, who was a student at the Conservatoire. They became engaged in the summer of 1883, but for unknown reasons the engagement was broken off the next year. Elgar was greatly distressed, and some of his later cryptic dedications of romantic music may have alluded to Helen and his feelings for her. Throughout his life, Elgar was often inspired by close women friends; Helen Weaver was succeeded by Mary Lygon, Dora Penny, Julia Worthington, Alice Stuart Wortley and finally Vera Hockman, who enlivened his old age.\nIn 1882, seeking more professional orchestral experience, Elgar was employed as a violinist in Birmingham in William Stockley's Orchestra, for whom he played every concert for the next seven years and where he later said he \"learned all the music I know\". On 13 December 1883 he took part with Stockley in a performance at Birmingham Town Hall of one of his first works for full orchestra, the \"S\u00e9r\u00e9nade mauresque\" \u2013 the first time one of his compositions had been performed by a professional orchestra. Stockley had invited him to conduct the piece but later recalled \"he declined, and, further, insisted upon playing in his place in the orchestra. The consequence was that he had to appear, fiddle in hand, to acknowledge the genuine and hearty applause of the audience.\" Elgar often went to London in an attempt to get his works published, but this period in his life found him frequently despondent and low on money. He wrote to a friend in April 1884, \"My prospects are about as hopeless as ever\u00a0... I am not wanting in energy I think, so sometimes I conclude that 'tis want of ability.\u00a0... I have no money\u00a0\u2013 not a cent.\"\nMarriage.\nWhen Elgar was 29, he took on a new pupil, Caroline Alice Roberts, known as Alice, daughter of the late Major-General Sir Henry Roberts, and published author of verse and prose fiction. Eight years older than Elgar, Alice became his wife three years later. Elgar's biographer Michael Kennedy writes, \"Alice's family was horrified by her intention to marry an unknown musician who worked in a shop and was a Roman Catholic. She was disinherited.\" They were married on 8 May 1889, at Brompton Oratory. From then until her death, she acted as his business manager and social secretary, dealt with his mood swings, and was a perceptive musical critic. She did her best to gain him the attention of influential society, though with limited success. In time, he would learn to accept the honours given him, realising that they mattered more to her and her social class and recognising what she had given up to further his career. In her diary, she wrote, \"The care of a genius is enough of a life work for any woman.\" As an engagement present, Elgar dedicated his short violin-and-piano piece \"Salut d'Amour\" to her. With Alice's encouragement, the Elgars moved to London to be closer to the centre of British musical life, and Elgar started devoting his time to composition. Their only child, Carice Irene, was born at their home in West Kensington on 14 August 1890. Her name, revealed in Elgar's dedication of \"Salut d'Amour\", was a contraction of her mother's names Caroline and Alice.\nElgar took full advantage of the opportunity to hear unfamiliar music. In the days before miniature scores and recordings were available, it was not easy for young composers to get to know new music. Elgar took every chance to do so at the Crystal Palace Concerts. He and Alice attended day after day, hearing music by a wide range of composers. Among these were masters of orchestration from whom he learned much, such as Berlioz and Richard Wagner. His own compositions made little impact on London's musical scene. August Manns conducted Elgar's orchestral version of \"Salut d'amour\" and the Suite in D at the Crystal Palace, and two publishers accepted some of Elgar's violin pieces, organ voluntaries, and part songs. Some tantalising opportunities seemed to be within reach but vanished unexpectedly. For example, an offer from the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, to run through some of his works was withdrawn at the last second when Sir Arthur Sullivan arrived unannounced to rehearse some of his own music. Sullivan was horrified when Elgar later told him what had happened. Elgar's only important commission while in London came from his home city: the Worcester Festival Committee invited him to compose a short orchestral work for the 1890 Three Choirs Festival. The result is described by Diana McVeagh in the \"Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\", as \"his first major work, the assured and uninhibited \"Froissart\".\" Elgar conducted the first performance in Worcester in September 1890. For lack of other work, he was obliged to leave London in 1891 and return with his wife and child to Worcestershire, where he could earn a living conducting local musical ensembles and teaching. They settled in Alice's former home town, Great Malvern.\nGrowing reputation.\nDuring the 1890s, Elgar gradually built up a reputation as a composer, chiefly of works for the great choral festivals of the English Midlands. \"The Black Knight\" (1892) and \"King Olaf\" (1896), both inspired by Longfellow, \"The Light of Life\" (1896) and \"Caractacus\" (1898) were all modestly successful, and he obtained a long-standing publisher in Novello and Co. Other works of this decade included the \"Serenade for Strings\" (1892) and \"Three Bavarian Dances\" (1897). Elgar was of enough consequence locally to recommend the young composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor to the Three Choirs Festival for a concert piece, which helped establish the younger man's career. Elgar was catching the attention of prominent critics, but their reviews were polite rather than enthusiastic. Although he was in demand as a festival composer, he was only just getting by financially and felt unappreciated. In 1898, he said he was \"very sick at heart over music\" and hoped to find a way to succeed with a larger work. His friend August Jaeger tried to lift his spirits: \"A day's attack of the blues\u00a0... will not drive away your desire, your necessity, which is to exercise those creative faculties which a kind providence has given you. Your time of universal recognition will come.\"\nIn 1899, that prediction suddenly came true. At the age of forty-two, Elgar produced the \"Enigma Variations\", which were premiered in London under the baton of the eminent German conductor Hans Richter. In Elgar's own words, \"I have sketched a set of Variations on an original theme. The Variations have amused me because I've labelled them with the nicknames of my particular friends\u00a0... that is to say I've written the variations each one to represent the mood of the 'party' (the person)\u00a0... and have written what I think they would have written \u2013 if they were asses enough to compose\". He dedicated the work \"To my friends pictured within\". Probably the best known variation is \"Nimrod\", depicting Jaeger. Purely musical considerations led Elgar to omit variations depicting Arthur Sullivan and Hubert Parry, whose styles he tried but failed to incorporate in the variations. The large-scale work was received with general acclaim for its originality, charm and craftsmanship, and it established Elgar as the pre-eminent British composer of his generation.\nThe work is formally titled \"Variations on an Original Theme\"; the word \"Enigma\" appears over the first six bars of music, which led to the familiar version of the title. The enigma is that, although there are fourteen variations on the \"original theme\", there is another overarching theme, never identified by Elgar, which he said \"runs through and over the whole set\" but is never heard. Later commentators have observed that although Elgar is today regarded as a characteristically English composer, his orchestral music and this work in particular share much with the Central European tradition typified at the time by the work of Richard Strauss. The \"Enigma Variations\" were well received in Germany and Italy, and remain to the present day a worldwide concert staple.\nNational and international fame.\nElgar's biographer Basil Maine commented, \"When Sir Arthur Sullivan died in 1900 it became apparent to many that Elgar, although a composer of another build, was his true successor as first musician of the land.\" Elgar's next major work was eagerly awaited. For the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival of 1900, he set Cardinal John Henry Newman's poem \"The Dream of Gerontius\" for soloists, chorus and orchestra. Richter conducted the premiere, which was marred by a poorly prepared chorus, which sang badly. Critics recognised the mastery of the piece despite the defects in performance. It was performed in D\u00fcsseldorf, Germany, in 1901 and again in 1902, conducted by Julius Buths, who also conducted the European premiere of the \"Enigma Variations\" in 1901. The German press was enthusiastic. \"The Cologne Gazette\" said, \"In both parts we meet with beauties of imperishable value.\u00a0... Elgar stands on the shoulders of Berlioz, Wagner, and Liszt, from whose influences he has freed himself until he has become an important individuality. He is one of the leaders of musical art of modern times.\" \"The D\u00fcsseldorfer Volksblatt\" wrote, \"A memorable and epoch-making first performance! Since the days of Liszt nothing has been produced in the way of oratorio\u00a0... which reaches the greatness and importance of this sacred cantata.\" Richard Strauss, then widely viewed as the leading composer of his day, was so impressed that in Elgar's presence he proposed a toast to the success of \"the first English progressive musician, Meister Elgar.\" Performances in Vienna, Paris and New York followed, and \"The Dream of Gerontius\" soon became equally admired in Britain. According to Kennedy, \"It is unquestionably the greatest British work in the oratorio form\u00a0... [it] opened a new chapter in the English choral tradition and liberated it from its Handelian preoccupation.\" Elgar, as a Roman Catholic, was much moved by Newman's poem about the death and redemption of a sinner, but some influential members of the Anglican establishment disagreed. His colleague, Charles Villiers Stanford complained that the work \"stinks of incense\". The dean of Gloucester banned \"Gerontius\" from his cathedral in 1901, and at Worcester the following year, the dean insisted on expurgations before allowing a performance.\nElgar is probably best known for the first of the five \"Pomp and Circumstance Marches\", which were composed between 1901 and 1930. It is familiar to millions of television viewers all over the world every year who watch the Last Night of the Proms, where it is traditionally performed. When the theme of the slower middle section (technically called the \"trio\") of the first march came into his head, he told his friend Dora Penny, \"I've got a tune that will knock 'em\u00a0\u2013 will knock 'em flat\". When the first march was played in 1901 at a London Promenade Concert, it was conducted by Henry Wood, who later wrote that the audience \"rose and yelled\u00a0... the one and only time in the history of the Promenade concerts that an orchestral item was accorded a double encore.\" To mark the coronation of Edward VII and Alexandra, Elgar was commissioned to set A. C. Benson's \"Coronation Ode\" for a gala concert at the Royal Opera House on 30 June 1902. The approval of the king was confirmed, and Elgar began work. The contralto Clara Butt had persuaded him that the trio of the first \"Pomp and Circumstance\" march could have words fitted to it, and Elgar invited Benson to do so. Elgar incorporated the new vocal version into the Ode. The publishers of the score recognised the potential of the vocal piece, \"Land of Hope and Glory\", and asked Benson and Elgar to make a further revision for publication as a separate song. It was immensely popular and is now considered an unofficial British national anthem. In the United States, the trio, known simply as \"Pomp and Circumstance\" or \"The Graduation March\", has been adopted since 1905 for virtually all high school and university graduations.\nIn March 1904 a three-day festival of Elgar's works was presented at Covent Garden, an honour never before given to any English composer. \"The Times\" commented, \"Four or five years ago if any one had predicted that the Opera-house would be full from floor to ceiling for the performance of an oratorio by an English composer he would probably have been supposed to be out of his mind.\" The king and queen attended the first concert, at which Richter conducted \"The Dream of Gerontius\", and returned the next evening for the second, the London premiere of \"The Apostles\" (first heard the previous year at the Birmingham Festival). The final concert of the festival, conducted by Elgar, was primarily orchestral, apart for an excerpt from \"Caractacus\" and the complete \"Sea Pictures\" (sung by Clara Butt). The orchestral items were \"Froissart\", the \"Enigma Variations\", \"Cockaigne\", the first two (at that time the only two) \"Pomp and Circumstance\" marches, and the premiere of a new orchestral work, \"In the South\", inspired by a holiday in Italy.\nElgar was knighted at Buckingham Palace on 5 July 1904. The following month, he and his family moved to Pl\u00e2s Gwyn, a large house on the outskirts of Hereford, overlooking the River Wye, where they lived until 1911. Between 1902 and 1914, Elgar was, in Kennedy's words, at the zenith of popularity. He made four visits to the US, including one conducting tour, and earned considerable fees from the performance of his music. Between 1905 and 1908, he held the post of Peyton Professor of Music at the University of Birmingham. He had accepted the post reluctantly, feeling that a composer should not head a school of music. He was not at ease in the role, and his lectures caused controversy, with his attacks on the critics and on English music in general: \"Vulgarity in the course of time may be refined. Vulgarity often goes with inventiveness\u00a0... but the commonplace mind can never be anything but commonplace. An Englishman will take you into a large room, beautifully proportioned, and will point out to you that it is white \u2013 all over white \u2013 and somebody will say, 'What exquisite taste'. You know in your own mind, in your own soul, that it is not taste at all, that it is the want of taste, that is mere evasion. English music is white, and evades everything.\" He regretted the controversy and was glad to hand on the post to his friend Granville Bantock in 1908. His new life as a celebrity was a mixed blessing to the highly strung Elgar, as it interrupted his privacy, and he often was in ill-health. He complained to Jaeger in 1903, \"My life is one continual giving up of little things which I love.\" Both W. S. Gilbert and Thomas Hardy sought to collaborate with Elgar in this decade. Elgar refused, but would have collaborated with Bernard Shaw had Shaw been willing.\nElgar paid three visits to the USA between 1905 and 1911. His first was to conduct his music and to accept a doctorate from Yale University. His principal composition in 1905 was the \"Introduction and Allegro for Strings\", dedicated to Samuel Sanford. It was well received but did not catch the public imagination as \"The Dream of Gerontius\" had done and continued to do. Among keen Elgarians, however, \"The Kingdom\" was sometimes preferred to the earlier work: Elgar's friend Frank Schuster told the young Adrian Boult: \"compared with \"The Kingdom\", \"Gerontius\" is the work of a raw amateur.\"\nAs Elgar approached his fiftieth birthday, he began work on his first symphony, a project that had been in his mind in various forms for nearly ten years. His First Symphony (1908) was a national and international triumph. Within weeks of the premiere it was performed in New York under Walter Damrosch, Vienna under Ferdinand L\u00f6we, St Petersburg under Alexander Siloti, and Leipzig under Arthur Nikisch. There were performances in Rome, Chicago, Boston, Toronto and fifteen British towns and cities. In just over a year, it received a hundred performances in Britain, America and continental Europe.\nThe Violin Concerto (1910) was commissioned by Fritz Kreisler, one of the leading international violinists of the time. Elgar wrote it during the summer of 1910, with occasional help from W. H. Reed, the leader of the London Symphony Orchestra (LSO), who helped the composer with advice on technical points. Elgar and Reed formed a firm friendship, which lasted for the rest of Elgar's life. Reed's biography, \"Elgar As I Knew Him\" (1936), records many details of Elgar's methods of composition. The work was presented by the Royal Philharmonic Society, with Kreisler and the LSO, conducted by the composer. Reed recalled, \"the Concerto proved to be a complete triumph, the concert a brilliant and unforgettable occasion.\" So great was the impact of the concerto that Kreisler's rival Eug\u00e8ne Ysa\u00ffe spent much time with Elgar going through the work. There was great disappointment when contractual difficulties prevented Ysa\u00ffe from playing it in London.\nThe Violin Concerto was Elgar's last popular triumph. The following year he presented his Second Symphony in London, but was disappointed at its reception. Unlike the First Symphony, it ends not in a blaze of orchestral splendour but quietly and contemplatively. Reed, who played at the premiere, later wrote that Elgar was recalled to the platform several times to acknowledge the applause, \"but missed that unmistakable note perceived when an audience, even an English audience, is thoroughly roused or worked up, as it was after the Violin Concerto or the First Symphony.\" Elgar asked Reed, \"What is the matter with them, Billy? They sit there like a lot of stuffed pigs.\" The work was, by normal standards, a success, with twenty-seven performances within three years of its premiere, but it did not achieve the international \"furore\" of the First Symphony.\nLast major works.\nIn June 1911, as part of the celebrations surrounding the coronation of King George V, Elgar was appointed to the Order of Merit, an honour limited to twenty-four holders at any time. The following year, the Elgars moved back to London, to a large house in Netherhall Gardens, Hampstead, designed by Norman Shaw. There Elgar composed his last two large-scale works of the pre-war era, the choral ode, \"The Music Makers\" (for the Birmingham Festival, 1912) and the symphonic study \"Falstaff\" (for the Leeds Festival, 1913). Both were received politely but without enthusiasm. Even the dedicatee of \"Falstaff\", the conductor Landon Ronald, confessed privately that he could not \"make head or tail of the piece\", while the musical scholar Percy Scholes wrote of \"Falstaff\" that it was a \"great work\" but, \"so far as public appreciation goes, a comparative failure\".\nWhen World War I broke out, Elgar was horrified at the prospect of the carnage, but his patriotic feelings were nonetheless aroused. He composed \"A Song for Soldiers\", which he later withdrew. He signed up as a special constable in the local police and later joined the Hampstead Volunteer Reserve of the army. He composed patriotic works, \"Carillon\", a recitation for speaker and orchestra in honour of Belgium, and \"Polonia\", an orchestral piece in honour of Poland. \"Land of Hope and Glory\", already popular, became still more so, and Elgar wished in vain to have new, less nationalistic, words sung to the tune.\nElgar's other compositions during the war included incidental music for a children's play, \"The Starlight Express\" (1915); a ballet, \"The Sanguine Fan\" (1917); and \"The Spirit of England\" (1915\u20131917, to poems by Laurence Binyon), three choral settings very different in character from the romantic patriotism of his earlier years. His last large-scale composition of the war years was \"The Fringes of the Fleet\", settings of verses by Rudyard Kipling, performed with great popular success around the country, until Kipling for unexplained reasons objected to their performance in theatres. Elgar conducted a recording of the work for the Gramophone Company.\nTowards the end of the war, Elgar was in poor health. His wife thought it best for him to move to the countryside, and she rented \"Brinkwells\", a house near Fittleworth in Sussex, from the painter Rex Vicat Cole. There Elgar recovered his strength and, in 1918 and 1919, he produced four large-scale works. The first three of these were chamber pieces: the Violin Sonata in E\u00a0minor, the Piano Quintet in A minor, and the String Quartet in E minor. On hearing the work in progress, Alice Elgar wrote in her diary, \"E. writing wonderful new music\". All three works were well received. \"The Times\" wrote, \"Elgar's sonata contains much that we have heard before in other forms, but as we do not at all want him to change and be somebody else, that is as it should be.\" The quartet and quintet were premiered at the Wigmore Hall on 21 May 1919. \"The Manchester Guardian\" wrote, \"This quartet, with its tremendous climaxes, curious refinements of dance-rhythms, and its perfect symmetry, and the quintet, more lyrical and passionate, are as perfect examples of chamber music as the great oratorios were of their type.\"\nBy contrast, the remaining work, the Cello Concerto in E minor, had a disastrous premiere, at the opening concert of the LSO's 1919\u201320 season in October 1919. Apart from the Elgar work, which the composer conducted, the rest of the programme was conducted by Albert Coates, who overran his rehearsal time at the expense of Elgar's. Lady Elgar wrote, \"that brutal selfish ill-mannered bounder\u00a0... that brute Coates went on rehearsing.\" The critic of \"The Observer\", Ernest Newman, wrote, \"There have been rumours about during the week of inadequate rehearsal. Whatever the explanation, the sad fact remains that never, in all probability, has so great an orchestra made so lamentable an exhibition of itself.\u00a0... The work itself is lovely stuff, very simple \u2013 that pregnant simplicity that has come upon Elgar's music in the last couple of years \u2013 but with a profound wisdom and beauty underlying its simplicity.\" Elgar attached no blame to his soloist, Felix Salmond, who played the work for him again later. In contrast with the First Symphony and its hundred performances in just over a year, the Cello Concerto did not have a second performance in London for more than a year.\nLast years.\nAlthough in the 1920s Elgar's music was no longer in fashion, his admirers continued to present his works when possible. Reed singles out a performance of the Second Symphony in March 1920 conducted by \"a young man almost unknown to the public\", Adrian Boult, for bringing \"the grandeur and nobility of the work\" to a wider public. Also in 1920, Landon Ronald presented an all-Elgar concert at the Queen's Hall. Alice Elgar wrote with enthusiasm about the reception of the symphony, but this was one of the last times she heard Elgar's music played in public. After a short illness, she died of lung cancer on 7 April 1920, at the age of seventy-two.\nElgar was devastated by the loss of his wife. With no public demand for new works, and deprived of Alice's constant support and inspiration, he allowed himself to be deflected from composition. His daughter later wrote that Elgar inherited from his father a reluctance to \"settle down to work on hand but could cheerfully spend hours over some perfectly unnecessary and entirely unremunerative undertaking\", a trait that became stronger after Alice's death. For much of the rest of his life, Elgar indulged himself in his several hobbies. Throughout his life he was a keen amateur chemist, sometimes using a laboratory in his back garden. He even patented the \"Elgar Sulphuretted Hydrogen Apparatus\" in 1908. He enjoyed football, supporting Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C., for whom he composed an anthem, \"He Banged the Leather for Goal\", and in his later years he frequently attended horseraces. His prot\u00e9g\u00e9s, the conductor Malcolm Sargent and violinist Yehudi Menuhin, both recalled rehearsals with Elgar at which he swiftly satisfied himself that all was well and then went off to the races. In his younger days, Elgar had been an enthusiastic cyclist, buying Royal Sunbeam bicycles for himself and his wife in 1903 (he named his \"Mr. Phoebus\"). As an elderly widower, he enjoyed being driven about the countryside by his chauffeur. In November and December 1923, he took a voyage to Brazil, journeying up the Amazon to Manaus, where he was impressed by its opera house, the Teatro Amazonas. Almost nothing is recorded about Elgar's activities or the events that he encountered during the trip, which gave the novelist James Hamilton-Paterson considerable latitude when writing \"Gerontius\", a fictional account of the journey.\nAfter Alice's death, Elgar sold the Hampstead house, and after living for a short time in a flat in St James's in the heart of London, he moved back to Worcestershire, to the village of Kempsey, where he lived from 1923 to 1927. He did not wholly abandon composition in these years. He made large-scale symphonic arrangements of works by Bach and Handel and wrote his \"Empire March\" and eight songs \"Pageant of Empire\" for the 1924 British Empire Exhibition. Shortly after these were published, he was appointed Master of the King's Musick on 13 May 1924, following the death of Sir Walter Parratt.\nFrom 1926 onwards, Elgar made a series of recordings of his own works. Described by the music writer Robert Philip as \"the first composer to take the gramophone seriously\", he had already recorded much of his music by the early acoustic-recording process for His Master's Voice (HMV) from 1914 onwards, but the introduction of electrical microphones in 1925 transformed the gramophone from a novelty into a realistic medium for reproducing orchestral and choral music. Elgar was the first composer to take full advantage of this technological advance. Fred Gaisberg of HMV, who produced Elgar's recordings, set up a series of sessions to capture on disc the composer's interpretations of his major orchestral works, including the \"Enigma Variations\", \"Falstaff\", the first and second symphonies, and the cello and violin concertos. For most of these, the orchestra was the LSO, but the \"Variations\" were played by the Royal Albert Hall Orchestra. Later in the series of recordings, Elgar also conducted two newly founded orchestras, Boult's BBC Symphony Orchestra and Sir Thomas Beecham's London Philharmonic Orchestra.\nElgar's recordings were released on 78-rpm discs by both HMV and RCA Victor. After World War II, the 1932 recording of the Violin Concerto with the teenage Menuhin as soloist remained available on 78 and later on LP, but the other recordings were out of the catalogues for some years. When they were reissued by EMI on LP in the 1970s, they caused surprise to many by their fast tempi, in contrast to the slower speeds adopted by many conductors in the years since Elgar's death. The recordings were reissued on CD in the 1990s.\nIn November 1931, Elgar was filmed by Path\u00e9 for a newsreel depicting a recording session of \"Pomp and Circumstance March No. 1\" at the opening of EMI's Abbey Road Studios in London. It is believed to be the only surviving sound film of Elgar, who makes a brief remark before conducting the LSO, asking the musicians to \"play this tune as though you've never heard it before.\" A memorial plaque to Elgar at Abbey Road was unveiled on 24 June 1993.\nA late piece of Elgar's, the \"Nursery Suite\", was an early example of a studio premiere: its first performance was in the Abbey Road studios. For this work, dedicated to the wife and daughters of the Duke of York, Elgar once again drew on his youthful sketch-books.\nIn his final years, Elgar experienced a musical revival. The BBC organised a festival of his works to celebrate his seventy-fifth birthday, in 1932. He flew to Paris in 1933 to conduct the Violin Concerto for Menuhin. While in France, he visited his fellow composer Frederick Delius at his house at Grez-sur-Loing. He was sought out by younger musicians such as Adrian Boult, Malcolm Sargent and John Barbirolli, who championed his music when it was out of fashion. He began work on an opera, \"The Spanish Lady\", and accepted a commission from the BBC to compose a Third Symphony. His final illness prevented their completion. He fretted about the unfinished works. He asked Reed to ensure that nobody would \"tinker\" with the sketches and attempt a completion of the symphony, but at other times he said, \"If I can't complete the Third Symphony, somebody will complete it \u2013 or write a better one.\" After Elgar's death, Percy M. Young, in co-operation with the BBC and Elgar's daughter Carice, produced a version of \"The Spanish Lady\", which was issued on CD. The Third Symphony sketches were elaborated by the composer Anthony Payne into a complete score in 1997.\nInoperable colorectal cancer was discovered during an operation on 8 October 1933. He told his consulting doctor, Arthur Thomson, that he had no faith in an afterlife: \"I believe there is nothing but complete oblivion.\" Elgar died on 23 February 1934 at the age of seventy-six and was buried next to his wife at St Wulstan's Roman Catholic Church in Little Malvern. \nMusic.\nInfluences, antecedents and early works.\nElgar was contemptuous of folk music and had little interest in or respect for the early English composers, calling William Byrd and his contemporaries \"museum pieces\". Of later English composers, he regarded Purcell as the greatest, and he said that he had learned much of his own technique from studying Hubert Parry's writings. The continental composers who most influenced Elgar were Handel, Dvo\u0159\u00e1k and, to some degree, Brahms. In Elgar's chromaticism, the influence of Wagner is apparent, but Elgar's individual style of orchestration owes much to the clarity of nineteenth-century French composers, Berlioz, Massenet, Saint-Sa\u00ebns and, particularly, Delibes, whose music Elgar played and conducted at Worcester and greatly admired.\nElgar began composing when still a child, and all his life he drew on his early sketchbooks for themes and inspiration. The habit of assembling his compositions, even large-scale ones, from scraps of themes jotted down randomly remained throughout his life. His early adult works included violin and piano pieces, music for the wind quintet in which he and his brother played between 1878 and 1881, and music of many types for the Powick Asylum band. Diana McVeagh in \"Grove's Dictionary\" finds many embryonic Elgarian touches in these pieces, but few of them are regularly played, except \"Salut d'Amour\" and (as arranged decades later into \"The Wand of Youth\" Suites) some of the childhood sketches. Elgar's sole work of note during his first spell in London in 1889\u20131891, the overture \"Froissart\", was a romantic-bravura piece, influenced by Mendelssohn and Wagner, but also showing further Elgarian characteristics. Orchestral works composed during the subsequent years in Worcestershire include the \"Serenade for Strings\" and \"Three Bavarian Dances\". In this period and later, Elgar wrote songs and part songs. W. H. Reed expressed reservations about these pieces, but praised the part song \"The Snow\", for female voices, and \"Sea Pictures\", a cycle of five songs for contralto and orchestra which remains in the repertory.\nElgar's principal large-scale early works were for chorus and orchestra for the Three Choirs and other festivals. These were \"The Black Knight\", \"King Olaf\", \"The Light of Life\", \"The Banner of St George\" and \"Caractacus\". He also wrote a \"Te Deum\" and \"Benedictus\" for the Hereford Festival. Of these, McVeagh comments favourably on his lavish orchestration and innovative use of leitmotifs, but less favourably on the qualities of his chosen texts and the patchiness of his inspiration. McVeagh makes the point that, because these works of the 1890s were for many years little known (and performances remain rare), the mastery of his first great success, the \"Enigma Variations\", appeared to be a sudden transformation from mediocrity to genius, but in fact his orchestral skills had been building up throughout the decade.\nPeak creative years.\nElgar's best-known works were composed within the twenty-one years between 1899 and 1920. Most of them are orchestral. Reed wrote, \"Elgar's genius rose to its greatest height in his orchestral works\" and quoted the composer as saying that, even in his oratorios, the orchestral part is the most important. The \"Enigma Variations\" made Elgar's name nationally. The variation form was ideal for him at this stage of his career, when his comprehensive mastery of orchestration was still in contrast to his tendency to write his melodies in short, sometimes rigid, phrases. His next orchestral works, \"Cockaigne\", a concert-overture (1900\u20131901), the first two \"Pomp and Circumstance\" marches (1901), and the gentle \"Dream Children\" (1902), are all short: the longest of them, \"Cockaigne\", lasting less than fifteen minutes. \"In the South\" (1903\u20131904), although designated by Elgar as a concert-overture, is, according to Kennedy, really a tone poem and the longest continuous piece of purely orchestral writing Elgar had essayed. He wrote it after setting aside an early attempt to compose a symphony. The work reveals his continuing progress in writing sustained themes and orchestral lines, although some critics, including Kennedy, find that in the middle part \"Elgar's inspiration burns at less than its brightest.\" In 1905 Elgar completed the \"Introduction and Allegro for Strings\". This work is based, unlike much of Elgar's earlier writing, not on a profusion of themes but on only three. Kennedy called it a \"masterly composition, equalled among English works for strings only by Vaughan Williams's \"Tallis Fantasia\".\"\nDuring the next four years Elgar composed three major concert pieces, which, though shorter than comparable works by some of his European contemporaries, are among the most substantial such works by an English composer. These were his First Symphony, Violin Concerto, and Second Symphony, which all play for between forty-five minutes and an hour. McVeagh says of the symphonies that they \"rank high not only in Elgar's output but in English musical history. Both are long and powerful, without published programmes, only hints and quotations to indicate some inward drama from which they derive their vitality and eloquence. Both are based on classical form but differ from it to the extent that\u00a0... they were considered prolix and slackly constructed by some critics. Certainly the invention in them is copious; each symphony would need several dozen music examples to chart its progress.\"\nElgar's Violin Concerto and Cello Concerto, in the view of Kennedy, \"rank not only among his finest works, but among the greatest of their kind\". They are, however, very different from each other. The Violin Concerto, composed in 1909 as Elgar reached the height of his popularity, and written for the instrument dearest to his heart, is lyrical throughout and rhapsodical and brilliant by turns. The Cello Concerto, composed a decade later, immediately after World War I, seems, in Kennedy's words, \"to belong to another age, another world\u00a0... the simplest of all Elgar's major works\u00a0... also the least grandiloquent.\" Between the two concertos came Elgar's symphonic study \"Falstaff\", which has divided opinion even among Elgar's strongest admirers. Donald Tovey viewed it as \"one of the immeasurably great things in music\", with power \"identical with Shakespeare's\", while Kennedy criticises the work for \"too frequent reliance on sequences\" and an over-idealised depiction of the female characters. Reed thought that the principal themes show less distinction than some of Elgar's earlier works. Elgar himself thought \"Falstaff\" the highest point of his purely orchestral work.\nThe major works for voices and orchestra of the twenty-one years of Elgar's middle period are three large-scale works for soloists, chorus and orchestra: \"The Dream of Gerontius\" (1900), and the oratorios \"The Apostles\" (1903) and \"The Kingdom\" (1906); and two shorter odes, the \"Coronation Ode\" (1902) and \"The Music Makers\" (1912). The first of the odes, as a \"pi\u00e8ce d'occasion\", has rarely been revived after its initial success, with the culminating \"Land of Hope and Glory\". The second is, for Elgar, unusual in that it contains several quotations from his earlier works, as Richard Strauss quoted himself in \"Ein Heldenleben\". The choral works were all successful, although the first, \"Gerontius\", was and remains the best-loved and most performed. On the manuscript Elgar wrote, quoting John Ruskin, \"This is the best of me; for the rest, I ate, and drank, and slept, loved and hated, like another. My life was as the vapour, and is not; but this I saw, and knew; this, if anything of mine, is worth your memory.\" All three of the large-scale works follow the traditional model with sections for soloists, chorus and both together. Elgar's distinctive orchestration, as well as his melodic inspiration, lifts them to a higher level than most of their British predecessors.\nElgar's other works of his middle period include incidental music for \"Grania and Diarmid\", a play by George Moore and W. B. Yeats (1901), and for \"The Starlight Express\", a play based on a story by Algernon Blackwood (1916). Of the former, Yeats called Elgar's music \"wonderful in its heroic melancholy\". Elgar also wrote a number of songs during his peak period, of which Reed observes, \"it cannot be said that he enriched the vocal repertory to the same extent as he did that of the orchestra.\"\nFinal years and posthumous completions.\nAfter the Cello Concerto, Elgar completed no more large-scale works. He made arrangements of works by Bach, Handel and Chopin, in distinctively Elgarian orchestration, and once again turned his youthful notebooks to use for the \"Nursery Suite\" (1931). His other compositions of this period have not held a place in the regular repertory. For most of the rest of the twentieth century, it was generally agreed that Elgar's creative impulse ceased after his wife's death. Anthony Payne's elaboration of the sketches for Elgar's Third Symphony into a complete score led to a reconsideration of this supposition. Elgar left the opening of the symphony complete in full score, and those pages, along with others, show Elgar's orchestration changed markedly from the richness of his pre-war work. \"The Gramophone\" described the opening of the new work as something \"thrilling\u00a0... unforgettably gaunt\". Its first public performance was given by the BBC Symphony Orchestra under Andrew Davis in London on 15 February 1998. Payne also subsequently produced a performing version of the sketches for a sixth \"Pomp and Circumstance March\", premiered at the Proms in August 2006. Elgar's sketches for a piano concerto dating from 1913 were elaborated by the composer Robert Walker and first performed in August 1997 by the pianist David Owen Norris. The realisation has since been extensively revised.\nReputation.\nViews of Elgar's stature have varied in the decades since his music came to prominence at the beginning of the twentieth century. Richard Strauss, as noted, hailed Elgar as a progressive composer; even the hostile reviewer in \"The Observer\", unimpressed by the thematic material of the First Symphony in 1908, called the orchestration \"magnificently modern\". Hans Richter rated Elgar as \"the greatest modern composer\" in any country, and Richter's colleague Arthur Nikisch considered the First Symphony \"a masterpiece of the first order\" to be \"justly ranked with the great symphonic models \u2013 Beethoven and Brahms.\" By contrast, the critic W. J. Turner, in the mid-twentieth century, wrote of Elgar's \"Salvation Army symphonies\", and Herbert von Karajan called the \"Enigma Variations\" \"second-hand Brahms\". Elgar's immense popularity was not long-lived. After the success of his First Symphony and Violin Concerto, his Second Symphony and Cello Concerto were politely received but without the earlier wild enthusiasm. His music was identified in the public mind with the Edwardian era, and after the First World War he no longer seemed a progressive or modern composer. In the early 1920s, even the First Symphony had only one London performance in more than three years. Wood and younger conductors such as Boult, Sargent and Barbirolli championed Elgar's music, but in the recording catalogues and the concert programmes of the middle of the century his works were not well represented.\nIn 1924, the music scholar Edward J. Dent wrote an article for a German music journal in which he identified four features of Elgar's style that gave offence to a section of English opinion (namely, Dent indicated, the academic and snobbish section): \"too emotional\", \"not quite free from vulgarity\", \"pompous\", and \"too deliberately noble in expression\". This article was reprinted in 1930 and caused controversy. In the later years of the century there was, in Britain at least, a revival of interest in Elgar's music. The features that had offended austere taste in the inter-war years were seen from a different perspective. In 1955, the reference book \"The Record Guide\" wrote of the Edwardian background during the height of Elgar's career:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Boastful self-confidence, emotional vulgarity, material extravagance, a ruthless philistinism expressed in tasteless architecture and every kind of expensive yet hideous accessory: such features of a late phase of Imperial England are faithfully reflected in Elgar's larger works and are apt to prove indigestible today. But if it is difficult to overlook the bombastic, the sentimental, and the trivial elements in his music, the effort to do so should nevertheless be made, for the sake of the many inspired pages, the power and eloquence and lofty pathos, of Elgar's best work.\u00a0... Anyone who doubts the fact of Elgar's genius should take the first opportunity of hearing \"The Dream of Gerontius\", which remains his masterpiece, as it is his largest and perhaps most deeply felt work; the symphonic study, \"Falstaff\"; the Introduction and Allegro for Strings; the \"Enigma Variations\"; and the Violoncello Concerto.\nBy the 1960s, a less severe view was being taken of the Edwardian era. In 1966 the critic Frank Howes wrote that Elgar reflected the last blaze of opulence, expansiveness and full-blooded life, before World War I swept so much away. In Howes's view, there was a touch of vulgarity in both the era and Elgar's music, but \"a composer is entitled to be judged by posterity for his best work.\u00a0... Elgar is historically important for giving to English music a sense of the orchestra, for expressing what it felt like to be alive in the Edwardian age, for conferring on the world at least four unqualified masterpieces, and for thereby restoring England to the comity of musical nations.\"\nIn 1967 the critic and analyst David Cox considered the question of the supposed Englishness of Elgar's music. Cox noted that Elgar disliked folk-songs and never used them in his works, opting for an idiom that was essentially German, leavened by a lightness derived from French composers including Berlioz and Gounod. How then, asked Cox, could Elgar be \"the most English of composers\"? Cox found the answer in Elgar's own personality, which \"could use the alien idioms in such a way as to make of them a vital form of expression that was his and his alone. And the personality that comes through in the music is English.\" This point about Elgar's transmuting his influences had been touched on before. In 1930 \"The Times\" wrote, \"When Elgar's first symphony came out, someone attempted to prove that its main tune on which all depends was like the Grail theme in Parsifal.\u00a0... but the attempt fell flat because everyone else, including those who disliked the tune, had instantly recognized it as typically 'Elgarian', while the Grail theme is as typically Wagnerian.\" As for Elgar's \"Englishness\", his fellow-composers recognised it: Richard Strauss and Stravinsky made particular reference to it, and Sibelius called him \"the personification of the true English character in music\u00a0... a noble personality and a born aristocrat\".\nAmong Elgar's admirers there is disagreement about which of his works are to be regarded as masterpieces. The \"Enigma Variations\" are generally counted among them. \"The Dream of Gerontius\" has also been given high praise by Elgarians, and the Cello Concerto is similarly rated. Many rate the Violin Concerto equally highly, but some do not. Sackville-West omitted it from the list of Elgar masterpieces in \"The Record Guide\", and in a long analytical article in \"The Musical Quarterly\", Daniel Gregory Mason criticised the first movement of the concerto for a \"kind of sing-songiness\u00a0... as fatal to noble rhythm in music as it is in poetry\". \"Falstaff\" also divides opinion. It has never been a great popular favourite, and Kennedy and Reed identify shortcomings in it. In a \"Musical Times\" 1957 centenary symposium on Elgar led by Vaughan Williams, by contrast, several contributors share Eric Blom's view that \"Falstaff\" is the greatest of all Elgar's works.\nThe two symphonies divide opinion even more sharply. Mason rates the Second poorly for its \"over-obvious rhythmic scheme\", but calls the First \"Elgar's masterpiece.\u00a0... It is hard to see how any candid student can deny the greatness of this symphony.\" However, in the 1957 centenary symposium, several leading admirers of Elgar express reservations about one or both symphonies. In the same year, Roger Fiske wrote in \"The Gramophone\", \"For some reason few people seem to like the two Elgar symphonies equally; each has its champions and often they are more than a little bored by the rival work.\" The critic John Warrack wrote, \"There are no sadder pages in symphonic literature than the close of the First Symphony's Adagio, as horn and trombones twice softly intone a phrase of utter grief\", whereas to Michael Kennedy, the movement is notable for its lack of anguished yearning and \"angst\" and is marked instead by a \"benevolent tranquillity\".\nDespite the fluctuating critical assessment of the various works over the years, Elgar's major works taken as a whole have in the twenty-first century recovered strongly from their neglect in the 1950s. \"The Record Guide\" in 1955 could list only one currently available recording of the First Symphony, none of the Second, one of the Violin Concerto, two of the Cello Concerto, two of the \"Enigma Variations\", one of \"Falstaff\", and none of \"The Dream of Gerontius\". Since then there have been multiple recordings of all the major works. More than thirty recordings have been made of the First Symphony since 1955, for example, and more than a dozen of \"The Dream of Gerontius\". Similarly, in the concert hall, Elgar's works, after a period of neglect, are once again frequently programmed. The Elgar Society's website, in its diary of forthcoming performances, lists performances of Elgar's works by orchestras, soloists and conductors across Europe, North America and Australasia.\nHonours, awards and commemorations.\nElgar was knighted in 1904, and in 1911 he was appointed a member of the Order of Merit. In 1920 he received the Cross of Commander of the Belgian Order of the Crown; in 1924 he was made Master of the King's Musick; the following year he received the Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society; and in 1928 he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order (KCVO). Between 1900 and 1931, Elgar received honorary degrees from the Universities of Cambridge, Durham, Leeds, Oxford, Yale (USA), Aberdeen, Western Pennsylvania (USA), Birmingham and London. Foreign academies of which he was made a member were Regia Accademia di Santa Cecilia, Rome; Accademia del Reale Istituto Musicale, Florence; Acad\u00e9mie des Beaux Arts, Paris; Institut de France; and the American Academy. In 1931 he was created a Baronet, of Broadheath in the County of Worcester. In 1933 he was promoted within the Royal Victorian Order to Knight Grand Cross (GCVO). In Kennedy's words, he \"shamelessly touted\" for a peerage, but in vain. In \"Who's Who\", post-First World War, he claimed to have been awarded \"several Imperial Russian and German decorations (lapsed)\". Elgar was offered, but declined, the office of Mayor of Hereford (despite not being a member of its city council) when he lived in the city in 1905. The same year he was made an honorary freeman of the city of Worcester.\nThe house in Lower Broadheath where Elgar was born is now the Elgar Birthplace Museum, devoted to his life and work. Elgar's daughter, Carice, helped to found the museum in 1936 and bequeathed to it much of her collection of Elgar's letters and documents on her death in 1970. Carice left Elgar manuscripts to musical colleges: \"The Black Knight\" to Trinity College of Music; \"King Olaf\" to the Royal Academy of Music; \"The Music Makers\" to Birmingham University; the Cello Concerto to the Royal College of Music; \"The Kingdom\" to the Bodleian Library; and other manuscripts to the British Museum. The Elgar Society dedicated to the composer and his works was formed in 1951.\nElgar's statue at the end of Worcester High Street stands facing the cathedral, only yards from where his father's shop once stood. Another statue of the composer by Rose Garrard is at the top of Church Street in Malvern, overlooking the town and giving visitors an opportunity to stand next to the composer in the shadow of the Hills that he so often regarded. In September 2005, a third statue sculpted by Jemma Pearson was unveiled near Hereford Cathedral in honour of his many musical and other associations with the city. It depicts Elgar with his bicycle. From 1999 until early 2007, new Bank of England twenty pound notes featured a portrait of Elgar. The change to remove his image generated controversy, particularly because 2007 was the 150th anniversary of Elgar's birth. From 2007 the Elgar notes were phased out, ceasing to be legal tender on 30 June 2010. There are around 65 roads in the UK named after Elgar, including six in the counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire. Elgar had three locomotives named in his honour.\nElgar's life and music have inspired works of literature including the novel \"Gerontius\" and several plays. \"Elgar's Rondo\", a 1993 stage play by David Pownall depicts the dead Jaeger offering ghostly advice on Elgar's musical development. Pownall also wrote a radio play, \"Elgar's Third\" (1994); another Elgar-themed radio play is Alick Rowe's \"The Dorabella Variation\" (2003). David Rudkin's BBC television \"Play for Today\" \"Penda's Fen\" (1974) deals with themes including sex and adolescence, spying, and snobbery, with Elgar's music, chiefly \"The Dream of Gerontius\", as its background. In one scene, a ghostly Elgar whispers the secret of the \"Enigma\" tune to the youthful central character, with an injunction not to reveal it. \"Elgar on the Journey to Hanley\", a novel by Keith Alldritt (1979), tells of the composer's attachment to Dora Penny, later Mrs Powell, (depicted as \"Dorabella\" in the \"Enigma Variations\").\nPerhaps the best-known work depicting Elgar is Ken Russell's 1962 BBC television film \"Elgar\", made when the composer was still largely out of fashion. This hour-long film contradicted the view of Elgar as a jingoistic and bombastic composer, and evoked the more pastoral and melancholy side of his character and music.\nThe 2025 film \"The Choral,\" written by Alan Bennett, is built around a fictional 1916 performance of \"The Dream of Gerontius\" by the choral society of a Yorkshire town.\nNotes and references.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10086", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10086", "title": "European Investment Fund", "text": "Agency of the European Union\nThe European Investment Fund (EIF), established in 1994, is a financial institution for the provision of risk finance to SMEs (small and medium-sized enterprises), headquartered in Luxembourg. It is an EU body with the mandate to facilitate access to finance for European SMEs, by sharing or reducing the financial risk. The EIF is a part of the European Investment Bank Group and its task is to support the European Union public policy goals. \nIn 2024, the EIF channeled \u20ac14.4 billion of financing towards deeptech, life sciences, greentech, social impact funds, dual use defense technologies, and scale-up funds.\nNear to 43% of these investments (\u20ac6.1 billion) were green, and 45% went to regions in which economic development is below the EU average. In April 2025, Sifted reported that the EIF was \u201cEurope\u2019s biggest limited partner\u201d, with \u201c\u20ac143.7 billion in assets under management.\u201d\nIt does not lend money to SMEs directly; rather it provides finance through financial intermediaries that include banks, alternative lenders, and equity funds. Its main operations are in the areas of venture capital, private equity, private debt, guaranteeing loan portfolios, and securitization. In 2024, the EIF placed more than \u20ac7 billion in equity investments and worked with 96 new financial intermediaries.\nIts shareholders are: the European Investment Bank (59.78%); the European Union, represented by the European Commission (29.72%); and 38 financial institutions (10.5%). As of 1 January 2023, the Chief Executive is Marjut Falkstedt.\nThe EIF implemented the SME portion of the EU's European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI), also known as the Juncker Plan. Launched in 2015, the EFSI aimed to improve employment and economic growth by mobilizing \u20ac315 billion investment in European infrastructure projects by mid-2018. Since 2021, the EIF and the EIB have had a key role in implementing InvestEU, which is the successor to Juncker's EFSI.\nThe EIF participated in the EU's COVID-19 crisis response via the \u20ac25 billion Pan-European Guarantee Fund (EGF), launched in August 2020 to help SMEs through the crisis.\nThe EIF employs more than 700 people.\nHistory.\nThe EIF was founded in 1994 by the European Community (represented by the European Commission), the European Investment Bank and private financial institutions from 12 European countries. The foundational legal document, the Statutes of the European Investment Fund, was adopted by the EIB Board of Governors on 25 May 1994. The Statutes set the goals and the operation of the EIF under the European Investment Bank framework. It established EIF as a public-private partnership with the initial capital of 2 billion ecus, divided into 2000 shares. The 1994 Statutes specified that the task of the Fund was to support \u201cthe development of trans-European networks in the areas of transport, telecommunications and energy infrastructures, and the development of small and medium-sized enterprises\u201d, by providing guarantee instruments for SME loans. The list of initial shareholders included financial institutions from Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Greece, Spain, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal and the UK.\nIn 1997, the EIF started its activities in venture capital. In June 2000, the EIF was restructured, and the European Investment Bank became the majority shareholder. The European Investment Bank Group was established, and the EIF became the venture capital arm of the EIB Group. It has continued to provide guarantees for SME financing to financial institutions across Europe.\nWhen the European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker (2014\u20132019) introduced the \u20ac315 billion Investment plan for Europe, centered around the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI), the EIF led the implementation of the SME Window of EFSI. Launched in July 2015 by the European Union and the European Investment Bank Group, EFSI aimed to attract private investment (loans) for infrastructure projects that would kick-start Europe's economy.\nThe EIF also participated in the EU's COVID-19 crisis response via the \u20ac25 billion Pan-European Guarantee Fund (EGF), launched in August 2020 to support SMEs in getting through the crisis. For example, EIF's \u20ac350 million guarantee to Spanish banks, announced in December 2021, aimed to help the country's SMEs recover liquidity and safeguard jobs during the pandemic.\nIn 2024, the EIF marked 30 years of operation and became the official partner of the European Association of Guarantee Institutions (AECM). European Investment Fund estimated that, in the three decades since founding, it has financed around 2.1 million of micro, small and medium-sized businesses in Europe.\nActivity areas.\nThe European Investment Fund has a mandate from the European Union to support the creation and development of small and mid-sized companies. It is an enabler of EU policy objectives. It operates mainly in the EU countries, with some activity in the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), and in EU candidate and potential candidate countries.\nKey SME finance initiatives of the EIF are the InvestEU programme and ETCI fund of funds.\nInvestEU.\nInvestEU accounted for around 45% of the EIF activity in 2022, and for 40 percent (\u20ac5.75 billion) of the EIF commitments in 2024. The program is policy-led and built around four investment pillars: sustainable infrastructure; research, innovation and digitisation; small and medium-sized businesses; and social investment and skills. Under the InvestEU program, the EIF launched the first guarantee instrument \u201cdedicated exclusively to sustainability\u201d. Female representation, investments in climate and infrastructure funds and support for tech scale-ups and IPOs have been listed by the EIF as the novelties that InvestEU has brought since 2022. InvestEU is implemented on behalf of the European Union, and is the successor to the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI), also known as the \u201cJuncker Plan\u201d. The EIB Group, of which EIF is part, is responsible for managing 75% of the InvestEU.\nETCI and TechEU.\nThe European Tech Champions Initiative (ETCI) is a fund of funds that was launched in February 2023 by Belgium, France, Germany, Italy and Spain, together with the European Investment Bank Group. The ETCI invests in venture capital funds that invest in European scaleups, i.e. fast-growing tech companies. At the time of founding, the ETCI capital was \u20ac3.75 billion.\nIn May 2025 the European Investment Bank announced plans to provide \u20ac70 billion in startup and scaleup funding by 2027, under the wider TechEU platform launching later in the year. The EIB reported that the majority of capital for later-stage funding of European scaleups (typically in the range above \u20ac50 million) is coming from outside Europe; for such rounds of funding, \u201cthere are at least seven times more funds in the US than in the EU\u201d. Stakes in EU tech companies are often sold out of Europe, and often to US investors. TechEU aims to support European tech innovation and close the funding gap with the US.\nIn 2024, the EIF established the Defence Equity Facility, an equity fund worth \u20ac175 million. In July 2024, the EIF signed a Memorandum of Understanding with NATO\u2019s Innovation Fund (NIF).\nGovernance.\nThe European Investment Fund is managed by three authorities: the General Meeting, the Board of Directors and the Chief Executive.\nGeneral Meeting.\nThe General Meeting is held at least once per year. It consists of one representative of the European Investment Bank, one member of the European Commission and one representative from each financial institution that holds EIF shares. Each fund member's voting power corresponds to their number of shares. Decisions are adopted by the majority of the votes cast. General Meeting can decide on the admission of new members, approve annual reports submitted by the Board of Directors, approve annual balance sheets and PL accounts, amend the Statutes, appoint the Audit Board, increase the EIF capital, suspend or expel members, appoint the Board of Directors et al.\nBoard of Directors.\nThe Board of Directors has seven members. They are appointed by the General Meeting for a term of two years. Each of the three shareholder groups is represented. The Board meets nine to ten times per year and is accountable only to the General Meeting. It has the power to decide on all the EIF operations, which includes setting the return criteria and the limits of borrowing operations. It appoints the Chief Executive and the Deputy Chief Executive and submits the annual accounts and report to the General Meeting.\nChief Executive.\nThe EIF is managed by a Chief Executive, appointed for a term of up to 5 years. The Chief Executive oversees the daily operations of the EIF and reports to the Board.\nAudit Board.\nThe EIF is audited annually by an independent Audit Board, appointed by the General Meeting. The Audit Board usually has six members. It checks if EIF's operations have been carried out in accordance with the Statues, Rules of Procedure, and sound standards of banking. It checks if the financial accounts submitted by the Board of Directors give a true view of EIF's financial position, assets and liabilities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10087", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10087", "title": "European Currency Unit", "text": "Obsolete unit of account of the European Community\nThe European Currency Unit (, , \u200a; \u27e8\u20a0\u27e9, ECU, or XEU) was a unit of account used by the European Economic Community and composed of a basket of member country currencies. The ECU came in to operation on 13 March 1979 and was assigned the ISO\u00a04217 code. The ECU replaced the European Unit of Account (EUA) at parity in 1979, and it was later replaced by the euro (EUR) at parity on 1\u00a0January 1999.\nAs a unit of account, the ECU was not a circulating currency and did not replace or override the value of the currency of EEC member countries. However, it was used to price some international financial transactions and capital transfers.\nExchange rate.\nUsing a mechanism known as the \"snake in the tunnel\", the European Exchange Rate Mechanism was an attempt to minimize fluctuations between member state currencies\u2014initially by managing the variance of each against its respective ECU reference rate\u2014with the aim to achieve fixed ratios over time, and so enable the European Single Currency (which became known as the euro) to replace national currencies.\nHard ECU proposal.\nIn 1990 the British Chancellor of the Exchequer John Major proposed the creation of a 'hard' ECU, which different national currencies could compete against and, if the ECU was successful, could lead to a single currency. The move was seen by France and Germany as a wrecking tactic, especially when the increasingly Eurosceptic Thatcher announced her outright opposition to the European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and the idea was abandoned.\nEuro replaces the ECU.\nOn 1 January 1999, the euro (with the code EUR and symbol \u27e8\u20ac\u27e9) replaced the ECU at par (one-to-one). Unlike the ECU, the euro is a real currency, although not all member states participate (for details on euro membership see Eurozone). Two of the countries in the ECU basket of currencies, the UK and Denmark, did not join the eurozone, and a third, Greece, joined late. On the other hand, Finland and Austria joined the eurozone from the beginning, even though their currencies were not part of the ECU basket, since they had joined the EU in 1995, two years after the ECU composition was \"frozen\".\nLegal implications.\nDue to the ECU being used in some international financial transactions, there was a concern that foreign courts might not recognize the euro as the legal successor to the ECU. This was unlikely to be a problem, since it is a generally accepted principle of private international law that states determine their currencies, and that therefore states would accept the European Union legislation to that effect. However, for abundant caution, several foreign jurisdictions adopted legislation to ensure a smooth transition. Of particular importance, the U.S. states of Illinois and New York adopted legislation to ensure a large proportion of international financial contracts recognized the euro as the successor of the ECU.\nSymbol and name.\nThe ECU's symbol, \u20a0, consists of an interlaced \"C\" and \"E\"\u200a\u2014the initials of \"European Community\" in many languages of Europe. However, the symbol was not widely adopted. Few computer systems utilized by financial institutions and governments could render it, and commercial payment systems were obliged to use the ISO code, XEU, as with other currencies without widely recognised currency symbols. The Unicode designation for the ECU symbol () was not implemented on many personal computer operating systems until the release of Unicode v2.1 in May 1998, which also introduced the euro sign (). Microsoft did include the ECU symbol in many of its European versions of Windows beginning in the early 1990s; however, accessing it required the use of an Alt code, and not all typefaces provided a glyph. By 2009, Microsoft referred to the ECU symbol as \"historical\". Support among other operating systems, including Macintosh operating systems, was inconsistent.\nAlthough the acronym for ECU is formed from the English name of the unit, the \u00e9cu was a family of gold coins minted during the reign of Louis IX of France. The name of the ECU's successor, the euro, was chosen because the name did not favor any single language, nation, or historical period.\nCoins and notes.\nAs the ECU was only an electronic unit of account and not a full currency, it did not have any official coins or notes that could be used for everyday transactions. However, various European countries and organizations like the European Parliament made commemorative and mock-up coins and notes. A common theme on the coins was usually celebrating European unity, such as celebrating membership of the European Union.\nGibraltar issued commemorative coins from 1993 through 1998, though these were (nominally) legal tender only in Gibraltar, which uses the pound sterling.\nCurrency basket.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10088", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10088", "title": "Eastern Caribbean dollar", "text": "Currency of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States\nThe Eastern Caribbean dollar (symbol: EC$; code: XCD) is the currency of all seven full members and one associate member of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS). The successor to the British West Indies dollar, it has existed since 1965, and it is normally abbreviated with the dollar sign \"$\" or, alternatively, \"EC$\" to distinguish it from other dollar-denominated currencies. The EC$ is subdivided into 100 cents. It has been pegged to the United States dollar since 7 July 1976, at the exchange rate of US$ = .70.\nCirculation.\nSix of the states using the EC$ are independent states: Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. The other two, Anguilla and Montserrat, are British Overseas Territories. These states are all members of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union.\nOther associate members of the OECS do not use the Eastern Caribbean dollar as their official currency: the British Virgin Islands, Guadeloupe and Martinique. The British Virgin Islands were always problematic for currency purposes due to their proximity to the Danish West Indies, which became the United States Virgin Islands in 1917. Officially, the British Virgin Islands used to use sterling, but in practice the situation was more complicated and involved the circulation of French francs and U.S. dollars. In 1951, the British Virgin Islands adopted the British West Indies dollar which at that time operated in conjunction with the sterling coinage, and in 1959 they changed over officially to the U.S. dollar.\nGuadeloupe and Martinique, as part of France, use the euro as its currency.\nBritish Guiana and Barbados had previously been members of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union but withdrew in 1966 and 1972, respectively. Trinidad and Tobago had been a member of the earlier British West Indies currency union, but withdrew in 1964.\nThe combined population of the EC$ area is about 613,000 (2014 census and estimates), which is comparable to Montenegro or the American capital city of Washington, D.C. The combined GDP is 5.46\u00a0billion US dollars, which is comparable to Bermuda.\nThe late Queen Elizabeth II appears on the banknotes and also on the obverse of the coins. She was the head of state of all the states and territories using the EC$, except for Dominica (which was granted independence from the United Kingdom as a Republic). Dominica is nevertheless a member of the Commonwealth of Nations which now recognizes King Charles III as Head of the Commonwealth.\nHistory.\nQueen Anne's proclamation of 1704 was the first attempt to introduce sterling currency to the British West Indies, however it failed to displace the existing Spanish dollar currency system right up until the late 1870s. In 1822, the British government coined &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416 fractional 'Anchor dollars' for use in Mauritius and the British West Indies (but not Jamaica). A few years later copper fractional dollars were coined for Mauritius, Sierra Leone, and the British West Indies.\nThe next attempts to introduce British sterling silver coinage to the colonies came with an imperial order-in-council dated 1825. This move was inspired by a number of factors. The United Kingdom was now operating a very successful gold standard in relation to the gold sovereign that was introduced in 1816, and there was a desire to extend this system to the colonies. In addition to this, there was that the supply of Spanish dollars (pieces of eight) had been cut off as a result of the revolutions in Latin America where most of the Spanish dollars were minted. The last Spanish Dollar was in fact minted at Potosi in 1825. There was now a growing desire to have a stable and steady supply of British shillings everywhere the British drum was beating. The 1825 order-in-council was largely a failure because it made sterling silver coinage legal tender at the unrealistic rating in relation to the Spanish dollar of = 4 shillings 4 pence. It succeeded in Jamaica, Bermuda, and British Honduras because the authorities in those territories set aside the official ratings and used the more realistic rating of = 4 shillings. The reality of the rating between the dollar and the pound was based on the silver content of the Spanish pieces of eight as compared to the gold content of the British gold sovereign.\nA second imperial order-in-council was passed in 1838 with the correct rating of = 4 shillings 2 pence. In the years following the 1838 order-in-council, the British West Indies territories began to enact local legislation for the purposes of assimilating their monies of account with the British pound sterling. Gold discoveries in Australia in 1851 drove the silver dollar out of the West Indies, but it returned again with the great depreciation in the value of silver that followed with Germany's transition to the gold standard between 1871 and 1873. In the years immediately following 1873, there was a fear that the British West Indies might return to a silver standard. As such, legislation was passed in the individual territories to demonetize the silver dollars. Even though the British coinage was also silver, it represented fractions of the gold sovereign and so its value was based on a gold standard.\nDuring this period, and into the nineteenth century, accounts could be kept in either dollars or sterling. Jamaica, Bermuda, and the Bahamas preferred to use sterling accounts whereas British Guiana used dollar accounts. British Guiana used dollar accounts for the purpose of assisting in the transition from the Dutch guilder system of currency to the British pound sterling system. In the Eastern Caribbean territories the private sector preferred to use dollar accounts whereas the government preferred to use sterling accounts. In some of the Eastern Caribbean territories, notes were issued by various private banks, denominated in dollars equivalent to 4 shillings 2 pence. See Antigua dollar, Barbadian dollar, Dominican dollar, Grenadian dollar, Guyanese dollar, Saint Kitts dollar, Saint Lucia dollar, Saint Vincent dollar and Trinidad and Tobago dollar.\nIn 1946, a West Indian Currency Conference saw Barbados, British Guiana, the Leeward Islands, Trinidad and Tobago and the Windward Islands agree to establish a unified decimal currency system based on a West Indian dollar to replace the current arrangement of having three different Boards of Commissioners of Currency (for Barbados (which also served the Leeward and Windward Islands), British Guiana and Trinidad &amp; Tobago).\nIn 1949, the British government formalized the dollar system of accounts in British Guiana and the Eastern Caribbean territories by introducing the British West Indies dollar (BWI$) at the already existing conversion rate of per pound sterling (or = 4 shillings 2 pence). It was one of the many experimental political and economic ventures tested by the British government to form a uniform system within the British West Indies territories. The symbol \"BWI$\" was frequently used and the currency was known verbally as the \"Beewee\" (slang for British West Indies) dollar. Shortly thereafter in 1950, the British Caribbean Currency Board (BCCB) was set up in Trinidad with the sole right to issue notes and coins of the new unified currency and given the mandate of keeping full foreign exchange cover to ensure convertibility at .80 per pound sterling. In 1951, the British Virgin Islands joined the arrangement, but this led to discontent because that territory was more naturally drawn to the currency of the neighbouring U.S. Virgin Islands. In 1961, the British Virgin Islands withdrew from the arrangement and adopted the U.S. dollar.\nUntil 1955, the BWI$ existed only as banknotes in conjunction with sterling fractional coinage. Decimal coins replaced the sterling coins in 1955. These decimal coins were denominated in cents, with each cent worth one halfpenny in sterling.\nIn 1958, the West Indies Federation was established and the BWI$ was its currency. However, although Jamaica (including the Cayman Islands and the Turks and Caicos Islands) was part of the West Indies Federation, it retained the Jamaican pound, despite adopting the BWI$ as legal tender from 1954. Jamaica, the Cayman Islands, and the Turks and Caicos Islands were already long established users of the sterling accounts system of pounds, shillings, and pence.\nIn 1964 Jamaica ended the legal tender status of the BWI$ and Trinidad and Tobago withdrew from the currency union (adopting the Trinidad and Tobago dollar) forcing the movement of the headquarters of the BCCB to Barbados and soon the \"BWI$\" dollar lost its regional support.\nIn 1965, the British West Indies dollar of the now defunct West Indies Federation was replaced at par by the Eastern Caribbean dollar and the BCCB was replaced by the Eastern Caribbean Currency Authority or ECCA (established by the Eastern Caribbean Currency Agreement 1965). British Guiana withdrew from the currency union the following year. Grenada, which had used the Trinidad and Tobago dollar from 1964, rejoined the common currency arrangement in 1968. Barbados withdrew from the currency union in 1972, following which the ECCA headquarters were moved to St. Kitts.\nBetween 1965 and 1983, the Eastern Caribbean Currency Authority issued the EC$, with banknotes from 1965 and coins from 1981. The EC$ is now issued by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, based in the city of Basseterre, in Saint Kitts and Nevis. The bank was established by an agreement (the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank Agreement) signed at Port of Spain on 5 July 1983.\nThe exchange rate of = \u00a31 sterling (equivalent to the old = 4s\u00a02d) continued until 1976 for the new Eastern Caribbean dollar.\nFor a wider outline of the history of currency in the region see Currencies of the British West Indies.\nCoins.\nUntil 1981, the coins of the BWI$ circulated. In 1982, a new series of coins was introduced in denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10 and 25 cents and 1 dollar. The 1 and 5 cent coins were scalloped in shape while the 2 cent coin was square. These three were struck in aluminum. The 10 and 25 cent coins were round and cupro-nickel. The dollar was aluminum bronze and also round. The round, aluminum bronze dollar coin was replaced in 1989 with a decagonal, cupro-nickel type. In 2002 new and larger round-shaped 1, 2, and 5 cent pieces were introduced, along with a new 1 dollar coin which was also round. The effigy of Queen Elizabeth II was also changed that same year on all coin denominations to the Ian Rank-Broadley design, making it the last commonwealth currency up to that date to discontinue the Arnold Machin portrait. Their compositions remained aluminum and cupro-nickel, respectively. Higher denominations exist, but these were issued only as medal-coins. 1 and 2 cent coins were withdrawn from circulation in July 2015, and remained legal tender until 30 June 2020.\nBanknotes.\nIn 1965, the Eastern Caribbean Currency Authority issued banknotes in denominations of 1, 5, 20 and 100 dollars, all featuring Pietro Annigoni's 1956 portrait of Queen Elizabeth II in regalia of the Order of the Garter. The first issues in the name of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank in 1985 were of the same denominations, with the addition of 10 dollar notes. The last 1 dollar notes were issued in 1989 and 50 dollar notes were introduced in 1993. On 1 April 2008, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank issued a new series of banknotes which are like the preceding issues, except for omitting both the barcode and the country code letters which form part of the serial number on current notes. In 2012, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank issued a series of banknotes with Braille features in an effort to provide notes which are easier for blind and visually impaired persons to use. The raised Braille characters on the upgraded notes feature a cricket theme in the form of balls and stumps. These characters have been added to the 10, 20, 50, and 100 dollar notes.\nIn 2019, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank introduced a new family of notes produced in polymer substrate and presented in a vertical format.\nPrevious issues.\nThe 2012 issue included raised braille elements for the visually-impaired in the form of a cricket ball and stumps. These were added to the EC$10, $20, $50, and $100 banknotes. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10090", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10090", "title": "Erythromycin", "text": "Antibiotic medication\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nErythromycin (sometimes abbreviated ETM in reports) is an antibiotic used for the treatment of a number of bacterial infections. This includes respiratory tract infections, skin infections, chlamydia infections, pelvic inflammatory disease, and syphilis. It may also be used during pregnancy to prevent Group B streptococcal infection in the newborn, and to improve delayed stomach emptying. It can be given intravenously and by mouth. An eye ointment is routinely recommended after delivery to prevent eye infections in the newborn.\nCommon side effects include abdominal cramps, vomiting, and diarrhea. More serious side effects may include \"Clostridioides difficile\" colitis, liver problems, prolonged QT, and allergic reactions. It is generally safe in those who are allergic to penicillin. Erythromycin also appears to be safe to use during pregnancy. While generally regarded as safe during breastfeeding, its use by the mother during the first two weeks of life may increase the risk of pyloric stenosis in the baby. This risk also applies if taken directly by the baby during this age. It is in the macrolide family of antibiotics and works by decreasing bacterial protein production.\nErythromycin was first isolated in 1952 from the bacteria \"Saccharopolyspora erythraea\". It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. In 2023, it was the 235th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 1million prescriptions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedical uses.\nErythromycin can be used to treat bacteria responsible for causing infections of the skin and upper respiratory tract, including \"Streptococcus\", \"Staphylococcus\", \"Haemophilus\" and \"Corynebacterium\" genera. The following represents MIC susceptibility data for a few medically significant bacteria:\nIt may be useful in treating gastroparesis due to this promotility effect. It has been shown to improve feeding intolerances in those who are critically ill. Intravenous erythromycin may also be used in endoscopy to help clear stomach contents to enhance endoscopic visualization, potentially improving diagnostic accuracy and subsequent management.\nAvailable forms.\nErythromycin is available in enteric-coated tablets, slow-release capsules, oral suspensions, ophthalmic solutions, ointments, gels, enteric-coated capsules, non enteric-coated tablets, non enteric-coated capsules, and injections.\nThe following erythromycin combinations are available for oral dosage:\nFor injection, the available combinations are:\nFor ophthalmic use:\nAdverse effects.\nGastrointestinal disturbances, such as diarrhea, nausea, abdominal pain, and vomiting, are very common because erythromycin is a motilin agonist.\nMore serious side effects include arrhythmia with prolonged QT intervals, including \"torsades de pointes\", and reversible deafness. Allergic reactions range from urticaria to anaphylaxis. Cholestasis and Stevens\u2013Johnson syndrome are some other rare side effects that may occur.\nStudies have shown evidence both for and against the association of pyloric stenosis and exposure to erythromycin prenatally and postnatally. Exposure to erythromycin (especially long courses at antimicrobial doses, and also through breastfeeding) has been linked to an increased probability of pyloric stenosis in young infants. Erythromycin used for feeding intolerance in young infants has not been associated with hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.\nErythromycin estolate has been associated with reversible hepatotoxicity in pregnant women in the form of elevated serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase and is not recommended during pregnancy. Some evidence suggests similar hepatotoxicity in other populations.\nIt can also affect the central nervous system, causing psychotic reactions, nightmares, and night sweats.\nInteractions.\nErythromycin is metabolized by enzymes of the cytochrome P450 system, in particular, by isozymes of the CYP3A superfamily. The activity of the CYP3A enzymes can be induced or inhibited by certain drugs (e.g., dexamethasone), which can cause it to affect the metabolism of many different drugs, including erythromycin. If other CYP3A substrates \u2014 drugs that are broken down by CYP3A \u2014 such as simvastatin (Zocor), lovastatin (Mevacor), or atorvastatin (Lipitor) \u2014 are taken concomitantly with erythromycin, levels of the substrates increase, often causing adverse effects. A noted drug interaction involves erythromycin and simvastatin, resulting in increased simvastatin levels and the potential for rhabdomyolysis. Another group of CYP3A4 substrates are drugs used for migraine such as ergotamine and dihydroergotamine; their adverse effects may be more pronounced if erythromycin is associated.\nEarlier case reports on sudden death prompted a study on a large cohort that confirmed a link between erythromycin, ventricular tachycardia, and sudden cardiac death in patients also taking drugs that prolong the metabolism of erythromycin (like verapamil or diltiazem) by interfering with CYP3A4. Hence, erythromycin should not be administered to people using these drugs, or drugs that also prolong the QT interval. Other examples include terfenadine (Seldane, Seldane-D), astemizole (Hismanal), cisapride (Propulsid, withdrawn in many countries for prolonging the QT time) and pimozide (Orap). Interactions with theophylline, which is used mostly in asthma, were also shown.\nErythromycin and doxycycline can have a synergistic effect when combined and kill bacteria (\"E. coli)\" with a higher potency than the sum of the two drugs together. This synergistic relationship is only temporary. After approximately 72 hours, the relationship shifts to become antagonistic, whereby a 50/50 combination of the two drugs kills less bacteria than if the two drugs were administered separately.\nIt may alter the effectiveness of combined oral contraceptive pills because of its effect on the gut flora. A review found that when erythromycin was given with certain oral contraceptives, there was an increase in the maximum serum concentrations and AUC of estradiol and dienogest.\nErythromycin is an inhibitor of the cytochrome P450 system, which means it can have a rapid effect on levels of other drugs metabolised by this system, e.g., warfarin.\nPharmacology.\nMechanism of action.\nErythromycin displays bacteriostatic activity or inhibits growth of bacteria, especially at higher concentrations. By binding to the 50s subunit of the bacterial rRNA complex, protein synthesis and subsequent structure and function processes critical for life or replication are inhibited. Erythromycin interferes with aminoacyl translocation, preventing the transfer of the tRNA bound at the A site of the rRNA complex to the P site of the rRNA complex. Without this translocation, the A site remains occupied, thus the addition of an incoming tRNA and its attached amino acid to the nascent polypeptide chain is inhibited. This interferes with the production of functionally useful proteins, which is the basis of this antimicrobial action.\nErythromycin increases gut motility by binding to motilin receptor, thus it is a motilin receptor agonist in addition to its antimicrobial properties. It can be therefore administered intravenously as a stomach emptying stimulant.\nPharmacokinetics.\nErythromycin is easily inactivated by gastric acid; therefore, all orally administered formulations are given as either enteric-coated or more-stable salts or esters, such as erythromycin ethylsuccinate. Erythromycin is very rapidly absorbed, and diffuses into most tissues and phagocytes. Due to the high concentration in phagocytes, erythromycin is actively transported to the site of infection, where, during active phagocytosis, large concentrations of erythromycin are released.\nMetabolism.\nMost of erythromycin is metabolised by demethylation in the liver by the hepatic enzyme CYP3A4. Its main elimination route is in the bile with little renal excretion, 2%\u201315% unchanged drug. Erythromycin's elimination half-life ranges between 1.5 and 2.0 hours and is between 5 and 6 hours in patients with end-stage renal disease. Erythromycin levels peak in the serum 4 hours after dosing; ethylsuccinate peaks 0.5\u20132.5 hours after dosing, but can be delayed if digested with food.\nErythromycin crosses the placenta and enters breast milk. The American Association of Pediatrics determined erythromycin is safe to take while breastfeeding. Absorption in pregnant patients has been shown to be variable, frequently resulting in levels lower than in nonpregnant patients.\nChemistry.\nComposition.\nStandard-grade erythromycin is primarily composed of four related compounds known as erythromycins A, B, C, and D. Each of these compounds can be present in varying amounts and can differ by lot. Erythromycin A has been found to have the most antibacterial activity, followed by erythromycin B. Erythromycins C and D are about half as active as erythromycin A. Some of these related compounds have been purified and can be studied and researched individually.\nSynthesis.\nOver the three decades after the discovery of erythromycin A and its activity as an antimicrobial, many attempts were made to synthesize it in the laboratory. The presence of 10 stereogenic carbons and several points of distinct substitution has made the total synthesis of erythromycin A a formidable task. Complete syntheses of erythromycins' related structures and precursors such as 6-deoxyerythronolide B have been accomplished, giving way to possible syntheses of different erythromycins and other macrolide antimicrobials. Woodward successfully completed the synthesis of erythromycin A, which was published in 1981.\nHistory.\nIn 1952, Filipino scientist Abelardo B. Aguilar sent some soil samples to his employers at Eli Lilly and Company. Aguilar had managed to isolate erythromycin from the metabolic products of a strain of \"Streptomyces erythreus\" (designation changed to \"Saccharopolyspora erythraea\") found in the samples. Aguilar received no further credit or compensation for his discovery.\nThe scientist was allegedly promised a trip to the company's manufacturing plant in Indianapolis, Indiana, but it was never fulfilled. In a 1956 letter to Eugene N. Beesley, the company's president at the time, Aguilar wrote: \"A leave of absence is all I ask as I do not wish to sever my connection with a great company which has given me wonderful breaks in life.\" The request was not granted.\nAguilar reached out to Lilly again in 1993, requesting royalties from sales of the drug over the years, intending to set up a foundation for poor and sickly Filipinos. This request was also denied, and he died in September the same year.\nLilly filed for patent protection on the compound, which was granted in 1953. The product had been launched commercially in 1952 under the brand name \"Ilosone\" (after the Philippine province of Iloilo where Aguilar had collected the original soil samples). Erythromycin was also formerly called \"Ilotycin\".\nThe antibiotic clarithromycin was invented by scientists at the Japanese drug company Taisho Pharmaceutical in the 1970s as a result of their efforts to overcome the acid instability of erythromycin.\nSociety and culture.\nEconomics.\nIt is available as a generic medication.\nIn the United States, in 2014, the price increased to seven dollars per 500mg tablet.\nThe US price of erythromycin rose three times between 2010 and 2015, from 24 cents per 500mg tablet in 2010 to $8.96 in 2015. In 2017, a Kaiser Health News study found that the per-unit cost of dozens of generics doubled or even tripled from 2015 to 2016, increasing spending by the Medicaid program. Due to price increases by drug manufacturers, Medicaid paid on average $2,685,330 more for Erythromycin in 2016 compared to 2015 (not including rebates). In the US by 2018, generic drug prices had climbed another 5% on average.\nThe UK price listed in the BNF for erythromycin 500mg tablets was \u00a336.40 for 100 tablets (36.4 pence each) . This price is not paid by NHS patients: there is no NHS prescription charge in Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland; while NHS patients in England without an exemption are liable for a flat rate prescription charge. , that charge was \u00a39.90 for each prescribed medicine.\nBrand names.\nBrand names include Robimycin, E-Mycin, E.E.S. Granules, E.E.S.-200, E.E.S.-400, E.E.S.-400 Filmtab, Erymax, Ery-Tab, Eryc, Ranbaxy, Erypar, EryPed, Eryped 200, Eryped 400, Erythrocin Stearate Filmtab, Erythrocot, E-Base, Erythroped, Ilosone, MY-E, Pediamycin, Zineryt, Abboticin, Abboticin-ES, Erycin, PCE Dispertab, Stiemycine, Acnasol, and Tiloryth.\nVeterinary uses.\nErythromycin is also used in fishcare for the \"broad spectrum treatment and control of bacterial disease\". Body slime, mouth fungus, furunculosis, bacterial gill illness, and hemorrhagic septicaemia are all examples of bacterial diseases in fish that may be treated and controlled with this therapy. The usage of Erythromycin in fishcare is mainly limited to therapies targeting gram-positive bacteria.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10091", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10091", "title": "Environmental law", "text": "Branch of law concerning the natural environment\nEnvironmental laws are laws that protect the environment. The term \"environmental law\" encompasses treaties, statutes, regulations, conventions, and policies designed to protect the natural environment and manage the impact of human activities on ecosystems and natural resources, such as forests, minerals, or fisheries. It addresses issues such as pollution control, resource conservation, biodiversity protection, climate change mitigation, and sustainable development. As part of both national and international legal frameworks, environmental law seeks to balance environmental preservation with economic and social needs, often through regulatory mechanisms, enforcement measures, and incentives for compliance. \nThe field emerged prominently in the mid-20th century as industrialization and environmental degradation spurred global awareness, culminating in landmark agreements like the 1972 Stockholm Conference and the 1992 Rio Declaration. Key principles include the precautionary principle, the polluter pays principle, and intergenerational equity. Modern environmental law intersects with human rights, international trade, and energy policy. \nInternationally, treaties such as the Paris Agreement (2015), the Kyoto Protocol (1997), and the Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) establish cooperative frameworks for addressing transboundary issues. Nationally, laws like the UK's Clean Air Act 1956 and the US Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 establish regulations to limit pollution and manage chemical safety. Enforcement varies by jurisdiction, often involving governmental agencies, judicial systems, and international organizations. Environmental impact assessments are a common way to enforce environmental law.\nChallenges in environmental law include reconciling economic growth with sustainability, determining adequate levels of compensation, and addressing enforcement gaps in international contexts. The field continues to evolve in response to emerging crises such as biodiversity loss, plastic pollution in oceans, and climate change.\nHistory.\nExamples of laws designed to preserve the environment for its own sake or for human enjoyment are found throughout history. In the common law, the primary protection was found in the law of nuisance, but this only allowed for private actions for damages or injunctions if there was harm to land. Thus, smells emanating from pigsties, strict liability against dumping rubbish, or damage from exploding dams. Private enforcement, however, was limited and found to be woefully inadequate to deal with major environmental threats, particularly threats to common resources. During the \"Great Stink\" of 1858, the dumping of sewerage into the River Thames began to smell so ghastly in the summer heat that Parliament had to be evacuated. Ironically, the Metropolitan Commission of Sewers Act 1848 had allowed the Metropolitan Commission for Sewers to close cesspits around the city in an attempt to \"clean up\" but this simply led people to pollute the river. In 19 days, Parliament passed a further Act to build the London sewerage system. London also suffered from terrible air pollution, and this culminated in the \"Great Smog\" of 1952, which in turn triggered its own legislative response: the Clean Air Act 1956. The basic regulatory structure was to set limits on emissions for households and businesses (particularly burning of coal) while an inspectorate would enforce compliance.\nPollution control.\nAir quality.\nAir quality index (AQI) is used to identify contaminants present in the air that would result in affecting public health. They test among contaminants and high levels of the major six pollutants, including nitrogen dioxide, ozone, carbon monoxide, and sulfur dioxide. The impacts on air quality reflect on the safety behind what contaminants are safe enough to breathe in. The high levels of pollutants can vary based on seasonal changes and what is more likely to cause an issue with air quality at its peak. Exposure to dangerous pollutants can adverse health effects over time, and can be a potential threat to a decline in population over time.\nWaste management.\nConsuming less waste can heavily reduce the amount of energy used in products and help minimize consumption of goods over time. Waste separation could potentially lead to having additional resources and filter out waste during that process. Ways to reduce the amount of waste include green purchasing and reducing disposable products that contribute to climate change. Wealth has led to increase in environmental risks with waste produced including corporations, thus limiting the amount of regulation.\nContaminant cleanup.\nSewage treatments are used for filtering out any contaminants that are present to ensure water quality remains clean and safe to consume. If left untreated for long period of time, antibiotic resistance may occur and will eventually cause health problems as the treatment plants won't get filtered easily. Government officials would need to test often to check the filtering system for efficiency. Wastewater and river ecosystems can effectively remove heavy metals such as lead and cadmium by using sea cucumbers, algae, and decayed plants to reduce the amount of heavy toxins that may be in water.\nChemical safety.\nChemical safety laws govern the use of chemicals in human activities, particularly human-made chemicals in modern industrial applications. As contrasted with media-oriented environmental laws (e.g., air or water quality laws), chemical control laws seek to manage the (potential) pollutants themselves. Regulatory efforts include banning specific chemical constituents in consumer products (e.g., Bisphenol A in plastic bottles), and regulating pesticides.\nSafety regulations including the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) determine the chemicals that are considered harmful from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), but end up placing restrictions to several chemicals per year as opposed to finding many other chemicals that would be considered harmful if exposed. According to the EPA, only 200 out of the 84,000 chemicals used in 2013 were used for testing purposes, raising concerns on whether TSCA would be up to date in their database. Chemicals would need to be tested for toxicity, instability, and flammability when coming into contact with other chemicals. It is essential to identify and analyze the different types of chemicals for its potential risks or it could have dangerous outcomes.\nResource sustainability.\nWater resources.\nWater resources laws govern the ownership and use of water resources, including surface water and ground water. Regulatory areas may include water conservation, use restrictions, and ownership regimes.\nSuch laws include the right to be provided clean water at the bare minimum, according to the United Nations Committee. Water resources should be safe, clean, accessible, and affordable for human concern. This also means having facilities that operate in combatting water pollution and provide clean sources of water for maintenance. Duty dumping may occur if one is not held responsible for fulfilling their obligations in attempt to reduce environmental impact. Financial obligations are required for reaching quality standards to avoid risk of contamination that would raise public health concerns. An economic approach is made to provide a budget for having running water regulated normally and varies among countries distribution systems in efforts to reach human standards. Involvement is crucial for helping with water safety concerns, gaining attention of communities to help support programs established to further regulate water consumption.\nMineral resources.\nManaging mineral resources can be challenging to maintain as supply chains have lower chances of traceability with importing goods from their designated spots for mining. Sustainability and quality processes can be done through regulatory obligations for ensuring the source of importing goods are taken responsibility. The risks that may be involved can include unsafe working conditions as mining is labor-intensive and workers' rights since environmental risks are likely to occur when mining, such as water contamination and ingesting minerals when exposed in the air. Mining conditions can vary by country as some prohibit mining if there are unsafe working conditions while some are likely to be interested as it adheres to investments for mining industries growing in the future.\nWildlife and plants.\nWildlife laws govern the potential impact of human activity on wild animals, whether directly on individuals or populations, or indirectly via habitat degradation. Similar laws may operate to protect plant species. Such laws may be enacted entirely to protect biodiversity, or as a means for protecting species deemed important for other reasons. Regulatory efforts may include the creation of special conservation statuses, prohibitions on killing, harming, or disturbing protected species, efforts to induce and support species recovery, establishment of wildlife refuges to support conservation, and prohibitions on trafficking in species or animal parts to combat poaching.\nIllegal wildlife trade has become an organized crime, and has led to tracking down poachers through law enforcement and high-level security approaches. Criminal activity involving animals have undergone pressure once regulation standards are established, having activities happen in other places to avoiding law enforcement. Conservationists may argue that it is risky that poachers are likely to be armed with weapons when law hunting down animals, leaving no choice but to recruit armed rangers for stopping their crimes. Tackling illegal wildlife crime would require involvement and support from international policies and law enforcement such as INTERPOL and EUROPOL. EUROPOL had to deal with political pressure to combat environmental crime, making it a priority to focus on. Ecological changes pertaining to human activity caused a decline in wildlife population over time. Relationships between humans and species result in negative outcomes of economic development and cultural significances.\nFish and game.\nFish and game laws regulate the right to pursue and take or kill certain kinds of fish and wild animal (game). Such laws may restrict the days to harvest fish or game, the number of animals caught per person, the species harvested, or the weapons or fishing gear used. Such laws may seek to balance dueling needs for preservation and harvest and to manage both environment and populations of fish and game. Game laws can provide a legal structure to collect license fees and other money which is used to fund conservation efforts as well as to obtain harvest information used in wildlife management practice.\nIllegal fishing often gets unreported with little to no regulation for transporting goods in facilities. Overfishing has impacted fisheries with a decline in economic growth and destruction of ecosystems. Marine resources would cause pressure among other countries relying on fishing for providing food in communities if illegal fishing isn't managed carefully. Another issue is an increase in marine pollution that has a decline of fish population with ocean disposals of toxic waste and lack of oxygen produced, which makes harvesting fish difficult to accomplish.\nPrinciples.\nEnvironmental law has developed in response to emerging awareness of\u2014and concern over\u2014issues impacting the world. While laws have developed piecemeal and for a variety of reasons, some effort has gone into identifying key concepts and guiding principles common to environmental law as a whole. Some laws are seen as temporary or transitional where political realities prevent adoption of more ideal rules. Pope Francis in his 2015 encyclical letter \"Laudato si\"' acknowledged that \"political realism may call for transitional measures and technologies, so long as these are accompanied by the gradual framing and acceptance of binding commitments\".\nThe principles discussed below are not an exhaustive list and are not universally recognized or accepted. Nonetheless, they represent important principles for the understanding of environmental law around the world.\nSustainable development.\nDefined by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) as \"development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs,\" sustainable development may be considered together with the concepts of \"integration\" (development cannot be considered in isolation from sustainability) and \"interdependence\" (social and economic development, and environmental protection, are interdependent). Laws mandating environmental impact assessment and requiring or encouraging development to minimize environmental impacts may be assessed against this principle.\nThe modern concept of sustainable development was a topic of discussion at the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm Conference), and the driving force behind the 1983 World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED, or Bruntland Commission). In 1992, the first UN Earth Summit resulted in the Rio Declaration, Principle 3 of which reads: \"The right to development must be fulfilled so as to equitably meet developmental and environmental needs of present and future generations.\" Sustainable development has been a core concept of international environmental discussion ever since, including at the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Earth Summit 2002), and the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Earth Summit 2012, or Rio+20).\nEquity.\nDefined by UNEP to include intergenerational equity \u2013 \"the right of future generations to enjoy a fair level of the common patrimony\" \u2013 and intragenerational equity \u2013 \"the right of all people within the current generation to fair access to the current generation's entitlement to the Earth's natural resources\" \u2013 environmental equity considers the present generation under an obligation to account for long-term impacts of activities, and to act to sustain the global environment and resource base for future generations. Pollution control and resource management laws may be assessed against this principle.\nEquity is approached by combatting social justice for the sake of reaching climate goals in having more sustainability. International law decided to shift from equality to equity in hopes of acknowledging the needs and provide fair share of resources. The CBDR principle had been established back in 2015, but was modified by the Paris Agreement regarding climate change.\nTransboundary responsibility.\nDefined in the international law context as an obligation to protect one's own environment, and to prevent damage to neighboring environments, UNEP considers transboundary responsibility at the international level as a potential limitation on the rights of the sovereign state. Laws that act to limit externalities imposed upon human health and the environment may be assessed against this principle.\nCommunity participation is analyzed through international law that looks into environmental law and cases such as genocide and providing aid. Such laws include heritage laws that describe the cultural aspect and property rights of others. Responsibilities include pollution damage among two states, leading to calamities for countries to deal with. Some countries contribute to transboundary pollution and pass on to other places to clean up, establishing laws to decide on holding countries liable on causing damage to resources. Having strict liability depends on negotiations done in international court and what values are held for environmental reasons.\nPublic participation and transparency.\nIdentified as essential conditions for \"accountable governments... industrial concerns\", and organizations generally, public participation and transparency are presented by UNEP as requiring \"effective protection of the human right to hold and express opinions and to seek, receive and impart ideas... a right of access to appropriate, comprehensible and timely information held by governments and industrial concerns on economic and social policies regarding the sustainable use of natural resources and the protection of the environment, without imposing undue financial burdens upon the applicants and with adequate protection of privacy and business confidentiality,\" and \"effective judicial and administrative proceedings\". These principles are present in environmental impact assessment, laws requiring publication and access to relevant environmental data, and administrative procedure.\nParticipating has shown to be more effective when trying to reach a point and use strategic matters for implementing action within policies. Public policies that are managed for sustainability would need financial incentives since the work put into these cases require lots of support and looking into ecological systems. International relations will need a relationship between participating in policy changes and TGI governance involvement. Debates with international relations still occur, focusing on the importance of participating in protecting natural resources by being involved with government policies.\nPrecautionary principle.\nOne of the most commonly encountered and controversial principles of environmental law, the Rio Declaration formulated the precautionary principle as follows:\nIn order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation. The principle may play a role in any debate over the need for environmental regulation.\nPrecautions are done in regards of having higher levels of protection among resources such as human health concerns and conservation for protecting the environment. According to the EU, it has not properly defined the meaning of precautionary principle since it depends on protection of resources and policies implemented. The CJEU expressed the concern of \u201cwhere there is uncertainty as to the existence or extent of human health, the institutions may take protective measures without having to wait until the reality and seriousness of those risks become fully apparent.\" Budgets are proposed for recovering any damages to resources done to communities in relation to water, air, and soil that may be impacted as a result of natural causes such as floods, droughts, hurricanes, and wildfires.\nThe concept of prevention can perhaps better be considered an overarching aim that gives rise to a multitude of legal mechanisms, including prior assessment of environmental harm, licensing or authorization that set out the conditions for operation and the consequences for violation of the conditions, as well as the adoption of strategies and policies. Emission limits and other product or process standards, the use of best available techniques and similar techniques can all be seen as applications of the concept of prevention.\nPrevention is necessary to avoid resources destroyed and the amount of budgeting needed to recover from incidents so communities don't fall apart. Natural disasters are unavoidable by taking action before the incident happens can result in safe evacuations. They can be predicted based on people who had previously encountered with a natural disaster. Prevention from pollution can happen if policies are made to either ban substances or reduce the intake of contaminants in air, water, and soil for healthy conditions. Wildlife can be conserved through foreign aid and taking further action through funding programs that protect against poachers who may be armed and affiliate with an organization.\nPolluter pays principle.\nThe polluter pays principle is the idea that \"the environmental costs of economic activities, including the cost of preventing potential harm, should be internalized rather than imposed upon society at large.\" All issues related to responsibility for cost for environmental remediation and compliance with pollution control regulations involve this principle.\nThe rise of carbon emissions have resulted from corporations and facilities that fail to acknowledge the potential risks of climate change over time. Policies that cause environmental damage needs action done in hopes of preventing harm form happening again. Evidence of harm would need to be shown to see the damages done and how those get resolved. Government regulations may set aside the idea of conserving resources for their own benefit and not acknowledging those suffering from it.\nTheory.\nEnvironmental law is a continuing source of controversy. Debates over the necessity, fairness, and cost of environmental regulation are ongoing, as well as regarding the appropriateness of regulations versus market solutions to achieve even agreed-upon ends.\nAllegations of scientific uncertainty fuel the ongoing debate over greenhouse gas regulation, and are a major factor in debates over whether to ban particular pesticides. In cases where the science is well-settled, it is not unusual to find that corporations intentionally hide or distort the facts, or sow confusion.\nIt is very common for regulated industry to argue against environmental regulation on the basis of cost. Difficulties arise in performing cost\u2013benefit analysis of environmental issues. It is difficult to quantify the value of an environmental value such as a healthy ecosystem, clean air, or species diversity. Many environmentalists' response to pitting economy vs. ecology is summed up by former Senator and founder of Earth Day Gaylord Nelson, \"The economy is a wholly owned subsidiary of the environment, not the other way around.\" Furthermore, environmental issues are seen by many as having an ethical or moral dimension, which would transcend financial cost. Even so, there are some efforts underway to systemically recognize environmental costs and assets, and account for them properly in economic terms.\nWhile affected industries spark controversy in fighting regulation, there are also many environmentalists and public interest groups who believe that current regulations are inadequate, and advocate for stronger protection. Environmental law conferences \u2013 such as the annual Public Interest Environmental Law Conference in Eugene, Oregon \u2013 typically have this focus, also connecting environmental law with class, race, and other issues.\nAn additional debate is to what extent environmental laws are fair to all regulated parties. For instance, researchers Preston Teeter and Jorgen Sandberg highlight how smaller organizations can often incur disproportionately larger costs as a result of environmental regulations, which can ultimately create an additional barrier to entry for new firms, thus stifling competition and innovation.\nInternational environmental law.\nGlobal and regional environmental issues are increasingly the subject of international law. Debates over environmental concerns implicate core principles of international law and have been the subject of numerous international agreements and declarations.\nCustomary international law is an important source of international environmental law. These are the norms and rules that countries follow as a matter of custom and they are so prevalent that they bind all states in the world. When a principle becomes customary law is not clear cut and many arguments are put forward by states not wishing to be bound. Examples of customary international law relevant to the environment include the duty to warn other states promptly about icons of an environmental nature and environmental damages to which another state or states may be exposed, and Principle 21 of the Stockholm Declaration ('good neighborliness' or sic utere).\nGiven that customary international law is not static but ever evolving and the continued increase of air pollution (carbon dioxide) causing climate changes, has led to discussions on whether basic customary principles of international law, such as the jus cogens (peremptory norms) and erga omnes principles could be applicable for enforcing international environmental law.\nNumerous legally binding international agreements encompass a wide variety of issue-areas, from terrestrial, marine and atmospheric pollution through to wildlife and biodiversity protection. International environmental agreements are generally multilateral (or sometimes bilateral) treaties (a.k.a. convention, agreement, protocol, etc.). Protocols are subsidiary agreements built from a primary treaty. They exist in many areas of international law but are especially useful in the environmental field, where they may be used to regularly incorporate recent scientific knowledge. They also permit countries to reach an agreement on a framework that would be contentious if every detail were to be agreed upon in advance. The most widely known protocol in international environmental law is the Kyoto Protocol, which followed from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.\nWhile the bodies that proposed, argued, agreed upon, and ultimately adopted existing international agreements vary according to each agreement, certain conferences, including 1972's United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, 1983's World Commission on Environment and Development, 1992's United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, and 2002's World Summit on Sustainable Development have been particularly important. Multilateral environmental agreements sometimes create an International Organization, Institution or Body responsible for implementing the agreement. Major examples are the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).\nInternational environmental law also includes the opinions of international courts and tribunals. While there are few and they have limited authority, the decisions carry much weight with legal commentators and are quite influential on the development of international environmental law. One of the biggest challenges in international decisions is to determine an adequate compensation for environmental damages. The courts include the International Court of Justice (ICJ), the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), the European Court of Justice, European Court of Human Rights and other regional treaty tribunals.\nPrevious research found that economic development level and the nations' moral value affected environmental regulation compliance. Developed countries like the US, EU, and Australia are urging for better laws targeting the reduction of harmful environmental impacts. It is worth noting that there is a direct correlation between economic development and the distance between law and ethics. Developed countries have a closer relationship between environmental laws and moral values. If a country's legal system is completely divorced from its moral values, people may not abide by the laws and they will lose their significance and effectiveness. Despite environmental regulations, the water in India's River Ganges remains poor as an example.\nAround the world.\nAfrica.\nAccording to the International Network for Environmental Compliance and Enforcement (INECE), the major environmental issues in Africa are \"drought and flooding, air pollution, deforestation, loss of biodiversity, freshwater availability, degradation of soil and vegetation, and widespread poverty.\" The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is focused on the \"growing urban and industrial pollution, water quality, electronic waste and indoor air from cookstoves.\" They hope to provide enough aid on concerns regarding pollution before their impacts contaminate the African environment as well as the global environment. By doing so, they intend to \"protect human health, particularly vulnerable populations such as children and the poor.\" In order to accomplish these goals in Africa, EPA programs are focused on strengthening the ability to enforce environmental laws as well as public compliance to them. Other programs work on developing stronger environmental laws, regulations, and standards.\nAsia.\nThe Asian Environmental Compliance and Enforcement Network (AECEN) is an agreement between 16 Asian countries dedicated to improving cooperation with environmental laws in Asia. These countries include Cambodia, China, Indonesia, India, Maldives, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Nepal, Philippines, Pakistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vietnam, and Lao PDR.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Union issues secondary legislation on environmental issues that are valid throughout the EU (so called regulations) and many directives that must be implemented into national legislation from the 27 member states (national states). Examples are the Regulation (EC) No. 338/97 on the implementation of CITES; or the Natura 2000 network the centerpiece for nature &amp; biodiversity policy, encompassing the bird Directive (79/409/EEC/ changed to 2009/147/EC)and the habitats directive (92/43/EEC). Which are made up of multiple SACs (Special Areas of Conservation, linked to the habitats directive) &amp; SPAs (Special Protected Areas, linked to the bird directive), throughout Europe.\nEU legislation is ruled in Article 249 Treaty for the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). Topics for common EU legislation are:\nIn February 2024, the European Parliament adopted a law making a big, intentionally caused, environmental damage \u201ccomparable to ecocide\u201d a crime that can be punished by up to 10 years in prison. The members of the Union should enter it to their national law, during 2 years. The Parliament also approved a nature restoration law which obligate members to restore 20% of degraded ecosystems (including 30% of drained peatland) by 2030 and 100% by 2050.\nMiddle East.\nEnvironmental law is rapidly growing in the Middle East. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is working with countries in the Middle East to improve \"environmental governance, water pollution and water security, clean fuels and vehicles, public participation, and pollution prevention.\"\nOceania.\nThe main concerns about environmental issues in Oceania are \"illegal releases of air and water pollutants, illegal logging/timber trade, illegal shipment of hazardous wastes, including e-waste and ships slated for destruction, and insufficient institutional structure/lack of enforcement capacity\". The Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Programme (SPREP) is an international organization between Australia, the Cook Islands, FMS, Fiji, France, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, PNG, Samoa, Solomon Island, Tonga, Tuvalu, US, and Vanuatu. The SPREP was established in order to provide assistance in improving and protecting the environment as well as assure sustainable development for future generations.\nAustralia.\n\"Commonwealth v Tasmania\" (1983), also known as the \"Tasmanian Dam Case\", was a highly significant case in Australian environmental law.\nThe \"Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999\" is the centerpiece of environmental legislation in Australia. It sets up the \"legal framework to protect and manage nationally and internationally important flora, fauna, ecological communities and heritage places\" and focuses on protecting world heritage properties, national heritage properties, wetlands of international importance, nationally threatened species and ecological communities, migratory species, Commonwealth marine areas, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, and the environment surrounding nuclear activities. However, it has been subject to numerous reviews examining its shortcomings, the latest taking place in mid-2020. The interim report of this review concluded that the laws created to protect unique species and habitats are ineffective.\nBrazil.\nThe Brazilian government created the Ministry of Environment in 1992 in order to develop better strategies for protecting the environment, using natural resources sustainably, and enforcing public environmental policies. The Ministry of Environment has authority over policies involving environment, water resources, preservation, and environmental programs involving the Amazon.\nCanada.\nThe Department of the Environment Act establishes the Department of the Environment in the Canadian government as well as the position Minister of the Environment. Their duties include \"the preservation and enhancement of the quality of the natural environment, including water, air and soil quality; renewable resources, including migratory birds and other non-domestic flora and fauna; water; meteorology;\" The Environmental Protection Act is the main piece of Canadian environmental legislation that was put into place March 31, 2000. The Act focuses on \"respecting pollution prevention and the protection of the environment and human health in order to contribute to sustainable development.\" Other principle federal statutes include the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, and the Species at Risk Act. When provincial and federal legislation are in conflict federal legislation takes precedence, that being said individual provinces can have their own legislation such as Ontario's Environmental Bill of Rights, and Clean Water Act.\nChina.\nAccording to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, \"China has been working with great determination in recent years to develop, implement, and enforce a solid environmental law framework. Chinese officials face critical challenges in effectively implementing the laws, clarifying the roles of their national and provincial governments, and strengthening the operation of their legal system.\" Explosive economic and industrial growth in China has led to significant environmental degradation, and China is currently in the process of developing more stringent legal controls. The harmonization of Chinese society and the natural environment is billed as a rising policy priority.\nEnvironmental lawsuits have been available in China since the early 2000s.15 Public protest, however, plays a greater role in shaping China's environmental policy than litigation does.15\nCongo (RC).\nIn the Republic of Congo, inspired by the African models of the 1990s, the phenomenon of constitutionalization of environmental law appeared in 1992, which completed an historical development of environmental law and policy dating back to the years of independence and even long before the colonization. It gives a constitutional basis to environmental protection, which traditionally was part of the legal framework. The two Constitutions of 15 March 1992 and 20 January 2002 concretize this paradigm, by stating a legal obligation of a clean environment, by establishing a principle of compensation and a foundation of criminal nature. By this phenomenon, Congolese environmental law is situated between non-regression and the search for efficiency.\"\nEcuador.\nWith the enactment of the 2008 Constitution, Ecuador became the first country in the world to codify the Rights of Nature. The Constitution, specifically Articles 10 and 71\u201374, recognizes the inalienable rights of ecosystems to exist and flourish, gives people the authority to petition on the behalf of ecosystems, and requires the government to remedy violations of these rights. The rights approach is a break away from traditional environmental regulatory systems, which regard nature as property and legalize and manage degradation of the environment rather than prevent it.\nThe Rights of Nature articles in Ecuador's constitution are part of a reaction to a combination of political, economic, and social phenomena. Ecuador's abusive past with the oil industry, most famously the class-action litigation against Chevron, and the failure of an extraction-based economy and neoliberal reforms to bring economic prosperity to the region has resulted in the election of a New Leftist regime, led by President Rafael Correa, and sparked a demand for new approaches to development. In conjunction with this need, the principle of \"Buen Vivir,\" or good living \u2013 focused on social, environmental and spiritual wealth versus material wealth \u2013 gained popularity among citizens and was incorporated into the new constitution.\nThe influence of indigenous groups, from whom the concept of \"Buen Vivir\" originates, in the forming of the constitutional ideals also facilitated the incorporation of the Rights of Nature as a basic tenet of their culture and conceptualization of \"Buen Vivir.\"\nEgypt.\nThe Environmental Protection Law outlines the responsibilities of the Egyptian government to \"preparation of draft legislation and decrees pertinent to environmental management, collection of data both nationally and internationally on the state of the environment, preparation of periodical reports and studies on the state of the environment, formulation of the national plan and its projects, preparation of environmental profiles for new and urban areas, and setting of standards to be used in planning for their development, and preparation of an annual report on the state of the environment to be prepared to the President.\"\nIndia.\nIn India, Environmental law is governed by the Environment Protection Act, 1986. This act is enforced by the Central Pollution Control Board and the numerous State Pollution Control Boards. Apart from this, there are also individual legislation specifically enacted for the protection of Water, Air, Wildlife, etc. Such legislations include :\nJapan.\nThe Basic Environmental Law is the basic structure of Japan's environmental policies replacing the Basic Law for Environmental Pollution Control and the Nature Conservation Law. The updated law aims to address \"global environmental problems, urban pollution by everyday life, loss of accessible natural environment in urban areas and degrading environmental protection capacity in forests and farmlands.\"\nThe three basic environmental principles that the Basic Environmental Law follows are \"the blessings of the environment should be enjoyed by the present generation and succeeded to the future generations, a sustainable society should be created where environmental loads by human activities are minimized, and Japan should contribute actively to global environmental conservation through international cooperation.\"\nFrom these principles, the Japanese government have established policies such as \"environmental consideration in policy formulation, establishment of the Basic Environment Plan which describes the directions of long-term environmental policy, environmental impact assessment for development projects, economic measures to encourage activities for reducing environmental load, improvement of social infrastructure such as sewerage system, transport facilities etc., promotion of environmental activities by corporations, citizens and NGOs, environmental education, and provision of information, promotion of science and technology.\"\nNew Zealand.\nThe Ministry for the Environment and Office of the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment were established by the Environment Act 1986. These positions are responsible for advising the Minister on all areas of environmental legislation. A common theme of New Zealand's environmental legislation is sustainably managing natural and physical resources, fisheries, and forests. The Resource Management Act 1991 is the main piece of environmental legislation that outlines the government's strategy to managing the \"environment, including air, water soil, biodiversity, the coastal environment, noise, subdivision, and land use planning in general.\"\nRussia.\nThe Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of the Russian Federation makes regulation regarding \"conservation of natural resources, including the subsoil, water bodies, forests located in designated conservation areas, fauna and their habitat, in the field of hunting, hydrometeorology and related areas, environmental monitoring and pollution control, including radiation monitoring and control, and functions of public environmental policy making and implementation and statutory regulation.\"\nSingapore.\nSingapore is a signatory of the Convention on Biological Diversity; with most of its CBD obligations being overseen by the National Biodiversity Reference Centre, a division of its National Parks Board (NParks). Singapore is also a signatory of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Animals, with its obligations under that treaty also being overseen by NParks. The Parliament of Singapore has enacted numerous pieces of legislation to fulfil its obligations under these treaties, such as the Parks and Trees Act, Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act, and Wildlife Act. The new Wildlife (Protected Wildlife Species) Rules 2020 marks the first instance in Singapore's history that direct legal protection has been offered for specific named species, as listed in Parts 1-5 of the Rules' schedule.\nVietnam.\nVietnam is currently working with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency on dioxin remediation and technical assistance in order to lower methane emissions. In March 2002, the U.S. and Vietnam signed the U.S.-Vietnam Memorandum of Understanding on Research on Human Health and the Environmental Effects of Agent Orange/Dioxin.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10093", "revid": "12845131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10093", "title": "Eurostar", "text": "High-speed train service in Western Europe\nEurostar is an international high-speed rail service in Western Europe, connecting Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom through the Channel Tunnel.\nThe service is operated by the Eurostar Group which was formed from the merger of Eurostar, which operated trains through the Channel Tunnel to the United Kingdom, and Thalys which operated entirely within continental Europe.\nEurostar transported 19.5million passengers in 2024. The operator is exploring future network expansions and aims to double passenger numbers by 2030.\nHistory.\nConception and planning.\nThe history of the Eurostar brand can be traced to the choice in 1986 of a rail tunnel to provide a cross-channel link between Britain and France. A previous attempt to construct a tunnel between the two nations had begun in 1974, but was quickly aborted. Construction began afresh in 1988. Eurotunnel was created to manage and own the tunnel, which was finished in 1993, the official opening taking place on 6 May 1994.\nIn addition to the tunnel's shuttle trains carrying cars and lorries between Folkestone and Calais, the tunnel opened up the possibility of through passenger and freight train services between places further afield. British Rail and France's SNCF contracted with Eurotunnel to use half the tunnel's capacity for this purpose. In 1987, Britain, France and Belgium set up an International Project Group to specify a train to provide an international high-speed passenger service through the tunnel. France had been operating high-speed TGV services since 1981, and had begun construction of a new high-speed line between Paris and the Channel Tunnel, LGV Nord; French TGV technology was chosen as the basis for the new trains. An order for 30 trainsets, to be manufactured in France but with some British and Belgian components, was placed in December 1989. On 20 June 1993, the first Eurostar test train travelled through the tunnel to the UK. Various technical difficulties in running the new trains on British tracks were quickly overcome.\nLaunch of service.\nOn 14 November 1994, Eurostar services began running from Waterloo International station in London, to Paris Nord, as well as Brussels-South railway station. The train service started with a limited \"Discovery\" service; the full daily service started from 28 May 1995.\nIn 1995, Eurostar was achieving an average end-to-end speed of from London to Paris.\nOn 8 January 1996, Eurostar launched services from a second railway station in the UK when Ashford International was opened.\nAlso in 1996, Eurostar commenced its year-round service from London to Disneyland with the first train running on 29 June. The following year saw the introduction of services to the French Alps during the winter.\nOn 20 July 2002 a summer seasonal service from London to Avignon-Centre was launched. The service ran until 2014 after which it was replaced on 1 May 2015 by an expanded service calling at Avignon TGV and also serving Lyon and Marseille.\nOn 23 September 2003, passenger services began running on the first completed section of High Speed 1. Following a high-profile glamorous opening ceremony and a large advertising campaign, on 14 November 2007, Eurostar services in London transferred from Waterloo to the extended and extensively refurbished London St Pancras International.\nDirect services from London to Amsterdam (returning to Brussels only) were launched on 4 April 2018. This service was made a return service on 26 October 2020.\nRecords achieved.\nThe Channel Tunnel used by Eurostar services holds the record for having the longest underwater section of any tunnel in the world, and it is the third-longest railway tunnel (behind the Seikan Tunnel and the Gotthard Base Tunnel) in the world.\nOn 30 July 2003, a Eurostar train set a new British speed record of on the first section of the \"High Speed 1\" railway between the Channel Tunnel, and Fawkham Junction in north Kent, two months before official public services began running.\nOn 16 May 2006, Eurostar set a new record for the longest non-stop high-speed journey, a distance of from London to Cannes taking 7hours 25minutes.\nOn 4 September 2007, a record-breaking train left Paris Nord at 10:44 (09:44BST) and reached London St Pancras International in 2hours 3minutes 39seconds, carrying journalists and railway workers. This record trip was also the first passenger-carrying arrival at the new London St Pancras International station. On 20 September 2007, Eurostar broke another record when it completed the journey from Brussels to London in 1hour 43minutes.\nRegional Eurostar and Nightstar.\nThe original proposals for Eurostar included direct services to Paris and Brussels from cities north of London: Manchester Piccadilly via Birmingham New Street on the West Coast Main Line and Leeds and Glasgow Central via Edinburgh Waverley, Newcastle and York on the East Coast Main Line.\nSeven 14-coach \"North of London\" Eurostar trains for these Regional Eurostar services were built, but these services never came to fruition. Predicted journey times of almost nine hours for Glasgow to Paris at the time of growth of low-cost air travel during the 1990s made the plans commercially unviable against the cheaper and quicker airlines. Other reasons that have been suggested for these services having never been run were both government policies and the disruptive privatisation of British Rail. Three of the Regional Eurostar units were leased by Great North Eastern Railway (GNER) to increase domestic services from London King's Cross to York and later Leeds. The lease expired in December 2005, and most of the North of London sets were transferred to SNCF for TGV services in northern France.\nAn international Nightstar sleeper train was also planned; this would have travelled the same routes as Regional Eurostar, plus the Great Western Main Line to Cardiff Central. These were also deemed commercially unviable, and the scheme was abandoned with no services ever operated. In 2000, the coaches were sold to Via Rail in Canada.\nMerger with Thalys.\nOn 27 September 2019, the heads of two of Eurostar's major shareholders, Guillaume Pepy of SNCF, and the chair of SNCB, Sophie Dutordoir, publicised that Eurostar was planning to come together with its sister company the Franco-Belgian transnational rail service Thalys. The arrangement is to merge their operations under the working title of \"Green Speed\" and expand services outside the core London-Paris-Brussels-Amsterdam service, to create a grand Western European high-speed rail service covering the UK, France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany, serving up to 30million customers by 2030.\nAs of 2019,[ [update]] Thalys assisted Eurostar with onward connections between Amsterdam and Brussels, and to provide the Amsterdam to London service, in lieu of passport and customs checks at Amsterdam Centraal station.\nIn September 2020, the merger between Thalys and Eurostar International was confirmed, a year after Thalys announced its intention to merge with the cross-Channel provider subject to gaining European Commission clearance, to form \"Green Speed\". SNCF and SNCB already hold a controlling shareholding in Eurostar. In October 2021, it was announced that, following the completion of the merger, the Thalys brand would be discontinued, with all of the new operation's services to be operated under the Eurostar name but with each service's own liveries.\nIn October 2023, the Eurostar brand replaced Thalys, operating as one network and combining ticket sales in a single system.\nCorporate structure.\nEurostar was originally operated as a collaboration of three separate French, British and Belgian corporate entities. On 1 September 2010, Eurostar was incorporated as a single corporate entity, Eurostar International Limited (EIL), replacing the joint operation between EUKL, SNCF and SNCB/NMBS. EIL is ultimately owned by SNCF (55%), Caisse de d\u00e9p\u00f4t et placement du Qu\u00e9bec (CDPQ) (30%), Hermes Infrastructure (10%) and SNCB (5%).\nImpact of COVID-19.\nBy January 2021, Eurostar ridership went down to less than 1% of pre-pandemic levels. The combined financial troubles and lack of ridership caused by the COVID-19 pandemic led to Eurostar seeking governmental assistance from Britain's Treasury and Department for Transport, even though Britain sold its 40% Eurostar holding in 2015. Eurostar's appeal included granting the company access to Bank of England-backed loans and a temporary reduction in track access charges for use of the UK's high-speed rail line. Despite being majority-owned by the French state railway, SNCF, Eurostar was thought to have already exhausted options for governmental assistance from Paris, but both the French transport minister and the UK Department for Transport confirmed they were working on further plans to maintain the service.\nBy the end of 2022, Eurostar had debts of \u20ac964m, following French bailouts and commercial loans. Ridership levels returned to around 8million in 2022, however this figure was still 3million below 2019 levels. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, Eurostar has not served the Ashford International or Ebbsfleet International stations in the UK, or Calais Frethun in France, and has withdrawn its Disneyland Paris and Avignon services, as part of plans to focus on the most profitable routes.\nMainline routes.\nLGV Nord (France).\nThe LGV Nord (, ) is a French high-speed rail line that connects Paris with the HSL 1 at the Belgium\u2013France border and the Channel Tunnel. It opened in 1993. Of all French high-speed lines, LGV Nord sees the widest variety of high-speed rolling stock and is quite busy; a proposed cut-off bypassing Lille, which would reduce Eurostar journey times between Paris and London, is called LGV Picardie.\nChannel Tunnel.\nThe Channel Tunnel is the only rail connection between Great Britain and the European mainland. It joins LGV Nord in France with High Speed 1 in Britain. Tunnelling began in 1988, and the tunnel was officially opened by British sovereign, Elizabeth II, and the French President, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, on 6 May 1994.\nIt is owned by Getlink, which charges a toll to Eurostar for its use. Within the Channel Tunnel, Eurostar trains operate at a reduced speed of for safety reasons.\nSince the launch of Eurostar services, severe disruptions and cancellations have been caused by fires breaking out within the Channel Tunnel, such as in 1996 and 2008.\nHSL 1 (Belgium).\nHSL 1 connects Brussels with the French border. 88\u00a0km (55\u00a0mi) long (71\u00a0km (44\u00a0mi) dedicated high-speed tracks, 17\u00a0km (11\u00a0mi) modernised lines), it began service on 14 December 1997. The line has appreciably shortened rail journeys, the journey from Paris to Brussels now taking 1:22. In combination with the LGV Nord, it has also impacted international journeys to France and London.\nHSL 2 (Belgium).\nHSL 2 runs between Leuven and Ans. 95\u00a0km (59\u00a0mi) long (61\u00a0km (38\u00a0mi) dedicated high-speed tracks, 34\u00a0km (21\u00a0mi) modernised lines) it began service on 15 December 2002. Combined with HSL 3 to the German border, the combined eastward high speed lines have greatly accelerated journeys between Brussels, Paris and Germany.\nHSL 3 (Belgium).\nHSL 3 connects Li\u00e8ge to the German border. 56\u00a0km (35\u00a0mi) long (42\u00a0km (26\u00a0mi) dedicated high-speed tracks, 14\u00a0km (8.7\u00a0mi) modernised lines), it was completed on 15 December 2007, but trains did not start to use it until 14 June 2009. HSL 3 is used by international Eurostar and ICE trains only.\nCologne\u2013Aachen high-speed line.\nThe Cologne\u2013Aachen high-speed line is not a newly built railway line, but a project to upgrade the existing railway line which was opened in 1841 by the Rhenish Railway Company. The line inside Germany has a length of about 70 kilometres (43\u00a0mi). The first 40\u00a0km (25\u00a0mi) from Cologne to D\u00fcren have been rebuilt. Since 2002 the line allows for speeds up to 250\u00a0km/h (155\u00a0mph). Separate tracks have been built parallel to the high-speed tracks for local S-Bahn traffic. The remaining line from D\u00fcren to Aachen allows speeds up to 160\u00a0km/h (100\u00a0mph) with some slower sections.\nHigh Speed 1 (United Kingdom).\nHigh Speed 1, formerly known as the Channel Tunnel Rail Link (CTRL), is a British high-speed rail line that connects London with the Channel Tunnel. It opened in two stages. The first section between the tunnel and north Kent opened in September 2003, cutting journey times by 21minutes. On 14 November 2007, commercial services began over the whole of the High Speed 1 reducing journey times by a further 20minutes. The line's London terminal is London St Pancras International, which was redeveloped for the project.\nHSL-Zuid (Netherlands).\nThe HSL-Zuid (, ), is a Dutch high-speed railway line that connects Amsterdam with the HSL 4 at the Belgium-Netherlands border. It opened on 7 September 2009.\nServices.\nFrequency.\nEurostar offers up to 15 weekday London \u2013 Paris services (19 on Fridays), all services being non-stop. There are also nine (ten on Friday) London\u2013Brussels services, of which two run non-stop (continuing to Amsterdam) and a further two call at Lille only. Four services daily operate to Amsterdam via Brussels and Rotterdam, some calling at Lille. There were also seasonal services: in the winter, \"Snow trains\", aimed at skiers, to Bourg-Saint-Maurice, Aime-la-Plagne and Mo\u00fbtiers in the Alps; these ran weekly, arriving in the alps in the evening and leaving the same evening to arrive in London the following morning. This service was suspended at the time of the COVID-19 pandemic. It resumed for the 2023/24 ski season, but with no direct/through train. Instead, passengers travelling to/from London change to a domestic Eurostar train at Lille-Europe.\nIn February 2018, Eurostar announced the start of its long-planned service from London to Amsterdam, with an initial two trains per day from April of that year running between London St Pancras International and Amsterdam Centraal. This launched as a one-way service, with return trains carrying passengers to Rotterdam and Brussels Midi/Zuid, making a 28-minute stop (which was not deemed long enough to process UK-bound passengers) and then carrying different passengers from Brussels to London. Initially passengers travelling back took a Thalys service to Brussels Midi/Zuid where they could join the Eurostar. This was due to the lack of facilities for juxtaposed controls by the UK Border Force at Amsterdam Centraal and Rotterdam Centraal. On 4 February 2020, the Dutch Minister of Infrastructure and Water Management, Cora van Nieuwenhuizen, and the UK Transport Secretary, Grant Shapps, announced that juxtaposed controls would be established at Amsterdam Centraal and Rotterdam Centraal. The direct train from Amsterdam was originally due to launch on 30 April 2020, and from Rotterdam on 18 May 2020, although it was later postponed to 26 October 2020 for both cities due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nSince 14 November 2007, all Eurostar trains have been routed via High Speed1 to or from the redeveloped London terminus at London St Pancras International, which at a cost of \u00a3800million was extensively rebuilt and extended to cope with long Eurostar trains.\nIt had been intended to retain some Eurostar services at Waterloo International, but this was ruled out on cost grounds.\nCompletion of High Speed1 increased the potential number of trains serving London. Separation of Eurostar from British domestic services through Kent meant that timetabling was no longer affected by peak-hour restrictions.\nFares.\nEurostar's fares were significantly higher in its early years; the cheapest fare in 1994 was \u00a399 return.\nIn 2002, Eurostar was planning cheaper fares, an example of which was an offer of \u00a350-day returns from London to Paris or Brussels.\nBy March 2003, the cheapest fare from the UK was \u00a359 return, available all year around. In June 2009 it was announced that one-way single fares would be available at \u00a331 at the cheapest. Competition between Eurostar and airline services was a large factor in ticket prices being reduced from the initial levels.\nBusiness Premier fares also slightly undercut air fares on similar routes, targeted at regular business travellers.\nIn 2009, Eurostar greatly increased its budget ticket availability to help maintain and grow its dominant market share.\nThe Eurostar ticketing system is very complex, being distributed through no fewer than 48 individual sales systems.\nEurostar is a member of the Amadeus CRS distribution system, making its tickets available alongside those of airlines worldwide.\nEurostar has two sub-classes of first class: Standard Premier and Business Premier; benefits include guaranteed faster checking-in and meals served at-seat, as well as the improved furnishings and interior of carriages.\nThe rebranding is part of Eurostar's marketing drive to attract more business professionals. Increasingly, business people in a group have been chartering private carriages as opposed to individual seats on the train.\nService connections.\nWithout the operation of Regional Eurostar services using the North of London trainsets across the rest of Britain, Eurostar has developed its connections with other transport services instead, such as integrating effectively with traditional UK rail operators' schedules and routes, making it possible for passengers to use Eurostar as a quick connection to further destinations on the continent.\nAll four main terminals used by the Eurostar service \u2013 London St Pancras International, Paris Nord, Brussels-South and Amsterdam Centraal \u2013 are served by domestic trains and by local urban transport networks such as the London Underground, Paris Metro, Brussels Metro and Amsterdam Metro.\nIntegration with other operators.\nStandard Eurostar tickets no longer include free onward connections to or from any other station in Belgium: this is now available for a flat-rate supplement, currently \u00a35.50.\nThrough-tickets.\nEurostar offers a through-ticket to specific destinations by train, that is a single contract for multi leg journeys with certain passenger rights and protections.\nEurostar has announced several partnerships with other rail services,\nmost notably Thalys connections at Lille and Brussels for passengers to go beyond current Eurostar routes towards the Netherlands and Germany.\nIn 2002, Eurostar initiated the Eurostar-Plus program, offering through-tickets for onward journeys from Lille and Paris to dozens of destinations in France.\nThrough-tickets are also available from 68 British towns and cities to destinations in France and Belgium.\nIn May 2009 Eurostar announced that a formal connection to Switzerland had been established in a partnership between Eurostar and Lyria, which will operate TGV services from Lille to the Swiss Alps for Eurostar connection.\nIn May 2019, Eurostar ended its agreement with Deutsche Bahn that allowed passengers to travel on a through-ticket by train from the UK via Brussels to Germany and further to Austria and Switzerland. Under the agreement, passengers could travel on a single through-ticket with passenger rights in case of disruption of one train. However, the through-tickets ceased to be sold from 9 November 2019.\nRailteam.\nEurostar is a member of Railteam, a marketing alliance formed in July 2007 of seven European high-speed rail operators.\nThe alliance plans to allow tickets to be booked from one end of Europe to the other on a single website. In June 2009 London and Continental Railways, and the Eurostar UK operations they held ownership of, became fully nationalised by the UK government.\nAir-rail alliances.\nIn September 2024, Eurostar signed a memorandum of understanding to join SkyTeam as its first non-airline partner. This cooperation will enable integrated intermodal transport (air-rail) in the UK, France and the Netherlands.\nEurostar has a codeshare agreement with KLM\nEurostar has interline agreements with the following airlines: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nControls and security.\nBecause the UK is no longer a member of the European Union and was never part of the Schengen Area, and because the Netherlands, Belgium and France are not part of the Common Travel Area, all cross-channel Eurostar passengers must go through border controls. Both the British Government and the Schengen governments concerned (Belgium, Netherlands and France) have legal obligations to check the travel documents of those entering and leaving their respective countries.\nTo allow passengers to walk off the train without arrival checks in most cases, juxtaposed controls ordinarily take place at the embarkation station.\nTo comply with UK law, there are full security checks similar to those at airports, consisting of bag X-rays and walk-through metal detectors. The recommended check-in time is 90\u2013120minutes except for business class where it is 45\u201360minutes; these are much longer than previously because of extra checks in place due to Brexit and the COVID-19 pandemic.\nEurostar passengers travelling within the Schengen area on trains towards London bypass border checks, and enter the pre-allocated cars at the rear of the train, which are reserved for these passengers. This area is then searched at Lille and all passengers removed. This arrangement was set up after numerous people entered the UK without prior authorisation, by buying a ticket from Brussels to Lille or Calais but remaining on the train until London \u2013 an issue exacerbated by Belgian police threatening to arrest UK Border Agency staff at Brussels-South if they tried to prevent passengers whom they suspected of attempting to exploit this loophole from boarding Eurostar trains. Travel from Calais or Lille towards Brussels and the Netherlands has no border or security control. On 7 July 2020, a modified agreement was signed in Brussels that includes The Netherlands in the previous agreement. This allows for juxtaposed controls in Amsterdam and Rotterdam like those in Brussels and Paris.\nWhen the tripartite agreements were signed, the Belgian Government said that it had serious questions about the compatibility of this agreement with the Schengen Convention and the principle of free movement of people enshrined in various European treaties.\nOn 30 June 2009, Eurostar raised concerns at the UK House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee that it was illegal under French law to collect the information required by the UK government under the e-Borders scheme, and the company would be unable to cooperate.\nOn the northbound Disneyland and ski trains, the security check and French passport check took place at the origin, while the UK passport check took place at the UK arrival stations. These were the only routes where passengers are not cleared by UK border officials before crossing the Channel.\nOn the northbound Marseille-London train, there was no facility for security or passport checks at the southern French stations, so passengers left the train at Lille-Europe, taking all their belongings with them, and underwent security and border checks there before rejoining the train which waited at the station for just over an hour.\nOn several occasions, people have tried to stow away illegally on board the train, sometimes in large groups, trying to enter the UK; border monitoring and security is therefore extremely tight.\nEurostar claims to have good and well-funded security measures.\nOperational performance.\nEurostar's punctuality has fluctuated from year to year, but usually remains over 90%; in the first quarter of 1999, 89% of services operated were on time, and in the second quarter it reached 92%. Eurostar's best punctuality record was 97.35%, between 16 and 22 August 2004. In 2006, it was 92.7%, and in 2007, 91.5% were on time. In the first quarter of 2009, 96% of Eurostar services were punctual, compared with rival air routes' 76%.\nAn advantage held by Eurostar is the convenience and speed of the service: with shorter check-in times than at most airports and hence quicker boarding and less queueing and high punctuality, it takes less time to travel between central London and central Paris by high-speed rail than by air.\nEurostar has a dominant share of the combined rail\u2013air market on a number of its routes, notably its legacy links. On London-Paris, it now has 80-90% of the market, up from 66% in 2004 and 71% in 2007. On London-Brussels, it now has 80% of the market up from 59% in 2004, and 65% in 2007. On the historic Thalys routes, it has a dominant position on Paris-Amsterdam (80%), and had a dominant position on point-to-point journeys between Paris and Brussels/West Germany (80%) as of 2014. This dominant position may shift as competitors enter the market.\nEurostar's passenger numbers initially failed to meet predictions. In 1996, London and Continental Railways forecast that passenger numbers would reach 21.4million annually by 2004, but only 7.3million was achieved. Eighty-two million passengers used Waterloo International Station from its opening in 1994 to its closure in 2007. 2008 was a record year for Eurostar, with a 10.3% rise in passenger use, which was attributed to the use of High Speed 1 and the move to London St Pancras International. The following year, Eurostar saw an 11.5% fall in passenger numbers during the first three months of 2009, attributed to the 2008 Channel Tunnel fire and the Great Recession.\nAs a result of the poor economic conditions, Eurostar received state aid in May 2009 to cancel out some of the accumulated debt from the High Speed 1 construction programme. Later that year, during snowy conditions in the run-up to Christmas, thousands of passengers were left stranded as several trains broke down and many more were cancelled. In an independent review commissioned by Eurostar, the company came in for serious criticism about its handling of the incident and lack of plans for such a scenario.\nIn 2006, the Department for Transport predicted that, by 2037, annual cross-channel passenger numbers would probably reach 16million, considerably less optimistic than London and Continental Railways's original 1996 forecast. In 2007 Eurostar set a target of carrying 10million passengers by 2010.\nThe company cited several factors to support this objective, such as improved journey times, punctuality and station facilities. Passengers in general, it stated, are becoming increasingly aware of the environmental effects of air travel, and Eurostar services emit much less carbon dioxide. and that its remaining carbon emissions are now offset, making its services carbon neutral. Further expansion of the high-speed rail network in Europe, such as the HSL-Zuid line between Belgium and the Netherlands, continues to bring more destinations within rail-competitive range, giving Eurostar the possibility of opening up new services in future.\nThe following chart presents the estimated number of passengers annually transported by the Eurostar service since 1995:\nIn 2019, cumulative ridership since 1994 surpassed 200million. Eurostar transported 19.5million passengers in 2024, the highest ever, surpassing the pre-pandemic high in 2019.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nAwards and accolades.\nEurostar has been hailed as having set new standards in international rail travel and has won praise several times over for its high standards. However, Eurostar had previously struggled with its reputation and brand image. One commentator had defined the situation at the time as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In June 2003, Eurostar was battling to recover from the worst period in its 10-year history. Negative media coverage combined with poor sales and the general public's low opinion of the British rail industry, created a major challenge... Eurostar was finding it difficult to pick itself up from one of the worst periods in its decade-long history. The period post 9/11 had sent the business into a downturn. Passenger numbers were drying up due to worries over international travel. Several management changes had led to a pause in strategy. Punctuality had suffered badly because of wider problems with the UK's rail infrastructure.\nEurostar won the Train Operator of the Year award in the HSBC Rail Awards for 2005. In 2006, Eurostar's Environment Group was set up, with the aim of making changes in the Eurostar services' daily running to decrease negative environmental impact. The organisation set itself a target of reducing carbon emissions per passenger journey by 25% by 2012. Drivers were trained in techniques to achieve maximum energy efficiency, and lighting was minimised; the provider of the bulk of the energy for the Channel Tunnel was switched to nuclear power stations in France. Eurostar's target was to reduce emissions by 35 per cent per passenger journey by 2012, putting itself beyond the efforts of other railway companies in this field and thereby winning the 2007 Network Rail Efficiency Award. In the grand opening ceremony of London St Pancras International, one of the Eurostar trains was given the name 'Tread Lightly', said to symbolise their smaller impact on the environment compared to planes. By 2008, Eurostar's environmental credentials had become highly developed and promoted.\nSince then, Eurostar has received multiple awards. It was declared the Best Train Company in the joint Guardian/Observer Travel Awards 2008 and earned a spot on the Sunday Times' Best Green Companies List (2009). Other awards include: ICARUS' Environmental Award for Best Rail Provider (2009), Guardian &amp; Observer Travel Award for Best Train Company (2009), Travel Weekly's Golden Globes Award for Best Rail Operator (2010), World Travel Market's Responsible Tourism Award for Best Low Carbon Initiative (2011), TNT Magazine's Gold Backpack Award for Favourite Travel Transport (2012), World Travel Awards Europe's Leading Passenger Rail Operator (2011), National Rail Awards Train of the Year (2017), PETA's Travel Award for Best Travel Experience (2019), Mobile Industry Awards' Distributor of the Year (2020).\nEnvironmental initiatives.\nIn 2007, Eurostar said they would become the world's first carbon-neutral train service through its launch of \"Tread Lightly,\" an environmental programme with the goal of reducing the service's carbon-dioxide emissions by 25% by 2012. The programme included: reducing power consumption on its rolling stock; sourcing more electricity from lower-emission generators; adding new controls on lighting, heating, and air conditioning; reducing paper usage via electronic tickets; recycling water and employee uniforms; sourcing all food on board from Britain, France, or Belgium. Eurostar also funded three renewable energy projects in developing regions around the world: a windfarm in Tamil Nadu, India; a micro-hydropower project in China; and a plan specifying improvements on fuel consumption of three-wheeler taxis in Indonesia.\nIn 2019, Eurostar removed all single-use plastics from its trains between London and Paris. Now the trains serve only wooden cutlery, recyclable cans of water, glass wine bottles, paper-based coffee cups, and eco-friendly food packaging. Eurostar partnered with the Woodland Trust, ReforestAction, and Trees for All in 2020, with the goal of planting 20,000 trees each year in woodlands along its routes across the UK, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Since Tread Lightly launched, Eurostar has reduced its carbon footprint by over 40% and now emits up to 90% less greenhouse gas emissions than the equivalent flight.\nBut in 2023 cycle booking was described as \"farcical\".\nDomestic journeys on London services.\nEurostar is not permitted to carry passengers on London services for journeys within one country, so passengers cannot travel (for example) from Lille to Marne-la-Vall\u00e9e\u2013Chessy, London to Ashford, or Rotterdam to Amsterdam on a London service. Lille to Brussels is the only international intra-Schengen journey that Eurostar is offering for sale on London services.\nFleet.\nCurrent fleet.\nEurostar e300.\nBuilt between 1992 and 1996, Eurostar's fleet consisted of 38 EMU trains, designated Class 373 in the United Kingdom and TGV TMST in France. The units have also been branded as the Eurostar e300 by Eurostar since 2015. There are two variants:\nEach train has a unique four-digit number starting with \"3\" (3xxx). This designates the train as a Mark 3 TGV (Mark 1 being SNCF TGV Sud-Est; Mark 2 being SNCF TGV Atlantique). The second digit denotes the country of ownership:\nThe trains are essentially modified TGV sets, and can operate at up to on high-speed lines, and in the Channel Tunnel. It is possible to exceed the 300km/h speed limit, but only with special permission from the safety authorities in the respective country.\nSpeed limits in the Channel Tunnel are dictated by air-resistance, energy (heat) dissipation and the need to be used with other, slower trains. The trains were designed with Channel Tunnel safety in mind, and consist of two independent \"half-sets\" each with its own power car. In the event of a serious fire on board while travelling through the tunnel, passengers would be transferred into the undamaged half of the train, which would then be detached and driven out of the tunnel to safety.\nIf the undamaged part were the rear half of the train, this would be driven by the Chef du Train (conductor), who is a fully authorised driver and occupies the rear driving cab while the train travels through the tunnel for this purpose.\nAs the Class 374 units have entered service the Class 373 fleet has gradually been reduced. Eleven remain in regular service with 17 scrapped and ten in storage.\nFleet updates.\nIn 2004\u20132005 the \"Inter-Capital\" sets still in daily use for international services were refurbished with a new interior designed by Philippe Starck.\nThe original grey-yellow scheme in Standard class and grey-red of First/Premium First were replaced with a grey-brown look in Standard and grey-burnt-orange in First class. Power points were added to seats in First class and coaches 5 and 14 in Standard class. Premium First class was renamed BusinessPremier.\nIn 2008, Eurostar announced that it would be carrying out a mid-life refurbishment of its Class 373 trains to allow the fleet to remain in service beyond 2020.\nThis will include the 28 units making up the Eurostar fleet, but not the three Class 373/1 units used by SNCF or the seven Class 373/2 \"North of London\" sets.\nAs part of the refurbishment, the Italian company Pininfarina was contracted to redesign the interiors, and The Yard Creative was selected to design the new buffet cars.\nOn 11 May 2009 Eurostar revealed the new look for its first-class compartments.\nThe first refurbished train was due in service in 2012, and Eurostar planned to complete the entire process by 2014. On 13 November 2014 Eurostar announced the first refurbished trains would not re-enter the fleet until the 3rd or 4th quarter of 2015 due to delays at the completion centre. The last refurbished \"e300\" eventually re-entered service in April 2019.\nEurostar e320.\nIn addition to the announced mid-life update of the existing Class 373 fleet, Eurostar in 2009 began looking to purchase eight new trainsets. Any new trains would need to meet the same safety rules governing passage through the Channel Tunnel as the existing Class 373 fleet. The replacement to the Class 373 trains has been decided jointly between the French Transport Ministry and the UK Department for Transport. The new trains will be equipped to use the new ERTMS in-cab signalling system, due to be fitted to High Speed 1 around 2040.\nOn 7 October 2010, it was reported that Eurostar had selected Siemens as preferred bidder to supply 10 Siemens Velaro trainsets at a cost of \u20ac600million These would be sixteen-car, self-propelled, trainsets built to meet Channel Tunnel requirements. The top speed of the e320 trainsets is with 902 seats, compared to the e300 fleet which has a top speed of and a seating capacity of 750. Total traction power will be rated at . The e320 trainsets would also be quadri-current, adding the ability to run on the 15\u00a0kV \u200a16.7\u00a0Hz AC system used in Germany, allowing for an expanded route network, including services between London and Cologne.\nThe selection of Siemens would see it break into the French high-speed market for the first time, as all French high-speed operators use TGV derivatives produced by Alstom. Alstom attempted legal action to prevent Eurostar from acquiring the German-built trains, claiming that the Siemens sets would breach Channel Tunnel safety rules, but the case was thrown out by the High Court in London. On 4 November 2010, Alstom lodged a complaint with the European Commission over the tendering process. Alstom then started legal action claiming that the Eurostar tender process was \"ineffective\", the High Court rejected the second suit in July 2011. In April 2012, Alstom said it would call off court actions against Siemens.\nOn 13 November 2014, Eurostar announced the purchase of an additional seven e320s for delivery in the second half of 2016. At the same time, Eurostar announced the first five e320s from the original order of ten would be available by December 2015, with the remaining five entering service by May 2016. Of the five sets ready by December 2015, three of them were planned to be used on London-Paris and London-Brussels routes.\nEurostar Celestia.\nIn May 2024, Eurostar announced its intention to order up to 50 new trains. Although it was speculated that the company would select Alstom\u2019s double-decker Avelia Horizon units, no firm order had been placed at that time.\nIn October 2025, SNCF Voyageurs, acting on behalf of Eurostar, confirmed an order for 30 Avelia Horizon double-decker trainsets with a four-voltage configuration, under its existing framework agreement with Alstom, with options for an additional 20 units. The new fleet will be marketed as \"Eurostar Celestia\", a name chosen by Eurostar staff derived from the Latin \"caelestis\", meaning \u201cheavenly\". The trains will each have 540 seats and are scheduled for delivery by January 2031, with entry into service planned for May 2031.\nIf introduced on services to London, they would represent the first major fleet of double-decker trains to operate in the UK. Eurostar announced its intention to maintain the entire fleet at Temple Mills Depot in London which would be modified at a cost of \u20ac80 million to accommodate these trains, creating around 350 jobs.\nAccidents and incidents.\nA number of technical incidents have affected Eurostar services over the years, but up to the present[ [update]] there has only been one major accident involving a service operated by Eurostar, a derailment in June 2000. Other incidents in the Channel Tunnel \u2013 such as the 1996 and 2008 Channel Tunnel fires \u2013 have affected Eurostar services but were not directly related to Eurostar's operations. However, the breakdowns in the tunnel, which resulted in cessation of service and inconvenience to thousands of passengers, in the run-up to Christmas 2009, proved a public-relations disaster.\n2000.\nOn 5 June 2000, a Eurostar train travelling from Paris to London derailed on the LGV Nord high-speed line while travelling at . Fourteen people were treated for light injuries or shock, with no fatalities or major injuries. The articulated nature of the trainset was credited with maintaining stability during the incident and all of the train stayed upright. The incident was caused by a traction link on the second bogie of the front power car coming loose, leading to components of the transmission system on that bogie impacting the track.\n2009.\nDuring the December 2009 European snowfall, five Eurostar trains broke down inside the Channel Tunnel, after leaving France, and one in Kent on 18 December. Although the trains had been winterised, the systems had not coped with the conditions. Over 2,000passengers were stuck inside failed trains inside the tunnel, and over 75,000 had their services disrupted. All Eurostar services were cancelled from Saturday 19 December to Monday 21 December 2009. An independent review, published on 12 February 2010, was critical of the contingency plans in place for assisting passengers stranded by the delays, calling them \"insufficient\".\nFuture developments.\nEurostar expansion.\nEurostar and Thalys merged in 2023, with the intention to double combined passenger numbers from 14.8million to 30million.\nIn an interview with Eurostar's former Chief Executive Nicolas Petrovic in the \"Financial Times\" in May 2012, an intention for cross-Channel Eurostar to serve ten new destinations was expressed, including Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Cologne, Lyon, Marseille and Geneva, along with a likely second hub to be created in Brussels. London-Amsterdam services launched in 2018.\nIn 2025, Eurostar announced that the purchase of 50 new trains would also allow for the creation of new routes by the early 2030s, including direct services from London to Frankfurt, from London to Geneva, and from Amsterdam/Brussels to Geneva.\nIn March 2016, in an interview with Bloomberg, Eurostar's Chief Executive expressed interest in operating a direct train service between London and Bordeaux. Journey time was said to be around 4.5hours using the new LGV Sud Europe Atlantique.\nOperational difficulties with UK\u2013Schengen trains.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We know we can go to most places in France physically, because our trains are compatible with French infrastructure, but then you've got to look at impact on fleet utilisation, you've got to have a station that's got the spare capacity to have a train stood for a number of hours, for all the security, screening, passport control passes. So it's not possible to go just anywhere. And you've got to be able to get the control authorities to agree that there's a big enough market for it to be worthwhile for them to set up there.\"\nThe e320 trains allow Eurostar the possibility of London to Germany services in the future, but implementing such new services is complex. The UK is neither part of the Schengen Agreement, which allows unrestricted movement across borders of member countries, nor a member of the EU. This means that travellers between the UK and EU must pass through full border identification, visa and customs controls for their departure and arrival countries, while travellers between stations within the Schengen area do not. The logistics of providing space and time for these controls while conforming to the requirements of free travel within the Schengen area makes implementing new services operationally complex. The \"Lille loophole\" solution requires Eurostar customers travelling from Brussels to Lille to be segregated and guarded from other passengers for their journey. Similarly, when the Amsterdam to London route began, it was direct in only one direction: passengers had to disembark in Brussels to go through the juxtaposed controls. The direct connection was subject to talks between the UK and Dutch governments, and juxtaposed controls buildings were constructed on platforms at Amsterdam Centraal and Rotterdam Centraal, opening on 26 October 2020. These were both closed on 15 June 2024 and are planned to remain closed until 9 February 2025 due to major track works at Amsterdam Centraal. Eurostar stated direct Rotterdam to London services could not be maintained due to the much smaller customs facility at Rotterdam, leaving around 760 of the 902 seats on each train empty.\nThe difficulties that Eurostar faces in expanding its services between the UK and the EU would also be faced by any potential competitors to Eurostar. Trains must use platforms that are physically isolated, a constraint which other intra-EU operators do not face. In addition, the British authorities are required to make security and passport checks on passengers before they board the train, which might deter domestic passengers. Compounding the difficulties in providing a similar service are the Channel Tunnel safety rules, the major ones being the \"half-train rule\" and the \"length rule\". The \"half-train rule\" stipulated that passenger trains had to be able to split in an emergency. Class 373 trains were designed as two half-sets, which when coupled form a complete train, enabling them to be split easily in the event of an emergency while in the tunnel, with the unaffected set able to be driven out. The half-train rule was finally abolished in May 2010. However, the \"length rule\", which states that passenger trains must be at least long with a through corridor (to match the distance between the safety doors in the tunnel), was retained, preventing any potential operators from applying to run services with existing fleets, as the majority of both TGV and ICE trains are only long.\nCompetition.\nFollowing the liberalisation of international rail travel by European Union directives in 2010, various operators have announced proposals for competition with Eurostar.\nDeutsche Bahn (DB) intended to run services between London to Frankfurt and Amsterdam (two of the biggest air travel markets in Europe), with trains 'splitting &amp; joining' in Brussels. In July 2010, DB announced that it intended to make a test run with a high-speed ICE-3MF train through the Channel Tunnel in October 2010 in preparation for possible future operations. The trial ran on 19 October 2010 with a Class 406 ICE train specially liveried with a British \"Union flag\" decal. The train was then put on display for the press at London St Pancras International. However, this was not the class of train planned for the proposed service, instead proposing to use Class 407 ICE units, specially adapted for stronger Channel Tunnel safety standards.\nDB scrapped the plan, mainly due to advance passport check requirements. DB had hoped that immigration checks could be done on board, but British authorities required immigration and security checks to be done at Lille-Europe station, taking at least 30minutes.\nIn 2021, Renfe, the national operator of Spain announced it was proposing competing London to Paris services. In 2022, Getlink, the owner of the Channel Tunnel had reportedly considered purchasing trains suitable for competing services, leasing them to rival operations, while in 2023, Mobico Group, the owner of National Express has also been reported to be considering cross-Channel services named 'Evolyn'.\nFrom August 2024 to March 2025, the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) solicited final proposals on whether competition should be added through the Channel Tunnel, with Eurostar, Virgin Trains Europe, Evolyn, Gemini, and Trenitalia submitting plans. On 30 October 2025, ORR announced that there was enough maintenance space at Temple Mills Depot to allow a second competitor to run through the Channel Tunnel, and it had approved \"Virgin Trains Europe\" to begin operations within the next five years.\nLong term possibilities.\nStratford International station.\nEurostar trains do not currently call at Stratford International, which was intended to be a London stop for the regional Eurostars when the station was constructed. This was to be reviewed following the 2012 Olympics. However, in 2013, Eurostar claimed that its 'business would be hit' by stopping trains there.\nRegional Eurostar.\nAlthough the original plan for Regional Eurostar services to destinations north of London was abandoned, the significantly improved journey times available since the opening of High Speed 1 \u2014 which is physically connected to both the East Coast Main Line and the North London Line (for the West Coast Main Line) at London St Pancras International \u2013 and the increased maximum speeds on the West Coast Main Line since the 2000s may make potential Regional Eurostar services more commercially viable. This would be even more likely if proposals are adopted for a new high-speed line from London to the north of Britain.\nSimon Montague, Eurostar's Director of Communications, commented that: \"...International services to the regions are only likely once High Speed 2 is built.\" However, as of 2014 the current plans for High Speed 2 do not allow for a direct rail link between that new line and High Speed 1, meaning passengers would still be required to change at London Euston and take some form of transportation to London St Pancras.\nKey pieces of infrastructure still belong to LCR via its subsidiary London &amp; Continental Stations and Property, such as the Manchester International Depot, and Eurostar (UK) still owns several track access rights and the rights to paths on both the East Coast Main Line and the West Coast Main Line.\nWhile no announcement has been made of plans to start Regional Eurostar services, it remains a possibility for the future. In the meantime, the closest equivalent to Regional Eurostar services are same-station connections with East Midlands Railway and Thameslink, changing at London St Pancras. The construction of a new concourse at the adjacent London King's Cross improved interchange with London St Pancras and provided London North Eastern Railway, Great Northern, Hull Trains and Grand Central services with easier connections to Eurostar.\nLGV Picardie.\nLGV Picardie is a proposed high-speed line between Paris and Calais via Amiens. By cutting off the corner of the LGV Nord at Lille, it would enable Eurostar trains to save 20minutes on the journey between Paris and Calais, bringing the London\u2013Paris journey time under 2hours. In 2008, the French Government announced its future investment plans for new LGVs to be built up to 2020; LGV Picardie was not included but was listed as planned in the longer term.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10094", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10094", "title": "Eurostar train", "text": ""}
{"id": "10100", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10100", "title": "Equinox", "text": "Semi-annual astronomical event where the Sun is directly above the Earth's equator\nA solar equinox is a moment in time when the Sun appears directly above the equator, rather than to its north or south. On the day of the equinox, the Sun appears to rise directly east and set directly west. This occurs twice each year, around 20 March and 23 September.\nAn equinox is equivalently defined as the time when the plane of Earth's equator passes through the geometric center of the Sun's disk. This is also the moment when Earth's rotation axis is directly perpendicular to the Sun-Earth line, tilting neither toward nor away from the Sun. In modern times, since the Moon (and to a lesser extent the planets) causes Earth's orbit to vary slightly from a perfect ellipse, the equinox is officially defined by the Sun's more regular ecliptic longitude rather than by its declination. The instants of the equinoxes are currently defined to be when the apparent geocentric longitude of the Sun is 0\u00b0 and 180\u00b0.\nThe word is derived from the Latin ', from ' (equal) and \"\" (night). On the day of an equinox, daytime and nighttime are of approximately equal duration all over the planet. Contrary to popular belief, they are not exactly equal because of the angular size of the Sun, atmospheric refraction, and the rapidly changing duration of the length of day that occurs at most latitudes around the equinoxes. Long before conceiving this equality, equatorial cultures noted the day when the Sun rises due east and sets due west, and indeed this happens on the day closest to the astronomically defined event. As a consequence, according to a properly constructed and aligned sundial, the daytime duration is 12 hours.\nIn the Northern Hemisphere, the March equinox is called the vernal or spring equinox while the September equinox is called the autumnal or fall equinox. In the Southern Hemisphere, the reverse is true. During the year, equinoxes alternate with solstices. Leap years and other factors cause the dates of both events to vary slightly.\nHemisphere-neutral names are \"northward equinox\" for the March equinox, indicating that at that moment the solar declination is crossing the celestial equator in a northward direction, and \"southward equinox\" for the September equinox, indicating that at that moment the solar declination is crossing the celestial equator in a southward direction.\nDaytime is increasing at the fastest at the vernal equinox and decreasing at the fastest at the autumnal equinox.\nEquinoxes on Earth.\nGeneral.\nSystematically observing the sunrise, people discovered that it occurs between two extreme locations at the horizon and eventually noted the midpoint between the two. Later it was realized that this happens on a day when the duration of the day and the night are practically equal and the word \"equinox\" comes from Latin \"aequus\", meaning \"equal\", and \"nox\", meaning \"night\".\nIn the northern hemisphere, the \"vernal equinox\" (March) conventionally marks the beginning of spring in most cultures and is considered the start of the New Year in the Assyrian calendar, Hindu, and the Persian or Iranian calendars, while the \"autumnal equinox\" (September) marks the beginning of autumn. Ancient Greek calendars too had the beginning of the year either at the autumnal or vernal equinox and some at solstices. The Antikythera mechanism predicts the equinoxes and solstices.\nThe equinoxes are the only times when the solar terminator (the \"edge\" between night and day) is perpendicular to the equator. As a result, the northern and southern hemispheres are equally illuminated.\nFor the same reason, this is also the time when the Sun rises for an observer at one of Earth's rotational poles and sets at the other. For a brief period lasting approximately four days, both North and South Poles are in daylight. For example, in 2021 sunrise on the North Pole is 18 March 07:09 UTC, and sunset on the South Pole is 22 March 13:08 UTC. Also in 2021, sunrise on the South Pole is 20 September 16:08 UTC, and sunset on the North Pole is 24 September 22:30 UTC.\nIn other words, the equinoxes are the only times when the subsolar point is on the equator, meaning that the Sun is exactly overhead at a point on the equatorial line. The subsolar point crosses the equator moving northward at the March equinox and southward at the September equinox.\nDate.\nWhen Julius Caesar established the Julian calendar in 45\u00a0BC, he set 25\u00a0March as the date of the spring equinox; this was already the starting day of the year in the Persian and Indian calendars. Because the Julian year is longer than the tropical year by about 11.3\u00a0minutes on average (or 1\u00a0day in 128\u00a0years), the calendar \"drifted\" with respect to the two equinoxes \u2013 so that in 300\u00a0AD the spring equinox occurred on about 21\u00a0March, and by the 1580s\u00a0AD it had drifted backwards to 11\u00a0March.\nThis drift induced Pope Gregory XIII to establish the modern Gregorian calendar. The Pope wanted to continue to conform with the edicts of the Council of Nicaea in 325\u00a0AD concerning the date of Easter, which means he wanted to move the vernal equinox to the date on which it fell at that time (21\u00a0March is the day allocated to it in the Easter table of the Julian calendar), and to maintain it at around that date in the future, which he achieved by reducing the number of leap years from 100 to 97 every 400\u00a0years. However, there remained a small residual variation in the date and time of the vernal equinox of about \u00b127\u00a0hours from its mean position, virtually all because the distribution of 24\u00a0hour centurial leap-days causes large jumps (see ).\nModern dates.\nThe dates of the equinoxes change progressively during the leap-year cycle, because the Gregorian calendar year is not commensurate with the period of the Earth's revolution about the Sun. It is only after a complete Gregorian leap-year cycle of 400\u00a0years that the seasons commence at approximately the same time. In the 21st\u00a0century the earliest March equinox will be 19\u00a0March 2096, while the latest was 21\u00a0March 2003. The earliest September equinox will be 21\u00a0September 2096 while the latest was 23\u00a0September 2003 (Universal Time).\nLength of equinoctial day and night.\nOn the date of the equinox, the center of the Sun spends a roughly equal amount of time above and below the horizon at every location on the Earth, so night and day are about the same length. Sunrise and sunset can be defined in several ways, but a widespread definition is the time that the top limb of the Sun is level with the horizon. With this definition, the day is longer than the night at the equinoxes:\nIn sunrise/sunset tables, the atmospheric refraction is assumed to be 34\u00a0arcminutes, and the assumed semidiameter (apparent radius) of the Sun is 16\u00a0arcminutes. (The apparent radius varies slightly depending on time of year, slightly larger at perihelion in January than aphelion in July, but the difference is comparatively small.) Their combination means that when the upper limb of the Sun is on the visible horizon, its centre is 50\u00a0arcminutes below the geometric horizon, which is the intersection with the celestial sphere of a horizontal plane through the eye of the observer.\nThese effects make the day about 14\u00a0minutes longer than the night at the equator and longer still towards the poles. The real equality of day and night only happens in places far enough from the equator to have a seasonal difference in day length of at least 7\u00a0minutes, actually occurring a few days towards the winter side of each equinox. One result of this is that, at latitudes below \u00b12.0 degrees, all the days of the year are longer than the nights. \nThe times of sunset and sunrise vary with the observer's location (longitude and latitude), so the dates when day and night are equal also depend upon the observer's location.\nA third correction for the visual observation of a sunrise (or sunset) is the angle between the apparent horizon as seen by an observer and the geometric (or sensible) horizon. This is known as the dip of the horizon and varies from 3\u00a0arcminutes for a viewer standing on the sea shore to 160\u00a0arcminutes for a mountaineer on Everest. The effect of a larger dip on taller objects (reaching over 2\u00bd\u00b0 of arc on Everest) accounts for the phenomenon of snow on a mountain peak turning gold in the sunlight long before the lower slopes are illuminated.\nThe date on which the length of day and night are exactly the same is known as an \"equilux\"; the neologism, believed to have been coined in the 1980s, achieved more widespread recognition in the 21st\u00a0century. At the most precise measurements, a true equilux is rare, because the lengths of day and night change more rapidly than any other time of the year around the equinoxes. In the mid-latitudes, daylight increases or decreases by about three minutes per day at the equinoxes, and thus adjacent days and nights only reach within one minute of each other. The date of the closest approximation of the equilux varies slightly by latitude; in the mid-latitudes, it occurs a few days before the spring equinox and after the fall equinox in each respective hemisphere.\nUnequal intervals between equinoxes.\nBecause the movement of the Earth on its orbit obeys Kepler's laws of planetary motion, the interval from March equinox to September equinox is about 186 days, while the interval from September equinox to March equinox is about 179 days, which makes the polar day at the North Pole about 7 days longer than that at the South Pole. \nAuroras.\nMirror-image conjugate auroras have been observed during the equinoxes.\nCultural aspects.\nThe equinoxes are sometimes regarded as the start of spring and autumn. A number of traditional harvest festivals are celebrated on the date of the equinoxes.\nPeople in a large part of the former Persian Empire, in Iran, Afghanistan, Tajikistan and most of the Central Asia, celebrate the Persian new year, Nowruz, which is spring equinox in northern hemisphere. This day marks the new year in Solar Hijri calendar. \nReligious architecture is often determined by the equinox; the Angkor Wat Equinox during which the sun rises in a perfect alignment over Angkor Wat in Cambodia is one such example.\nCatholic churches, since the recommendations of Charles Borromeo, have often chosen the equinox as their reference point for the orientation of churches.\nEffects on satellites.\nOne effect of equinoctial periods is the temporary disruption of communications satellites. For all geostationary satellites, there are a few days around the equinox when the Sun goes directly behind the satellite relative to Earth (i.e. within the beam-width of the ground-station antenna) for a short period each day. The Sun's immense power and broad radiation spectrum overload the Earth station's reception circuits with noise and, depending on antenna size and other factors, temporarily disrupt or degrade the circuit. The duration of those effects varies but can range from a few minutes to an hour. (For a given frequency band, a larger antenna has a narrower beam-width and hence experiences shorter duration \"Sun outage\" windows.)\nSatellites in geostationary orbit also experience difficulties maintaining power during the equinox because they have to travel through Earth's shadow and rely only on battery power. Usually, a satellite travels either north or south of the Earth's shadow because Earth's axis is not directly perpendicular to a line from the Earth to the Sun at other times. During the equinox, since geostationary satellites are situated above the Equator, they are in Earth's shadow for the longest duration all year.\nEquinoxes on other planets.\nEquinoxes are defined on any planet with a tilted rotational axis. A dramatic example is Saturn, where the equinox places its ring system edge-on facing the Sun. When seen from above \u2013 a view seen during an equinox for the first time from the \"Cassini\" space probe in 2009 \u2013 they receive very little sunshine; indeed, they receive more planetshine than light from the Sun. This phenomenon occurs once every 14.7\u00a0years on average, and can last a few weeks before and after the exact equinox. Saturn's most recent equinox was on 6\u00a0May 2025.\nMars's most recent equinoxes were on 12\u00a0January 2024 (northern autumn), and on 26\u00a0December 2022 (northern spring).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10101", "revid": "51017858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10101", "title": "Eugene Wigner", "text": "Hungarian-American physicist and mathematician (1902\u20131995)\nEugene Paul Wigner (, ; November 17, 1902 \u2013 January 1, 1995) was a Hungarian-American theoretical physicist who also contributed to mathematical physics. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 \"for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles\".\nA graduate of the Technical Hochschule Berlin (now Technische Universit\u00e4t Berlin), Wigner worked as an assistant to Karl Weissenberg and Richard Becker at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin, and David Hilbert at the University of G\u00f6ttingen. Wigner and Hermann Weyl were responsible for introducing group theory into physics, particularly the theory of symmetry in physics. Along the way he performed ground-breaking work in pure mathematics, in which he authored a number of mathematical theorems. In particular, Wigner's theorem is a cornerstone in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. He is also known for his research into the structure of the atomic nucleus. In 1930, Princeton University recruited Wigner, along with John von Neumann, and he moved to the United States, where he obtained citizenship in 1937.\nWigner participated in a meeting with Leo Szilard and Albert Einstein that resulted in the Einstein\u2013Szilard letter, which prompted President Franklin D. Roosevelt to authorize the creation of the Advisory Committee on Uranium with the purpose of investigating the feasibility of nuclear weapons. Wigner was afraid that the German nuclear weapon project would develop an atomic bomb first. During the Manhattan Project, he led a team whose task was to design nuclear reactors to convert uranium into weapons grade plutonium. At the time, reactors existed only on paper, and no reactor had yet gone critical. Wigner was disappointed that DuPont was given responsibility for the detailed design of the reactors, not just their construction. He became director of research and development at the Clinton Laboratory (now the Oak Ridge National Laboratory) in early 1946, but became frustrated with bureaucratic interference by the Atomic Energy Commission, and returned to Princeton.\nIn the postwar period, he served on government bodies, including the National Bureau of Standards from 1947 to 1951, the mathematics panel of the National Research Council from 1951 to 1954, the physics panel of the National Science Foundation, and the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1952 to 1957 and again from 1959 to 1964. In later life, he became more philosophical, and published \"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences\", his best-known work outside technical mathematics and physics.\nEarly life and education.\nWigner Jen\u0151 P\u00e1l was born in Budapest, Austria-Hungary on November 17, 1902, to middle class Jewish parents, Elisabeth Elsa Einhorn and Antal Anton Wigner, a leather tanner. He had an elder sister, Berta, known as Biri, and a younger sister Margit, known as Manci, who later married British theoretical physicist Paul Dirac. He was home schooled by a professional teacher until the age of nine, when he started school at the third grade. During this period, Wigner developed an interest in mathematical problems. At the age of 11, Wigner contracted what his doctors believed to be tuberculosis. His parents sent him to live for six weeks in a sanatorium in the Austrian mountains, before the doctors concluded that the diagnosis was mistaken.\nWigner's family was Jewish, but not religiously observant, and his Bar Mitzvah was a secular one. From 1915 through 1919, he studied at the secondary grammar school called Fasori Evang\u00e9likus Gimn\u00e1zium, the school his father had attended. Religious education was compulsory, and he attended classes in Judaism taught by a rabbi. A fellow student was J\u00e1nos von Neumann, who was a year behind Wigner. They both benefited from the instruction of the noted mathematics teacher L\u00e1szl\u00f3 R\u00e1tz. In 1919, to escape the B\u00e9la Kun communist regime, the Wigner family briefly fled to Austria, returning to Hungary after Kun's downfall. Partly as a reaction to the prominence of Jews in the Kun regime, the family converted to Lutheranism. Wigner explained later in his life that his family decision to convert to Lutheranism \"was not at heart a religious decision but an anti-communist one\".\nAfter graduating from the secondary school in 1920, Wigner enrolled at the Budapest University of Technical Sciences, known as the \"M\u0171egyetem\". He was not happy with the courses on offer, and in 1921 enrolled at the \"Technische Hochschule Berlin\" (now Technische Universit\u00e4t Berlin), where he studied chemical engineering. He also attended the Wednesday afternoon colloquia of the German Physical Society. These colloquia featured leading researchers including Max Planck, Max von Laue, Rudolf Ladenburg, Werner Heisenberg, Walther Nernst, Wolfgang Pauli, and Albert Einstein. Wigner also met the physicist Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd, who at once became Wigner's closest friend. A third experience in Berlin was formative. Wigner worked at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry (now the Fritz Haber Institute), and there he met Michael Polanyi, who became, after R\u00e1tz, Wigner's greatest teacher. Polanyi supervised Wigner's DSc thesis, \"Bildung und Zerfall von Molek\u00fclen\" (\"Formation and Decay of Molecules\").\nMiddle years.\nWigner returned to Budapest, where he went to work at his father's tannery, but in 1926, he accepted an offer from Karl Weissenberg at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Berlin. Weissenberg wanted someone to assist him with his work on X-ray crystallography, and Polanyi had recommended Wigner. After six months as Weissenberg's assistant, Wigner went to work for Richard Becker for two semesters. Wigner explored quantum mechanics, studying the work of Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger. He also delved into the group theory of Ferdinand Frobenius and Eduard Ritter von Weber.\nWigner received a request from Arnold Sommerfeld to work at the University of G\u00f6ttingen as an assistant to the great mathematician David Hilbert. This proved a disappointment, as the aged Hilbert's abilities were failing, and his interests had shifted to logic. Wigner nonetheless studied independently. He laid the foundation for the theory of symmetries in quantum mechanics and in 1927 introduced what is now known as the Wigner D-matrix. Wigner and Hermann Weyl were responsible for introducing group theory into quantum mechanics. The latter had written a standard text, \"Group Theory and Quantum Mechanics\" (1928), but it was not easy to understand, especially for younger physicists. Wigner's \"Group Theory and Its Application to the Quantum Mechanics of Atomic Spectra\" (1931) made group theory accessible to a wider audience.\nIn these works, Wigner laid the foundation for the theory of symmetries in quantum mechanics. Wigner's theorem, proven by him in 1931, is a cornerstone of the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics. The theorem specifies how physical symmetries such as rotations, translations, and CPT symmetry are represented on the Hilbert space of states. According to the theorem, any symmetry transformation is represented by a linear and unitary or antilinear and antiunitary transformation of Hilbert space. The representation of a symmetry group on a Hilbert space is either an ordinary representation or a projective representation.\nIn the late 1930s, Wigner extended his research into atomic nuclei. By 1929, his papers were drawing notice in the world of physics. In 1930, Princeton University recruited Wigner for a one-year lectureship, at 7 times the salary that he had been drawing in Europe. Princeton recruited von Neumann at the same time. Jen\u0151 P\u00e1l Wigner and J\u00e1nos von Neumann had collaborated on three papers together in 1928 and two in 1929. They anglicized their first names to \"Eugene\" and \"John\", respectively. When their year was up, Princeton offered a five-year contract as visiting professors for half the year. The Technische Hochschule responded with a teaching assignment for the other half of the year. This was very timely, since the Nazis soon rose to power in Germany. At Princeton in 1934, Wigner introduced his sister Margit \"Manci\" Wigner to the physicist Paul Dirac, with whom she remarried.\nPrinceton did not rehire Wigner when his contract ran out in 1936. Through Gregory Breit, Wigner found new employment at the University of Wisconsin. There, he met his first wife, Amelia Frank, who was a physics student there. However, she died unexpectedly in 1937, leaving Wigner distraught. He therefore accepted an offer in 1938 from Princeton to return there. Wigner became a naturalized citizen of the United States on January 8, 1937, and he brought his parents to the United States.\nManhattan Project.\nAlthough he was a professed political amateur, on August 2, 1939, he participated in a meeting with Le\u00f3 Szil\u00e1rd and Albert Einstein that resulted in the Einstein\u2013Szil\u00e1rd letter, which prompted President Franklin D. Roosevelt to authorize the creation of the Advisory Committee on Uranium with the purpose of investigating the feasibility of atomic bombs. Wigner was afraid that the German nuclear weapon project would develop an atomic bomb first, and even refused to have his fingerprints taken because they could be used to track him down if Germany won. \"Thoughts of being murdered,\" he later recalled, \"focus your mind wonderfully.\"\nOn June 4, 1941, Wigner married his second wife, Mary Annette Wheeler, a professor of physics at Vassar College, who had completed her Ph.D. at Yale University in 1932. After the war she taught physics on the faculty of Rutgers University's Douglass College in New Jersey until her retirement in 1964. They remained married until her death in November 1977. They had two children, David Wigner and Martha Wigner Upton.\nDuring the Manhattan Project, Wigner led a team that included J. Ernest Wilkins Jr., Alvin M. Weinberg, Katharine Way, Gale Young and Edward Creutz. The group's task was to design the production nuclear reactors that would convert uranium into weapons grade plutonium. At the time, reactors existed only on paper, and no reactor had yet gone critical. In July 1942, Wigner chose a conservative 100 MW design, with a graphite neutron moderator and water cooling. Wigner was present at a converted rackets court under the stands at the University of Chicago's abandoned Stagg Field on December 2, 1942, when the world's first atomic reactor, Chicago Pile One (CP-1) achieved a controlled nuclear chain reaction.\nWigner was disappointed that DuPont was given responsibility for the detailed design of the reactors, not just their construction. He threatened to resign in February 1943, but was talked out of it by the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory, Arthur Compton, who sent him on vacation instead. As it turned out, a design decision by DuPont to give the reactor additional load tubes for more uranium saved the project when neutron poisoning became a problem. Without the additional tubes, the reactor could have been run at 35% power until the boron impurities in the graphite were burned up and enough plutonium produced to run the reactor at full power; but this would have set the project back a year. During the 1950s, he would even work for DuPont on the Savannah River Site. Wigner did not regret working on the bomb, remarking:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In fact, my regret is that it was not done sooner. If we had begun trying seriously to control fission in 1939, we might have had an atomic bomb by the Winter of 1943-1944. At that time Stalin's army was still bottled up in Stalingrad. By the middle of 1945, when we first used the bomb, they had already overrun much of Central Europe. The Yalta Conference would have produced a document much less favourable to Russia, and even Communist China might have been set back. So I do not regret helping to build the bomb.\nAn important discovery Wigner made during the project was the Wigner effect. This is a swelling of the graphite moderator caused by the displacement of atoms by neutron radiation. The Wigner effect was a serious problem for the reactors at the Hanford Site in the immediate post-war period, and resulted in production cutbacks and a reactor being shut down entirely. It was eventually discovered that it could be overcome by controlled heating and annealing.\nThrough Manhattan project funding, Wigner and Leonard Eisenbud also developed an important general approach to nuclear reactions, the Wigner\u2013Eisenbud R-matrix theory, which was published in 1947.\nLater years.\nWigner was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1944 and the United States National Academy of Sciences in 1945. He accepted a position as the director of research and development at the Clinton Laboratory (now the Oak Ridge National Laboratory) in Oak Ridge, Tennessee in early 1946. Because he did not want to be involved in administrative duties, he became co-director of the laboratory, with James Lum handling the administrative chores as executive director. When the newly created Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) took charge of the laboratory's operations at the start of 1947, Wigner feared that many of the technical decisions would be made in Washington. He also saw the Army's continuation of wartime security policies at the laboratory as a \"meddlesome oversight\", interfering with research. One such incident occurred in March 1947, when the AEC discovered that Wigner's scientists were conducting experiments with a critical mass of uranium-235 when the director of the Manhattan Project, Major General Leslie R. Groves, Jr., had forbidden such experiments in August 1946 after the death of Louis Slotin at the Los Alamos Laboratory. Wigner argued that Groves's order had been superseded, but was forced to terminate the experiments, which were completely different from the one that killed Slotin.\nFeeling unsuited to a managerial role in such an environment, he left Oak Ridge in 1947 and returned to Princeton University, although he maintained a consulting role with the facility for many years. In the postwar period, he served on a number of government bodies, including the National Bureau of Standards from 1947 to 1951, the mathematics panel of the National Research Council from 1951 to 1954, the physics panel of the National Science Foundation, and the influential General Advisory Committee of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1952 to 1957 and again from 1959 to 1964. He also contributed to civil defense.\nWigner was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1950.\nNear the end of his life, Wigner's thoughts turned more philosophical. In 1960, he published a now classic article on the philosophy of mathematics and of physics, which has become his best-known work outside technical mathematics and physics, \"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences\". He argued that biology and cognition could be the origin of physical concepts, as we humans perceive them, and that the happy coincidence that mathematics and physics were so well matched, seemed to be \"unreasonable\" and hard to explain. His original paper has provoked and inspired many responses across a wide range of disciplines. These included Richard Hamming in Computer Science, Arthur Lesk in Molecular Biology, Peter Norvig in data mining, Max Tegmark in Physics, Ivor Grattan-Guinness in Mathematics, and Vela Velupillai in Economics.\nTurning to philosophical questions about the theory of quantum mechanics, Wigner developed a thought experiment (later called Wigner's Friend paradox) to illustrate his belief that consciousness is foundational to the quantum mechanical measurement process. He thereby followed an ontological approach that sets human's consciousness at the center: \"All that quantum mechanics purports to provide are probability connections between subsequent impressions (also called 'apperceptions') of the consciousness\".\nMeasurements are understood as the interactions which create the impressions in our consciousness (and as a result modify the wave function of the \"measured\" physical system), an idea which has been called the \"consciousness causes collapse\" interpretation.\nHugh Everett III (a student of Wigner's) discussed Wigner's thought experiment in the introductory part of his 1957 dissertation as an \"amusing, but \"extremely hypothetical\" drama\". In an early draft of Everett's work, one also finds a drawing of the Wigner's Friend situation, which must be seen as the first evidence on paper of the thought experiment that was later assigned to be Wigner's. This suggests that Everett must at least have discussed the problem together with Wigner.\nIn November 1963, Wigner called for the allocation of 10% of the national defense budget to be spent on nuclear blast shelters and survival resources, arguing that such an expenditure would be less costly than disarmament. Wigner considered a recent Woods Hole study's conclusion that a nuclear strike would kill 20% of Americans to be a very modest projection and that the country could recover from such an attack more quickly than Germany had recovered from the devastation of World War II.\nWigner was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1963 \"for his contributions to the theory of the atomic nucleus and the elementary particles, particularly through the discovery and application of fundamental symmetry principles\". The prize was shared that year, with the other half of the award divided between Maria Goeppert-Mayer and J. Hans D. Jensen. Wigner professed that he had never considered the possibility that this might occur, and added: \"I never expected to get my name in the newspapers without doing something wicked.\" He also won the Franklin Medal in 1950, the Enrico Fermi award in 1958, the Atoms for Peace Award in 1959, the Max Planck Medal in 1961, the National Medal of Science in 1969, the Albert Einstein Award in 1972, the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1974, the eponymous Wigner Medal in 1978, and the Herzl Prize in 1982. In 1968 he gave the Josiah Willard Gibbs lecture.\nAfter his retirement from Princeton in 1971, Wigner prepared the first edition of Symmetries and Reflections, a collection of philosophical essays, and became more involved in international and political meetings; around this time he became a leader and vocal defender of the Unification Church's annual International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences.\nMary died in November 1977. In 1979, Wigner married his third wife, Eileen Clare-Patton (Pat) Hamilton (1915-2010), the widow of physicist Donald Ross Hamilton, the dean of the graduate school at Princeton University, who had died in 1972. In 1992, at the age of 90, he published his memoirs, \"The Recollections of Eugene P. Wigner\" with Andrew Szanton. In it, Wigner said: \"The full meaning of life, the collective meaning of all human desires, is fundamentally a mystery beyond our grasp. As a young man, I chafed at this state of affairs. But by now I have made peace with it. I even feel a certain honor to be associated with such a mystery.\" In his collection of essays 'Philosophical Reflections and Syntheses' (1995), he commented: \"It was not possible to formulate the laws of quantum mechanics in a fully consistent way without reference to consciousness.\"\nWigner was credited as a member of the advisory board for the Western Goals Foundation, a private domestic intelligence agency created in the US in 1979 to \"fill the critical gap caused by the crippling of the FBI, the disabling of the House Un-American Activities Committee and the destruction of crucial government files\".\nWigner died of pneumonia at the University Medical Center in Princeton, New Jersey on January 1, 1995.\nSee also.\nSelected contributions.\nTheoretical physics\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMathematics\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10103", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10103", "title": "Electroweak interaction", "text": "Unified description of electromagnetism and the weak interaction\nIn particle physics, the electroweak interaction or electroweak force is the unified description of two of the fundamental interactions of nature: electromagnetism (electromagnetic interaction) and the weak interaction. Although these two forces appear very different at everyday low energies, the theory models them as two different aspects of the same force. Above the unification energy, on the order of 246\u00a0GeV, they would merge into a single force. Thus, if the temperature is high enough \u2013 approximately 1015\u00a0K \u2013 then the electromagnetic force and weak force merge into a combined electroweak force.\nDuring the quark epoch (shortly after the Big Bang), the electroweak force split into the electromagnetic and weak force. It is thought that the required temperature of 1015\u00a0K has not been seen widely throughout the universe since before the quark epoch, and currently the highest human-made temperature in thermal equilibrium is around (from the Large Hadron Collider).\nSheldon Glashow, Abdus Salam, and Steven Weinberg were awarded the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physics for their contributions to the unification of the weak and electromagnetic interaction between elementary particles, known as the Weinberg\u2013Salam theory. The existence of the electroweak interactions was experimentally established in two stages, the first being the discovery of neutral currents in neutrino scattering by the Gargamelle collaboration in 1973, and the second in 1983 by the UA1 and the UA2 collaborations that involved the discovery of the W and Z gauge bosons in proton\u2013antiproton collisions at the converted Super Proton Synchrotron. In 1999, Gerardus 't Hooft and Martinus Veltman were awarded the Nobel prize for showing that the electroweak theory is renormalizable.\nHistory.\nAfter the Wu experiment in 1956 discovered parity violation in the weak interaction, a search began for a way to relate the weak and electromagnetic interactions. Extending his doctoral advisor Julian Schwinger's work, Sheldon Glashow first experimented with introducing two different symmetries, one chiral and one achiral, and combined them such that their overall symmetry was unbroken. This did not yield a renormalizable theory, and its gauge symmetry had to be broken by hand as no spontaneous mechanism was known, but it predicted a new particle, the Z boson. This received little notice, as it matched no experimental finding.\nIn 1964, Salam and John Clive Ward had the same idea, but predicted a massless photon and three massive gauge bosons with a manually broken symmetry. Later around 1967, while investigating spontaneous symmetry breaking, Weinberg found a set of symmetries predicting a massless, neutral gauge boson. Initially rejecting such a particle as useless, he later realized his symmetries produced the electroweak force, and he proceeded to predict rough masses for the W and Z bosons. Significantly, he suggested this new theory was renormalizable. In 1971, Gerard 't Hooft proved that spontaneously broken gauge symmetries are renormalizable even with massive gauge bosons.\nFormulation.\nMathematically, electromagnetism is unified with the weak interactions as a Yang\u2013Mills field with an SU(2) \u00d7 U(1) gauge group, which describes the formal operations that can be applied to the electroweak gauge fields without changing the dynamics of the system. These fields are the weak isospin fields W1, W2, and W3, and the weak hypercharge field B.\nThis invariance is known as electroweak symmetry.\nThe generators of SU(2) and U(1) are given the name weak isospin (labeled T) and weak hypercharge (labeled Y) respectively. These then give rise to the gauge bosons that mediate the electroweak interactions \u2013 the three W bosons of weak isospin (\"W\"1, \"W\"2, and \"W\"3), and the \"B\" boson of weak hypercharge, respectively, all of which are \"initially\" massless. These are not physical fields yet, before spontaneous symmetry breaking and the associated Higgs mechanism.\nIn the Standard Model, the observed physical particles, the and bosons, and the photon, are produced through the spontaneous symmetry breaking of the electroweak symmetry SU(2) \u00d7 U(1) to U(1)em, effected by the Higgs mechanism (see also Higgs boson), an elaborate quantum-field-theoretic phenomenon that \"spontaneously\" alters the realization of the symmetry and rearranges degrees of freedom.\nThe electric charge arises as the particular linear combination (nontrivial) of Y (weak hypercharge) and the T3 component of weak isospin (formula_1) that does \"not\" couple to the Higgs boson. That is to say: the Higgs and the electromagnetic field have no effect on each other, at the level of the fundamental forces (\"tree level\"), while any \"other\" combination of the hypercharge and the weak isospin must interact with the Higgs. This causes an apparent separation between the weak force, which interacts with the Higgs, and electromagnetism, which does not. Mathematically, the electric charge is a specific combination of the hypercharge and T3 outlined in the figure.\nU(1)em (the symmetry group of electromagnetism only) is defined to be the group generated by this special linear combination, and the symmetry described by the U(1)em group is unbroken, since it does not \"directly\" interact with the Higgs.\nThe above spontaneous symmetry breaking makes the W3 and B bosons coalesce into two different physical bosons with different masses \u2013 the boson, and the photon (),\n formula_2\nwhere \u03b8 is the \"weak mixing angle\". The axes representing the particles have essentially just been rotated, in the (W3, B) plane, by the angle \u03b8. This also introduces a mismatch between the mass of the and the mass of the particles (denoted as m and m, respectively),\n formula_3\nThe W1 and W2 bosons, in turn, combine to produce the charged massive bosons :\n formula_4\nLagrangian.\nBefore electroweak symmetry breaking.\nThe Lagrangian for the electroweak interactions is divided into four parts before electroweak symmetry breaking manifests,\n formula_5\nThe formula_6 term describes the interaction between the three W vector bosons and the B vector boson, \n formula_7\nwhere formula_8 (formula_9) and formula_10 are the field strength tensors for the weak isospin and weak hypercharge gauge fields.\nformula_11 is the kinetic term for the Standard Model fermions. The interaction of the gauge bosons and the fermions are through the gauge covariant derivative,\n formula_12\nwhere the subscript j sums over the three generations of fermions; Q, u, and d are the left-handed doublet, right-handed singlet up, and right handed singlet down quark fields; and L and e are the left-handed doublet and right-handed singlet electron fields.\nThe Feynman slash formula_13 means the contraction of the 4-gradient with the Dirac matrices, defined as\n formula_14\nand the covariant derivative (excluding the gluon gauge field for the strong interaction) is defined as\n formula_15\nHere formula_16 is the weak hypercharge and the formula_17 are the components of the weak isospin.\nThe formula_18 term describes the Higgs field formula_19 and its interactions with itself and the gauge bosons,\n formula_20\nwhere formula_21 is the vacuum expectation value.\nThe formula_22 term describes the Yukawa interaction with the fermions, \n formula_23\nand generates their masses, manifest when the Higgs field acquires a nonzero vacuum expectation value, discussed next. The formula_24 for formula_25 are matrices of Yukawa couplings.\nAfter electroweak symmetry breaking.\nThe Lagrangian reorganizes itself as the Higgs field acquires a non-vanishing vacuum expectation value dictated by the potential of the previous section. As a result of this rewriting, the symmetry breaking becomes manifest. In the history of the universe, this is believed to have happened shortly after the hot big bang, when the universe was at a temperature \n(assuming the Standard Model of particle physics).\nDue to its complexity, this Lagrangian is best described by breaking it up into several parts as follows.\n formula_26\nThe kinetic term formula_27 contains all the quadratic terms of the Lagrangian, which include the dynamic terms (the partial derivatives) and the mass terms (conspicuously absent from the Lagrangian before symmetry breaking)\n formula_28\nwhere the sum runs over all the fermions of the theory (quarks and leptons), and the fields formula_29 formula_30 formula_31 and formula_32 are given as\n formula_33\nwith formula_34 to be replaced by the relevant field (formula_35 formula_36 formula_37) and f\u2009abc by the structure constants of the appropriate gauge group.\nThe neutral current formula_38 and charged current formula_39 components of the Lagrangian contain the interactions between the fermions and gauge bosons,\n formula_40\nwhere formula_41 The electromagnetic current formula_42 is\n formula_43\nwhere formula_44 is the fermions' electric charges. \nThe neutral weak current formula_45 is\n formula_46\nwhere formula_47 is the fermions' weak isospin.\nThe charged current part of the Lagrangian is given by\n formula_48\nwhere formula_49 is the right-handed singlet neutrino field, and the CKM matrix formula_50 determines the mixing between mass and weak eigenstates of the quarks.\nformula_51 contains the Higgs three-point and four-point self interaction terms,\n formula_52\nformula_53 contains the Higgs interactions with gauge vector bosons,\n formula_54\nformula_55 contains the gauge three-point self interactions,\n formula_56\nformula_57 contains the gauge four-point self interactions,\n formula_58\nformula_59 contains the Yukawa interactions between the fermions and the Higgs field,\n formula_60\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10104", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10104", "title": "Elara", "text": "Elara may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10105", "revid": "47614224", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10105", "title": "Erasmus Reinhold", "text": "German astronomer and mathematician (1511\u20131553)\nErasmus Reinhold (22 October 1511 \u2013 19 February 1553) was a German astronomer and mathematician, considered to be the most influential astronomical pedagogue of his generation. He was born and died in Saalfeld, Saxony.\nHe was educated, under Jacob Milich, at the University of Wittenberg, where he was first elected dean and later became rector. In 1536 he was appointed professor of higher mathematics by Philipp Melanchthon. In contrast to the limited modern definition, \"mathematics\" at the time also included applied mathematics, especially astronomy. His colleague, Georg Joachim Rheticus, also studied at Wittenberg and was appointed professor of lower mathematics in 1536.\nReinhold catalogued a large number of stars. His publications on astronomy include a commentary (1542, 1553) on Georg Purbach's \"Theoricae novae planetarum\". Reinhold knew about Copernicus and his heliocentric ideas prior to the publication of his \"De revolutionibus\", and made a favourable reference to him in his commentary on Purbach. However, Reinhold (like other astronomers before Kepler and Galileo) translated Copernicus' mathematical methods back into a geocentric system, rejecting heliocentric cosmology on physical and theological grounds.\nDuke Albert of Brandenburg Prussia supported Reinhold and financed the printing of Reinhold's \"Prutenicae Tabulae\" (1551, 1562, 1571, and 1585) or \"Prussian Tables\". These astronomical tables helped to disseminate calculation methods of Copernicus throughout the Empire, however, Gingerich notes that they showed a \"notable lack of commitment\" to heliocentricity and were \"carefully framed\" to be independent of the movement of the Earth. Both Reinhold's \"Prutenic Tables\" and Copernicus' studies were the foundation for the Calendar Reform by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582.\nIt was Reinhold's heavily annotated copy of \"De revolutionibus\" in the Royal Observatory, Edinburgh, that started Owen Gingerich on his search for copies of the first and second editions which he describes in \"The Book Nobody Read\". In Reinhold's unpublished commentary on \"De revolutionibus\", he calculated the distance from the Earth to the Sun. He \"massaged\" his calculation method in order to arrive at an answer close to that of Ptolemy.\nHis name has been given to a prominent lunar impact crater that lies to the south-southwest of the crater Copernicus, on the Mare Insularum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10106", "revid": "46275428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10106", "title": "Earthquake", "text": "Sudden movement of the Earth's crust\nAn earthquake, also called a quake, tremor, or temblor, is the shaking of the Earth's surface resulting from a sudden release of energy in the lithosphere that creates seismic waves. Earthquakes can range in intensity, from those so weak they cannot be felt, to those violent enough to propel objects and people into the air, damage critical infrastructure, and wreak destruction across entire cities. The seismic activity of an area is the frequency, type, and size of earthquakes experienced over a particular time. The seismicity at a particular location in the Earth is the average rate of seismic energy release per unit volume.\nIn its most general sense, the word \"earthquake\" is used to describe any seismic event that generates seismic waves. Earthquakes can occur naturally or be induced by human activities, such as mining, fracking, and nuclear weapons testing. The initial point of rupture is called the hypocenter or focus, while the ground level directly above it is the epicenter. Earthquakes are primarily caused by geological faults, but also by volcanism, landslides, and other seismic events.\nSignificant historical earthquakes include the 1556 Shaanxi earthquake in China, with over 830,000 fatalities, and the 1960 Valdivia earthquake in Chile, the largest ever recorded at 9.5 magnitude. Earthquakes result in various effects, such as ground shaking and soil liquefaction, leading to significant damage and loss of life. When the epicenter of a large earthquake is located offshore, the seabed may be displaced sufficiently to cause a tsunami. Earthquakes can trigger landslides. Earthquakes' occurrence is influenced by tectonic movements along faults, including normal, reverse (thrust), and strike-slip faults, with energy release and rupture dynamics governed by the elastic-rebound theory.\nEfforts to manage earthquake risks involve prediction, forecasting, and preparedness, including seismic retrofitting and earthquake engineering to design structures that withstand shaking. The cultural impact of earthquakes spans myths, religious beliefs, and modern media, reflecting their profound influence on human societies. Similar seismic phenomena, known as marsquakes and moonquakes, have been observed on other celestial bodies, indicating the universality of such events beyond Earth.\nTerminology.\nAn earthquake is the shaking of the surface of Earth resulting from a sudden release of energy in the lithosphere that creates seismic waves. Earthquakes may also be referred to as \"quakes\", \"tremors\", or \"temblors\". The word \"tremor\" is also used for non-earthquake seismic rumbling.\nIn its most general sense, an \"earthquake\" is any seismic event\u2014whether natural or caused by humans\u2014that generates seismic waves. Earthquakes are caused mostly by the rupture of geological faults but also by other events such as volcanic activity, landslides, mine blasts, fracking and nuclear tests. An earthquake's point of initial rupture is called its hypocenter or focus. The epicenter is the point at ground level directly above the hypocenter.\nThe seismic activity of an area is the frequency, type, and size of earthquakes experienced over a particular time. The seismicity at a particular location in the Earth is the average rate of seismic energy release per unit volume.\nMajor examples.\nOne of the most devastating earthquakes in recorded history was the 1556 Shaanxi earthquake, which occurred on 23 January 1556 in Shaanxi, China. More than 100,000 people died, with the region losing up to 830,000 people afterwards due to emigration, plague, and famine. Most houses in the area were yaodongs\u2014dwellings carved out of loess hillsides\u2014and many victims were killed when these structures collapsed. The 1976 Tangshan earthquake, which killed between 240,000 and 655,000 people, was the deadliest of the 20th century.\nThe 1960 Chilean earthquake is the largest earthquake that has been measured on a seismograph, reaching 9.5 magnitude on 22 May 1960. Its epicenter was near Ca\u00f1ete, Chile. The energy released was approximately twice that of the next most powerful earthquake, the Good Friday earthquake (27 March 1964), which was centered in Prince William Sound, Alaska. The ten largest recorded earthquakes have all been megathrust earthquakes; however, of these ten, only the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake is simultaneously one of the deadliest earthquakes in history.\nEarthquakes that caused the greatest loss of life, while powerful, were deadly because of their proximity to either heavily populated areas or the ocean, where earthquakes often create tsunamis that can devastate communities thousands of kilometers away. Regions most at risk for great loss of life include those where earthquakes are relatively rare but powerful, and poor regions with lax, unenforced, or nonexistent seismic building codes.\nOccurrence.\nTectonic earthquakes occur anywhere on the earth where there is sufficient stored elastic strain energy to drive fracture propagation along a fault plane. The sides of a fault move past each other smoothly and aseismically only if there are no irregularities or asperities along the fault surface that increases the frictional resistance. Most fault surfaces do have such asperities, which leads to a form of stick-slip behavior. Once the fault has locked, continued relative motion between the plates leads to increasing stress and, therefore, stored strain energy in the volume around the fault surface. This continues until the stress has risen sufficiently to break through the asperity, suddenly allowing sliding over the locked portion of the fault, releasing the stored energy. This energy is released as a combination of radiated elastic strain seismic waves, frictional heating of the fault surface, and cracking of the rock, thus causing an earthquake.\nThis process of gradual build-up of strain and stress punctuated by occasional sudden earthquake failure is referred to as the elastic-rebound theory. It is estimated that only 10 percent or less of an earthquake's total energy is radiated as seismic energy. Most of the earthquake's energy is used to power the earthquake fracture growth or is converted into heat generated by friction. Therefore, earthquakes lower the Earth's available elastic potential energy and raise its temperature, though these changes are negligible compared to the conductive and convective flow of heat out from the Earth's deep interior.\nFault types.\nThere are three main types of fault, all of which may cause an interplate earthquake: normal, reverse (thrust), and strike-slip. Normal and reverse faulting are examples of dip-slip, where the displacement along the fault is in the direction of dip and where movement on them involves a vertical component. Many earthquakes are caused by movement on faults that have components of both dip-slip and strike-slip; this is known as oblique slip.\nThe topmost, brittle part of the Earth's crust, and the cool slabs of the tectonic plates that are descending into the hot mantle, are the only parts of our planet that can store elastic energy and release it in fault ruptures. Rocks hotter than about flow in response to stress; they do not rupture in earthquakes. The maximum observed lengths of ruptures and mapped faults (which may break in a single rupture) are approximately . Examples are the earthquakes in Alaska (1957), Chile (1960), and Sumatra (2004), all in subduction zones. The longest earthquake ruptures on strike-slip faults, like the San Andreas Fault (1857, 1906), the North Anatolian Fault in Turkey (1939), and the Denali Fault in Alaska (2002), are about half to one third as long as the lengths along subducting plate margins, and those along normal faults are even shorter.\nNormal faults.\nNormal faults occur mainly in areas where the crust is being extended such as a divergent boundary. Earthquakes associated with normal faults are generally less than magnitude 7. Maximum magnitudes along many normal faults are even more limited because many of them are located along spreading centers, as in Iceland, where the thickness of the brittle layer is only about .\nReverse faults.\nReverse faults occur in areas where the crust is being shortened such as at a convergent boundary. Reverse faults, particularly those along convergent boundaries, are associated with the most powerful earthquakes (called megathrust earthquakes) including almost all of those of magnitude 8 or more. Megathrust earthquakes are responsible for about 90% of the total seismic moment released worldwide.\nStrike-slip faults.\nStrike-slip faults are steep structures where the two sides of the fault slip horizontally past each other; transform boundaries are a particular type of strike-slip fault. Strike-slip faults, particularly continental transforms, can produce major earthquakes up to about magnitude 8. Strike-slip faults tend to be oriented near vertically, resulting in an approximate width of within the brittle crust. Thus, earthquakes with magnitudes much larger than 8 are not possible.\nIn addition, there exists a hierarchy of stress levels in the three fault types. Thrust faults are generated by the highest, strike-slip by intermediate, and normal faults by the lowest stress levels. This can easily be understood by considering the direction of the greatest principal stress, the direction of the force that \"pushes\" the rock mass during the faulting. In the case of normal faults, the rock mass is pushed down in a vertical direction, thus the pushing force (\"greatest\" principal stress) equals the weight of the rock mass itself. In the case of thrusting, the rock mass \"escapes\" in the direction of the least principal stress, namely upward, lifting the rock mass, and thus, the overburden equals the \"least\" principal stress. Strike-slip faulting is intermediate between the other two types described above. This difference in stress regime in the three faulting environments can contribute to differences in stress drop during faulting, which contributes to differences in the radiated energy, regardless of fault dimensions.\nEnergy released.\nFor every unit increase in seismic magnitude, there is a roughly thirty-fold increase in the energy released. For instance, an earthquake of magnitude 6.0 releases approximately 32 times as much energy as an earthquake of magnitude 5.0, and a 7.0 magnitude earthquake releases about 1,000 times as much energy as a 5.0 magnitude earthquake. An 8.6-magnitude earthquake releases the same amount of energy as 10,000 atomic bombs of the size used in World War II.\nThis is so because the energy released in an earthquake, and thus its magnitude, is proportional to the area of the fault that ruptures and the stress drop. Therefore, the greater the length and width of the faulted area, the greater the resulting magnitude. The most important parameter controlling the maximum earthquake magnitude on a fault, however, is not the maximum available length, but the available width because the latter varies by a factor of 20. Along converging plate margins, the dip angle of the rupture plane is very shallow, typically about 10 degrees. Thus, the width of the plane within the top brittle crust of the Earth can reach (such as in Japan, 2011, or in Alaska, 1964), making the most powerful earthquakes possible.\nFocus.\nThe majority of tectonic earthquakes originate in the Ring of Fire at depths not exceeding tens of kilometers. Earthquakes occurring at depths less than are classified as \"shallow-focus\" earthquakes, while those with focal depths between are commonly termed \"mid-focus\" or \"intermediate-depth\" earthquakes.\nIn subduction zones, where older and colder oceanic crust descends beneath another tectonic plate, deep-focus earthquakes may occur at much greater depths (ranging from ). These seismically active areas of subduction are known as Wadati\u2013Benioff zones. Deep-focus earthquakes occur at depths where the subducted lithosphere should no longer be brittle, due to the high temperature and pressure. A possible mechanism for the generation of deep-focus earthquakes is faulting caused by olivine undergoing a phase transition into a spinel structure.\nVolcanic activity.\nEarthquakes often occur in volcanic regions and are caused there, both by tectonic faults and the movement of magma in volcanoes. Such earthquakes can serve as an early warning of volcanic eruptions, as during the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Earthquake swarms can serve as markers for the location of the flowing magma throughout the volcanoes. These swarms can be recorded by seismometers and tiltmeters (a device that measures ground slope) and used as sensors to predict imminent or upcoming eruptions.\nRupture dynamics.\nA tectonic earthquake begins as an area of initial slip on the fault surface that forms the focus. Once the rupture has been initiated, it begins to propagate away from the focus, spreading out along the fault surface. Lateral propagation will continue until either the rupture reaches a barrier, such as the end of a fault segment, or a region on the fault where there is insufficient stress to allow continued rupture. For larger earthquakes, the depth extent of rupture will be constrained downwards by the brittle-ductile transition zone and upwards by the ground surface. The mechanics of this process are poorly understood because it is difficult either to recreate such rapid movements in a laboratory or to record seismic waves close to a nucleation zone due to strong ground motion.\nIn most cases, the rupture speed approaches, but does not exceed, the shear wave (S wave) velocity of the surrounding rock. There are a few exceptions to this:\nSupershear earthquakes.\nSupershear earthquake ruptures are known to have propagated at speeds greater than the S wave velocity. These have so far all been observed during large strike-slip events. The unusually wide zone of damage caused by the 2001 Kunlun earthquake has been attributed to the effects of the sonic boom developed in such earthquakes.\nSlow earthquakes.\nSlow earthquake ruptures travel at unusually low velocities. A particularly dangerous form of slow earthquake is the tsunami earthquake, observed where the relatively low felt intensities, caused by the slow propagation speed of some great earthquakes, fail to alert the population of the neighboring coast, as in the 1896 Sanriku earthquake.\nCo-seismic overpressuring and effect of pore pressure.\nDuring an earthquake, high temperatures can develop at the fault plane, increasing pore pressure and consequently vaporization of the groundwater already contained within the rock. In the coseismic phase, such an increase can significantly affect slip evolution and speed, in the post-seismic phase it can control the Aftershock sequence because, after the main event, pore pressure increase slowly propagates into the surrounding fracture network. From the point of view of the Mohr-Coulomb strength theory, an increase in fluid pressure reduces the normal stress acting on the fault plane that holds it in place, and fluids can exert a lubricating effect. As thermal overpressurization may provide positive feedback between slip and strength fall at the fault plane, a common opinion is that it may enhance the faulting process instability. After the mainshock, the pressure gradient between the fault plane and the neighboring rock causes a fluid flow that increases pore pressure in the surrounding fracture networks; such an increase may trigger new faulting processes by reactivating adjacent faults, giving rise to aftershocks. Analogously, artificial pore pressure increase, by fluid injection in Earth's crust, may induce seismicity.\nTidal forces.\nTides may trigger some seismicity.\nClusters.\nMost earthquakes form part of a sequence, related to each other in terms of location and time. Most earthquake clusters consist of small tremors that cause little to no damage, but there is a theory that earthquakes can recur in a regular pattern. Earthquake clustering has been observed, for example, in Parkfield, California where a long-term research study is being conducted around the Parkfield earthquake cluster.\nAftershocks.\nAn aftershock is an earthquake that occurs after a previous earthquake, the mainshock. Rapid changes of stress between rocks, and the stress from the original earthquake are the main causes of these aftershocks, along with the crust around the ruptured fault plane as it adjusts to the effects of the mainshock. An aftershock is in the same region as the main shock but always of a smaller magnitude, however, they can still be powerful enough to cause even more damage to buildings that were already previously damaged from the mainshock. If an aftershock is larger than the mainshock, the aftershock is redesignated as the mainshock and the original main shock is redesignated as a foreshock. Aftershocks are formed as the crust around the displaced fault plane adjusts to the effects of the mainshock.\nSwarms.\nEarthquake swarms are sequences of earthquakes striking in a specific area within a short period. They are different from earthquakes followed by a series of aftershocks by the fact that no single earthquake in the sequence is the main shock, so none has a notably higher magnitude than another. An example of an earthquake swarm is the 2004 activity at Yellowstone National Park. In August 2012, a swarm of earthquakes shook Southern California's Imperial Valley, showing the most recorded activity in the area since the 1970s.\nSometimes a series of earthquakes occur in what has been called an \"earthquake storm\", where the earthquakes strike a fault in clusters, each triggered by the shaking or stress redistribution of the previous earthquakes. Similar to aftershocks but on adjacent segments of fault, these storms occur over the course of years, with some of the later earthquakes as damaging as the early ones. Such a pattern was observed in the sequence of about a dozen earthquakes that struck the North Anatolian Fault in Turkey in the 20th century and has been inferred for older anomalous clusters of large earthquakes in the Middle East.\nFrequency.\nIt is estimated that around 500,000 earthquakes occur each year, detectable with current instrumentation. About 100,000 of these can be felt. Minor earthquakes occur very frequently around the world in places like California and Alaska in the U.S., as well as in El Salvador, Mexico, Guatemala, Chile, Peru, Indonesia, the Philippines, Iran, Pakistan, the Azores in Portugal, Turkey, New Zealand, Greece, Italy, India, Nepal, and Japan. Larger earthquakes occur less frequently, the relationship being exponential; for example, roughly ten times as many earthquakes larger than magnitude 4 occur than earthquakes larger than magnitude 5. In the (low seismicity) United Kingdom, for example, it has been calculated that the average recurrences are:\nan earthquake of 3.7\u20134.6 every year, an earthquake of 4.7\u20135.5 every 10\u00a0years, and an earthquake of 5.6 or larger every 100\u00a0years. This is an example of the Gutenberg\u2013Richter law.\nThe number of seismic stations has increased from about 350 in 1931 to many thousands today. As a result, many more earthquakes are reported than in the past, but this is because of the vast improvement in instrumentation, rather than an increase in the number of earthquakes. The United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimates that, since 1900, there have been an average of 18 major earthquakes (magnitude 7.0\u20137.9) and one great earthquake (magnitude 8.0 or greater) per year, and that this average has been relatively stable. In recent years, the number of major earthquakes per year has decreased, though this is probably a statistical fluctuation rather than a systematic trend. More detailed statistics on the size and frequency of earthquakes is available from the United States Geological Survey. A recent increase in the number of major earthquakes has been noted, which could be explained by a cyclical pattern of periods of intense tectonic activity, interspersed with longer periods of low intensity. However, accurate recordings of earthquakes only began in the early 1900s, so it is too early to categorically state that this is the case.\nMost of the world's earthquakes (90%, and 81% of the largest) take place in the , horseshoe-shaped zone called the circum-Pacific seismic belt, known as the Pacific Ring of Fire, which for the most part bounds the Pacific plate. Massive earthquakes tend to occur along other plate boundaries too, such as along the Himalayan Mountains.\nWith the rapid growth of mega-cities such as Mexico City, Tokyo, and Tehran in areas of high seismic risk, some seismologists are warning that a single earthquake may claim the lives of up to three million people.\nInduced seismicity.\nWhile most earthquakes are caused by the movement of the Earth's tectonic plates, human activity can also produce earthquakes. Activities both above ground and below may change the stresses and strains on the crust, including building reservoirs, extracting resources such as coal or oil, and injecting fluids underground for waste disposal or fracking. Most of these earthquakes have small magnitudes. The 5.7 magnitude 2011 Oklahoma earthquake is thought to have been caused by disposing wastewater from oil production into injection wells, and studies point to the state's oil industry as the cause of other earthquakes in the past century. A Columbia University paper suggested that the 8.0 magnitude 2008 Sichuan earthquake was induced by loading from the Zipingpu Dam, though the link has not been conclusively proved.\nMeasurement and location.\nThe instrumental scales used to describe the size of an earthquake began with the Richter scale in the 1930s. It is a relatively simple measurement of an event's amplitude, and its use has become minimal in the 21st century. Seismic waves travel through the Earth's interior and can be recorded by seismometers at great distances. The surface-wave magnitude was developed in the 1950s as a means to measure remote earthquakes and to improve the accuracy for larger events. The moment magnitude scale not only measures the amplitude of the shock but also takes into account the seismic moment (total rupture area, average slip of the fault, and rigidity of the rock). The Japan Meteorological Agency seismic intensity scale, the Medvedev\u2013Sponheuer\u2013Karnik scale, and the Mercalli intensity scale are based on the observed effects and are related to the intensity of shaking.\nIntensity and magnitude.\nThe shaking of the earth is a common phenomenon that has been experienced by humans from the earliest of times. Before the development of strong-motion accelerometers, the intensity of a seismic event was estimated based on the observed effects. Magnitude and intensity are not directly related and calculated using different methods. The magnitude of an earthquake is a single value that describes the size of the earthquake at its source. Intensity is the measure of shaking at different locations around the earthquake. Intensity values vary from place to place, depending on the distance from the earthquake and the underlying rock or soil makeup.\nThe first scale for measuring earthquake magnitudes was developed by Charles Francis Richter in 1935. Subsequent scales (seismic magnitude scales) have retained a key feature, where each unit represents a ten-fold difference in the amplitude of the ground shaking and a 32-fold difference in energy. Subsequent scales are also adjusted to have approximately the same numeric value within the limits of the scale.\nAlthough the mass media commonly reports earthquake magnitudes as \"Richter magnitude\" or \"Richter scale\", standard practice by most seismological authorities is to express an earthquake's strength on the moment magnitude scale, which is based on the actual energy released by an earthquake, the static seismic moment.\nSeismic waves.\nEvery earthquake produces different types of seismic waves, which travel through rock with different velocities:\nSpeed of seismic waves.\nPropagation velocity of the seismic waves through solid rock ranges from approx. up to , depending on the density and elasticity of the medium. In the Earth's interior, the shock- or P waves travel much faster than the S waves (approx. relation 1.7:1). The differences in travel time from the epicenter to the observatory are a measure of the distance and can be used to image both sources of earthquakes and structures within the Earth. Also, the depth of the hypocenter can be computed roughly.\nP wave speed\nS waves speed\nSeismic wave arrival.\nAs a consequence, the first waves of a distant earthquake arrive at an observatory via the Earth's mantle.\nOn average, the kilometer distance to the earthquake is the number of seconds between the P- and S wave arrival times, multiplied by 8. Slight deviations are caused by inhomogeneities of subsurface structure. By such analysis of seismograms, the Earth's core was located in 1913 by Beno Gutenberg.\nS waves and later arriving surface waves do most of the damage compared to P waves. P waves squeeze and expand the material in the same direction they are traveling, whereas S waves shake the ground up and down and back and forth.\nLocation and reporting.\nEarthquakes are not only categorized by their magnitude but also by the place where they occur. The world is divided into 754 Flinn\u2013Engdahl regions (F-E regions), which are based on political and geographical boundaries as well as seismic activity. More active zones are divided into smaller F-E regions whereas less active zones belong to larger F-E regions.\nStandard reporting of earthquakes includes its magnitude, date and time of occurrence, geographic coordinates of its epicenter, depth of the epicenter, geographical region, distances to population centers, location uncertainty, several parameters that are included in USGS earthquake reports (number of stations reporting, number of observations, etc.), and a unique event ID.\nAlthough relatively slow seismic waves have traditionally been used to detect earthquakes, scientists realized in 2016 that gravitational measurement could provide instantaneous detection of earthquakes, and confirmed this by analyzing gravitational records associated with the 2011 Tohoku-Oki (\"Fukushima\") earthquake.\nEffects.\nThe effects of earthquakes include, but are not limited to, the following:\nShaking and ground rupture.\nShaking and ground rupture are the main effects created by earthquakes, principally resulting in more or less severe damage to buildings and other rigid structures. The severity of the local effects depends on the complex combination of the earthquake magnitude, the distance from the epicenter, and the local geological and geomorphological conditions, which may amplify or reduce wave propagation. The ground-shaking is measured by ground acceleration.\nSpecific local geological, geomorphological, and geostructural features can induce high levels of shaking on the ground surface even from low-intensity earthquakes. This effect is called site or local amplification. It is principally due to the transfer of the seismic motion from hard deep soils to soft superficial soils and the effects of seismic energy focalization owing to the typical geometrical setting of such deposits.\nGround rupture is a visible breaking and displacement of the Earth's surface along the trace of the fault, which may be of the order of several meters in the case of major earthquakes. Ground rupture is a major risk for large engineering structures such as dams, bridges, and nuclear power stations and requires careful mapping of existing faults to identify any that are likely to break the ground surface within the life of the structure.\nSoil liquefaction.\nSoil liquefaction occurs when, because of the shaking, water-saturated granular material (such as sand) temporarily loses its strength and transforms from a solid to a liquid. Soil liquefaction may cause rigid structures, like buildings and bridges, to tilt or sink into the liquefied deposits. For example, in the 1964 Alaska earthquake, soil liquefaction caused many buildings to sink into the ground, eventually collapsing upon themselves.\nHuman impacts.\nPhysical damage from an earthquake will vary depending on the intensity of shaking in a given area and the type of population. Underserved and developing communities frequently experience more severe impacts (and longer lasting) from a seismic event compared to well-developed communities. Impacts may include:\nWith these impacts and others, the aftermath may bring disease, a lack of basic necessities, mental consequences such as panic attacks and depression to survivors, and higher insurance premiums. Recovery times will vary based on the level of damage and the socioeconomic status of the impacted community.\nLandslides.\nChina stood out in several categories in a study group of 162 earthquakes (from 1772 to 2021) that included landslide fatalities. Due to the 2008 Sichuan earthquake, it had 42% of all landslide fatalities within the study (total event deaths were higher). They were followed by Peru (22%) from the 1970 Ancash earthquake, and Pakistan (21%) from the 2005 Kashmir earthquake. China was also on top with the highest area affected by landslides with more than 80,000\u00a0km2, followed by Canada with 66,000\u00a0km2 (1988 Saguenay and 1946 Vancouver Island). Strike-slip (61 events) was the dominant fault type listed, followed closely by thrust/reverse (57), and normal (33).\nFires.\nEarthquakes can cause fires by damaging electrical power or gas lines. In the event of water mains rupturing and a loss of pressure, it may also become difficult to stop the spread of a fire once it has started. For example, more deaths in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake were caused by fire than by the earthquake itself.\nTsunami.\nTsunamis are long-wavelength, long-period sea waves produced by the sudden or abrupt movement of large volumes of water\u2014including when an earthquake occurs at sea. In the open ocean, the distance between wave crests can surpass , and the wave periods can vary from five minutes to one hour. Such tsunamis travel 600\u2013800\u00a0kilometers per hour (373\u2013497 miles per hour), depending on water depth. Large waves produced by an earthquake or a submarine landslide can overrun nearby coastal areas in a matter of minutes. Tsunamis can also travel thousands of kilometers across open ocean and wreak destruction on far shores hours after the earthquake that generated them.\nOrdinarily, subduction earthquakes under magnitude 7.5 do not cause tsunamis, although some instances of this have been recorded. Most destructive tsunamis are caused by earthquakes of magnitude 7.5 or more.\nFloods.\nFloods may be secondary effects of earthquakes if dams are damaged. Earthquakes may cause landslips to dam rivers, which collapse and cause floods.\nThe terrain below the Sarez Lake in Tajikistan is in danger of catastrophic flooding if the landslide dam formed by the earthquake, known as the Usoi Dam, were to fail during a future earthquake. Impact projections suggest the flood could affect roughly five million people.\nManagement.\nPrediction.\nEarthquake prediction is a branch of the science of seismology concerned with the specification of the time, location, and magnitude of future earthquakes within stated limits. Many methods have been developed for predicting the time and place in which earthquakes will occur. Despite considerable research efforts by seismologists, scientifically reproducible predictions cannot yet be made to a specific day or month. Popular belief holds earthquakes are preceded by earthquake weather, in the early morning.\nForecasting.\nWhile forecasting is usually considered to be a type of prediction, earthquake forecasting is often differentiated from earthquake prediction. Earthquake forecasting is concerned with the probabilistic assessment of general earthquake hazards, including the frequency and magnitude of damaging earthquakes in a given area over years or decades. For well-understood faults the probability that a segment may rupture during the next few decades can be estimated.\nEarthquake warning systems have been developed that can provide regional notification of an earthquake in progress, but before the ground surface has begun to move, potentially allowing people within the system's range to seek shelter before the earthquake's impact is felt.\nPreparedness.\nThe objective of earthquake engineering is to foresee the impact of earthquakes on buildings, bridges, tunnels, roadways, and other structures, and to design such structures to minimize the risk of damage. Existing structures can be modified by seismic retrofitting to improve their resistance to earthquakes. Earthquake insurance can provide building owners with financial protection against losses resulting from earthquakes. Emergency management strategies can be employed by a government or organization to mitigate risks and prepare for consequences.\nArtificial intelligence may help to assess buildings and plan precautionary operations. The Igor expert system is part of a mobile laboratory that supports the procedures leading to the seismic assessment of masonry buildings and the planning of retrofitting operations on them. It has been applied to assess buildings in Lisbon, Rhodes, and Naples.\nIndividuals can also take preparedness steps like securing water heaters and heavy items that could injure someone, locating shutoffs for utilities, and being educated about what to do when the shaking starts. For areas near large bodies of water, earthquake preparedness encompasses the possibility of a tsunami caused by a large earthquake.\nIn culture.\nFrom the lifetime of the Greek philosopher Anaxagoras in the 5th century BCE to the 14th century CE, earthquakes were usually attributed to \"air (vapors) in the cavities of the Earth.\" Pliny the Elder called earthquakes \"underground thunderstorms\". Thales of Miletus (625\u2013547 BCE) was the only documented person who believed that earthquakes were caused by tension between the earth and water.\nIn Norse mythology, earthquakes were explained as the violent struggle of the god Loki being punished for the murder of Baldr, god of beauty and light. In Greek mythology, Poseidon was the cause and god of earthquakes. In Japanese mythology, Namazu (\u9bf0) is a giant catfish who causes earthquakes. In Taiwanese folklore, the T\u0113-g\u00fb (\u5730\u725b) is a giant earth buffalo who causes earthquakes.\nIn the New Testament, Matthew's Gospel refers to earthquakes occurring both after the death of Jesus (, 54) and at his resurrection ().\nIn modern popular culture, the portrayal of earthquakes is shaped by the memory of great cities laid waste, such as Kobe in 1995 or San Francisco in 1906. Fictional earthquakes tend to strike suddenly and without warning. For this reason, stories about earthquakes generally begin with the disaster and focus on its immediate aftermath, as in \"Short Walk to Daylight\" (1972), \"The Ragged Edge\" (1968) or \"\" (1999). A notable example is Heinrich von Kleist's classic novella, \"The Earthquake in Chile\", which describes the destruction of Santiago in 1647. Haruki Murakami's short fiction collection \"After the Quake\" depicts the consequences of the Kobe earthquake of 1995.\nThe most popular single earthquake in fiction is the hypothetical \"Big One\" expected of California's San Andreas Fault someday, as depicted in the novels \"Richter 10\" (1996), \"Goodbye California\" (1977), \"2012\" (2009), and \"San Andreas\" (2015), among other works.\nOutside of Earth.\nPhenomena similar to earthquakes have been observed on other planets (e.g., \"marsquakes\" on Mars) and on the Moon (e.g., \"moonquakes\").\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10109", "revid": "32828466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10109", "title": "Esotericism", "text": "Esotericism is a set of local discrete and occult spiritual practices like:\nIts most important historiography and bibliography can be found at 'Esotericism' and other books by Pierre A. Riffard.\nReferences.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10110", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10110", "title": "Emperor of Japan", "text": "The emperor of Japan is the hereditary monarch and head of state of Japan. The emperor is defined by the Constitution of Japan as the symbol of the Japanese state and the unity of the Japanese people, his position deriving from \"the will of the people with whom resides sovereign power\". The Imperial Household Law governs the line of imperial succession. Pursuant to his constitutional role as a national symbol, and in accordance with rulings by the Supreme Court of Japan, the emperor is personally immune from prosecution. By virtue of his position as the head of the Imperial House, the emperor is also recognized as the head of the Shinto religion, which holds him to be the direct descendant of the sun goddess Amaterasu. According to tradition, the office of emperor was created in the 7th century BC, but the first historically verifiable emperors appear around the 5th or 6th centuries AD.\nThe role of the emperor of Japan has historically alternated between a largely ceremonial symbolic role and that of an actual imperial ruler. Since the establishment of the first shogunate in 1192, the emperors of Japan have rarely taken on a role as supreme battlefield commander, unlike many Western monarchs. Japanese emperors have nearly always been controlled by external political forces, to varying degrees. Between 1192 and 1867, the \"sh\u014dguns\", or their \"shikken\" regents in Kamakura (1203\u20131333), were the \"de facto\" rulers of Japan, although they were nominally appointed by the emperor. After the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the emperor was the embodiment of all sovereign power in the realm, as enshrined in the Meiji Constitution of 1889. Since the enactment of the 1947 constitution, the role of emperor has been relegated to that of a ceremonial head of state without even nominal political powers. The emperor is the head of the Japanese honors system, conferring orders, decorations, medals, and awards in the name of the state and on behalf of its people in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet.\nSince the mid-nineteenth century, the emperor and other members of the imperial family have resided at the Imperial Palace, located on the former site of Edo Castle in the heart of Tokyo, the current capital of Japan. Earlier, emperors resided in Kyoto, the ancient capital, for nearly eleven centuries. The Emperor's Birthday (currently 23 February) is a national holiday.\nNaruhito is the current emperor of Japan. He acceded to the Chrysanthemum Throne upon the abdication of his father, Emperor Akihito, on 1 May 2019. He is the only remaining monarch and head of state in the world who holds the title of Emperor.\nConstitutional role.\nMost constitutional monarchies formally vest executive power in the reigning monarch in their capacity as head of state. In turn, these constitutional monarchs are bound by either convention or statute to exercise their prerogatives on the advice of ministers responsible to the duly elected parliament. Some monarchies codify this principle further by requiring royal acts to be countersigned by a minister in order to take effect, thus passing political and legal accountability from the reigning monarch to the minister tendering advice. By contrast, Japan is one of only two such sovereign states where the monarch is not even the \"nominal\" chief executive; the other is Sweden. Rather, of the Constitution of Japan explicitly vests executive authority in the Cabinet, of which the prime minister is the leader. The emperor is also not the commander-in-chief of the Japan Self-Defense Forces. Instead, the Japan Self-Defense Forces Act of 1954 explicitly vests supreme command and control in the prime minister. Nevertheless, the emperor remains Japan's internationally recognized head of state.\nThe emperor's fundamental role within the machinery of the Japanese constitution is to perform important representational functions as \"\u2026the symbol of the State and of the unity of the People, deriving his position from the will of the people with whom resides sovereign power.\" He is limited to performing \"acts in matters of state\" as delineated by the Constitution, without even nominal powers related to government. Moreover, said acts are only exercised in accordance with the binding advice and consent of the Cabinet, which is collectively responsible to the Diet and thence to the electorate. Nevertheless, the emperor enjoys the following rights in the conduct of state business: (a) the right to be consulted before acting on ministerial advice; (b) the right to encourage a given policy or course of administrative action; and (c) the right to warn the Cabinet against the same. In these respects, the emperor personifies the democratic state, sanctions legitimate authority, ensures the legality of his official acts, and guarantees the execution of the public will. These functions, when considered altogether, serve two purposes: foremost, to uphold the continuity and stability of Japanese democracy; and second, to foster a shared national identity and cultural heritage that transcends party politics. In order to maintain his institutional neutrality as Japan's national symbol, he is barred from making political statements.\nIt is the emperor's preeminent constitutional duty to appoint the prime minister as designated by the Diet and the chief justice as designated by the Cabinet. However, the emperor does not have the authority to decline the nominations. The emperor's other responsibilities, laid down in Article 7 of the Constitution, concern the basic functioning of the state. To this end, the emperor, on behalf of the Japanese people:\nRegular ceremonies of the emperor with a constitutional basis are the Imperial Investitures \"(Shinninshiki)\" in the Tokyo Imperial Palace and the Speech from the Throne ceremony in the House of Councillors in the National Diet Building. The latter ceremony opens ordinary and extra sessions of the Diet. Ordinary sessions are opened each January and also after new elections to the House of Representatives. Extra sessions usually convene in the autumn and are opened then.\nCultural role.\nThe \"Tenn\u014d\" is regarded as the foremost Shint\u014d priest in terms of religion. This sacred duty dates back to the Niiname-sai (\u65b0\u5617\u796d, \"tasting of new rice\") imperial harvest festival. In this ritual, the emperor presents newly gathered rice to the gods. The celebration is known as \"Daij\u014dsai\" (\u5927\u5617\u796d, \"Great Tasting\") and takes place in the first year after the emperor's accession to the throne. The historical text \"Nihonshoki\", written in the year 720, has the first mention of this ceremony, whose beginnings are believed to date back even further. The event evolved through time to become the Day of Thanksgiving for Labour, a recognized official holiday today.\nThe office of the emperor is also cultural bearer and steward of tradition and culture. For example, the \"Utakai Hajime\" is the annual poetry reading competition convened by the emperor. The emperor is supported in this function by the empress and other members of the imperial family, who have honorary patronages of many associations and organisations. They travel extensively throughout the year within the country to uphold these roles.\nIn sports, the \"Emperor's Cup\" (\u5929\u7687\u8cdc\u676f, \"Tenn\u014d shihai\") is given to a number of competitions such as football, judo, volleyball, and the top division \"y\u016bsh\u014d\" winner of a sumo tournament.\nHistory.\nAlthough the emperor has been a symbol of continuity with the past, the degree of power exercised by the emperor has varied considerably throughout Japanese history.\nOrigins.\nAccording to the traditional account of the Nihon Shoki, Japan was founded by Emperor Jimmu years ago. However, most modern scholars agree to regard Jimmu and the nine first emperors as mythical. Emperor Sujin, the 10th emperor, may have been a real historical figure. The emperors from Emperor \u014cjin are considered as perhaps factual. As one argument, the reign of Emperor Kinmei (c.\u2009509\u2013571 AD), the 29th emperor, is the first for whom contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates.\nArchaeological information about the earliest historical rulers of Japan may be contained in the ancient tombs known as \"kofun\", constructed between the early 3rd century and the early 7th century AD. However, since the Meiji period, the Imperial Household Agency has refused to open the \"kofun\" to the public or to archaeologists, citing their desire not to disturb the spirits of the past emperors. \"Kofun\" period artefacts were also increasingly crucial in Japan as the Meiji government used them to reinforce their authority. In 2016, the Imperial Household Agency reversed its position and decided to allow researchers to enter some of the \"kofun\" with limited time and way.\nIn the early 7th century, the emperor had begun to be called the . The title of emperor was borrowed from China, being derived from Chinese characters, and was retroactively applied to the legendary Japanese rulers who reigned before the 7th\u20138th centuries AD.\nDisputes and instability (10th century).\nThe growth of the samurai class from the 10th century gradually weakened the power of the imperial family over the realm, leading to a time of instability. Emperors are known to have come into conflict with the reigning shogun from time to time. Some instances, such as Emperor Go-Toba's 1221 rebellion against the Kamakura shogunate and the 1336 Kenmu Restoration under Emperor Go-Daigo, show the power struggle between the Imperial Court in Kyoto and the military governments of Japan.\nFactional control (530s\u20131867) and \"sh\u014dguns\" (1192\u20131867).\nThere have been seven non-imperial families who have controlled Japanese emperors: the Soga (530s\u2013645), the Fujiwara (850s\u20131070), the Taira (1159\u20131180s), the Minamoto (1192\u20131199/1203), the H\u014dj\u014d (1199/1203\u20131333), the Ashikaga (1336\u20131565), and the Tokugawa (1603\u20131867). However, every shogun from the Minamoto, Ashikaga, and Tokugawa families had to be officially recognized by the emperors, who were still the source of sovereignty, although they could not exercise their powers independently from the shogunate.\nDuring the major part of 1192 to 1867, political sovereignty of the state was exercised by the \"sh\u014dguns\" or their \"shikken\" regents (1203\u20131333), whose authority was conferred by Imperial warrant. When Portuguese explorers first came into contact with the Japanese (see \"Nanban period\"), they described Japanese conditions in analogy, likening the emperor with great symbolic authority, but little political power, to the pope, and the \"sh\u014dgun\" to secular European rulers (e.g., the Holy Roman emperor). In keeping with the analogy, they even used the term \"emperor\" in reference to the \"sh\u014dguns\" and their regents, e.g. in the case of Toyotomi Hideyoshi, whom missionaries called \"Emperor Taico-sama\" (from Taik\u014d and the honorific \"sama\"). A Dutch embassy report used similar terminology in 1691. Empress Go-Sakuramachi was the last ruling empress of Japan and reigned from 1762 to 1771. During the Sakoku period of 1603 to 1868, there was very limited trade between Japan and foreigners. The Dutch were the only westerners who had limited access to Japan.\nKenmu Restoration (1333\u20131336).\nEmperor Go-Daigo succeeded in 1333 to get back the direct authority directly to the emperor after overthrowing the Kamakura shogunate, with the help of Ashikaga Takauji, a defected Kamakura general. The short three-year period during which the power was directly in the hand of the emperor is called the Kenmu Restoration. The direct ruling of the emperor proved however inefficient and ultimately failed, with Takauji grabbing political power for himself.\nMeiji Restoration (1868).\nIn July 1853, Commodore Perry's Black Ships of the US Navy made their first visit to Edo Bay. Japan lacked the military and industrial power to prevent it. Unequal treaties coerced and took advantage of Japan. Consequently, Japan was forcibly opened to foreign trade and the shogunate proved incapable of hindering the \"barbarian\" interlopers; Emperor K\u014dmei thus began to assert himself politically. By the early 1860s, the relationship between the Imperial Court and the shogunate was changing radically. Disaffected domains and \"r\u014dnin\" began to rally to the call of \"sonn\u014d j\u014di\" (\"revere the emperor, expel the barbarians\"). The domains of Satsuma and Ch\u014dsh\u016b, historic enemies of the Tokugawa, used this turmoil to unite their forces and won an important military victory outside of Kyoto against Tokugawa forces.\nOn 9 November 1867, the Shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu formally stepped down to restore Emperor Meiji to nominal full power. He issued the imperial decree of constitutionalism on 14 April 1875. The Meiji Constitution was adopted on 11 February 1889. The emperor of Japan became an active ruler with considerable political power over foreign policy and diplomacy which was shared with an elected Imperial Diet. The Japanese subjects gained many rights and duties.\nThe constitution described the emperor (in Article 4) as: \"the head of the Empire, combining in Himself the rights of sovereignty\", and he \"exercises them, according to the provisions of the present Constitution\". His rights included to sanction and promulgate laws, to execute them and to exercise \"supreme command of the Army and the Navy\". The liaison conference created in 1893 also made the emperor the leader of the Imperial General Headquarters. On Meiji's death in 1912 and the accession of his son Taish\u014d, who suffered from ill-health and various disabilities, many of these powers were assumed by the Imperial Diet in an era known as the Taish\u014d Democracy.\nWorld War II (1937\u20131945).\nEmperor Sh\u014dwa (Hirohito) was in power during the Pacific War; he controlled both the sovereign of the state and the imperial forces. The role of the emperor as head of the State Shinto religion was exploited during the war, creating an Imperial cult that led to kamikaze bombers and other manifestations of fanaticism. This in turn led to the requirement in the Potsdam Declaration for the elimination \"for all time of the authority and influence of those who have deceived and misled the people of Japan into embarking on world conquest\".\nIn State Shinto, the emperor was believed to be an (manifest kami or incarnation of a deity). Following Japan's surrender, the Allies issued the Shinto Directive separating church and state within Japan. In 1946, Emperor Sh\u014dwa was forced to proclaim the Humanity Declaration, but the declaration excludes the word , including the unusual word instead. As such, some experts doubt whether his divinity was renounced. Jean Herbert said it would be inadmissible to deny his divine origin.\nEmperor Sh\u014dwa was excluded from the postwar Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal. Scholars dispute the power he had and the role he played during WWII. Emperor Sh\u014dwa's reign from 1926 until his death in 1989 makes him the longest-lived and longest-reigning historical Japanese emperor, and one of the longest-reigning monarchs in the world.\nContemporary (1978\u2013present).\nThe Emperors of Japan have not visited Yasukuni Shrine since 1978. Hirohito maintained an official boycott of Yasukuni Shrine after it was revealed to him that Class-A war criminals had secretly been enshrined. The boycott was continued by his son and grandson, Akihito and Naruhito.\nBy 1979, Emperor Sh\u014dwa was the only monarch in the world with the monarchical title \"emperor.\" Emperor Sh\u014dwa was the longest-reigning historical monarch in Japan's history and the world's longest reigning contemporary monarch until he was surpassed by King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand in July 2008.\nAccording to journalist Makoto Inoue of \"The Nikkei\", Emperor Emeritus Akihito wanted to be closer to the people, rather than be treated like a god or robot. Inoue believes that during his reign, he transformed the symbolic role of emperor into a human being. In March 2019, the Mainichi reported 87% thought Akihito fulfilled his role as symbol of the state.\nOn 30 April 2019, Emperor Akihito abdicated due to health issues and the Heisei era ended. The previous time abdication occurred was Emperor K\u014dkaku in 1817. Akihito's eldest son, Naruhito ascended on 1 May 2019, referred to as \"Kinj\u014d Tenn\u014d\" and Reiwa era started.\nCurrent constitution.\nIn 1947 the post-war became law when it received the emperor's assent on 3 November 1946. It provides for a parliamentary system of government and guarantees certain fundamental rights. Under its terms, the emperor of Japan is \"the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people\" and exercises a purely ceremonial role without the possession of sovereignty. It was drawn up under the Allied occupation that followed World War II and changed Japan's previous Prussian-style Meiji Constitution that granted the emperor theoretically unlimited powers. The liberal constitution was inspired by several European states. Currently, it is a rigid document and the oldest unamended constitution.\nRealm and territories.\nHistorically, territorial designations are not a requirement for the position of \"Tenn\u014d\" (emperor). Rather it is the emperor's symbolic and religious power of authority. Since the Kamakura shogunate, the emperor held \"de jure\" ownership of the realm. Throughout most of medieval Japan, the shogun's legitimate authority was based on being appointed and receiving the power from the emperor even though the shogun was the \"de facto\" ruler. The emperor was considered a direct descendant of Amaterasu and of utmost importance in the Shinto religion and sentimental traditions. Thus no shogun tried to usurp the emperor, instead they tried to keep the emperor under control and away from politics. However, the emperor still had the power to \"control time\" via the Japanese Neng\u014d which names eras on calendars after emperors.\nDuring the Kofun period the first central government of the unified state was Yamato in the Kinai region of central Japan. The territory of Japan has changed throughout history. Its largest extent was the Empire of Japan. In 1938 it was .\nThe maximum extent including the home islands and the Japanese colonial empire was in 1942. After its defeat in World War II the empire was dismantled. The contemporary territories include the Japanese archipelago and these areas. Regardless of territorial changes the emperor remains the formal head of state of Japan. During most of history, \"de facto\" power was with shoguns or prime ministers. The emperor was more like a revered embodiment of divine harmony than the head of an actual governing administration. In Japan, it was more effective for ambitious daimyo (feudal lords) to hold actual power, as such positions were not inherently contradictory to the emperor's position. The shoguns and prime ministers derived their legitimacy from the emperor. The parliamentary government continues a similar coexistence with the emperor.\nThe first recorded instance of the name \"Nihon\" was between 665 and 703 during the Asuka period. This was several centuries after the start of the current imperial line. The various names of Japan do not affect the status of the emperor as head of state.\nEducation.\nThe emperors traditionally had an education officer. In recent times, Emperor Taish\u014d had Count Nogi Maresuke, Emperor Sh\u014dwa had Marshal-Admiral Marquis T\u014dg\u014d Heihachir\u014d, and Emperor Akihito had Elizabeth Gray Vining as well as as their tutors. Members of the imperial family were obliged to be educated at the Gakush\u016bin (Peer's School) by the 1926 Act of Education for the Imperial family, which was abolished in 1947.\nReference and naming.\nThe Japanese language has two words equivalent to the English word \"emperor\": , which refers exclusively to the emperor of Japan, and , which primarily identifies non-Japanese emperors. \"Sumeramikoto\" (\"the imperial person\") was also used in Old Japanese.\nThe title given posthumously to an emperor changed after the death of Emperor Murakami in 967, who was the last to receive the title . From the death of Emperor En'y\u016b in 991 onward, the title started to be used instead of \"tenn\u014d\" as the honorary title attached to the . The term \"in\" originally referred to both the residence and the honorific title of a . However, from the Heian period onward, as it became rare for emperors to pass away before abdicating, the \"in\" title became established as a posthumous title. An exception is Emperor Antoku, who died during his reign in 1187, and was posthumously given a title that included \"tenn\u014d\". Although \"tenn\u014d\" was not used for emperors from the 10th or 12th century to the 19th century, it continued to be used for emperors who died before Juntoku abdicated due to the 1221 J\u014dky\u016b Rebellion.\nDuring their reign, the term \"tenn\u014d\" was only written in documents on limited occasions, such as when it was written as \"tenn\u014d\" but read as \"sumeramikoto\" in the . Normally, out of respect, euphemistic expressions like , , or , which refer to the emperor's palace or supreme status, were used instead.\nHowever, as the use of the title \"in\", which originally referred to retired emperors, gradually expanded over time to include members of the imperial family, shoguns, daimyos, and even commoners, it came to be seen as inappropriate for deceased emperors. The Edo period Confucian scholar Nakai Chikuzan (1730\u20131804) remarked, \"The title \"in\" is used by everyone from feudal lords and nobles to samurai and commoners, so it lacks the supreme honor of the imperial title and is unworthy\" (from \"S\u014db\u014d Kigen\"). He argued that deceased emperors should be referred to as \"Era Name + Tenn\u014d.\"\nAmid this trend, when Emperor K\u014dkaku died in 1840, Emperor Nink\u014d consulted with the court nobles about reviving the title \"tenn\u014d\" and obtained permission from the Tokugawa shogunate. He then selected a posthumous name, and in 1841, bestowed the title and posthumous name . From this point onward, the title \"tenn\u014d\" was once again used for deceased emperors.\nOther titles that were recorded to be in use were \"k\u014d\" (\u7687), \"tei\" (\u5e1d), \"\u014d\" (\u738b), all meaning \"prince\" or \"emperor\", and \"tenshi\" (\u5929\u5b50), or \"son of heaven\".\nIn English, the term \"mikado\" ( or ), literally meaning \"the honorable gate\" (i.e. the gate of the imperial palace, which indicates the person who lives in and possesses the palace; compare \"Sublime Porte\", an old term for the Ottoman government), was once used (as in \"The Mikado\", a 19th-century operetta), but this term is now obsolete.\nJapanese emperors take on a regnal name, which is the common and polite way to refer to the emperor as a person during their reign. Japanese regnal names are more precisely names for a period of time that begins with a historical event, such as the enthronement of an emperor. Since Emperor Meiji, it has been customary to have one era per emperor and to rename each emperor after his death using the name of the era over which he presided. Before Emperor Meiji, the names of the eras were changed more frequently, and the posthumous names of the emperors were chosen differently.\nHirohito was never referred to by his name in Japan. He was given the posthumous name \"Sh\u014dwa Tenn\u014d\" after his death, which is the only name that Japanese speakers currently use when referring to him.\nThe current emperor on the throne is typically referred to as \"Tenn\u014d Heika\" (, \"His [Imperial] Majesty the Emperor\"), \"Kinj\u014d Heika\" (, \"His Current Majesty\") or simply \"Tenn\u014d\", when speaking Japanese. Emperor Akihito received the title \"Daij\u014d Tenn\u014d\" (, Emperor Emeritus), often shortened to \"J\u014dk\u014d\" (), upon his abdication on 30 April 2019, and is expected to be renamed \"Heisei Tenn\u014d\" () after his death and will then be referred to exclusively by that name in Japanese.\nOrigin of the title.\nOriginally, the ruler of Japan was known as either / (\"Yamato-\u014dkimi\", \"Grand King of Yamato\"), / (\"Wa-\u014d\"/\"Wakoku-\u014d\", \"King of Wa\", used externally) or (\"Ame-no-shita shiroshimesu \u014dkimi\" or \"Sumera no mikoto\", \"Grand King who rules all under heaven\", used internally) in Japanese and Chinese sources before the 7th century. The oldest diplomatic reference to the title (\"Tenshi\", Emperor or Son of Heaven) can be found in a diplomatic document sent from Empress Suiko to the Sui dynasty of China in 607. In this document, Empress Suiko introduced herself to Emperor Yang of Sui as \u65e5\u51fa\u8655\u5929\u5b50 (\"Hi izurutokoro no tenshi\") meaning \"Heavenly son of the land where the sun rises\". The oldest documented use of the title (\"Tenn\u014d\", heavenly emperor) appears on a wooden tablet, or \"mokkan\", that was unearthed in Asuka-mura, Nara Prefecture in 1998 and dated back to the reign of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d in the 7th century.\nMarriage traditions.\nThroughout history, Japanese emperors and noblemen appointed a spouse to the position of chief wife, rather than just keeping a harem or an assortment of female attendants.\nThe Japanese imperial dynasty consistently practiced official polygamy until the Taish\u014d period (1912\u20131926). Besides his empress, the emperor could take, and nearly always took, several secondary consorts (\"concubines\") of various hierarchical degrees. Concubines were allowed also to other dynasts (Shinn\u014dke, \u014cke). After a decree by Emperor Ichij\u014d (r.\u2009986\u00a0\u2013\u00a01011), some emperors even had two empresses simultaneously (identified by the separate titles \"k\u014dg\u014d\" and \"ch\u016bg\u016b\"). With the help of all this polygamy, the imperial clan could produce more offspring. (Sons by secondary consorts were usually recognized as imperial princes, too, and such a son could be recognized as heir to the throne if the empress did not give birth to an heir.)\nOf the eight reigning empresses of Japan, none married or gave birth after ascending the throne. Some of them, being widows, had produced children before their reigns. In the succession, children of the empress were preferred over sons of secondary consorts. Thus it was significant which quarters had preferential opportunities in providing chief wives to imperial princes, i.e. supplying future empresses.\nApparently, the oldest tradition of official marriages within the imperial dynasty involved marriages between dynasty members, even between half-siblings or between uncle and niece. Such marriages were deemed to preserve better the imperial blood; or they aimed at producing children symbolic of a reconciliation between two branches of the imperial dynasty. Daughters of other families remained concubines until Emperor Sh\u014dmu (701\u2013706)\u2014in what was specifically reported as the first elevation of its kind\u2014elevated his Fujiwara consort Empress K\u014dmy\u014d to chief wife.\nJapanese monarchs have been, as much as others elsewhere, dependent on making alliances with powerful chiefs and with other monarchs. Many such alliances were sealed by marriages. However, in Japan such marriages soon became incorporated as elements of tradition which controlled the marriages of later generations, though the original practical alliance had lost its real meaning. A repeated pattern saw an imperial son-in-law under the influence of his powerful non-imperial father-in-law.\nBeginning from the 7th and 8th centuries, emperors primarily took women of the Fujiwara clan as their highest-ranking wives \u2013 the most probable mothers of future monarchs. This was cloaked as a tradition of marriage between heirs of two \"kami\" (Shinto deities): descendants of Amaterasu with descendants of the family \"kami\" of the Fujiwara. (Originally, the Fujiwara descended from relatively minor nobility, thus their \"kami\" is an unremarkable one in the Japanese myth world.) To produce imperial children, heirs of the nation, with two-side descent from the two kami, was regarded as desirable \u2013 or at least it suited powerful Fujiwara lords, who thus received preference in the imperial marriage-market. The reality behind such marriages was an alliance between an imperial prince and a Fujiwara lord (his father-in-law or grandfather), the latter with his resources supporting the prince to the throne and most often controlling the government. These arrangements established the tradition of regents (Sessh\u014d and Kampaku), with these positions held only by a Fujiwara sekke lord.\nEarlier, the emperors had married women from families of the government-holding Soga lords, and women of the imperial clan, i.e. various-degree cousins and often even their own half-sisters. Several imperial figures of the 5th and 6th centuries such as Prince Sh\u014dtoku (574\u2013622) were children of half-sibling couples. Such marriages often served as alliance or succession devices: the Soga lord ensured his domination of a prince who would be put on the throne as a puppet; or a prince ensured the combination of two imperial descents, to strengthen his own and his children's claim to the throne. Marriages were also a means to seal a reconciliation between two imperial branches.\nAfter a couple of centuries, emperors could no longer take anyone from outside such families as a primary wife, no matter what the potential expediency of such a marriage and the power or wealth offered by such a match. Only very rarely did a prince ascend the throne whose mother was not descended from the approved families. The earlier necessity and expediency had mutated into a strict tradition that did not allow for current expediency or necessity, but only prescribed the daughters of a restricted circle of families as eligible brides, because they had produced eligible brides for centuries. Tradition had become more forceful than law.\nFujiwara women often became empresses, while concubines came from less exalted noble families. In the last thousand years, sons of an imperial male and a Fujiwara woman have been preferred in the succession. The five Fujiwara families, Ichij\u014d, Kuj\u014d, Nij\u014d, Konoe, and Takatsukasa, functioned as the primary source of imperial brides from the 8th century to the 19th century, even more often than daughters of the imperial clan itself. Fujiwara daughters were thus the usual empresses and mothers of emperors. The Meiji-era Imperial House Law of 1889 made this restriction on brides for the emperor and crown prince explicit. A clause stipulated that daughters of Sekke (the five main branches of the higher Fujiwara) and daughters of the imperial clan itself were primarily acceptable brides. The law was repealed in the aftermath of World War II. In 1959 the future Emperor Akihito became the first crown-prince for over a thousand years to marry a consort from outside the previously eligible circle.\nThree Sacred Treasures.\nIn Japanese mythology, the sacred treasures were bestowed on Ninigi-no-Mikoto, the grandson of the goddess Amaterasu, at the advent of Tenson k\u014drin. Amaterasu sent him to pacify Japan by bringing the three celestial gifts that are used by the emperor. The account of Ninigi being sent to earth appears in the . The Three Sacred Treasures were inherited by successive Japanese emperors, which are the same as or similar to the sacred treasures in mythology. These three gifts signify that the emperor is the descendant of Amaterasu. The three sacred treasures are:\nDuring the succession rite (senso, \u8df5\u795a), possessing the jewel Yasakani no Magatama, the sword Kusanagi and the mirror Yata no Kagami are a testament of the legitimate serving emperor.\nSuccession.\nThe origins of the Japanese imperial dynasty are obscure, and it bases its position on the claim that it has \"reigned since time immemorial\". There are no records of any emperor who was not said to have been a descendant of other, yet there is suspicion that Emperor Keitai (c. AD 500) may have been an unrelated outsider, though the sources (Kojiki, Nihon-Shoki) state that he was a male-line descendant of Emperor \u014cjin. However, his descendants, including his successors, were according to records descended from at least one and probably several imperial princesses of the older lineage.\nMillennia ago, the Japanese imperial family developed its own peculiar system of hereditary succession. It has been non-primogenitural, more or less agnatic, based mostly on rotation. Today, Japan uses strict agnatic primogeniture, which was adopted from Prussia, by which Japan was greatly influenced in the 1870s.\nThe controlling principles and their interaction were apparently very complex and sophisticated, leading to even idiosyncratic outcomes. Some chief principles apparent in the succession have been:\nHistorically, the succession to the Chrysanthemum Throne has always passed to descendants in male line from the imperial lineage. Generally, they have been males, though over the reign of one hundred monarchs there have been nine women (one pre-historical and eight historical) as emperor on eleven occasions.\nOver a thousand years ago, a tradition started that an emperor should ascend relatively young. A dynast who had passed his toddler years was regarded suitable and old enough. Reaching the age of legal majority was not a requirement. Thus, a multitude of Japanese emperors have ascended as children, as young as 6 or 8 years old. The high-priestly duties were deemed possible for a walking child. A reign of around 10 years was regarded a sufficient service. Being a child was apparently a fine property, to better endure tedious duties and to tolerate subjugation to political power-brokers, as well as sometimes to cloak the truly powerful members of the imperial dynasty. Almost all Japanese empresses and dozens of emperors abdicated and lived the rest of their lives in pampered retirement, wielding influence behind the scenes. Several emperors abdicated to their entitled retirement while still in their teens. These traditions show in Japanese folklore, theater, literature, and other forms of culture, where the emperor is usually described or depicted as an adolescent.\nBefore the Meiji Restoration, Japan had eleven reigns of reigning empresses, all of them daughters of the male line of the Imperial House. None ascended purely as a wife or as a widow of an emperor. Imperial daughters and granddaughters, however, usually ascended the throne as a sort of a \"stop gap\" measure \u2013 if a suitable male was not available or some imperial branches were in rivalry so that a compromise was needed. Over half of Japanese empresses and many emperors abdicated once a suitable male descendant was considered to be old enough to rule (just past toddlerhood, in some cases). Four empresses, Empress Suiko, Empress K\u014dgyoku (also Empress Saimei), and Empress Jit\u014d, as well as the legendary Empress Jing\u016b, were widows of deceased emperors and princesses of the blood imperial in their own right. One, Empress Genmei, was the widow of a crown prince and a princess of the blood imperial. The other four, Empress Gensh\u014d, Empress K\u014dken (also Empress Sh\u014dtoku), Empress Meish\u014d, and Empress Go-Sakuramachi, were unwed daughters of previous emperors. None of these empresses married or gave birth after ascending the throne.\nArticle 2 of the Meiji Constitution (the Constitution of the Empire of Japan) stated, \"The Imperial Throne shall be succeeded to by imperial male descendants, according to the provisions of the Imperial House Law.\" The 1889 Imperial Household Law fixed the succession on male descendants of the imperial line, and specifically excluded female descendants from the succession. In the event of a complete failure of the main line, the throne would pass to the nearest collateral branch, again in the male line. If the empress did not give birth to an heir, the emperor could take a concubine, and the son he had by that concubine would be recognized as heir to the throne. This law, which was promulgated on the same day as the Meiji Constitution, enjoyed co-equal status with that constitution.\nArticle 2 of the Constitution of Japan, promulgated in 1947 by influence of the U.S. occupation administration, provides that \"The Imperial Throne shall be dynastic and succeeded to in accordance with the Imperial Household Law passed by the Diet.\" The Imperial Household Law of 1947, enacted by the ninety-second and last session of the Imperial Diet, retained the exclusion on female dynasts found in the 1889 law. The government of Prime Minister Yoshida Shigeru hastily cobbled together the legislation to bring the Imperial Household in compliance with the American-written Constitution of Japan that went into effect in May 1947. In an effort to control the size of the imperial family, the law stipulates that only legitimate male descendants in the male line can be dynasts, that imperial princesses lose their status as imperial family members if they marry outside the imperial family, and that the emperor and other members of the Imperial Family may not adopt children. It also prevented branches, other than the branch descending from Taish\u014d, from being imperial princes any longer.\nCurrent status.\nSuccession is now regulated by laws passed by the National Diet. The current law excludes women from the succession. A change to this law had been considered until Princess Kiko gave birth to Prince Hisahito.\nUntil the birth of Hisahito, son of Prince Akishino, on 6 September 2006, there was a potential succession problem, since Prince Akishino was the only male child to be born into the imperial family since 1965. Following the birth of Princess Aiko on 1 December 2001, there was public debate about amending the current Imperial Household Law to allow women to succeed to the throne. In January 2005, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi appointed a special panel composed of judges, university professors, and civil servants to study changes to the Imperial Household Law and to make recommendations to the government.\nOn October 25, 2005, the panel dealing with the succession issue recommended amending the law to allow females of the male line of imperial descent to ascend the Japanese throne. On January 20, 2006, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi devoted part of his annual keynote speech to the controversy, pledging to submit a bill allowing women to ascend the throne to ensure that the succession continues in the future in a stable manner. Shortly after the announcement that Princess Kiko was pregnant with her third child, Koizumi suspended such plans. As of 2025[ [update]], her son, Prince Hisahito, is second in line to the throne under the current law of succession. On January 3, 2007, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe announced that he would drop the proposal to alter the Imperial Household Law.\nAnother proposed plan is to allow unmarried men from the abolished collateral branches of the imperial family to rejoin through adoption or marriage. This would be an emergency measure to ensure stable succession. It does not revise the Imperial Household Law. This does not restore the royalty of the 11 collateral branches of the Imperial House that were abolished in October 1947.\nCrown Prince Akishino was formally declared first in line to the chrysanthemum throne on November 8, 2020.\nBurial traditions.\nDuring the Kofun period, so-called \"archaic funerals\" were held for the dead emperors, but only the funerary rites from the end of the period, which the chronicles describe in more detail, are known. They were centered around the rite of the \"mogari\" (), a provisional depository between death and permanent burial.\nEmpress Jit\u014d was the first Japanese imperial personage to be cremated (in 703). After that, with a few exceptions, all emperors were cremated up to the Edo period. For the next 350 years, in-ground burial became the favoured funeral custom. Until 1912, the emperors were usually buried in Kyoto. From Emperor Taish\u014d onward, the emperors have been buried at the Musashi Imperial Graveyard in Tokyo.\nIn 2013, the Imperial Household Agency announced that Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko would be cremated after they die.\nWealth.\nUntil the end of World War II, the Japanese monarchy was thought to be among the wealthiest in the world. Before 1911, no distinction was made between the imperial crown estates and the emperor's personal properties, which were considerable. The Imperial Property Law, which came into effect in January 1911, established two categories of imperial properties: the hereditary or crown estates and the personal (\"ordinary\") properties of the imperial family. The Imperial Household Minister was given the responsibility for observing any judicial proceedings concerning imperial holdings. Under the terms of the law, imperial properties were only taxable in cases where no conflict with the Imperial House Law existed; however, crown estates could only be used for public or imperially-sanctioned undertakings. Personal properties of certain members of the imperial family, in addition to properties held for imperial family members who were minors, were exempted from taxation. Those family members included the Empress Dowager, the Empress, the Crown Prince and Crown Princess, the Imperial Grandson and the consort of the Imperial Grandson. As a result of the poor economic conditions in Japan, of crown lands (about 26% of the total landholdings) were either sold or transferred to government and private-sector interests in 1921. In 1930, the Nagoya Detached Palace (Nagoya Castle) was donated to the city of Nagoya, with six other imperial villas being either sold or donated at the same time. In 1939, Nij\u014d Castle, the former Kyoto residence of the Tokugawa shoguns and an imperial palace since the Meiji Restoration, was likewise donated to the city of Kyoto.\nAt the end of 1935, according to official government figures, the Imperial Court owned roughly of landed estates, the bulk of which () were the emperor's private lands, with the total acreage of the crown estates amounting to some ; those landholdings comprised palace complexes, forest and farm lands and other residential and commercial properties. The total value of the imperial properties was then estimated at \u00a5650\u00a0million, or roughly US$195\u00a0million at prevailing exchange rates. This was in addition to the emperor's personal fortune, which amounted to hundreds of millions of yen and included numerous family heirlooms and furnishings, purebred livestock and investments in major Japanese firms, such as the Bank of Japan, other major Japanese banks, the Imperial Hotel and Nippon Yusen.\nFollowing Japan's defeat in the Second World War, all of the collateral branches of the imperial family were abolished under the Allied occupation of the country and the subsequent constitutional reforms, forcing those families to sell their assets to private or government owners. Staff numbers in the imperial households were slashed from a peak of roughly 6,000 to about 1,000. The imperial estates and the emperor's personal fortune (then estimated at US$17.15\u00a0million, or roughly US$800\u00a0million in 2024 terms) were transferred to either state or private ownership, excepting of landholdings. Since the 1947 constitutional reforms, the imperial family has been supported by an official civil list sanctioned by the Japanese government. The largest imperial divestments were the former imperial Kiso and Amagi forest lands in Gifu and Shizuoka prefectures, grazing lands for livestock in Hokkaido and a stock farm in the Chiba region, all of which were transferred to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. Imperial property holdings have been further reduced since 1947 after several handovers to the government. Today, the primary imperial properties include the two imperial palaces at Tokyo and Kyoto, several imperial villas and a number of imperial farms and game preserves.\nAs of 2017, Akihito has an estimated net worth of US$40\u00a0million. The wealth and expenditures of the emperor and the imperial family have remained a subject of speculation and were largely withheld from the public until 2003, when Mori Yohei, a former royal correspondent for the \"Mainichi Shimbun\", obtained access to 200 documents through a recently passed public information law. Mori's findings, which he published in a book, revealed details of the imperial family's US$240\u00a0million civil list (in 2003 values). Among other details, the book revealed the imperial family employed a staff of over 1,000 people. The total cost of events related to the enthronement of Emperor Naruhito was approximately 16.6 billion yen ($150 million) in 2019. This is 30% higher than Emperor Emeritus Akihito's accession (1990).\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInformational notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10111", "revid": "14674391", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10111", "title": "Emperor", "text": "Type of monarch\nAn emperor (from , via ) is the (male) ruler of an empire. Empress, the female equivalent, may indicate an emperor's wife (empress consort), mother/grandmother (empress dowager/grand empress dowager), or a woman who rules in her own right and name (empress regnant or \"suo jure\"). Emperors are generally recognized to be of the highest monarchic honour and rank, surpassing king. In Europe, the title of Emperor has been used since the Middle Ages, considered in those times equal or almost equal in dignity to that of Pope due to the latter's position as visible head of the Church and spiritual leader of the Catholic part of Western Europe. The emperor of Japan is the only currently reigning monarch whose title is translated into English as \"Emperor\", although he no longer reigns over an empire.\nBoth emperors and kings are monarchs or sovereigns, both emperor and empress are considered monarchical titles. In as much as there is a strict definition of emperor, it is that an emperor has no relations implying the superiority of any other ruler and typically rules over more than one nation. Therefore, a king might be obliged to pay tribute to another ruler, or be restrained in his actions in some unequal fashion, but an emperor should in theory be completely free of such restraints. However, monarchs heading empires have not always used the title in all contexts\u2014the British sovereign did not assume the title Empress of the British Empire even during the incorporation of India, though she was declared Empress of India.\nIn Western Europe, the title of Emperor was used exclusively by the Holy Roman Emperor, whose imperial authority was derived from the concept of , i.e., they claimed succession to the authority of the Roman emperors, thus linking themselves to Roman institutions and traditions as part of state ideology. Although initially ruling much of Central Europe and northern Italy, by the 19th century, the emperor exercised little power beyond the German-speaking states.\nAlthough technically an elective title, by the late 16th century, the imperial title had in practice come to be inherited by the Habsburg Archdukes of Austria and, following the Thirty Years' War, their control over the states (outside the Habsburg monarchy, i.e. Austria, Bohemia and various territories outside the empire) had become nearly non-existent. However, Napoleon Bonaparte was crowned Emperor of the French in 1804 and was shortly followed by Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor, who declared himself Emperor of Austria in the same year. The position of Holy Roman Emperor nonetheless continued until Francis II abdicated that position in 1806. In Eastern Europe, the monarchs of Russia also used to wield imperial authority as successors to the Eastern Roman Empire. Their status was officially recognized by the Holy Roman Emperor in 1514, although not officially used by the Russian monarchs until 1547. However, the Russian emperors are better known by their Russian-language title of Tsar even after Peter the Great adopted the title of Emperor of All Russia in 1721.\nHistorians have liberally used \"emperor\" and \"empire\" anachronistically and out of its Roman and European context to describe any large state from the past or the present. Some titles are considered equivalent to \"emperor\" or are translated as \"emperor\". Examples of that are\u00a0Roman emperors' titles, King of Kings, Khalifa, Huangdi, Cakravartin, Great Khan, Aztec monarchs' title, Inca monarchs' title, etc. Sometimes this reference has even extended to non-monarchically ruled states and their spheres of influence, such as the Athenian Empire of the late 5th century BC, the Angevin Empire of the Plantagenets and the Soviet and American \"empires\" of the Cold War era. However, such \"empires\" did not need to be headed by an \"emperor\". \"Empire\" became identified instead with vast territorial holdings rather than the title of its ruler by the mid-18th century.\nFor purposes of protocol, the size and scope of a kingdom or empire may determine precedence in international diplomatic relations, but currently, precedence among heads of state who are sovereigns\u2014whether they be kings, queens, emperors, empresses, princes, princesses and presidents may be determined by the size and scope or time that each one has been continuously in office. Outside the European context, \"emperor\" was the translation given to holders of titles who were accorded the same precedence as European emperors in diplomatic terms. In reciprocity, these rulers might accredit equal titles in their native languages to their European peers. Through centuries of international convention, this has become the dominant rule to identifying an emperor in the modern era.\nRoman Empire.\nClassical Antiquity.\nWhen Republican Rome turned into a \"de facto\" monarchy in the second half of the 1st century BC, at first there was no name for the title of the new type of monarch. Ancient Romans abhorred the name Rex (\"king\"), and it was critical to the political order to maintain the forms and pretenses of republican rule. Julius Caesar had been Dictator, an acknowledged and traditional office in Republican Rome. Caesar was not the first to hold it, but following his assassination the term was abhorred in Rome.\nAugustus, considered the first Roman emperor, established his hegemony by collecting on himself offices, titles, and honours of Republican Rome that had traditionally been distributed to different people, concentrating what had been distributed power in one man. One of these offices was \"princeps senatus\", (\"first man of the Senate\") and became changed into Augustus' chief honorific, \"princeps civitatis\" (\"first citizen\") from which the modern English word and title prince is descended. The first period of the Roman Empire, from 27 BC to AD 284, is called the \"principate\" for this reason. However, it was the informal descriptive of \"Imperator\" (\"commander\") that became the title increasingly favored by his successors. Previously bestowed on high officials and military commanders who had \"imperium\", Augustus reserved it exclusively to himself as the ultimate holder of all \"imperium\". (\"Imperium\" is Latin for the authority to command, one of a various types of authority delineated in Roman political thought.)\nBeginning with Augustus, \"Imperator\" appeared in the title of all Roman monarchs through the extinction of the Empire in 1453. After the reign of Augustus' immediate successor Tiberius, being proclaimed \"imperator\" was transformed into the act of accession to the head of state. Other honorifics used by the Roman emperors have also come to be synonyms for Emperor:\nAfter the turbulent Year of the Four Emperors in 69, the Flavian dynasty reigned for three decades. The succeeding Nervan-Antonian dynasty, ruling for most of the 2nd century, stabilised the empire. This epoch became known as the era of the \"Five Good Emperors\", and was followed by the short-lived Severan dynasty.\nDuring the Crisis of the 3rd century, barracks emperors succeeded one another at short intervals. Three short lived secessionist attempts had their own emperors: the Gallic Empire, the Britannic Empire, and the Palmyrene Empire though the latter used \"rex\" more regularly.\nThe Principate (27 BC \u2013 284 AD) period was succeeded by what is known as the Dominate (284 AD \u2013 527 AD), during which Emperor Diocletian tried to put the empire on a more formal footing. Diocletian sought to address the challenges of the Empire's now vast geography and the instability caused by the informality of succession by the creation of co-emperors and junior emperors. At one point, there were as many as five sharers of the \"imperium\" (see: Tetrarchy). In 325 AD Constantine I defeated his rivals and restored single emperor rule, but following his death the empire was divided among his sons. For a time the concept was of one empire ruled by multiple emperors with varying territory under their control, however following the death of Theodosius I the rule was divided between his two sons and increasingly became separate entities. The areas administered from Rome are referred to by historians the Western Roman Empire and those under the immediate authority of Constantinople called the Eastern Roman Empire or (after the Battle of Yarmouk in 636 AD) the Later Roman or Byzantine Empire. The subdivisions and co-emperor system were formally abolished by Emperor Zeno in 480 AD following the death of Julius Nepos last Western Emperor and the ascension of Odoacer as the \"de facto\" King of Italy in 476 AD.\nByzantine period.\nBefore the 4th Crusade.\nHistorians generally refer to the continuing Roman Empire in the east as the Byzantine Empire after Byzantium, the original name of the town that Constantine I would elevate to the Imperial capital as New Rome in AD 330. (The city is more commonly called Constantinople and is today named Istanbul). Although the empire was again subdivided and a co-emperor sent to Italy at the end of the fourth century, the office became unitary again only 95 years later at the request of the Roman Senate and following the death of Julius Nepos, last Western Emperor. This change was a recognition of the reality that little remained of Imperial authority in the areas that had been the Western Empire, with even Rome and Italy itself now ruled by the essentially autonomous Odoacer.\nThese Later Roman \"Byzantine\" emperors completed the transition from the idea of the emperor as a semi-republican official to the emperor as an absolute monarch. Of particular note was the translation of the Latin \"Imperator\" into the Greek \"Basileus\", after Emperor Heraclius changed the official language of the empire from Latin to Greek in AD 620. Basileus, a title which had long been used for Alexander the Great was already in common usage as the Greek word for the Roman emperor, but its definition and sense was \"King\" in Greek, essentially equivalent with the Latin \"Rex\". Byzantine period emperors also used the Greek word \"autokrator\", meaning \"one who rules himself\", or \"monarch\", which was traditionally used by Greek writers to translate the Latin \"dictator\". Essentially, the Greek language did not incorporate the nuances of the Ancient Roman concepts that distinguished \"imperium\" from other forms of political power.\nIn general usage, the Byzantine imperial title evolved from simply \"emperor\" (\"basileus\") to \"emperor of the Romans\" (\"basileus t\u014dn R\u014dmai\u014dn\") in the 9th century, to \"emperor and autocrat of the Romans\" (\"basileus kai autokrat\u014dr t\u014dn R\u014dmai\u014dn\") in the 10th. In fact, none of these (and other) additional epithets and titles had ever been completely discarded.\nOne important distinction between the post Constantine I (reigned AD 306\u2013337) emperors and their pagan predecessors was cesaropapism, the assertion that the emperor (or other head of state) is also the head of the Church. Although this principle was held by all emperors after Constantine, it met with increasing resistance and ultimately rejection by bishops in the west after the effective end of Imperial power there. This concept became a key element of the meaning of \"emperor\" in the Byzantine and Orthodox east, but went out of favor in the west with the rise of Roman Catholicism.\nThe Byzantine Empire also produced three women who effectively governed the state: the Empress Irene and the Empresses Zoe and Theodora.\nLatin emperors.\nIn 1204 Constantinople fell to the Venetians and the Franks in the Fourth Crusade. Following the sacking of the city, the conquerors declared a new \"Empire of Romania\", known to historians as the Latin Empire of Constantinople, installing Baldwin IX, Count of Flanders, as Emperor. However, Byzantine resistance to the new empire meant that it was in constant struggle to establish itself. Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos succeeded in recapturing Constantinople in 1261. The Principality of Achaea, a vassal state the empire had created in Morea (Greece) intermittently continued to recognize the authority of the crusader emperors for another half century. Pretenders to the title continued among the European nobility until circa 1383.\nAfter the 4th Crusade.\nWith Constantinople occupied, claimants to the imperial succession styled themselves as emperor in the chief centers of resistance: The Laskarid dynasty in the Empire of Nicaea, the Komnenid dynasty in the Empire of Trebizond and the Doukid dynasty in the Despotate of Epirus. In 1248, Epirus recognized the Nicaean emperors, who subsequently recaptured Constantinople in 1261. The Trapezuntine emperor formally submitted in Constantinople in 1281, but frequently flouted convention by styling themselves emperor back in Trebizond thereafter.\nEurope.\nByzantium's close cultural and political interaction with its Balkan neighbors Bulgaria and Serbia, and with Russia (Kievan Rus', then Muscovy) led to the adoption of Byzantine imperial traditions in all of these countries.\nHoly Roman Empire.\nThe \"Emperor\" of the Romans' title was a reflection of the \"translatio imperii\" (\"transfer of rule\") principle that regarded the Holy Roman emperors as the inheritors of the title of Emperor of the Western Roman Empire, despite the continued existence of the Roman Empire in the east, hence the problem of two emperors.\nFrom the time of Otto the Great onward, much of the former Carolingian kingdom of Eastern Francia became the Holy Roman Empire. The prince-electors elected one of their peers as King of the Romans and King of Italy before being crowned by the Pope. The emperor could also pursue the election of his heir (usually a son) as King, who would then succeed him after his death. This junior king then bore the title of King of the Romans. Although technically already ruling, after the election he would be crowned as emperor by the pope. The last emperor to be crowned by the pope was Charles V; all emperors after him were technically \"emperors-elect\", but were universally referred to as \"emperor\".\nThe Holy Roman emperor was considered the first among those in power. He was also the first defender of Christianity. From 1452 to the end of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 (except in the years 1742 to 1745) only members of the House of Habsburg were Holy Roman emperors. Karl von Habsburg is currently the head of the House of Habsburg.\nAustrian Empire.\nThe first Austrian Emperor was the last Holy Roman Emperor, Franz II. In the face of aggressions by Napoleon, Francis feared for the future of the Holy Roman Empire. He wished to maintain his and his family's Imperial status in the event that the Holy Roman Empire should be dissolved, as it indeed was in 1806 when an Austrian-led army suffered a humiliating defeat at the Battle of Austerlitz. After which, the victorious Napoleon proceeded to dismantle the old \"Reich\" by severing a good portion from the empire and turning it into a separate Confederation of the Rhine. With the size of his imperial realm significantly reduced, Francis II, \"Holy Roman Emperor\" became Francis I, \"Emperor of Austria\". The new imperial title may have sounded less prestigious than the old one, but Francis' dynasty continued to rule from Austria and a Habsburg monarch was still an emperor (\"Kaiser\"), and not just merely a king (\"K\u00f6nig\"), in name. According to the historian Friedrich Heer, the Austrian Habsburg emperor remained an \"auctoritas\" of a special kind. He was \"the grandson of the Caesars\", he remained the patron of the Holy Church.\nThe title lasted just a little over one century until 1918, but it was never clear what territory constituted the \"Empire of Austria\". When Francis took the title in 1804, the Habsburg lands as a whole were dubbed the \"Kaisertum \u00d6sterreich\". \"Kaisertum\" might literally be translated as \"emperordom\" (on analogy with \"kingdom\") or \"emperor-ship\"; the term denotes specifically \"the territory ruled by an emperor\", and is thus somewhat more general than Reich, which in 1804 carried connotations of universal rule. Austria proper (as opposed to the complex of Habsburg lands as a whole) had been part of the Archduchy of Austria since the 15th century, and most of the other territories of the Empire had their own institutions and territorial history. There were some attempts at centralization, especially during the reign of Maria Theresa and her son Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor. These efforts were finalized in the early 19th century. When the Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen (Hungary) were given self-government in 1867, the non-Hungarian portions were called the Empire of Austria. They were officially known as the \"Kingdoms and Lands Represented in the Imperial Council (\"Reichsrat\")\". The title of Emperor of Austria and the associated Empire were both abolished at the end World War I in 1918, when German Austria became a republic and the other kingdoms and lands represented in the Imperial Council established their independence or adhesion to other states.\nThe \"Kaisers\" of the Austrian Empire (1804\u20131918) were Franz I (1804\u20131835), Ferdinand I (1835\u20131848), Franz Joseph I (1848\u20131916) and Karl I (1916\u20131918). The current head of the House of Habsburg is Karl von Habsburg.\nBulgaria.\nIn 913, Simeon I of Bulgaria was crowned Emperor (Tsar, originally more fully Tsesar, \"c\u011bsar\"') of his own people by the Patriarch of Constantinople and Imperial regent Nicholas Mystikos outside the Byzantine capital. In its final expanded form, under the Second Bulgarian Empire the title read \"Emperor and Autocrat of all Bulgarians and Greeks\" (\u0426\u0430\u0440 \u0438 \u0441\u0430\u043c\u043e\u0434\u044a\u0440\u0436\u0435\u0446 \u043d\u0430 \u0432\u0441\u0438\u0447\u043a\u0438 \u0431\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0438 \u0438 \u0433\u044a\u0440\u0446\u0438, \"Car i samod\u0103r\u017eec na vsi\u010dki b\u0103lgari i g\u0103rci\" in the modern vernacular). The Roman component in the Bulgarian imperial title indicated both rule over Greek speakers and the derivation of the imperial tradition from the Romans, however this component was never recognised by the Byzantine court.\nByzantine recognition of Simeon's imperial title was revoked by the succeeding Byzantine government. The decade 914\u2013924 was spent in destructive warfare between Byzantium and Bulgaria over this and other matters of conflict. The Bulgarian monarch, who had further irritated his Byzantine counterpart by claiming the title \"Emperor of the Romans\" (\"basileus t\u014dn R\u014dmai\u014dn\"), was eventually recognized, as \"Emperor of the Bulgarians\" (\"basileus t\u014dn Boulgar\u014dn\") by the Byzantine Emperor Romanos I Lakapenos in 924. Byzantine recognition of the imperial dignity of the Bulgarian monarch and the patriarchal dignity of the Bulgarian patriarch was again confirmed at the conclusion of permanent peace and a Bulgarian-Byzantine dynastic marriage in 927. In the meantime, the Bulgarian imperial title may have been also tacitly confirmed by the pope, as claimed in later Bulgarian diplomatic correspondence. The Bulgarian imperial title \"tsar\" was adopted by all Bulgarian monarchs up to the fall of Bulgaria under Ottoman rule. Despite the attempt of Pope Innocent III to limit the Bulgarian monarch to the title of King (\"Rex\"), Kaloyan of Bulgaria considered himself an Emperor (\"Imperator\") and his successor Boril of Bulgaria was specifically accused of improperly using the imperial title by his neighbor, the Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders. Nevertheless, the Bulgarian imperial title was recognized by its neighbors and trading partners, including Byzantium, Hungary, Serbia, Venice, Genoa, Dubrovnik. 14th-century Bulgarian literary compositions saw the Bulgarian capital (Tarnovo) as a successor of Rome and Constantinople.\nAfter Bulgaria obtained full independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1908, its monarch, who was previously styled \"Knyaz\", Prince, took the traditional title of \"Tsar\", this time translated as King. Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha is the former Tsar Simeon II of Bulgaria.\nFrance.\nThe kings of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\" and the July Monarchy used the title \"Empereur de France\" in diplomatic correspondence and treaties with the Ottoman emperor from at least 1673 onwards. The Ottomans insisted on this elevated style while refusing to recognize the Holy Roman emperors or the Russian tsars because of their rival claims of the Roman crown. In short, it was an indirect insult by the Ottomans to the HRE and the Russians. The French kings also used it for Morocco (1682) and Persia (1715).\nFirst French Empire.\nNapoleon Bonaparte, who was already First Consul of the French Republic (\"Premier Consul de la R\u00e9publique fran\u00e7aise\") for life, declared himself Emperor of the French (\"Empereur des Fran\u00e7ais\") on 18 May 1804, thus creating the French Empire (\"Empire Fran\u00e7ais\").\nNapoleon relinquished the title of Emperor of the French on 6 April and again on 11 April 1814. Napoleon's infant son, Napoleon II, was recognized by the Council of Peers, as Emperor from the moment of his father's abdication, and therefore reigned (as opposed to ruled) as Emperor for fifteen days, 22 June to 7 July 1815.\nElba.\nSince 3 May 1814, the Sovereign Principality of Elba was created as a miniature non-hereditary monarchy under the exiled French Emperor Napoleon I. According to the Treaty of Fontainebleau (1814), Napoleon I was allowed to enjoy the imperial title for life. The islands were \"not\" restyled an empire.\nOn 26 February 1815, Napoleon abandoned Elba for France, reviving the French Empire for a Hundred Days; the Allies declared an end to Napoleon's sovereignty over Elba on 25 March 1815, and on 31 March 1815 Elba was ceded to the restored Grand Duchy of Tuscany by the Congress of Vienna. After his final defeat, Napoleon was treated as a general by the British authorities during his second exile to Atlantic Isle of St. Helena. His title was a matter of dispute with the governor of St Helena, who insisted on addressing him as \"General Bonaparte\", despite the \"historical reality that he had been an emperor\" and therefore retained the title.\nSecond French Empire.\nNapoleon I's nephew, Napoleon III, resurrected the title of emperor on 2 December 1852, after establishing the Second French Empire in a presidential coup, subsequently approved by a plebiscite. His reign was marked by large scale public works, the development of social policy, and the extension of France's influence throughout the world. During his reign, he also set about creating the Second Mexican Empire (headed by his choice of Maximilian I of Mexico, a member of the House of Habsburg), to regain France's hold in the Americas and to achieve greatness for the 'Latin' race. Napoleon III was deposed on 4 September 1870, after France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War. The Third Republic followed and after the death of his son Napoleon (IV), in 1879 during the Zulu War, the Bonapartist movement split, and the Third Republic was to last until 1940.\nThe role of head of the House of Bonaparte is claimed by Jean-Christophe Napol\u00e9on and Charles Napol\u00e9on.\nIberian Peninsula.\nSpain.\nThe origin of the title \"Imperator totius Hispaniae\" (Latin for \"Emperor of All Spain\") is murky. It was associated with the Leonese monarchy perhaps as far back as Alfonso the Great (\"r.\" 866\u2013910). The last two kings of its Astur-Leonese dynasty were called emperors in a contemporary source.\nKing Sancho\u00a0III of Navarre conquered Leon in 1034 and began using it. His son, Ferdinand\u00a0I of Castile, also took the title in 1039. Ferdinand's son, Alfonso\u00a0VI of Le\u00f3n and Castile, took the title in 1077. It then passed to his son-in-law, Alfonso\u00a0I of Aragon, in 1109. His stepson and Alfonso\u00a0VI's grandson, Alfonso VII, was the only one who actually had an imperial coronation in 1135.\nThe title was not exactly hereditary but self-proclaimed by those who had, wholly or partially, united the Christian northern part of the Iberian Peninsula, often at the expense of killing rival siblings. The popes and Holy Roman emperors protested at the usage of the imperial title as a usurpation of leadership in western Christendom. After Alfonso\u00a0VII's death in 1157 the title was abandoned, and the kings who used it are not commonly mentioned as having been \"emperors\", in Spanish or other historiography.\nAfter the fall of the Byzantine Empire the legitimate heir to the throne, Andreas Palaiologos, willed away his claim to Ferdinand and Isabella in 1503.\nPortugal.\nAfter the independence and proclamation of the Empire of Brazil from the Kingdom of Portugal by Prince Pedro, who became Emperor, in 1822 his father, King John\u00a0VI of Portugal, briefly held the honorific style of Titular Emperor of Brazil and the treatment of \"His Imperial and Royal Majesty\" under the 1825 Treaty of Rio de Janeiro, by which Portugal recognized the independence of Brazil. The style of Titular Emperor was a life title, and became extinct upon the holder's demise. John\u00a0VI held the imperial title for a few months only, from the ratification of the Treaty in November 1825 until his death in March 1826. During those months, however, as John's imperial title was purely honorific while his son, Pedro\u00a0I, remained the sole monarch of the Brazilian Empire. Duarte Pio is the current head of the House of Braganza.\nGreat Britain.\nIn the late 3rd century, by the end of the epoch of the \"barracks emperors\" in Rome, there were two Britannic emperors, reigning for about a decade. After the end of Roman rule in Britain, the Imperator Cunedda forged the Kingdom of Gwynedd in northern Wales, but all his successors were titled kings and princes.\nEngland.\nThere was no consistent title for the king of England before 1066, and monarchs chose to style themselves as they pleased. Imperial titles were used inconsistently, beginning with Athelstan in 930 and ended with the Norman conquest of England. Empress Matilda (1102\u20131167) is the only English monarch commonly referred to as \"emperor\" or \"empress\", but she acquired her title through her marriage to Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor.\nDuring the rule of Henry VIII the Statute in Restraint of Appeals declared that 'this realm of England is an Empire...governed by one Supreme Head and King having the dignity and royal estate of the imperial Crown of the same'. This was in the context of the divorce of Catherine of Aragon and the English Reformation, to emphasize that England had never accepted the quasi-imperial claims of the papacy. Hence England and, by extension its modern successor state, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, is according to English law an Empire ruled by a King endowed with the imperial dignity. However, this has not led to the creation of the \"title\" of Emperor in England, nor in Great Britain, nor in the United Kingdom.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 1801, George III rejected the title of Emperor when offered. The only period when British monarchs held the title of \"Emperor\" in a dynastic succession started when the title Empress of India was created for Queen Victoria. The government led by Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, conferred the additional title upon her by an Act of Parliament, reputedly to assuage the monarch's irritation at being, as a mere Queen, notionally inferior to the emperors of Russia, Germany, and Austria. That included her own daughter (Princess Victoria, who was the wife of the reigning German Emperor). Hence, \"Queen Victoria felt handicapped in the battle of protocol by not being an Empress herself\". The Indian Imperial designation was also formally justified as the expression of Britain succeeding the former Mughal Emperor as suzerain over hundreds of princely states. The Indian Independence Act 1947 provided for the abolition of the use of the title \"Emperor of India\" by the British monarch, but this was not executed by King George VI until a royal proclamation on 22 June 1948. Despite this, George VI continued as king of India until 1950 and as king of Pakistan until his death in 1952.\nThe last Empress of India was George VI's wife, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother.\nGerman Empire.\nUnder the guise of idealism giving way to realism, German nationalism rapidly shifted from its liberal and democratic character in 1848 to Prussian prime minister Otto von Bismarck's authoritarian \"Realpolitik\". Bismarck wanted to unify the rival German states to achieve his aim of a conservative, Prussian-dominated Germany. Three wars led to military successes and helped to convince German people to do this: the Second war of Schleswig against Denmark in 1864, the Austro-Prussian War against Austria in 1866, and the Franco-Prussian War against the Second French Empire in 1870\u201371. During the Siege of Paris in 1871, the North German Confederation, supported by its allies from southern Germany, formed the German Empire with the proclamation of the Prussian king Wilhelm I as German Emperor in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace of Versailles, to the humiliation of the French, who ceased to resist only days later.\nAfter his death he was succeeded by his son Frederick III who was only emperor for 99 days. In the same year his son Wilhelm II became the third emperor within a year. He was the last German emperor. After the empire's defeat in World War I the empire, called the German Reich, had a president as head of state instead of an emperor. The use of the word \"Reich\" was abandoned following World War II.\nRussia.\nIn 1472, the niece of the last Byzantine emperor, Sophia Palaiologina, married Ivan\u00a0III, grand prince of Moscow, who began championing the idea of Russia being the successor to the Byzantine Empire. This idea was represented more emphatically in the composition the monk Filofej addressed to their son Vasili\u00a0III. In 1480, after ending Muscovy's dependence on its overlords of the Great Horde, Ivan\u00a0III began the usage of the titles Tsar and Autocrat (\"samoderzhets\"). His insistence on recognition as such by the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire since 1489 resulted in the granting of this recognition in 1514 by Emperor Maximilian\u00a0I to Vasili\u00a0III. His son Ivan\u00a0IV emphatically crowned himself Tsar of Russia on 16 January 1547. The word \"Tsar\" derives from Latin Caesar, but this title was used in Russia as equivalent to \"King\"; the error occurred when medieval Russian clerics referred to the biblical Jewish kings with the same title that was used to designate Roman and Byzantine rulers \u2014 \"Caesar\".\nOn 31 October 1721, Peter\u00a0I was proclaimed Emperor by the Governing Senate. The title used was Latin \"\"Imperator\", which is a westernizing form equivalent to the traditional Slavic title \"Tsar\"\". He based his claim partially upon a letter discovered in 1717 written in 1514 from Maximilian\u00a0I to Vasili\u00a0III, in which the Holy Roman Emperor used the term in referring to Vasili.\nA formal address to the ruling Russian monarch adopted thereafter was 'Your Imperial Majesty'. The crown prince was addressed as 'Your Imperial Highness'.\nThe title has not been used in Russia since the abdication of Emperor Nicholas\u00a0II on 15 March 1917.\nThe Russian Empire produced four reigning Empresses, all in the eighteenth century. These were Catherine\u00a0I, Anne, Elizabeth, and Catherine\u00a0II.\nThe role of head of the House of Romanov is claimed by Grand Duchess Maria Vladimirovna of Russia (Great-great-granddaughter of Alexander\u00a0II of Russia), Prince Andrew Romanoff (great-great-grandson of Nicholas\u00a0I of Russia), and Prince Karl Emich of Leiningen (Great-grandson of Grand Duke Kirill Vladimirovich of Russia).\nSerbia.\nIn 1345, the Serbian King Stefan Uro\u0161 IV Du\u0161an proclaimed himself Emperor (Tsar) and was crowned as such at Skopje on Easter 1346 by the newly created Serbian Patriarch, and by the Patriarch of Bulgaria and the autocephalous Archbishop of Ohrid. His imperial title was recognized by the Bulgarian Empire and various other neighbors and trading partners but not by the Byzantine Empire. In its final standardized form, the Serbian imperial title read \"Emperor of Serbs and Greeks\" (\u0446\u0430\u0440 \u0421\u0440\u0431\u0430 \u0438 \u0413\u0440\u043a\u0430, \"car Srba i Grka\" in modern Serbian). It was only employed by two monarchs in Serbia, Stefan Uro\u0161 IV Du\u0161an and his son Stefan Uro\u0161 V, becoming extinct after the latter's death in 1371. A half-brother of Du\u0161an, Simeon Uro\u0161, and then his son Jovan Uro\u0161, claimed the same title, until the latter's abdication in 1373, while ruling as dynasts in Thessaly. The \"Greek\" component in the Serbian imperial title indicates both rule over Greek speakers and the derivation of the imperial tradition from the Romans. A renegade Hungarian-Serb commander, Jovan Nenad, who claimed to be a descendant of Serbian and Byzantine rulers, styled himself Emperor.\nThe Americas.\nPre-Columbian traditions.\nThe Aztec and Inca traditions are unrelated to one another. Both were conquered under the reign of King Charles I of Spain who was simultaneously emperor-elect of the Holy Roman Empire during the fall of the Aztecs and fully emperor during the fall of the Incas. Incidentally by being king of Spain, he was also Roman (Byzantine) emperor in pretence through Andreas Palaiologos. The translations of their titles were provided by the Spanish.\nAztec Empire.\nThe only pre-Columbian North American rulers to be commonly called emperors were the \"Huey Tlatoani\" of the Mexica city-states of Tenochtitlan, Tlacopan and Texcoco, which along with their allies and tributaries are popularly known as the Aztec Empire (1375\u20131521). \"Tlatoani\" is a generic Nahuatl word for \"speaker\"; however, most English translators use \"king\" for their translation, thus rendering \"huey tlatoani\" as \"great king\" or \"emperor.\"\nThe Triple Alliance was an elected monarchy chosen by the elite. The emperors of Tenochtitlan and Texcoco were nominally equals, each receiving two-fifths of tribute from the vassal kingdoms, whereas the emperor of Tlacopan was a junior member and only received one-fifth of the tribute, due to the fact that Tlacopan was a newcomer to the alliance. Despite the nominal equality, Tenochtitlan eventually assumed a de facto dominant role in the Empire, to the point that even the emperors of Tlacopan and Texcoco would acknowledge Tenochtitlan's effective supremacy. Spanish conquistador Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s executed Emperor Cuauht\u00e9moc and installed puppet rulers who became vassals for Spain.\nInca Empire.\nThe only pre-Columbian South American rulers to be commonly called emperors were the \"Sapa Inca\" of the Inca Empire (1438\u20131533). Spanish conquistador Francisco Pizarro, conquered the Inca for Spain, killed Emperor Atahualpa, and installed puppets as well. Atahualpa may actually be considered a usurper as he had achieved power by killing his half-brother and he did not perform the required coronation with the imperial crown \"mascaipacha\" by the \"Huillaq Uma\" (high priest).\nPost-Columbian Americas.\nBrazil.\nWhen Napoleon I ordered the invasion of Portugal in 1807 because it refused to join the Continental System, the Portuguese Braganzas moved their capital to Rio de Janeiro to avoid the fate of the Spanish Bourbons (Napoleon I arrested them and made his brother Joseph king). When the French general Jean-Andoche Junot arrived in Lisbon, the Portuguese fleet had already left with all the local elite.\nIn 1808, under a British naval escort, the fleet arrived in Brazil. Later, in 1815, the Portuguese Prince Regent (since 1816 King Jo\u00e3o VI) proclaimed the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves, as a union of three kingdoms, lifting Brazil from its colonial status.\nAfter the fall of Napoleon I and the Liberal revolution in Portugal, the Portuguese royal family returned to Europe (1821). Prince Pedro of Braganza (King Jo\u00e3o's older son) stayed in South America acting as regent of the local kingdom, but, two years later in 1822, he proclaimed himself Pedro I, first Emperor of Brazil. He did, however, recognize his father, Jo\u00e3o VI, as \"Titular Emperor of Brazil\" \u2014a purely honorific title\u2014until Jo\u00e3o VI's death in 1826.\nThe empire came to an end in 1889, with the overthrow of Emperor Pedro II (Pedro I's son and successor), when the Brazilian republic was proclaimed.\nToday the headship of the Imperial House of Brazil is disputed between two branches of the House of Orl\u00e9ans-Braganza.\nHaiti.\nHaiti was declared an empire by its ruler, Jean-Jacques Dessalines, who made himself Jacques I, on 20 May 1805. He was assassinated the next year. Haiti again became an empire from 1849 to 1859 under Faustin Soulouque.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, the First Mexican Empire was the first of two empires created. After the declaration of independence on 15 September 1821, it was the intention of the Mexican parliament to establish a commonwealth whereby the king of Spain, Ferdinand VII, would also be Emperor of Mexico, but in which both countries were to be governed by separate laws and with their own legislative offices. Should the king refuse the position, the law provided for a member of the House of Bourbon to accede to the Mexican throne.\nFerdinand VII, however, did not recognize the independence and said that Spain would not allow any other European prince to take the throne of Mexico. By request of Parliament, the president of the regency Agust\u00edn de Iturbide was proclaimed emperor of Mexico on 12 July 1822 as Agust\u00edn I. Agust\u00edn de Iturbide was the general who helped secure Mexican independence from Spanish rule, but was overthrown by the Plan of Casa Mata.\nIn 1863, the invading French, under Napoleon III (see above), in alliance with Mexican conservatives and nobility, helped create the Second Mexican Empire, and invited Archduke Maximilian, of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine, younger brother of the Austrian Emperor Franz Josef I, to become emperor Maximilian I of Mexico. The childless Maximilian and his consort Empress Carlota of Mexico, daughter of Leopold I of Belgium, adopted Agust\u00edn's grandsons Agustin and Salvador as his heirs to bolster his claim to the throne of Mexico. Maximilian and Carlota made Chapultepec Castle their home, which has been the only palace in North America to house sovereigns. After the withdrawal of French protection in 1867, Maximilian was captured and executed by the liberal forces of Benito Ju\u00e1rez.\nThis empire led to French influence in the Mexican culture and also immigration from France, Belgium, and Switzerland to Mexico. Maximilian's closest living agnatic relative is Karl von Habsburg, the head of the House of Habsburg.\nMiddle East.\nThe term \"king of kings\" is used for the \"emperor\". The title King of Kings takes various forms depending on the language, and was used not only in Iran but also in countries surrounding Iran.\nIran.\nPersian monarchs took the imperial title of shahenshah (king of kings) to show superiority towards subordinate kings (shah). \"Shahanshah\" is usually translated as \"king of kings\" or simply \"king\" for ancient rulers of the Achaemenid, Arsacid, and Sassanid dynasties, and often shortened to \"shah\" for rulers since the Safavid dynasty in the 16th century. Iranian rulers were typically regarded in the West as emperors.\nIn Persia, from the time of Darius the Great, Persian rulers used the title \"King of Kings\" (\"Shahanshah\" in Persian) since they had dominion over peoples from the borders of India to the borders of Greece and Egypt. The Sassanid monarchs used the title King of kings of Iranians and non-Iranians to denote their rule over non-Iranian lands. The last \"shahanshah\" (Mohammad Reza Pahlavi) was ousted in 1979 following the Iranian Revolution.\nOttoman Empire.\nOttoman rulers held many titles and appellations denoting their Imperial status. These included: Sultan of Sultans, Padishah, and Hakan.\nThe full style of the Ottoman sultan once the empire's frontiers had stabilized became:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sultan (given name) Khan, Sovereign of The Sublime House of Osman, (Sultan of Sultans), (Khan of Khans), Commander of the faithful and Successor of the Prophet of the Lord of the Universe, Custodian of the Holy Cities of Mecca, Medina and Quds (Jerusalem), Padishah (Emperor) of The Three Cities of Istanbul (Constantinople), Edirne (Adrianople) and Bursa, and of the Cities of Ch\u00e2m (Damascus) and Cairo (Egypt), of all Azerbaijan, of the Maghreb, of Barkah, of Kairouan, of Alep, of the Arab and Persian Iraq, of Basra, of El Hasa strip, of Raqqa, of Mosul, of Parthia, of , of Cilicia, of the provinces of Erzurum, of Sivas, of Adana, of Karaman, of Van, of Barbaria, of Habech (Abyssinia), of Tunisia, of Tripoli, of Ch\u00e2m (Syria), of Cyprus, of Rhodes, of Crete, of the province of Morea (Peloponnese), of Bahr-i Sefid (Mediterranean Sea), of Bahr-i Siyah (Black Sea), of Anatolia, of Rumelia (the European part of the Empire), of Bagdad, of Kurdistan, of Greece, of Turkestan, of Tartary, of Circassia, of the two regions of Kabarda, of Gorjestan (Georgia), of the steppe of Kipchaks, of the whole country of the Tatars, of Kefa (Theodosia) and of all the neighbouring regions, of Bosnia, of the City and Fort of Belgrade, of the province of Sirbistan (Serbia), with all the castles and cities, of all Arnaut, of all Eflak (Wallachia) and Bogdania (Moldavia), as well as all the dependencies and borders, and many others countries and cities.\nAfter the Ottoman capture of Constantinople in 1453, the Ottoman sultans began to style themselves Kaysar-i Rum (Ceaser of the Romans) as they asserted themselves to be the heirs to the Roman Empire by right of conquest. The title was of such importance to them that it led them to eliminate the various Byzantine successor states \u2013 and therefore rival claimants \u2013 over the next eight years. Though the term \"emperor\" was rarely used by Westerners of the Ottoman sultan, it was generally accepted by Westerners that he had imperial status.\nHarun Osman is currently the head of the Ottoman dynasty.\nIndian subcontinent.\nIn the Vedic period, there was a federal imperial system called the \"Samrajya system\" and its emperor's title was \"Samrat\" (). Those monarchs, who could bring under subjection many rulers, claimed the title of \"Samrat\".\nAnother type of Indian imperialism was called the \"Chakravarti system\". Emperors wished to be called \"Chakravarti\", meaning\u00a0\"universal monarch.\"\nThe actual condition of \"Samrat\", which is an objective term, and the theoretical status of \"Chakravarti\", which is a poetical concept, were connected in point of psychology.\nMauryan Empire.\nFrom 322 to 185 BC the Indian subcontinent was dominated by the Maurya dynasty of Magadha, whose monarchs used the title(s) of Chakravarti or Samrat.\nChandragupta of the Maurya Empire is referred to as the first emperor of the first unified Indian subcontinent. The first references to a \"Chakravartin\" as a secular monarch appear in reference to Ashoka of the Maurya Empire.\nDelhi Sultanate.\nFrom 1206 to 1526 most of the Indian subcontinent was dominated by the Muslim Delhi Sultanate, whose monarchs used the title Sultan of Sultans.\nMughal Empire.\nFrom the 14th century until the 19th century the Indian subcontinent was dominated by predominantly Muslim rulers like the Mughals in the second unified Indian subcontinent,whose rulers used the title Shahenshah and Padishah (or Badshah) of Hindustan.\nBritish Raj.\nWhen the British monarchs ruled over India, they adopted the additional title of \"Kaisar-i-Hind\" (transl. Emperor of India).\nAfrica.\nEthiopia.\nFrom 1270 the Solomonic dynasty of Ethiopia used the title , literally \"King of Kings\". The use of the \"king of kings\" style began a millennium earlier in this region, however, with the title being used by the kings of Aksum, beginning with Sembrouthes in the 3rd century.\nAnother title used by this dynasty was . translates as Empress, and was used by the only reigning empress, Zewditu, along with the official title (\"Queen of Kings\").\nIn 1936, the Italian king Victor Emmanuel III claimed the title of emperor after Ethiopia was occupied by Italy during the Second Italo-Abyssinian War. After the defeat of the Italians by the British and the Ethiopians in 1941, Haile Selassie was restored to the throne but Victor Emmanuel did not relinquish his claim until 1943, even though he had no standing to the title.\nThe current head of the Solomonic dynasty is Zera Yacob Amha Selassie.\nCentral African Empire.\nIn 1976, President Jean-B\u00e9del Bokassa of the Central African Republic, proclaimed the country to be an autocratic Central African Empire, and made himself Emperor as Bokassa I. The expenses of his coronation ceremony actually bankrupted the country. He was overthrown three years later and the republic was restored.\nEast Asia.\n\u7687\u5e1d is the title of emperors in East Asia. An emperor is called \"Hu\u00e1ngd\u00ec\" in Chinese, \"Hwangje\" in Korean, \"Ho\u00e0ng \u0111\u1ebf\" in Vietnamese, and \"K\u014dtei\" in Japanese, but these are all just their respective pronunciations of the Chinese character \u7687\u5e1d. However, the Japanese call only their emperors with the special title of \"Tenn\u014d\" (\u5929\u7687).\nThe rulers of China and (once Westerners became aware of the role) Japan were always accepted in the West as emperors, and referred to as such. The claims of other East Asian monarchies to the title may have been accepted for diplomatic purposes, but it was not necessarily used in more general contexts.\nChina.\nThe East Asian tradition is different from the Roman tradition, having arisen separately. What links them together is the use of the Chinese logographs \u7687 (\"hu\u00e1ng\") and \u5e1d (\"d\u00ec\") which together or individually are imperial. Because of the cultural influence of China, China's neighbors adopted these titles or had their native titles conform in \"hanzi\". Anyone who spoke to the emperor was to address the emperor as b\u00ecxi\u00e0 (\u965b\u4e0b, lit. the \"Bottom of the Steps\"), corresponding to the Imperial Majesty\"; sh\u00e8ngsh\u00e0ng (\u8056\u4e0a, lit. Holy Highness); or w\u00e0nsu\u00ec (\u4e07\u5c81, lit. \"You, of Ten Thousand Years\").\nIn 221 BC, Ying Zheng, who was king of Qin at the time, proclaimed himself \"Shi Huangdi\" (\u59cb\u7687\u5e1d), which translates as \"first emperor\". \"Huangdi\" is composed of \"huang\" (\"august one\", \u7687) and \"di\" (\"sage-king\", \u5e1d), and referred to legendary/mythological sage-emperors living several millennia earlier, of which three were \"huang\" and five were \"di\". Thus Ying Zheng became Qin Shi Huang, abolishing the system where the \"huang\"/\"di\" titles were reserved to dead and/or mythological rulers. Since then, the title \"king\" became a lower ranked title, and later divided into two grades. Although not as popular, the title \u738b \"wang\" (king or prince) was still used by many monarchs and dynasties in China up to the Taipings in the 19th century. \u738b is pronounced \"v\u01b0\u01a1ng\" in Vietnamese, \"\u014d\" in Japanese, and \"wang\" in Korean.\nThe imperial title continued in China until the Qing dynasty was overthrown in 1912. The title was briefly revived from 12 December 1915 to 22 March 1916 by President Yuan Shikai and again in early July 1917 when General Zhang Xun attempted to restore last Qing emperor Puyi to the throne. Puyi retained the title and attributes of a foreign emperor, as a personal status, until 1924. After the Japanese occupied Manchuria in 1931, they proclaimed it to be the Empire of Manchukuo, and Puyi became emperor of Manchukuo. This empire ceased to exist when it was occupied by the Soviet Red Army in 1945.\nIn general, an emperor would have one empress (\"Huanghou\", \u7687\u540e) at one time, although posthumous entitlement to empress for a concubine was not uncommon. The earliest known usage of \"huanghou\" was in the Han dynasty. The emperor would generally select the empress from his concubines. In subsequent dynasties, when the distinction between wife and concubine became more accentuated, the crown prince would have chosen an empress-designate before his reign. Imperial China produced only one reigning empress, Wu Zetian, and she used the same Chinese title as an emperor (\"Huangdi\", \u7687\u5e1d). Wu Zetian then reigned for about 15 years (AD 690\u2013705).\nUnder the tributary system of China, monarchs of Korea and Vietnam sometimes called themselves \"emperor\" in their country. They introduced themselves as \"king\" for China and other countries (Emperor at home, king abroad). In Japan, Ashikaga Yoshimitsu a shogun was granted title of \"King of Japan\" for trade by the Ming emperor. However, the Shogun was a subject of the Japanese emperor. It was contrary to rules of tributary system, but the Ming emperor connived it for the purpose of suppressing the Wokou.\nJapan.\nThe earliest emperor recorded in and is Emperor Jimmu, who is said to be a descendant of Amaterasu's grandson Ninigi who descended from Heaven (Tenson k\u014drin). If one believes what is written in , the emperors have an unbroken direct male lineage that goes back more than 2,600 years.\nIn ancient Japan, the earliest titles for the sovereign were either \u30e4\u30de\u30c8\u5927\u738b/\u5927\u541b (\"yamato \u014dkimi\", Grand King of Yamato), \u502d\u738b/\u502d\u56fd\u738b (\"wa\u014d\"/\"wakoku\u014d\", King of Wa, used externally), or \u6cbb\u5929\u4e0b\u5927\u738b (\"amenoshita shiroshimesu \u014dkimi\", Grand King who rules all under heaven, used internally).\nIn 607, Empress Suiko sent a diplomatic document to China, which she wrote \"the emperor of the land of the rising sun (\u65e5\u51fa\u8655\u5929\u5b50) sends a document to the emperor of the land of the setting sun (\u65e5\u6c92\u8655\u5929\u5b50)\" and began to use the title emperor externally. As early as the 7th century, the word \u5929\u7687 (which can be read either as \"sumera no mikoto\", divine order, or as \"tenn\u014d\", Heavenly Emperor, the latter being derived from a Tang Chinese term referring to the Pole star around which all other stars revolve) began to be used. The earliest use of this term is found on a wooden slat, or \"mokkan\", unearthed in Asuka-mura, Nara Prefecture in 1998. The slat dated back to the reign of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit\u014d. The reading 'Tenn\u014d' has become the standard title for the Japanese sovereign up to the present age. The term \u5e1d (\"mikado\", Emperor) is also found in literary sources.\nIn the Japanese language, the word \"tenn\u014d\" is restricted to Japan's own monarch; \"k\u014dtei\" (\u7687\u5e1d) is usually used for foreign emperors. Historically, retired emperors often kept power over a child-emperor as de facto regent. For a long time, a \"sh\u014dgun\" (military aristocratic class) or an imperial regent wielded actual political power. In fact, through much of Japanese history, the emperor has been little more than a figurehead. The Meiji Restoration restored practical abilities and the political system under Emperor Meiji. The last shogun Tokugawa Yoshinobu resigned in 1868.\nAfter World War II, all claims of divinity were dropped (see Ningen-sengen). The Diet acquired all prerogative powers of the Crown, reverting the latter to a ceremonial role. By 1979, after the short-lived Central African Empire (1976\u20131979), Emperor Sh\u014dwa was the only monarch in the world with the title emperor.\nAs of the early 21st century, Japan's succession law prohibits a female from ascending the throne. With the birth of a daughter as the first child of the then-Crown Prince Naruhito, Japan considered abandoning that rule. However, shortly after the announcement that Princess Kiko was pregnant with her third child, the proposal to alter the Imperial Household Law was suspended by then-Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi. On 3 January 2007, as the child turned out to be a son, Prime Minister Shinz\u014d Abe announced that he would drop the proposal.\nEmperor Naruhito is the 126th monarch according to Japan's traditional order of succession. The second and third in line of succession are Fumihito, Prince Akishino and Prince Hisahito. Historically, Japan has had eight reigning empresses who used the genderless title \"Tenn\u014d\", rather than the female consort title \"k\u014dg\u014d\" (\u7687\u540e) or \"ch\u016bg\u016b\" (\u4e2d\u5bae). There is ongoing discussion of the Japanese Imperial succession controversy. Although current Japanese law prohibits female succession, all Japanese emperors claim to trace their lineage to \"Amaterasu\", the Sun Goddess of the Shint\u014d religion. Thus, the emperor is thought to be the highest authority of the Shinto religion, and one of his duties is to perform Shinto rituals for the people of Japan.\nKorea.\nSome rulers of Goguryeo (37 BC\u2013AD 668) used the title of \"Taewang\" (; ), literally translated as \"Greatest King\". The title of \"Taewang\" was also used by some rulers of Silla (57 BC\u2013AD 935), including Beopheung and Jinheung.\nThe rulers of Balhae (698\u2013926) internally called themselves \"Seongwang\" (; ; lit. \"Holy King\").\nThe rulers of Goryeo (918\u20131392) used the titles of emperor and \"Son of Heaven of the East of the Ocean\" (; ). Goryeo's imperial system ended in 1270 with capitulation to the Mongol Empire.\nIn 1897, Gojong, the king of Joseon, proclaimed the founding of the Korean Empire (1897\u20131910), becoming the emperor of Korea. He declared the era name of \"Gwangmu\" (; ), meaning \"Bright and Martial\". The Korean Empire lasted until 1910, when it was annexed by the Empire of Japan.\nMongolia.\nThe \"Book of Wei\", a Chinese history book, records that the title Khagan (\u53ef\u6c57) and the title Hu\u00e1ngd\u00ec (\u7687\u5e1d) are the same. In the 13th century, Giovanni da Pian del Carpine called the Mongol great khan simply \"imperator\".\nThe title Khagan (khan of khans or grand khan) was held by Genghis Khan, founder of the Mongol Empire in 1206; he also formally took the Chinese title \"huangdi\", as \"Genghis Emperor\" ( ). Only the Khagans from Genghis Khan to the fall of the Yuan dynasty in 1368 are normally referred to as emperors in English.\nVietnam.\n\u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t Kingdom (40\u201343, 544\u2013602, 938\u20131407, 1427\u20131945) (The first ruler of Vietnam to take the title of Emperor (Ho\u00e0ng \u0110\u1ebf) was the founder of the Early L\u00fd dynasty, L\u00fd Nam \u0110\u1ebf, in the year AD 544)\nNg\u00f4 Quy\u1ec1n, the first ruler of \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t as an independent state, used the title \"V\u01b0\u01a1ng\" (\u738b, \"King\"). However, after the death of Ng\u00f4 Quy\u1ec1n, the country immersed in a civil war known as Anarchy of the 12 Warlords that lasted for over 20 years. In the end, \u0110inh B\u1ed9 L\u0129nh unified the country after defeating all the warlords and became the first ruler of \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t to use the title \"Ho\u00e0ng \u0110\u1ebf\" (\u7687\u5e1d, \"Emperor\") in 968. Succeeding rulers in Vietnam then continued to use this Emperor title until 1806 when this title was stopped being used for a century.\n\u0110inh B\u1ed9 L\u0129nh was not the first to claim the title of \"Ho\u00e0ng \u0110\u1ebf\" (\u7687\u5e1d, \"Emperor\"). Before him, L\u00fd B\u00ed and Mai Th\u00fac Loan also claimed this title. However, their rules were short-lived.\nThe Vietnamese emperors also gave this title to their ancestors who were lords or influential figures in the previous dynasty, as did the Chinese emperors. This practice was one of the many indications that Vietnam considered itself an equal to China which remained intact up to the twentieth century.\nIn 1802 the newly established Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty requested canonization from the Chinese Jiaqing Emperor and received the title \"Qu\u1ed1c V\u01b0\u01a1ng\" (\u570b\u738b, \"King of a State)\" and the name of the country as \"Vi\u1ec7t Nam\" (\u8d8a\u5357) instead \"\u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t\" (\u5927\u8d8a). To avoid unnecessary armed conflicts, the Vietnamese rulers accepted this in diplomatic relation and used the title Emperor only domestically. However, Vietnamese rulers never accepted the vassalage relationship with China and always refused to come to Chinese courts to pay homage to Chinese rulers (a sign of vassalage acceptance). China waged a number of wars against Vietnam throughout history, and after each failure, settled for the tributary relationship. The Yuan dynasty under Kublai Khan waged three wars against Vietnam to force it into a vassalage relationship but after successive failures, Kublai Khan's successor, Tem\u00fcr Khan, finally settled for a tributary relationship with Vietnam. Vietnam sent tributary missions to China once in three years (with some periods of disruptions) until the 19th century, Sino-French War France replaced China in control of northern Vietnam.\nThe emperors of the last dynasty of Vietnam continued to hold this title until the French conquered Vietnam. The emperor, however, was then a puppet figure only and could easily be disposed of by the French for more pro-France figure. Japan took Vietnam from France and the Axis-occupied Vietnam was declared an empire by the Japanese in March 1945. The line of emperors came to an end with B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i, who was deposed after the war, although he later served as head of state of South Vietnam from 1949 to 1955.\nReligion.\nChristianity.\nPopes bear the title \"Pontifex maximus\", which was one of the titles of the Roman emperors, so Guglielmo Ferrero said that the Pope is a direct successor to the Roman Emperor.\nIn East Asia, China, Japan, and South Korea, the title Pope is translated as \u6559\u7687, literally \"emperor of the religion\".\nIslam.\nIn the Islamosphere, \"Khalifa\" appears as the equivalent of emperor. During the Crusades, Abbasid khalifa came to be referred to as the \"emperor\".\nBuddhism and Hinduism.\nSome Buddhist or Hindu monarchs of East and Southeast Asia called Chakravarti were:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10113", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10113", "title": "Egalitarianism", "text": "School of thought favoring equality for all people\nEgalitarianism (from fr \" \u00e9gal\"\u00a0'equal'; also equalitarianism) is a school of thought within political philosophy that builds on the concept of social equality, prioritizing it for all people. Egalitarian doctrines are generally characterized by the idea that all humans are equal in fundamental worth or moral status. As such, all people should be accorded equal rights and treatment under the law. Egalitarian doctrines have been important in many modern political philosophies and social movements, including the Enlightenment, classical liberalism, libertarianism, feminism, civil rights, and international human rights. Egalitarianism is a major principle of both classical liberalism with its equality of rights, and redistributive left-wing politics with its stress on equality of outcome.\nOne key aspect of egalitarianism is its emphasis on equal opportunities for all individuals, regardless of their background or circumstances. This means ensuring that everyone has access to the same resources, education, and opportunities to succeed in life. By promoting equal opportunities, egalitarianism aims to level the playing field and reduce disparities that result from social inequalities.\nForms.\nSome specifically focused egalitarian concerns include communism, legal egalitarianism, luck egalitarianism, political egalitarianism, gender egalitarianism, racial equality, equality of opportunity, and Christian egalitarianism. Common forms of egalitarianism include political and philosophical.\nLegal egalitarianism.\nOne argument is that liberalism provides democratic societies with the means to carry out civic reform by providing a framework for developing public policy and providing the correct conditions for individuals to achieve civil rights. There are two major types of equality:\nEquality of person.\nThe English Bill of Rights of 1689 and the United States Constitution use only the term person in operative language involving fundamental rights and responsibilities, except for a reference to men in the English Bill of Rights regarding men on trial for treason; and a rule of proportional Congressional representation in the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution.\nAs the rest of the Constitution, in its operative language the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution uses the term person, stating that \"nor shall any State deprives any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws\".\nGender equality.\nThe motto \"\" was used during the French Revolution and is still used as an official motto of the French government. The 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen French Constitution is also framed with this basis in equal rights of humankind.\nThe Declaration of Independence of the United States is an example of an assertion of equality of men as \"All men are created equal\" and the wording of men and man is a reference to both men and women, i.e., mankind. John Locke is sometimes considered the founder of this form. Many state constitutions in the United States also use the rights of man language rather than rights of person since the noun man has always been a reference to and an inclusion of both men and women.\nThe Tunisian Constitution of 2014 provides that \"men and women shall be equal in their rights and duties\".\nFeminism is informed by egalitarian philosophy, being a gender-focused philosophy of equality. Feminism is distinguished from egalitarianism by also existing as a political and social movement.\nSocial egalitarianism.\nAt a cultural level, outcome based egalitarian theories have developed during the past two hundred years. These are based on an end-state theory of distributive justice rather than an entitlement theory of justice. Among the notable broadly egalitarian philosophies are socialism, communism, social anarchism, libertarian socialism, left-libertarianism, and progressivism, some of which propound economic egalitarianism. Anti-egalitarianism or elitism is opposition to egalitarianism.\nEconomic.\nAn early example of equality is what might be described as outcome economic egalitarianism is the Chinese philosophy of agriculturalism which held that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon egalitarian self-sufficiency.\nIn socialism, social ownership of means of production is sometimes considered to be a form of economic egalitarianism because in an economy characterized by social ownership the surplus product generated by industry would accrue to the population as a whole as opposed to a class of private owners, thereby granting each increased autonomy and greater equality in their relationships with one another. Although the economist Karl Marx is sometimes mistaken to be an egalitarian, Marx eschewed normative theorizing on moral principles altogether. Marx did have a theory of the evolution of moral principles concerning specific economic systems.\nThe American economist John Roemer has put forth a new perspective on equality and its relationship to socialism. Roemer attempts to reformulate Marxist analysis to accommodate normative principles of distributive justice, shifting the argument for socialism away from purely technical and materialist reasons to one of distributive justice. Roemer argues that according to the principle of distributive justice, the traditional definition of socialism is based on the principle that individual compensation is proportional to the value of the labor one expends in production (\"To each according to his contribution\") is inadequate. Roemer concludes that egalitarians must reject socialism as it is classically defined for equality to be realized.\nThe egalitarian management style focusses on the approach to democratize power, decision-making, and responsibility and distributed them more evenly among all members of a team or organization.\nEgalitarianism and non-human animals.\nMany philosophers, including Ingmar Persson, Peter Vallentyne, Nils Holtug, Catia Faria and Lewis Gompertz, have argued that egalitarianism implies that the interests of non-human animals must be taken into account as well. Philosopher Oscar Horta has further argued that egalitarianism implies rejecting speciesism, ceasing to exploit non-human animals and aiding animals suffering in nature. Furthermore, Horta argues that non-human animals should be prioritized since they are worse off than humans.\nReligious and spiritual egalitarianism.\nChristianity.\nIn 1957, Martin Luther King Jr. quoted (\"There is neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, male nor female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus\") in a pamphlet opposing racial segregation in the United States. He wrote, \"Racial segregation is a blatant denial of the unity which we all have in Christ.\" He also alluded to that verse at the end of his 1963 \"I Have a Dream\" speech. The verse is cited to support an egalitarian interpretation of Christianity. According to Jakobus M. Vorster, the central question debated by theologians is whether the statement about ecclesiastical relationships can be translated into a Christian-ethical norm for all human relationships. Vorster argues that it can, and that the verse provides a Christian foundation for the promotion of human rights and equality, in contrast to \"patriarchy, racism and exploitation\" which in his opinion are caused by human sinfulness. Karin Neutel notes how some apply the philosophy of Paul's statement to include sexuality, health and race saying \"[The original] three pairs must have been as relevant in the first century, as the additional categories are today.\" She argues that the verse points to a utopian, cosmopolitan community.\nIslam.\nThe verse 49:13 of The Quran states: \"O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you. Indeed, Allah is Knowing and Acquainted\". Muhammad echoed these egalitarian sentiments, sentiments that clashed with the practices of the pre-Islamic cultures. In a review of Louise Marlow's \"Hierarchy and Egalitarianism in Islamic Thought,\" Ismail Poonawala argues the desire for the Arab-Muslim Empire to consolidate power and administer the state rather led to the deemphasis of egalitarian teachings in the Qur'an and by the Prophet. Other verses indicate that only muslims are eligible for this equality, e.g. Surah 98:6 \"Indeed, they who disbelieved among the People of the Scripture and the polytheists will be in the fire of Hell, abiding eternally therein. Those are the worst of creatures.\"\nDiscussion.\nAlexander Berkman and Thompson et. al.\nThompson et al. theorize that any society consisting of only one perspective, be it egalitarianism, hierarchies, individualist, fatalist or autonomists will be inherently unstable as the claim is that an interplay between all these perspectives are required if each perspective is to be fulfilling. Although an individualist according to cultural theory is aversive towards both principles and groups, individualism is not fulfilling if individual brilliance cannot be recognized by groups, or if individual brilliance cannot be made permanent in the form of principles.121 Accordingly, they argue that egalitarians have no power except through their presence, unless they (by definition, reluctantly) embrace principles which enable them to cooperate with fatalists and hierarchies. They argue that this means they will also have no individual sense of direction without a group, which could be mitigated by following individuals outside their group, namely autonomists or individualists. Alexander Berkman suggests that \"equality does not mean an equal amount but equal opportunity. ... Do not make the mistake of identifying equality in liberty with the forced equality of the convict camp. True anarchist equality implies freedom, not quantity. It does not mean that everyone must eat, drink, or wear the same things, do the same work, or live in the same manner. Far from it: the very reverse. ... Individual needs and tastes differ, as appetites differ. It is an equal opportunity to satisfy them that constitutes true equality. ... Far from leveling, such equality opens the door for the greatest possible variety of activity and development. For human character is diverse.\"\nThe cultural theory of risk holds egalitarianism\u2014with fatalism termed as its opposite78\u2014as defined by a negative attitude towards rules and principles; and a positive attitude towards group decision-making.157 The theory distinguishes between hierarchists, who are positive towards both rules and groups; and egalitarians, who are positive towards groups, but negative towards rules. This is by definition a form of anarchist equality as referred to by Berkman. Thus, the fabric of an egalitarian society is held together by cooperation and implicit peer pressure rather than by explicit rules and punishment.158\nMarxism.\nKarl Marx and Friedrich Engels believed that an international proletarian revolution would bring about a socialist society which would then eventually give way to a communist stage of social development which would be a classless, stateless, moneyless, humane society erected on common ownership of the means of production and the principle of \"From each according to their ability, to each according to their needs\". Marxism rejected egalitarianism in the sense of greater equality between classes, clearly distinguishing it from the socialist notion of the abolition of classes based on the division between workers and owners of productive property.\nAllen Woods finds that Marx's view of classlessness was not the subordination of society to a universal interest such as a universal notion of equality, but it was about the creation of the conditions that would enable individuals to pursue their true interests and desires, making Marx's notion of communist society radically individualistic. Although his position is often confused or conflated with distributive egalitarianism in which only the goods and services resulting from production are distributed according to notional equality, Marx eschewed the entire concept of equality as abstract and bourgeois, preferring to focus on more concrete principles such as opposition to exploitation on materialist grounds and economic logic, or the philosophical concepts like alienation.\nMurray Rothbard.\nIn the title essay of his book \"Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays\", Murray Rothbard argued that egalitarian theory always results in a politics of statist control because it is founded on revolt against the ontological structure of reality itself. According to Rothbard, individuals are naturally unequal in their abilities, talents, and characteristics. He believed that this inequality was not only natural but necessary for a functioning society. In his view, people's unique qualities and abilities are what allow them to contribute to society in different ways.\nRothbard argued that egalitarianism was a misguided attempt to impose an artificial equality on individuals, which would ultimately lead to societal breakdown. He believed that attempts to force equality through government policies or other means would stifle individual freedom and prevent people from pursuing their own interests and passions. Furthermore, Rothbard believed that egalitarianism was rooted in envy and resentment towards those who were more successful or talented than others. He saw it as a destructive force that would lead to a culture of mediocrity, where people were discouraged from striving for excellence.\nEquity.\nThe Atlas movement defines equitism as the idea that all groups should have equal rights and benefits. The term has been used as the claimed philosophical basis of Telosa, a proposed utopia to be built in the United States by Marc Lore. Social equity is about equality of outcomes for each groups, while egalitarianism generally advocates for equality of opportunity, recognizing that a fair society should provide all members with the same opportunities while recognizing that different outcomes are expected due to human individuality.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10115", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10115", "title": "Expert witness", "text": "Person whose opinion is accepted by the judge as an expert\nAn expert witness, particularly in common law countries such as the United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States, is a person whose opinion by virtue of education, training, certification, skills or experience, is accepted by the judge as an expert. The judge may consider the witness's specialized (scientific, technical or other) opinion about evidence or about facts before the court within the expert's area of expertise, to be referred to as an \"expert opinion\". Expert witnesses may also deliver \"expert evidence\" within the area of their expertise. Their testimony may be rebutted by testimony from other experts or by other evidence or facts.\nHistory.\nThe forensic expert practice is an ancient profession. For example, in ancient Babylonia, midwives were used as experts in determining pregnancy, virginity and female fertility. Similarly, the Roman Empire recognized midwives, handwriting experts and land surveyors as legal experts. The codified use of expert witnesses and the admissibility of their testimony and scientific evidence has developed significantly in the Western court system over the last 250 years. The concept of allowing an expert witness to testify in a court setting and provide opinionated evidence on the facts of other witnesses was first introduced by Lord Mansfield in the case of \"Folkes v. Chadd\" in 1782. In this particular case, the court was hearing litigation regarding the silting of Wells Harbor in Norfolk and allowed leading civil engineer, John Smeaton, to provide scientific rationale behind the proposed legislation. The decision by the English Court to allow for an expert to provide contextual background and detail on a case is often cited as the root of modern rules on expert testimony.\nRole.\nExpert witnesses are called upon in the court system to serve as an objective party to the lawsuit and never function as an advocate for one side or the other. Expert witnesses are present in litigation to explain complicated scientific issues, not to influence the jury or judge with fervor. The main responsibilities of expert witnesses are to evaluate potential problems, defects, deficiencies, or errors only when able to fully appreciate a process or system. Expert witnesses are obligated to study the processes prior to making a survey or postpone the assignment prior to potentially missing the target due to lack of specific condition understanding. They are called to testify under the assumption that all the preparation required for a competent evaluation of the process has been made.\nTypically, experts are relied on for opinions on severity of injury, degree of sanity, cause of failure in a machine or other device, loss of earnings and associated benefits, care costs, and the like. In an intellectual property case an expert may be shown two music scores, book texts, or circuit boards and asked to ascertain their degree of similarity. In the majority of cases, the expert's personal relation to the defendant is considered and usually adjudged to be irrelevant.\nThe tribunal itself, or the judge, can in some systems call upon experts to technically evaluate a certain fact or action, in order to provide the court with a complete knowledge on the fact/action it is judging. The expertise has the legal value of an acquisition of data. The results of these experts are then compared to those by the experts of the parties.\nThe expert has a great responsibility, and especially in penal trials, and perjury by an expert is a severely punished crime in most countries. The use of expert witnesses is sometimes criticized in the United States because in civil trials, they are often used by both sides to advocate differing positions, and it is left up to a jury to decide which expert witness to believe. Although experts are legally prohibited from expressing their opinion of submitted evidence until after they are hired, sometimes a party can surmise beforehand, because of reputation or prior cases, that the testimony will be favorable regardless of any basis in the submitted data; such experts are commonly disparaged as \"hired guns.\"\nQualifications.\nAn expert witness at the time of trial is qualified by the court and must be re-qualified each time that person comes to trial for the offering of opinions. The qualification is given by each trial judge and takes place regardless of prior appearances by a particular expert witness. Expert witnesses are those whom the court has deemed qualified to speak on a topic to provide background to anyone on a lay jury.\nDuties in United States courts.\nIn high stakes cases multiple experts, in multiple topics, are often retained by each party. Although it is still relatively rare, the court itself may also retain its own independent expert. In all cases, fees paid to an expert may not be contingent on the outcome of the case.\nElectronic evidence has also entered the courtroom as critical forensic evidence. Audio and video evidence must be authenticated by both parties in any litigation by a forensic expert who is also an expert witness who assists the court in understanding details about that electronic evidence.\nVoice-mail recordings and closed-circuit television systems produce electronic evidence often used in litigation, more so today than in the past. Video recordings of bank robberies and audio recordings of life threats are presented in court rooms by electronic expert witnesses.\nRules of evidence and code of procedure.\nHearsay rule.\nOne important rule that applies to the expert witness but not the percipient witness is the exception to the hearsay rule. A percipient witness tells only what he/she actually knows about a case and nothing more. Percipient witnesses cannot give opinions nor conjecture regarding a hypothetical set of conditions. Conversely, the court does allow an expert to testify about issues that may not be personally known by them. This allows the expert to rely upon scientific articles, discussions with colleagues on the subject, testimony read in preparation for testimony in the case and similar pieces of information not personally known to the expert.\nChain of custody.\nIt is important that expert witnesses who handle evidence maintain a proper chain of custody such that they are able to authenticate the evidence, prove that it is what they represent it to be, when testifying at trial. Most notably in the context of a criminal prosecution, an expert witness who evaluates or examines an item pertinent to an investigation or case evaluation may add an entry to a \"chain of custody\" document, a form that contains the item's description, the time and date of release for all prior custodians of the item, and the time and date of release to the witness.\nWeight of testimony.\nIn the case of an expert witness, the weight of his/her evidence depends heavily on the foundation support established prior to an opinion being given. Examples include educational background, review of scholarly works, field studies and trainings which all lead up to developing a foundation of knowledge for credibility of a testimony. Before trial, all experts must prepare a report summarizing their analysis and conclusions and share the report with all other parties. This allows other parties to effectively cross-examine the expert.\nTypes.\nTestifying experts.\nIf the witness needs to testify in court, the privilege is no longer protected. The expert witness's identity and nearly all documents used to prepare the testimony will become discoverable. Usually an experienced lawyer will advise the expert not to take notes on documents because all of the notes will be available to the other party.\nAn expert testifying in a United States federal court must satisfy the requirements of Fed. R. Evid. 702. Generally, under Rule 702, an expert is a person with \"scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge\" who can \"assist the trier of fact,\" which is typically a jury. A witness who is being offered as an expert must first establish his or her competency in the relevant field through an examination of his or her credentials. The opposing attorney is permitted to conduct a voir dire of the witness in order to challenge that witness' qualifications. If qualified by the court, then the expert may testify \"in the form of an opinion or otherwise\" so long as: \"(1) the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable principles and methods, and (3) the witness has applied the principles and methods reliably to the facts of the case.\"\nAlthough experts can testify in any case in which their expertise is relevant, criminal cases are more likely to use forensic scientists or forensic psychologists, whereas civil cases, such as personal injury, may use forensic engineers, forensic accountants, employment consultants or care experts. Senior physicians \u2013 UK, Ireland, and Commonwealth consultants, U.S. attending physicians \u2013 are frequently used in both the civil and criminal courts.\nThe Federal Court of Australia has issued guidelines for experts appearing in Australian courts. This covers the format of the expert's written testimony as well as their behaviour in court. Similar procedures apply in non-court forums, such as the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission.\nEducating witness.\nThe educating witness teaches the fact-finder (jury or, in a bench trial, judge) about the underlying scientific theory and instrument implementing theory. This witness is an expert witness, called to elicit opinions that a theory is valid and the instruments involved are reliable. The witness must be qualified as an expert witness, which may require academic qualifications or specific training.\nReporting witness.\nCalled after teaching witness leaves stand. Usually the laboratory technician who personally conducted the test. Witness will describe both the test and the results. When describing test, will venture opinions that proper test procedures were used and that equipment was in good working order.\nNon-testifying experts.\nIn the U.S., a party may hire experts to help them evaluate a given case. For example, a car maker may hire an experienced mechanic to decide if its cars were built to specification. This kind of expert opinion will be protected from discovery by the opposing party. In other words, if the expert finds evidence against their client, the opposite party will not automatically gain access to it. This privilege is similar to the work-product doctrine (not to be confused with attorney\u2013client privilege).\nThe non-testifying expert can be present at the trial or hearing to aid the attorney in asking questions of other expert witnesses. Unlike a testifying expert, a non-testifying expert can be easily withdrawn from a case. It is also possible to change a non-testifying expert to a testifying expert before the expert disclosure date.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, under the Federal Rule of Evidence 702 (FRE), an expert witness must be qualified on the topic of testimony. In determining the qualifications of the expert, the FRE requires the expert have had specialized education, training, or practical experience in the subject matter relating to the case. The expert's testimony must be based on facts in evidence, and should offer opinion about the causation or correlation to the evidence in drawing a conclusion.\nExperts in the U.S. typically are paid on an hourly basis for their services in investigating the facts, preparing a report, and if necessary, testifying during pre-trial discovery, or at trial. Hourly fees range from approximately $200 to $750 or more per hour, varying primarily by the expert's field of expertise, and the individual expert's qualifications and reputation. In several fields, such as handwriting analysis, where the expert compares signatures to determine the likelihood of a forgery, and medical case reviews by a physician or nurse, in which the expert goes over hospital and medical records to assess the possibility of malpractice, experts often initially charge a flat fixed fee for their initial report. As with the hourly fees discussed previously, the amount of that flat fee varies considerably based on the reviewing expert's field, experience and reputation.\nIn 2017 Kootenai County, Idaho paid nearly $600,000 during the trial over the killing of a Coeur d'Alene police officer, with the public defenders paying approximately $311,000 for seven experts and the prosecutors paying $270,000 for three experts. A 2021 survey conducted by SEAK, Inc., a company that helps professionals serve as expert witnesses, revealed a median hourly rate of $500, $400, and $475 for testifying in court, case preparation, and deposition respectively. As for the highest amount ever billed for a single case, the median was $24,000 and the mean was just over $62,000.\nThe expert's professional fee, plus his or her related expenses, is generally paid by the party retaining the expert. In some circumstance the party who prevails in the litigation may be entitled to recover the amounts paid to its expert from the losing party.\nScientific evidence.\nIn law, scientific evidence is evidence derived from scientific knowledge or techniques. Most forensic evidence, including genetic evidence, is scientific evidence.\n\"Frye\" test.\nThe \"Frye\" test, coming from the case \"Frye v. United States\" (1923), said that admissible scientific evidence must be a result of a theory that had \"general acceptance\" in the scientific community. This test results in uniform decisions regarding admissibility. In particular, the judges in \"Frye\" ruled that:\n \"Just when a scientific principle or discovery crosses the line between experimental and demonstrable stages is difficult to define. Somewhere in this twilight zone the evidential force of the principle must be recognized, and while courts will go a long way in admitting expert testimony deduced from a well-recognized scientific principle or discovery, the thing from which the deduction is made must be sufficiently established to have gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs.\"\nIn 1923, the case of Frye v. United States instituted significant change to both criminal and civil law by addressing the use of expert witness testimony in conjunction with scientific testimony. In Frye v. United States, the defense team attempted to introduce both the results of a polygraph test administered to Frye to determine Frye's innocence as well as the testimony of an expert witness to verify and explain the results.\nHowever, the court rejected the expert's testimony, ruling that: \"While courts will go a long way in admitting expert testimony deduced from a well-recognized scientific principle or discovery, the thing from which the deduction is made must be sufficiently established to have gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it belongs.\"\nThrough this ruling, the judge's opinion in Frye v. United States set precedent and the standard by which expert witnesses would be utilized in the court system for decades. In the federal courts, between 1948 and 1975, Frye was cited 55 times; however, the use and application was not consistent. One of the major struggles that came out of this precedent was the application to both civil and criminal cases. Many of the courts and judges had trouble interpreting the \"general acceptance\" notion of a particular field in a concise and non-arbitrary manner. In 2012, courts in nine states still used the \"Frye\" standard when analyzing state expert witness rules.\nThe Federal Rules of Evidence\nIn 1975, the United States Congress issued the Federal Rules of Evidence. FRE 702 was issued to provide a standard for expert witness testimony to be upheld by the United States court system. The rule specified that the application of expert witnesses had to be attributed to a person with \"scientific or technical knowledge,\" in conjunction with a list of qualifications that would quality one to be an expert in terms of \"knowledge, skill, experience, training or education\". This rule thus clarified the acceptable use of expert witnesses in both criminal and civil cases.\nHowever, FRE 702 still left some courts in confusion. The courts who would use this new rule were confused as to whether FRE 702 served to bolster the \"general acceptance\" ruling in Frye or if FRE 702 was the replacement of this rule. For instance, in \"U.S. v. Williams\" (1978), the Second Circuit responded that \"the applicable considerations [for expert witness testimony] are 'probativeness, materiality, and reliability of the evidence on the one side, and any tendency to mislead, prejudice or confuse the jury on the other.'\" The court appeared to reject the previous precedent set by \"Frye\". The rationale in the Williams case was later adopted by other federal courts, including the Third Circuit which adopted a \"reliability\" test in 1984. Meanwhile, other federal courts stuck to the \"Frye\" precedent, causing a circuit split which would not be solved until the Supreme Court set a new expert standard in \"Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.\" (1993).\nDaubert standard.\nThe Daubert standard arose out of the 1993 U.S. Supreme Court case \"Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.\" It provides four factors that courts ought to consider when determining whether expert testimony is admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence:\nIn 2012, twenty-two states used the \"Daubert\" test when analyzing their own expert witness rules.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn England and Wales, under the Civil Procedure Rules (CPR), an expert witness is required to be independent and address his or her expert report to the court. A witness may be jointly instructed by both sides if the parties agree to this, especially in cases where the liability is relatively small.\nUnder the CPR, expert witnesses may be instructed to produce a joint statement detailing points of agreement and disagreement to assist the court or tribunal. The meeting is held quite independently of instructing lawyers, and often assists in resolution of a case, especially if the experts review and modify their opinions. When this happens, substantial trial costs can be saved when the parties to a dispute agree to a settlement. In most systems, the trial (or the procedure) can be suspended in order to allow the experts to study the case and produce their results. More frequently, meetings of experts occur before trial. Experts charge a professional fee which is paid by the party commissioning the report (both parties for joint instructions) although the report is addressed to the court. The fee must not be contingent on the outcome of the case. Expert witnesses may be subpoenaed (issued with a witness summons), although this is normally a formality to avoid court date clashes.\nScotland.\nIn Scots law, \"Davie v Magistrates of Edinburgh\" (1953) provides authority that where a witness has particular knowledge or skills in an area being examined by the court, and has been called to court in order to elaborate on that area for the benefit of the court, that witness may give evidence of his/her opinion on that area.\nTurkey.\nDuring a Erdo\u011fan-Gollum comparison trial, a panel of expert witnesses had to decide on the character of Gollum.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10116", "revid": "18174831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10116", "title": "Endocytosis", "text": "Cellular process\nEndocytosis is a cellular process in which substances are brought into the cell. The material to be internalized is surrounded by an area of cell membrane, which then buds off inside the cell to form a vesicle containing the ingested materials. Endocytosis includes pinocytosis (cell drinking) and phagocytosis (cell eating). It is a form of active transport.\nHistory.\nThe term was proposed by De Duve in 1963. Phagocytosis was discovered by \u00c9lie Metchnikoff in 1882.\nPathways.\nEndocytosis pathways can be subdivided into four categories: namely, receptor-mediated endocytosis (also known as clathrin-mediated endocytosis), caveolae, pinocytosis, and phagocytosis.\nStudy in mammalian cells confirm a reduction in clathrin coat size in an increased tension environment. In addition, it suggests that the two apparently distinct clathrin assembly modes, namely coated pits and coated plaques, observed in experimental investigations might be a consequence of varied tensions in the plasma membrane.\nMore recent experiments have suggested that these morphological descriptions of endocytic events may be inadequate, and a more appropriate method of classification may be based upon whether particular pathways are dependent on clathrin and dynamin.\nDynamin-dependent clathrin-independent pathways include FEME, UFE, ADBE, EGFR-NCE and IL2R\u03b2 uptake.\nDynamin-independent clathrin-independent pathways include the CLIC/GEEC pathway (regulated by Graf1), as well as MEND and macropinocytosis.\nClathrin-mediated endocytosis is the only pathway dependent on both clathrin and dynamin.\nPrincipal components.\nThe endocytic pathway of mammalian cells consists of endosomes, distinct membrane compartments, which internalize molecules from the plasma membrane and recycle them back to the surface (as in early endosomes and recycling endosomes), or sort them to degradation (as in late endosomes and lysosomes). The principal components of the endocytic pathway are:\nIt was recently found that an eisosome serves as a portal of endocytosis in yeast.\nClathrin-mediated.\nThe major route for endocytosis in most cells, and the best-understood, is that mediated by the molecule clathrin. This large protein assists in the formation of a coated pit on the inner surface of the plasma membrane of the cell. This pit then buds into the cell to form a coated vesicle in the cytoplasm of the cell. In so doing, it brings into the cell not only a small area of the surface of the cell but also a small volume of fluid from outside the cell.\nCoats function to deform the donor membrane to produce a vesicle, and they also function in the selection of the vesicle cargo. Coat complexes that have been well characterized so far include coat protein-I (COP-I), COP-II, and clathrin. Clathrin coats are involved in two crucial transport steps: (i) receptor-mediated and fluid-phase endocytosis from the plasma membrane to early endosome and (ii) transport from the TGN to endosomes. In endocytosis, the clathrin coat is assembled on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane, forming pits that invaginate to pinch off (scission) and become free CCVs. In cultured cells, the assembly of a CCV takes ~ 1min, and several hundred to a thousand or more can form every minute. The main scaffold component of clathrin coat is the 190-kD protein called clathrin heavy chain (CHC), which is associated with a 25- kD protein called clathrin light chain (CLC), forming three-legged trimers called triskelions.\nVesicles selectively concentrate and exclude certain proteins during formation and are not representative of the membrane as a whole. AP2 adaptors are multisubunit complexes that perform this function at the plasma membrane. The best-understood receptors that are found concentrated in coated vesicles of mammalian cells are the LDL receptor (which removes LDL from circulating blood), the transferrin receptor (which brings ferric ions bound by transferrin into the cell) and certain hormone receptors (such as that for EGF).\nAt any one moment, about 25% of the plasma membrane of a fibroblast is made up of coated pits. As a coated pit has a life of about a minute before it buds into the cell, a fibroblast takes up its surface by this route about once every 50 minutes. Coated vesicles formed from the plasma membrane have a diameter of about 100\u00a0nm and a lifetime measured in a few seconds. Once the coat has been shed, the remaining vesicle fuses with endosomes and proceeds down the endocytic pathway. The actual budding-in process, whereby a pit is converted to a vesicle, is carried out by clathrin; Assisted by a set of cytoplasmic proteins, which includes dynamin and adaptors such as adaptin.\nCoated pits and vesicles were first seen in thin sections of tissue in the electron microscope by Thomas F Roth and Keith R. Porter. The importance of them for the clearance of LDL from blood was discovered by Richard G. Anderson, Michael S. Brown and Joseph L. Goldstein in 1977. Coated vesicles were first purified by Barbara Pearse, who discovered the clathrin coat molecule in 1976.\nProcesses and components.\nCaveolin proteins like caveolin-1 (CAV1), caveolin-2 (CAV2), and caveolin-3 (CAV3), play significant roles in the caveolar formation process. More specifically, CAV1 and CAV2 are responsible for caveolae formation in non-muscle cells while CAV3 functions in muscle cells. The process starts with CAV1 being synthesized in the ER where it forms detergent-resistant oligomers. Then, these oligomers travel through the Golgi complex before arriving at the cell surface to aid in caveolar formation. Caveolae formation is also reversible through disassembly under certain conditions such as increased plasma membrane tension. These certain conditions then depend on the type of tissues that are expressing the caveolar function. For example, not all tissues that have caveolar proteins have a caveolar structure i.e. the blood-brain barrier.\nThough there are many morphological features conserved among caveolae, the functions of each CAV protein are diverse. One common feature among caveolins is their hydrophobic stretches of potential hairpin structures that are made of \u03b1-helices. The insertion of these hairpin-like \u03b1-helices forms a caveolae coat which leads to membrane curvature. In addition to insertion, caveolins are also capable of oligomerization which further plays a role in membrane curvature. Recent studies have also discovered that polymerase I, transcript release factor, and serum deprivation protein response also play a role in the assembly of caveolae. Besides caveolae assembly, researchers have also discovered that CAV1 proteins can also influence other endocytic pathways. When CAV1 binds to Cdc42, CAV1 inactivates it and regulates Cdc42 activity during membrane trafficking events.\nMechanisms.\nThe process of cell uptake depends on the tilt and chirality of constituent molecules to induce membrane budding. Since such chiral and tilted lipid molecules are likely to be in a \"raft\" form, researchers suggest that caveolae formation also follows this mechanism since caveolae are also enriched in raft constituents. When caveolin proteins bind to the inner leaflet via cholesterol, the membrane starts to bend, leading to spontaneous curvature. This effect is due to the force distribution generated when the caveolin oligomer binds to the membrane. The force distribution then alters the tension of the membrane which leads to budding and eventually vesicle formation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10118", "revid": "5795946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10118", "title": "Ezra Abbot", "text": "American biblical scholar (1819\u20131884)\nEzra Abbot (April 28, 1819, Jackson, Maine\u00a0\u2013 March 21, 1884, Cambridge, Massachusetts) was an American biblical scholar.\nLife and writings.\nAbbot was born at Jackson, Maine, April 28, 1819; son of Ezra and Phebe Abbot. He was educated at Phillips Exeter Academy and graduated from Bowdoin College in 1840. In 1847, at the request of Andrews Norton, he went to Cambridge, Massachusetts where he was principal of a public school until 1856. He was assistant librarian of Harvard University from 1856 to 1872, and planned and perfected an alphabetical card catalog, combining many of the advantages of the ordinary dictionary catalogs with the grouping of the minor topics under more general heads, which is characteristic of a systematic catalogue. From 1872 until his death he was Bussey Professor of New Testament Criticism and Interpretation in the Harvard Divinity School.\nAbbot's studies were chiefly in Southwest Asian languages and textual criticism of the New Testament, though his work as a bibliographer showed such results as the exhaustive list of writings (5300 in all) on the doctrine of the future life, appended to William Rounseville Alger's \"History of the Doctrine of a Future Life, as it has prevailed in all Nations and Ages\" (1862), and published separately in 1864.\nAbbot's publications, though always of the most thorough and scholarly character, were to a large extent dispersed in the pages of reviews, dictionaries, concordances, texts edited by others, Unitarian controversial treatises, etc. However, he took a more conspicuous and personal part in the preparation (with Baptist scholar Horatio Balch Hackett) of the enlarged American edition of Dr. (afterwards Sir) William Smith's \"Dictionary of the Bible\" (1867\u20131870), to which he contributed more than 400 articles, as well as greatly improving the bibliographical completeness of the work. He was an efficient member of the American revision committee for the Revised Version (1881\u20131885) of the King James Bible, and helped prepare Caspar Ren\u00e9 Gregory's Prolegomena to the revised Greek New Testament of Constantin von Tischendorf.\nHe was one of the 32 founding members of the Society of Biblical Literature in 1880.\nHis principal single work, representing his scholarly method and conservative conclusions, was \"The Authorship of the Fourth Gospel: External Evidences\" (1880; 2nd ed. by J. H. Thayer, with other essays, 1889), originally a lecture. In spite of the compression due to its form, this work was up to that time probably the ablest defense, based on external evidence, of the Johannine authorship, and certainly the most complete treatment of the relation of Justin Martyr to this gospel.\nHonors.\nAbbot was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1861. Though a layman, he received the degree of S.T.D. from Harvard in 1872, and that of D.D. from Edinburgh in 1884.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution"}
{"id": "10119", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10119", "title": "Edwin Abbott Abbott", "text": "British theologian and author (1838\u20131926)\nEdwin Abbott Abbott (20 December 1838\u00a0\u2013 12 October 1926) was an English schoolmaster, theologian, and Anglican priest, best known as the author of the novella \"Flatland\" (1884).\nEarly life and education.\nEdwin Abbott Abbott was the eldest son of Edwin Abbott (1808\u20131882), headmaster of the Philological School, Marylebone, and his wife, Jane Abbott (1806\u20131882). His parents were first cousins.\nHe was born in London and educated at the City of London School and at St John's College, Cambridge, where he took the highest honours of his class in classics, mathematics and theology, and became a fellow of his college. In particular, he was 1st Smith's prizeman in 1861.\nCareer.\nIn 1862 he took orders. After holding masterships at King Edward's School, Birmingham, he succeeded G. F. Mortimer as headmaster of the City of London School in 1865, at the early age of 26. There, he oversaw the education of future Prime Minister H. H. Asquith. Abbott was Hulsean lecturer in 1876.\nHe retired in 1889, and devoted himself to literary and theological pursuits. Abbott's open-minded inclinations in theology were prominent both in his educational views and in his books. His \"Shakespearian Grammar\" (1870) is a permanent contribution to English philology. In 1885, he published a life of Francis Bacon. His theological writings include three anonymously published religious romances \u2013 \"Philochristus\" (1878), where he tried to raise interest in Gospels reading, \"Onesimus\" (1882), and \"Silanus the Christian\" (1908).\nMore weighty contributions are the anonymous theological discussion \"\" (1886), \"Philomythus\" (1891), his book \"The Anglican Career of Cardinal Newman\" (1892), and his article \"The Gospels\" in the ninth edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", embodying a critical view which caused considerable stir in the English theological world. He also wrote \"St Thomas of Canterbury, His Death and Miracles\" (1898), \"Johannine Vocabulary\" (1905), and \"Johannine Grammar\" (1906).\nAbbott also wrote educational textbooks, one being \"Via Latina: A First Latin Book\" which was published in 1880 and distributed around the world within the education system.\n\"Flatland\".\nAbbott's best-known work is his 1884 novella \"Flatland: A Romance of Many Dimensions\" which describes a two-dimensional world and explores the nature of dimensions. It has often been categorized as science fiction although it could more precisely be called \"mathematical fiction\".\nWith the advent of modern science fiction from the 1950s to the present day, \"Flatland\" has seen a revival in popularity, especially among science fiction and cyberpunk fans. Many works have been inspired by the novella, including novel sequels and short films.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10120", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10120", "title": "Emma Abbott", "text": "American operatic soprano\nEmma Abbott (December 9, 1850 \u2013 January 5, 1891) was an American operatic soprano and impresario known for her pure, clear voice of great flexibility and volume.\nEarly life.\nEmma Abbott was born in 1850 in Chicago, Illinois, the daughter of the struggling Chicago musician Seth Abbott and his wife, Almira (n\u00e9e Palmer). As a child, she and her brother George studied singing, piano, guitar and violin with their father.\nThe family moved to Peoria, Illinois, Emma was eight years of age when, she made her first appearance on the stage, singing at a concert given in her father's office in Peoria. In 1854, Professor Abbott was unable to find a sufficient number of music students to make ends meet and the family suffered from financial problems. To help out, she and George began performing professionally when Emma was nine years old. She made her debut as a guitar player and singer in Peoria, Illinois in 1859, with George on the violin, and was teaching guitar by age thirteen.\nCareer.\nIn 1866, she joined an itinerant concert troupe and toured the country. While performing on the road she met and was befriended by Clara Louise Kellogg. Upon hearing Abbott in a concert in Toledo, Kellogg made it a point to meet her and encourage her to pursue an opera career and gave her a letter of introduction. Consequently, Abbott studied in New York City under Achille Errani, and made her concert d\u00e9but there in December 1871.\nIn 1872, Abbott went abroad to study with Antonio Sangiovanni in Milan. This was followed by further studies with Mathilde Marchesi, Pierre Fran\u00e7ois Wartel and Enrico Delle Sedie in Paris. She appeared in several productions in Paris, earning rave reviews for her fine soprano voice. She was awarded a contract with the Royal Opera in London and made her d\u00e9but at Covent Garden as Marie in \"La Fille du r\u00e9giment\" in 1876. However, her contract was cancelled shortly thereafter when she refused to sing Violetta from Verdi's \"La Traviata\" on moral grounds. That same year she secretly married Eugene Wetherell (d. 1889) and they returned to the United States, where she remained for the rest of her life.\nAbbott English Opera Company.\nOn February 23, 1877, Abbott made her American operatic d\u00e9but in New York, once again portraying Marie. In 1878 she and her husband Eugene Wetherell, organized an opera company known by her name (the Emma Abbott Grand English Opera Company), which toured extensively throughout the United States. It was the first opera company formed by a woman in the United States. Her husband ran the business end of the company and she managed the artistic side, often starring in the productions.\nThe company garnered a reputation among the public for quality productions and was quite successful. Among the notable roles that Abbott sang with the company are Juliette in Gounod's \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\", Virginia in \"Paul et Virginie\", Josephine in \"H.M.S. Pinafore\", the title role in Flotow's \"Martha\", Amina in Bellini's \"La Sonnambula\", and Violetta in \"La Traviata\", a role to which she apparently no longer objected, however, instead of singing \"Addio del passato\", she made Violetta expire with \"Nearer, my God, to Thee\".\nThroughout her career, she retained artistic control over her troupe, which sometimes numbered 60. Although the company's repertoire included works from the French, Italian and English operatic literatures, they always performed in English. Many of the works were abridged and interpolated songs were commonplace. For this reason the company and Abbott were not popular with many music critics who were unhappy with the changes to the standard repertoire. However, the company was incredibly popular with the public and was consistently financially successful. Abbott herself became known among Americans as 'the people's prima donna'.\nDeath.\nAbbott continued performing up until her sudden death from pneumonia in Salt Lake City, Utah in 1891, aged 40. She is buried at Oak Grove Cemetery in Gloucester, Massachusetts along with her husband.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10121", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10121", "title": "Epimetheus (disambiguation)", "text": "Epimetheus was a Titan in Greek mythology.\nEpimetheus may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10125", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10125", "title": "Emperor Sh\u014dmu", "text": "Emperor of Japan from 724 to 749\n was the 45th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Sh\u014dmu's reign spanned the years 724 through 749, during the Nara period.\nTraditional narrative.\nBefore his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (\"imina\") is not clearly known, but he was known as Oshi-hiraki Toyosakura-hiko-no-mikoto.\nSh\u014dmu was the son of Emperor Monmu and Fujiwara no Miyako, a daughter of Fujiwara no Fuhito.\nSh\u014dmu had five consorts and six Imperial sons and daughters.\nEvents of Sh\u014dmu's reign.\nSh\u014dmu was still a child at the time of his father's death; thus, his grandmother, Empress Gemmei, and aunt, Empress Gensho, occupied the throne before he acceded.\nSh\u014dmu continued to reside in the Hezei Palace.\nSh\u014dmu is known as the first emperor whose consort was not born into the imperial household. His consort K\u014dmy\u014d was a non-royal Fujiwara commoner. A ritsury\u014d office was created for the queen-consort, the \"Kogogushiki\"; and this bureaucratic innovation continued into the Heian period.\nEmperor Sh\u014dmu's tour to the eastern provinces.\nWhile battle maneuvers of the Fujiwara no Hirotsugu Rebellion were still underway, in Tenpy\u014d 12 10th month (November, 740) Emperor Sh\u014dmu left the capital at Heij\u014d-ky\u014d (Nara) and traveled eastward via Horikoshi (\u5800\u8d8a\u9813\u5bae; today Tsuge; 10th month, 29th day: November 22), Nabari (10th month, 30th day: November 23), Ao (\u5b89\u4fdd\u9813\u5bae; today Aoyama ; 11th month 1st day: November 24) to Kawaguchi in Ichishi District, Ise Province (today part of Tsu, formerly part of Hakusan) where he retreated together with his court to a temporary palace. One of his generals was left in command of the capital. Presumably Sh\u014dmu feared Fujiwara supporters in Nara and was hoping to quell potential uprisings in other parts of the country with his presence. After four days travelling through heavy rain and thick mud, the party reached Kawaguchi on Tenpy\u014d 12 11th month, 2nd day (25 November, 740) A couple of days later, they learn of Hirotsugu's execution and that the rebellion had been quelled.\nDespite the good news, Sh\u014dmu did not return to Heij\u014d-ky\u014d immediately, but stayed in Kawaguchi until Tenpy\u014d 12 11th month, 11th day (4 December, 740). He continued his journey east, then north via Mino Province and back west along the shores of Lake Biwa to Kuni in Yamashiro Province (today in Kizugawa) which he reached on Tenpy\u014d 12 12th month, 15th day (6 January, 741). Places passed along the way included Akasaka (\u8d64\u5742\u9813\u5bae; today Suzuka; 11th m. 14th d.: Dec 7\uff09, Asake district (\u671d\u660e\u90e1; today Yokkaichi; 11th m. 20th d.: Dec 13\uff09, Ishiura (\u77f3\u5360\u9813\u5bae; today Tado; 11th m. 25th d.: Dec 18\uff09, Tagi district (\u5f53\u4f0e\u90e1; today Y\u014dr\u014d; 11th m. 26th d.: Dec 19\uff09, Fuwa (\u4e0d\u7834\u9813\u5bae; today Tarui; 12th m. 1st d.: Dec 23\uff09, Yokokawa (\u6a2a\u5ddd\u9813\u5bae; today Sant\u014d or Maihara; 12th m. 6th d.: Dec 28), Inukami (\u72ac\u4e0a\u9813\u5bae; today Hikone; 12th m. 7th d.: Dec 29\uff09, Gam\u014d district (\u84b2\u751f\u90e1; today near Y\u014dkaichi; 12th m. 9th d.: Dec 31\uff09, Yasu (\u91ce\u6d32\u9813\u5bae; today Yasu or Moriyama; 12th m. 10th d.: Jan 1\uff09, Awazu (\u79be\u6d25\u9813\u5bae; today \u014ctsu; 12th m. 11th d.\uff1a Jan 2\uff09, Tamanoi (\u7389\u4e95\u9813\u5bae; today Yamashina-ku, Kyoto; 12th m. 14th d.\uff09. Situated among the hills and near a river north of Nara, Kuni was easily defensible. In addition, the area was linked with the Minister of the Right, Tachibana no Moroe, while Nara was a center of the Fujiwara clan. On Tenpy\u014d 12 12th month, 15 day (6 January, 741) Sh\u014dmu proclaimed a new capital at Kuni-ky\u014d.\nLegacy.\nSh\u014dmu, a devout Buddhist, is best remembered for commissioning, in 743, the sixteen-meter high statue of the Vairocana Buddha (the \"Daibutsu\") in T\u014ddai-ji of Nara. At the time, this was such a massive undertaking that later chroniclers accuse him of having completely exhausted the country's reserves of bronze and precious metals. In 752, the Sh\u014dmu held the Eye-opening Ceremony of the Great Buddha.\nEarlier in 741, he established the system of provincial temples, making this the closest anyone ever came to declaring Japan a Buddhist nation. In addition he commissioned the observance of the ohigan holiday for both spring and autumnal equinox.\nEmperor Sh\u014dmu died at age 56.\nThe actual site of Sh\u014dmu's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (\"misasagi\") at Nara.\nThe Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Sh\u014dmu's mausoleum. It is formally named \"Sahoyama no minami no misasagi\". The tomb site can be visited today in Horenji-cho, Tenri City near Nara City. The Imperial tomb of Sh\u014dmu's consort, Empress K\u014dmy\u014d, is located nearby.\nSh\u014ds\u014din.\nThe Sh\u014ds\u014d-in (\u6b63\u5009\u9662) is the treasure house of T\u014ddai-ji Temple in Nara, Japan.\nIt houses about 9.000 artifacts connected to Emperor Sh\u014dmu (701\u2013756) and Empress K\u014dmy\u014d (701\u2013760), as well as arts and crafts of the Tempy\u014d era of Japanese history.\nIts general importance derives from the fact, that it may be called an ark of Tang dynasty period cultural relics from Japan as well as from the continent: furniture, games, music instruments, clothing/accessories, weaponry, buddhist objects and pieces of writing.\nSee main entry.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Sh\u014dmu's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nEras of Sh\u014dmu's life.\nThe years of Sh\u014dmu's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or \"neng\u014d\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10126", "revid": "42807290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10126", "title": "Emperor Kanmu", "text": "Emperor of Japan from 781 to 806\n, or Kammu, was the 50th emperor of Japan, according to the traditional order of succession. Kammu reigned from 781 to 806, and it was during his reign that the scope of the emperor's powers reached its peak. His reign saw the transition from the Nara period to the Heian period.\nTraditional narrative.\nKammu's personal name (\"imina\") was . He was the eldest son of Prince Shirakabe (later known as Emperor K\u014dnin), and was born prior to Shirakabe's ascension to the throne. According to the , Yamabe's mother, Yamato no Niigasa (later called Takano no Niigasa), was a 10th generation descendant of Muryeong of Baekje (462\u2013523).\nAfter his father became emperor at the age of 61, Kammu's half-brother, Prince Osabe was appointed to the rank of crown prince. His mother was Princess Inoe, a daughter of Emperor Sh\u014dmu; but instead of Osabe, it was Kammu who was later named to succeed their father. After Inoe and Prince Osabe were confined and then died in 775, Osabe's sister \u2013 Kammu's half-sister Princess Sakahito \u2013 became Kammu's wife. Later, when he ascended to the throne in 781, Kammu appointed his young brother, Prince Sawara, whose mother was Takano no Niigasa, as crown prince. Hikami no Kawatsugu, a son of Emperor Tenmu's grandson Prince Shioyaki and Sh\u014dmu's daughter Fuwa, attempted to carry out a coup d'\u00e9tat in 782, but it failed and Kawatsugu and his mother were sent into exile. In 785 Sawara was expelled and died in exile.\nThe Nara period saw the appointment of the first \"sh\u014dgun\", \u014ctomo no Otomaro by Emperor Kammu in 794 CE. The sh\u014dgun in this time was not the type of \"de facto\" military dictator of Japan as in later history but was appointed to pacify the northern borderlands. The full title \"Sei-i Taish\u014dgun\" means \"Barbarian-subduing Great General\". Emperor Kammu granted the second title of sh\u014dgun to Sakanoue no Tamuramaro for subduing the Emishi in northern Honshu.\nKammu had 16 empresses and consorts, and 32 imperial sons and daughters. Among them, three sons would eventually ascend to the imperial throne: Emperor Heizei, Emperor Saga and Emperor Junna. Some of his descendants (known as the \"Kammu Taira\" or \"Kammu Heishi\") took the Taira hereditary clan title, and in later generations became prominent warriors. Examples include Taira no Masakado, Taira no Kiyomori, and (with a further surname expansion) the H\u014dj\u014d clan. The \"waka\" poet Ariwara no Narihira was one of his grandsons.\nKammu is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Kammu's mausoleum.\nEvents of Kammu's life.\nKammu was an active emperor who attempted to consolidate government hierarchies and functions. Kammu appointed Sakanoue no Tamuramaro (758\u2013811) to lead a military expedition against the Emishi.\nEras of Kammu's reign.\nThe years of Kammu's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (\"neng\u014d\").\nPolitics.\nDomestic relations.\nEarlier Imperial sponsorship of Buddhism, beginning with Prince Sh\u014dtoku (574\u2013622), had led to a general politicization of the clergy, along with an increase in intrigue and corruption. In 784 Kammu shifted his capital from Nara to Nagaoka-ky\u014d in a move that was said to be designed to encumber the powerful Nara Buddhist establishments out of state politics\u2014while the capital moved, the major Buddhist temples, and their officials, stayed put. Indeed, there was a steady stream of edicts issued from 771 right through the period of K\u016bkai's studies which, for instance, sought to limit the number of Buddhist priests, and the building of temples. However, the move was to prove disastrous and was followed by a series of natural disasters including the flooding of half the city. In 785 the principal architect of the new capital, and royal favourite, Fujiwara no Tanetsugu, was assassinated.\nMeanwhile, Kammu's armies were pushing back the boundaries of his empire. This led to an uprising, and in 789 a substantial defeat for Kammu's troops. Also in 789 there was a severe drought and famine\u2014the streets of the capital were clogged with the sick, and people avoiding being drafted into the military, or into forced labour. Many disguised themselves as Buddhist priests for the same reason. Consequently, in 792 Kammu abolished national conscription, replacing it with a system wherein each province formed a militia from the local gentry, however this system vitiated the authority of the Emperor and led to proliferation of private armies. Then in 794 Kammu suddenly shifted the capital again, this time to Heian-ky\u014d, which is modern day Kyoto. The new capital was started early the previous year, but the change was abrupt and led to even more confusion amongst the populace. Kammu's rule witnessed the frontiers of Japan expanding into Izawa and Shiba, under the command of a preeminent commander, Tamura Maro.\nPolitically Kammu shored up his rule by changing the syllabus of the university. Confucian ideology still provided the \"raison d'\u00eatre\" for the Imperial government. In 784 Kammu authorised the teaching of a new course based on the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\" based on two newly imported commentaries: \"Kung-yang\" and \"Ku-liang\". These commentaries used political rhetoric to promote a state in which the Emperor, as \"Son of Heaven,\" should extend his sphere of influence to barbarous lands, thereby gladdening the people. In 798 the two commentaries became required reading at the government university.\nEmperor Kanmu was the first person to conceive the \"Shinsen Sh\u014djiroku\", a Japanese genealogical record in 799 to properly track the clans' then ambiguous lineages, but it was not able to be completed before his death in 806. The project was later carried over by his sons and was completed during Emperor Saga's reign in 814.\nForeign relations.\nChina.\nKammu also sponsored the travels of the monks Saich\u014d and K\u016bkai to China, from where they returned to found the Japanese branches of, respectively, Tendai and Shingon Buddhism.\nKorea.\nHe was specifically interested in Paekche (and to an extent, Goguryeo) as his mother was of Paekche descent.\nKammu's emphasis towards his foreign heritage became prominent as his mother was not of the Imperial line, but was in fact a royal consort to Emperor K\u014dnin on top of coming from a clan of Korean origin, which could have negatively affected his ascension as emperor and be deemed illegitimate by some. To circumvent this, Kammu focused heavily on the mythological aspects of his mother's ancestor, Muryeong of Baekje and Muryeong's own ancestor, Dongmyeong of Goguryeo (Ko Chumong), emphasizing Chumong's heritage as a grandchild of the god Habaek and Kammu's own lineage that continued it claiming that he was part of the \"heavenly lineage\". He mentions this in \"Shoku Nihongi\" when honoring his late mother.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The empress dowager's clan (surname) was Yamato and her name was Niigasa. Her majesty had astonishing looks that spoke of maturity that was quickly recognized. She was married to Emperor K\u014dnin before he was officially inaugurated when she had his son (Kammu/Yamabe). Her ancestor was the son of King Muryeong of Baekje, Prince Junda. The king of Baekje is said to be the descendant of King Dongmyeong who hatched from an egg when his mother, the daughter of Habaek was touched by sunlight. The empress dowager, therefore I, am the direct descendant of them.\"\u2014\u200a\nIn 790, Emperor Kanmu issued a rescript that treated the Kudara no Konikishi clan (a fellow Japanese clan of Paekche descent) as \"relatives by marriage\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Kudara no Konikishi clan are my relatives by marriage.\"\u2014\u200a\nIt was related to the fact that the emperor's mother belonged to the Paekche-originated Yamato no Fuhito clan, who then claimed its roots in the Paekche royal family. In addition, according to the Shoku Nihongi, Takano no Niigasa was a 10th-generation descendant of King Muryeong of Baekje through his son Prince Junda (Nihon Shoki, chapter 17), making Emperor Kammu an 11th-generation descendant of Muryeong through maternal lineage. The Kudara no Konikishi clan fell under the influence of the southern branch of the Fujiwara clan after Kudara no Konikishi My\u014dshin had married Fujiwara no Tsugutada around 754. Emperor Kanmu's rescript of 790 aimed to support My\u014dshin's appointment as lady-in-waiting (\u5c1a\u4f8d), the highest post among court ladies, due to her similar background with Kammu.\nA 14th century book called \"Jinn\u014d Sh\u014dt\u014dki\" by Kitabatake Chikafusa states that a record that claimed of Japan's origin with Korea was lost during Kammu's time, which indicates that such intentions were highly regarded during Emperor Kanmu's reign up until the book's disappearance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Originally, it was recorded that \"Japan and the Three Kingdoms of Korea are the same\" but the book was lost during Emperor Kanmu's reign.\"\u2014\u200a\nIt can be deduced that Kammu advocated his Korean ancestry for both political and social reasons at the time, which was later officially recognized by the government coming from the Emperor of Japan.\nKugy\u014d.\n is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.\nIn general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kammu's reign, this apex of the \"Daij\u014d-kan\" included:\nWhen the daughter of a \"ch\u016bnagon\" became the favored consort of the Crown Prince Ate (later known as Heizei\"-tenn\u014d\"), her father's power and position in court was affected. Kammu disapproved of Fujiwara no Kusuko, daughter of Fujiwara no Tanetsugu; and Kammu had her removed from his son's household.\nConsorts and children.\nEmperor Kammu's Imperial family included 36 children.\nLegacy.\nIn 2001, Japan's emperor Akihito told reporters \"I, on my part, feel a certain kinship with Korea\", given the fact that it is recorded in the \"Chronicles of Japan\" that the Emperor Kammu's mother was one of the descendant of King Muryong of Baekje (462\u2013523). It was the first time that a Japanese emperor publicly referred to any Korean ancestry in the imperial line. According to the \"Shoku Nihongi\", Emperor Kammu's mother, Takano no Niigasa (720\u201390), is a descendant of Prince Junda, son of Muryeong, who died in Japan in 513 (\"Nihon Shoki\", Chapter 17).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10127", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10127", "title": "Empress Shotoku of Japan", "text": ""}
{"id": "10128", "revid": "49665754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10128", "title": "Elizabeth I", "text": "Queen of England and Ireland from 1558 to 1603\nElizabeth I (7 September 1533\u00a0\u2013 24 March 1603) was the Queen of England and Ireland from 17 November 1558 until her death. She was the last and longest reigning monarch of the House of Tudor. Her eventful reign, and its effect on history and culture, gave name to the Elizabethan era.\nElizabeth was the only surviving child of Henry VIII and his second wife, Anne Boleyn. When Elizabeth was two years old, her parents' marriage was annulled, her mother was executed, and Elizabeth was declared illegitimate. Henry restored her to the line of succession when she was 10. After Henry's death in 1547, Elizabeth's younger half-brother Edward VI ruled until his own death in 1553, bequeathing the crown to a Protestant cousin, Lady Jane Grey, and ignoring the claims of his two half-sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, despite statutes to the contrary. Edward's will was quickly set aside and the Catholic Mary became queen, deposing Jane. During Mary's reign, Elizabeth was imprisoned for nearly a year on suspicion of supporting Protestant rebels.\nUpon Mary's 1558 death, Elizabeth succeeded to the throne and set out to rule by good counsel. She depended heavily on a group of trusted advisers led by William Cecil, whom she created Baron Burghley. One of her first actions as queen was the establishment of an English Protestant church, of which she became the supreme governor. This arrangement, later named the Elizabethan Religious Settlement, would evolve into the Church of England. It was expected that Elizabeth would marry and produce an heir; however, despite numerous courtships, she never did. Because of this she is sometimes referred to as the \"Virgin Queen\". She was succeeded by her cousin, James VI of Scotland.\nIn government, Elizabeth was more moderate than her father and siblings had been. One of her mottoes was (\"I see and keep silent\"). In religion, she was relatively tolerant and avoided systematic persecution. After the pope declared her illegitimate in 1570, which in theory released English Catholics from allegiance to her, several conspiracies threatened her life, all of which were defeated with the help of her ministers' secret service, run by Francis Walsingham. Elizabeth was cautious in foreign affairs, manoeuvring between the major powers of France and Spain. She half-heartedly supported a number of ineffective, poorly resourced military campaigns in the Netherlands, France, and Ireland. By the mid-1580s, England could no longer avoid war with Spain.\nAs she grew older, Elizabeth became celebrated for her virginity. A cult of personality grew around her which was celebrated in the portraits, pageants, and literature of the day. The Elizabethan era is famous for the flourishing of English drama, led by playwrights such as William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe, the prowess of English maritime adventurers, such as Francis Drake and Walter Raleigh, and for the defeat of the Spanish Armada. Some historians depict Elizabeth as a short-tempered, sometimes indecisive ruler, who enjoyed more than her fair share of luck. Towards the end of her reign, a series of economic and military problems weakened her popularity. Elizabeth is acknowledged as a charismatic performer and a dogged survivor in an era when government was ramshackle and limited, and when monarchs in neighbouring countries faced internal problems and religious civil wars that jeopardised their thrones. After the short, disastrous reigns of her half-siblings, her 44 years on the throne provided welcome stability for the kingdom and helped to forge a sense of national identity.\nEarly life.\nInfancy.\nElizabeth was born at Greenwich Palace on 7 September 1533 and was named after her grandmothers, Elizabeth of York and Lady Elizabeth Howard. She was the second child of Henry VIII of England born in wedlock to survive infancy. Her mother was Henry VIII's second wife, Anne Boleyn. At birth, Elizabeth was the heir presumptive to the English throne. Her elder half-sister Mary had lost her position as a legitimate heir when Henry annulled his marriage to Mary's mother, Catherine of Aragon, to marry Anne, with the intent to sire a male heir and ensure the Tudor succession. She was baptised on 10 September 1533, and her godparents were Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury; Henry Courtenay, Marquess of Exeter; Elizabeth Stafford, Duchess of Norfolk; and Margaret Wotton, Dowager Marchioness of Dorset. A canopy was carried at the ceremony over the infant by her uncle George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford; John Hussey, Baron Hussey of Sleaford; Lord Thomas Howard; and William Howard, Baron Howard of Effingham.\nElizabeth was two years and eight months old when her mother was beheaded on 19 May 1536, four months after Catherine of Aragon's death from natural causes. Elizabeth was declared illegitimate and deprived of her place in the royal succession. Eleven days after Anne Boleyn's execution, Henry married Jane Seymour. Queen Jane died the next year shortly after the birth of their son, Edward, who was the undisputed heir apparent to the throne. Elizabeth was placed in her half-brother's household and carried the chrisom, or baptismal cloth, at his christening.\nEducation.\nElizabeth's first governess, Margaret Bryan, wrote that she was \"as toward a child and as gentle of conditions as ever I knew any in my life\". Catherine Champernowne, better known by her later, married name of Catherine \"Kat\" Ashley, was appointed as Elizabeth's governess in 1537, and she remained Elizabeth's friend until her death in 1565. Champernowne taught Elizabeth four languages: French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish. By the time William Grindal became her tutor in 1544, Elizabeth could write English, Latin, and Italian. Under Grindal, a talented and skilful tutor, she also progressed in French and Greek. By the age of 12, she was able to translate her stepmother Catherine Parr's religious work \"Prayers or Meditations\" from English into Italian, Latin, and French, which she presented to her father as a New Year's gift. From her teenage years and throughout her life, she translated works in Latin and Greek by numerous classical authors, including the \"Pro Marcello\" of Cicero, the \"De consolatione philosophiae\" of Boethius, a treatise by Plutarch, and the \"Annals\" of Tacitus. A translation of Tacitus from Lambeth Palace Library, one of only four surviving English translations from the early modern era, was confirmed as Elizabeth's own in 2019, after a detailed analysis of the handwriting and paper was undertaken.\nAfter Grindal died in 1548, Elizabeth received her education under her brother Edward's tutor, Roger Ascham, a sympathetic teacher who believed that learning should be engaging. Current knowledge of Elizabeth's schooling and precocity comes largely from Ascham's memoirs. By the time her formal education ended in 1550, Elizabeth was one of the best educated women of her generation. At the end of her life, she was believed to speak the Welsh, Cornish, Scottish, and Irish languages in addition to those mentioned above. The Venetian ambassador stated in 1603 that she \"possessed [these] languages so thoroughly that each appeared to be her native tongue\". Historian Mark Stoyle suggests that she was probably taught Cornish by William Killigrew, Groom of the Privy Chamber and later Chamberlain of the Exchequer. Elizabeth also grew to be a skilled musician, playing the virginal (harpsichord) and lute (tutored by Philip van Wilder). Elizabeth possibly played Thomas Tallis' early keyboard oeuvre, now surviving in the Mulliner Book, from a young age. \nAdolescence.\nHenry VIII died in 1547 and Elizabeth's half-brother, Edward VI, became king at the age of nine. Catherine Parr, Henry's widow, soon married Thomas Seymour, Baron Seymour of Sudeley, Edward VI's uncle and the brother of Lord Protector Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset. The couple took Elizabeth into their household at Chelsea. There Elizabeth experienced an emotional crisis that some historians believe affected her for the rest of her life. Thomas Seymour engaged in romps and horseplay with the 14-year-old Elizabeth, including entering her bedroom in his nightgown, tickling her, and slapping her on the buttocks. Elizabeth rose early and surrounded herself with maids to avoid his unwelcome morning visits. Parr, rather than confront her husband over his inappropriate activities, joined in. Twice she accompanied him in tickling Elizabeth, and once held her while he cut her black gown \"into a thousand pieces\". However, after Parr discovered the pair in an embrace, she ended this state of affairs. In May 1548, Elizabeth was sent away.\nThomas Seymour nevertheless continued scheming to control the royal family and tried to have himself appointed the governor of the King's person. When Parr died after childbirth on 5 September 1548, he renewed his attentions towards Elizabeth, intent on marrying her. Her governess Kat Ashley, who was fond of Seymour, sought to convince Elizabeth to take him as her husband. She tried to convince Elizabeth to write to Seymour and \"comfort him in his sorrow\", but Elizabeth claimed that Thomas was not so saddened by her stepmother's death as to need comfort.\nIn January 1549, Seymour was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower on suspicion of conspiring to depose his brother Somerset as Protector, marry Lady Jane Grey to King Edward VI, and take Elizabeth as his own wife. Elizabeth, living at Hatfield House, would admit nothing. Her stubbornness exasperated her interrogator, Robert Tyrwhitt, who reported, \"I do see it in her face that she is guilty\". Seymour was beheaded on 20 March 1549.\nHeir presumptive.\nEdward VI died on 6 July 1553, aged 15. His will ignored the Succession to the Crown Act 1543, excluded both Mary and Elizabeth from the succession, and instead declared as his heir Lady Jane Grey, granddaughter of Henry VIII's younger sister Mary Tudor, Queen of France. Jane was proclaimed queen by the privy council, but her support quickly crumbled, and she was deposed after nine days. On 3 August 1553, Mary rode triumphantly into London, with Elizabeth at her side. The show of solidarity between the sisters did not last long. Mary, a devout Catholic, was determined to crush the Protestant faith in which Elizabeth had been educated, and she ordered that everyone attend Catholic Mass; Elizabeth outwardly conformed. Mary's initial popularity ebbed away in 1554 when she announced plans to marry Philip of Spain, the son of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and a Catholic. Discontent spread rapidly through the country, and many looked to Elizabeth as a focus for their opposition to Mary's religious policies.\nIn January and February 1554, Wyatt's rebellion broke out; it was soon suppressed. Elizabeth was brought to court and interrogated regarding her role, and on 18 March, she was imprisoned in the Tower of London. Elizabeth fervently protested her innocence. Though it is unlikely that she had plotted with the rebels, some of them were known to have approached her. Mary's closest confidant, Emperor Charles's ambassador Simon Renard, argued that her throne would never be safe while Elizabeth lived; and Lord Chancellor Stephen Gardiner, worked to have Elizabeth put on trial. Elizabeth's supporters in the government, including William Paget, 1st Baron Paget, convinced Mary to spare her sister in the absence of hard evidence against her. Instead, on 22 May, Elizabeth was moved from the Tower to Woodstock Palace, where she was to spend almost a year under house arrest in the charge of Henry Bedingfeld. Crowds cheered her all along the way.\nOn 17 April 1555, Elizabeth was recalled to court to attend the final stages of Mary's apparent pregnancy. If Mary and her child died, Elizabeth would become queen, but if Mary gave birth to a healthy child, Elizabeth's chances of becoming queen would recede sharply. When it became clear that Mary was not pregnant, no one believed any longer that she could have a child. Elizabeth's succession seemed assured.\nKing Philip, who ascended the Spanish throne in 1556, acknowledged the new political reality and cultivated his sister-in-law. She was a better ally than the chief alternative, Mary, Queen of Scots, who had grown up in France and was betrothed to Francis, Dauphin of France. When his wife fell ill in 1558, Philip sent the Count of Feria to consult with Elizabeth. This interview was conducted at Hatfield House, where she had returned to live in October 1555. By October 1558, Elizabeth was already making plans for her government. Mary recognised Elizabeth as her heir on 6 November 1558 and Elizabeth became queen when Mary died on 17 November.\nAccession.\nElizabeth became queen at the age of 25, and declared her intentions to her council and other peers who had come to Hatfield to swear allegiance. The speech contains the first record of her adoption of the medieval political theology of the sovereign's \"two bodies\": the body natural and the body politic:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My lords, the law of nature moves me to sorrow for my sister; the burden that is fallen upon me makes me amazed, and yet, considering I am God's creature, ordained to obey His appointment, I will thereto yield, desiring from the bottom of my heart that I may have assistance of His grace to be the minister of His heavenly will in this office now committed to me. And as I am but one body naturally considered, though by His permission a body politic to govern, so shall I desire you all\u00a0... to be assistant to me, that I with my ruling and you with your service may make a good account to Almighty God and leave some comfort to our posterity on earth. I mean to direct all my actions by good advice and counsel.\nAs her triumphal progress wound through the city on the eve of the coronation ceremony, she was welcomed wholeheartedly by the citizens and greeted by orations and pageants, most with a strong Protestant flavour. Elizabeth's open and gracious responses endeared her to the spectators, who were \"wonderfully ravished\". The following day, 15 January 1559, a date chosen by her astrologer John Dee, Elizabeth was crowned and anointed by Owen Oglethorpe, the Catholic bishop of Carlisle, in Westminster Abbey. She was then presented for the people's acceptance, amidst a deafening noise of organs, fifes, trumpets, drums, and bells. Although Elizabeth was welcomed as queen in England, the country was still in a state of anxiety over the perceived Catholic threat at home and overseas, as well as the choice of whom she would marry.\nChurch settlement.\nElizabeth's personal religious convictions have been much debated by scholars. She was a Protestant, but kept Catholic symbols (such as the crucifix), and downplayed the role of sermons in defiance of a key Protestant belief.\nElizabeth and her advisers perceived the threat of a Catholic crusade against heretical England. The Queen therefore sought a Protestant solution that would not offend Catholics too greatly while addressing the desires of English Protestants, but she would not tolerate the Puritans, who were pushing for far-reaching reforms. As a result, the Parliament of 1559 started to legislate for a church based on the Protestant settlement of Edward VI, with the monarch as its head, but with many Catholic elements, such as vestments.\nThe House of Commons backed the proposals strongly, but the bill of supremacy met opposition in the House of Lords, particularly from the bishops. Elizabeth was fortunate that many bishoprics were vacant at the time, including the Archbishopric of Canterbury. This enabled supporters amongst peers to outvote the bishops and conservative peers. Nevertheless, Elizabeth was forced to accept the title of Supreme Governor of the Church of England rather than the more contentious title of Supreme Head, which many thought unacceptable for a woman to bear. The new Act of Supremacy became law on 8 May 1559. All public officials were forced to swear an oath of loyalty to the monarch as the supreme governor or risk disqualification from office; the heresy laws were repealed, to avoid a repeat of the persecution of dissenters by Mary. At the same time, a new Act of Uniformity was passed, which made attendance at church and the use of the 1559 \"Book of Common Prayer\" (an adapted version of the 1552 prayer book) compulsory, though the penalties for recusancy, or failure to attend and conform, were not extreme. Although 1559 injunctions stated that music was to be \"playnelye understanded, as if it were read without singing\", more elaborate pieces were allowed at certain times of the day, and the practice of composing Latin motets with Sarum texts continued in the Chapel Royal.\nMarriage question.\nFrom the start of Elizabeth's reign it was expected that she would marry, and the question arose to whom. Although she received many offers, she never married and remained childless; the reasons for this are not clear. Historians have speculated that Thomas Seymour had put her off sexual relationships. She considered several suitors until she was about 50 years old. Her last courtship was with Francis, Duke of Anjou, 22 years her junior. While risking possible loss of power like her sister, who played into the hands of King Philip II of Spain, marriage offered the chance of an heir. However, the choice of a husband might also provoke political instability or even insurrection.\nRobert Dudley.\nIn the spring of 1559, it became evident that Elizabeth was in love with her childhood friend Robert Dudley. It was said that his wife Amy was suffering from a \"malady in one of her breasts\" and that the Queen would like to marry Robert if his wife should die. By the autumn of 1559, several foreign suitors were vying for Elizabeth's hand; their impatient envoys engaged in ever more scandalous talk and reported that a marriage with her favourite was not welcome in England: \"There is not a man who does not cry out on him and her with indignation\u00a0... she will marry none but the favoured Robert.\" Amy Dudley died in September 1560, from a fall from a flight of stairs and, despite the coroner's inquest finding of accident, many people suspected her husband of having arranged her death so that he could marry the Queen. Elizabeth seriously considered marrying Dudley for some time. However, William Cecil, Nicholas Throckmorton, and some conservative peers made their disapproval unmistakably clear. There were even rumours that the nobility would rise if the marriage took place.\nAmong other marriage candidates being considered for the queen, Robert Dudley continued to be regarded as a possible candidate for nearly another decade. Elizabeth was extremely jealous of his affections, even when she no longer meant to marry him herself. She raised Dudley to the peerage as Earl of Leicester in 1564. In 1578, he finally married Lettice Knollys, to whom the queen reacted with repeated scenes of displeasure and lifelong hatred. Still, Dudley always \"remained at the centre of [Elizabeth's] emotional life\", as historian Susan Doran has described the situation. He died shortly after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588. After Elizabeth's own death, a note from him was found among her most personal belongings, marked \"his last letter\" in her handwriting.\nForeign candidates.\nMarriage negotiations constituted a key element in Elizabeth's foreign policy. She turned down the hand of Philip, her half-sister's widower, early in 1559 but for several years entertained the proposal of King Eric XIV of Sweden. Earlier in Elizabeth's life, a\u00a0Danish match for her had been discussed; Henry VIII had proposed one with the Danish prince Adolf, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp, in 1545, and Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, suggested a marriage with Prince Frederick (later Frederick II) several years later, but the negotiations had abated in 1551. In the years around 1559, a Dano-English Protestant alliance was considered, and to counter Sweden's proposal, King Frederick II proposed to Elizabeth in late 1559.\nFor several years, she seriously negotiated to marry Philip's cousin Charles II, Archduke of Austria. By 1569, relations with the Habsburgs had deteriorated. Elizabeth considered marriage to two French Valois princes in turn, first Henry, Duke of Anjou, and then from 1572 to 1581 his brother Francis, Duke of Anjou, formerly Duke of Alen\u00e7on. This last proposal was tied to a planned alliance against Spanish control of the Southern Netherlands. Elizabeth seems to have taken the courtship seriously for a time, wearing a frog-shaped earring that Francis had sent her.\nIn 1563, Elizabeth told an imperial envoy: \"If I follow the inclination of my nature, it is this: beggar-woman and single, far rather than queen and married\". Later in the year, following Elizabeth's illness with smallpox, the succession question became a heated issue in Parliament. Members urged the Queen to marry or nominate an heir, to prevent a civil war upon her death. She refused to do either. In April she prorogued the Parliament, which did not reconvene until she needed its support to raise taxes in 1566.\nHaving previously promised to marry, she told an unruly House:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I will never break the word of a prince spoken in public place, for my honour's sake. And therefore I say again, I will marry as soon as I can conveniently, if God take not him away with whom I mind to marry, or myself, or else some other great let [obstruction] happen.\nBy 1570, senior figures in the government privately accepted that Elizabeth would never marry or name a successor. William Cecil was already seeking solutions to the succession problem. For her failure to marry, Elizabeth was often accused of irresponsibility. Her silence, however, strengthened her own political security: she knew that if she named an heir, her throne would be vulnerable to a coup; she remembered the way that \"a second person, as I have been\" had been used as the focus of plots against her predecessor.\nVirginity.\nElizabeth's unmarried status inspired a cult of virginity related to that of the Virgin Mary. In poetry and portraiture, she was depicted as a virgin, a goddess, or both, not as a normal woman. At first, only Elizabeth made a virtue of her ostensible virginity: in 1559, she told the Commons, \"And, in the end, this shall be for me sufficient, that a marble stone shall declare that a queen, having reigned such a time, lived and died a virgin\". Later on, poets and writers took up the theme and developed an iconography that exalted Elizabeth. Public tributes to the Virgin by 1578 acted as a coded assertion of opposition to the queen's marriage negotiations with the Duke of Alen\u00e7on. Ultimately, Elizabeth would insist she was married to her kingdom and subjects, under divine protection. In 1599, she spoke of \"all my husbands, my good people\".\nThis claim of virginity was not universally accepted. Catholics accused Elizabeth of engaging in \"filthy lust\" that symbolically defiled the nation along with her body. Henry IV of France said that one of the great questions of Europe was \"whether Queen Elizabeth was a maid or no\".\nA central issue, when it comes to the question of Elizabeth's virginity, was whether the Queen ever consummated her love affair with Robert Dudley. In 1559, she had Dudley's bedchambers moved next to her own apartments. In 1561, she was mysteriously bedridden with an illness that caused her body to swell.\nIn 1587, a young man calling himself Arthur Dudley was arrested on the coast of Spain under suspicion of being a spy. The man claimed to be the illegitimate son of Elizabeth and Robert Dudley, with his age being consistent with birth during the 1561 illness. He was taken to Madrid for investigation, where he was examined by Francis Englefield, a Catholic aristocrat exiled to Spain and secretary to King Philip II. Three letters exist today describing the interview, detailing what Arthur proclaimed to be the story of his life, from birth in the royal palace to the time of his arrival in Spain. However, this failed to convince the Spaniards: Englefield admitted to King Philip that Arthur's \"claim at present amounts to nothing\", but suggested that \"he should not be allowed to get away, but [...] kept very secure.\" The King agreed, and Arthur was never heard from again. Modern scholarship dismisses the story's basic premise as \"impossible\", and asserts that Elizabeth's life was so closely observed by contemporaries that she could not have hidden a pregnancy.\nMary, Queen of Scots.\nElizabeth's first policy toward Scotland was to oppose the French presence there. She feared that the French planned to invade England and put her Catholic cousin Mary, Queen of Scots, on the throne. Mary was considered by many to be the heir to the English crown, being the granddaughter of Henry VIII's elder sister, Margaret. Mary boasted being \"the nearest kinswoman she hath\". Elizabeth was persuaded to send a force into Scotland to aid the Protestant rebels, and though the campaign was inept, the resulting Treaty of Edinburgh of July 1560 removed the French threat in the north. When Mary returned from France to Scotland in 1561 to take up the reins of power, the country had an established Protestant church and was run by a council of Protestant nobles supported by Elizabeth. Mary refused to ratify the treaty.\nIn 1563, Elizabeth proposed her own suitor, Robert Dudley, as a husband for Mary, without asking either of the two people concerned. Both proved unenthusiastic, and in 1565, Mary married Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, who carried his own claim to the English throne. The marriage was the first of a series of errors of judgement by Mary that handed the victory to the Scottish Protestants and to Elizabeth. Darnley quickly became unpopular and was murdered in February 1567 by conspirators almost certainly led by James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell. Shortly afterwards, on 15 May 1567, Mary married Bothwell, arousing suspicions that she had been party to the murder of her husband. Elizabeth confronted Mary about the marriage, writing to her:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How could a worse choice be made for your honour than in such haste to marry such a subject, who besides other and notorious lacks, public fame has charged with the murder of your late husband, besides the touching of yourself also in some part, though we trust in that behalf falsely.\nThese events led rapidly to Mary's defeat and imprisonment in Lochleven Castle. The Scottish lords forced her to abdicate in favour of her one-year-old son, James VI. James was taken to Stirling Castle to be raised as a Protestant. Mary escaped in 1568 but after a defeat at Langside sailed to England, where she had once been assured of support from Elizabeth. Elizabeth's first instinct was to restore her fellow monarch, but she and her council instead chose to play safe. Rather than risk returning Mary to Scotland with an English army or sending her to France and the Catholic enemies of England, they detained her in England, where she was imprisoned for the next nineteen years.\nCatholic cause.\nMary was soon the focus for rebellion. In 1569 there was a major Catholic rising in the North; the goal was to free Mary, marry her to Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, and put her on the English throne. After the rebels' defeat, over 750 of them were executed on Elizabeth's orders. In the belief that the revolt had been successful, Pope Pius V issued a bull in 1570, titled \"Regnans in Excelsis\", which declared \"Elizabeth, the pretended Queen of England and the servant of crime\" to be excommunicated and a heretic, releasing all her subjects from any allegiance to her. Catholics who obeyed her orders were threatened with excommunication. The papal bull provoked legislative initiatives against Catholics by Parliament, which were, however, mitigated by Elizabeth's intervention. In 1581, to convert English subjects to Catholicism with \"the intent\" to withdraw them from their allegiance to Elizabeth was made a treasonable offence, carrying the death penalty. From the 1570s missionary priests from continental seminaries went to England secretly in the cause of the \"reconversion of England\". Some were executed for treasonable conduct, engendering a cult of martyrdom.\n\"Regnans in Excelsis\" gave English Catholics a strong incentive to look to Mary as the legitimate sovereign of England. Mary may not have been told of every Catholic plot to put her on the English throne, but from the Ridolfi Plot of 1571 (which caused Mary's suitor, the Duke of Norfolk, to lose his head) to the Babington Plot of 1586, Elizabeth's spymaster Francis Walsingham and the royal council keenly assembled a case against her. At first, Elizabeth resisted calls for Mary's death. By late 1586, she had been persuaded to sanction Mary's trial and execution on the evidence of letters written during the Babington Plot. Elizabeth's proclamation of the sentence announced that \"the said Mary, pretending title to the same Crown, had compassed and imagined within the same realm diverse things tending to the hurt, death and destruction of our royal person.\" On 8 February 1587, Mary was beheaded at Fotheringhay Castle, Northamptonshire. After the execution, Elizabeth claimed that she had not intended for the signed execution warrant to be dispatched, and blamed her secretary, William Davison, for implementing it without her knowledge. The sincerity of Elizabeth's remorse and whether or not she wanted to delay the warrant have been called into question both by her contemporaries and later historians.\nWars.\nElizabeth's foreign policy was largely defensive. The exception was the English occupation of Le Havre from October 1562 to June 1563, which ended in failure when Elizabeth's Huguenot allies joined with the Catholics to retake the port. Elizabeth's intention had been to exchange Le Havre for Calais, lost to France in January 1558. Only through the activities of her fleets did Elizabeth pursue an aggressive policy. This paid off in the war against Spain, 80% of which was fought at sea. She knighted Francis Drake after his circumnavigation of the globe from 1577 to 1580, and he won fame for his raids on Spanish ports and fleets. An element of piracy and self-enrichment drove Elizabethan seafarers, over whom the Queen had little control.\nNetherlands.\nAfter the occupation and loss of Le Havre in 1562\u20131563, Elizabeth avoided military expeditions on the continent until 1585, when she sent an English army to aid the Protestant Dutch rebels against Philip II. This followed the deaths in 1584 of the Queen's allies William the Silent, Prince of Orange, and the Duke of Anjou, and the surrender of a series of Dutch towns to Alexander Farnese, Duke of Parma, Philip's governor of the Spanish Netherlands. In December 1584, an alliance between Philip II and the French Catholic League at Joinville undermined the ability of Anjou's brother, Henry III of France, to counter Spanish domination of the Netherlands. It also extended Spanish influence along the channel coast of France, where the Catholic League was strong, and exposed England to invasion. The siege of Antwerp in the summer of 1585 by the Duke of Parma necessitated some reaction on the part of the English and the Dutch. The outcome was the Treaty of Nonsuch of August 1585, in which Elizabeth promised military support to the Dutch. The treaty marked the beginning of the Anglo-Spanish War.\nThe expedition was led by Elizabeth's former suitor, the Earl of Leicester. Elizabeth from the start did not really back this course of action. Her strategy, to support the Dutch on the surface with an English army, while beginning secret peace talks with Spain within days of Leicester's arrival in Holland, had necessarily to be at odds with Leicester's, who had set up a protectorate and was expected by the Dutch to fight an active campaign. Elizabeth, on the other hand, wanted him \"to avoid at all costs any decisive action with the enemy\". He enraged Elizabeth by accepting the post of Governor-General from the Dutch States General. Elizabeth saw this as a Dutch ploy to force her to accept sovereignty over the Netherlands, which so far she had always declined. She wrote to Leicester:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We could never have imagined (had we not seen it fall out in experience) that a man raised up by ourself and extraordinarily favoured by us, above any other subject of this land, would have in so contemptible a sort broken our commandment in a cause that so greatly touches us in honour\u00a0... And therefore our express pleasure and commandment is that, all delays and excuses laid apart, you do presently upon the duty of your allegiance obey and fulfill whatsoever the bearer hereof shall direct you to do in our name. Whereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary at your utmost peril.\nElizabeth's \"commandment\" was that her emissary read out her letters of disapproval publicly before the Dutch Council of State, Leicester having to stand nearby. This public humiliation of her \"Lieutenant-General\" combined with her continued talks for a separate peace with Spain irreversibly undermined Leicester's standing among the Dutch. The military campaign was severely hampered by Elizabeth's repeated refusals to send promised funds for her starving soldiers. Her unwillingness to commit herself to the cause, Leicester's own shortcomings as a political and military leader, and the faction-ridden and chaotic situation of Dutch politics led to the failure of the campaign. Leicester finally resigned his command in December 1587. The Spanish still controlled the southern provinces of the Netherlands, and the threat of the invasion of England remained.\nSupport for the Dutch nevertheless continued. Leicester's replacement was Francis Vere who became sergeant major-general of all Elizabeth's troops in the Low Countries by 1589. This was a position he retained during fifteen campaigns with almost unbroken success. Vere enjoyed excellent relations with the Dutch under Maurice of Nassau, and worked in close co-operation with them to help secure the country for the cause of independence. Vere's troops shattered the myth of Spanish invincibility, and he thus secured Elizabeth's respect and admiration. English support for the Dutch finished after Elizabeth's death, but by that time the Dutch were strong enough to hold their own.\nSpain.\nWith England at war with Spain in 1585, Francis Drake undertook a year long voyage raiding Spanish ports and ships in the Caribbean. In 1587 he made a successful raid on C\u00e1diz, destroying the Spanish fleet of war ships intended for the \"Enterprise of England\", as Philip II had decided to take the war to England.\nOn 12 July 1588, the Spanish Armada, a great fleet of ships, set sail for the channel, planning to ferry a Spanish invasion force under the Duke of Parma to the coast of southeast England from the Netherlands. To intercept the Armada, Elizabeth sent her navy led by Francis Drake and Charles Howard. The armada was defeated by a combination of miscalculation, misfortune, and an attack of English fire ships off Gravelines at midnight on 28\u201329 July (7\u20138 August New Style), which dispersed the Spanish ships to the northeast. The Armada straggled home to Spain in shattered remnants, after disastrous losses on the coast of Ireland (after some ships had tried to struggle back to Spain via the North Sea, and then back south past the west coast of Ireland). Unaware of the Armada's fate, English militias mustered to defend the country under the Earl of Leicester's command. Leicester invited Elizabeth to inspect her troops at Tilbury in Essex on 8 August. Wearing a silver breastplate over a white velvet dress, she addressed them in her Speech to the Troops at Tilbury:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My loving people, we have been persuaded by some that are careful of our safety, to take heed how we commit ourself to armed multitudes for fear of treachery; but I assure you, I do not desire to live to distrust my faithful and loving people\u00a0... I know I have the body but of a weak and feeble woman, but I have the heart and stomach of a king, and of a King of England too, and think foul scorn that Parma or Spain, or any Prince of Europe should dare to invade the borders of my realm.\nWhen no invasion came, the nation rejoiced. Elizabeth's procession to a thanksgiving service at St Paul's Cathedral rivalled that of her coronation as a spectacle. The defeat of the armada was a potent propaganda victory, both for Elizabeth and for Protestant England. The English took their delivery as a symbol of God's favour and of the nation's inviolability under a virgin queen. However, the victory was not a turning point in the war, which continued for another sixteen years.\nIn 1589, the year after the Spanish Armada, Elizabeth sent to Spain the \"English Armada\" or \"Counter Armada\" with 23,375 men and 150 ships, led by Francis Drake as admiral and John Norreys as general. The English fleet suffered a catastrophic defeat with 11,000\u201315,000 killed, wounded or died of disease and 40 ships sunk or captured. The advantage England had won upon the destruction of the Spanish Armada was lost, and the Spanish victory marked a revival of Philip II's naval power through the next decade.\nWhile the English navy kept an eye on the next invasion, it was left for English privateers to see to the hunt for Spanish and Portuguese treasure ships. They would take part in highly lucrative joint stock expeditions to raid and plunder settlements and shipping in the Atlantic and on the Spanish Main. Known as \"Elizabethan Sea Dogs\"; they included the likes of Drake, Hawkins and Raleigh. Elizabeth's court and powerful London merchants were at the forefront of promoting, equipping and financing these expeditions, which were authorized by Elizabeth. She alone would receive nearly a third of the profits, which in addition filled her realm's coffers. One of the most notable prizes was a large and highly valuable Portuguese Carrack, the \"Madre de Deus\" which was taken in battle off the Azores in 1592. It was subject to mass theft after arrival in Dartmouth, which angered Elizabeth, but even so the rest of the cargo was still half the wealth of the English treasury at the time.\nThere were a number of failures; the most notable being Drake and Hawkins on a disastrous expedition to the Caribbean in 1595 during which both died, the news of which shocked Elizabeth. Despite this, a new breed of Sea Dogs came to fruition, the likes of James Lancaster, William Parker and the most successful of all Christopher Newport. Although they failed to capture any of the major treasure ships, Elizabeth's 'Sea Dogs' were highly successful; a strategy of harassment brought in an average of 15% of nation's imports every year throughout the war.\nIn 1596 Elizabeth sent the second English armada to C\u00e1diz, in the hope of seizing the treasure fleet. Led by her favorite the Earl of Essex, Elizabeth's fleet with Dutch support, succeeded in capturing C\u00e1diz costing the Spanish some 32 ships sunk along with the treasure in them. The victory was hailed as a triumph, and Essex became a hero - his prestige rivalling Elizabeth's. The Queen accused Essex of pilfering Spanish treasure, and questioned why he had dished out knighthoods whilst in C\u00e1diz, reminding him he had no authority to do so.\nMeanwhile, in revenge for C\u00e1diz, Philip II sent his second Spanish Armada to England a few months later, but this met with disaster - storms swept away the fleet before it saw sight of England, costing nearly 5,000 men and 40 ships sunk. This, along with the C\u00e1diz raid forced Spain to declare bankruptcy that year. Undeterred, Philip sent the third Armada in 1597, but near the English coast another storm dispersed the fleet, losing another 28 ships sunk or captured and 2,000 men. Elizabeth awarded Charles Howard the title of the Earl of Nottingham for his performance during the campaign. The Queen nevertheless was furious with the Earl of Essex who had been away on a failed expedition to the Azores, accusing him of making England defenseless \u2013 their relationship became ever more strained.\nAfter the death of Philip II in 1598, his successor Philip III built up his fleet once more and sent the fourth Spanish Armada to Ireland in 1601 to assist the rebels there. The Spanish this time made landfall and held the town of Kinsale for three months but following the defeat of the rebels outside the town the Spanish were forced to surrender their entire force along the Southwest Irish coast. This defeat weakened Spanish resolve in the war against England; both sides were nevertheless exhausted and peace was signed between England and Spain with the Treaty of London in 1604, a year after Elizabeth's death.\nWalter Raleigh claimed after her death that Elizabeth's caution had impeded the war against Spain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the late queen would have believed her men of war as she did her scribes, we had in her time beaten that great empire in pieces and made their kings of figs and oranges as in old times. But her Majesty did all by halves, and by petty invasions taught the Spaniard how to defend himself, and to see his own weakness.\nThough some historians have criticised Elizabeth on similar grounds, Elizabeth had good reason not to place too much trust in her commanders, who once in action tended, as she put it herself, \"to be transported with an haviour of vainglory\".\nFrance.\nWhen the Protestant Henry IV inherited the French throne in 1589, Elizabeth sent him military support. It was her first venture into France since the retreat from Le Havre in 1563. Henry's succession was strongly contested by the Catholic League and by Philip II, and Elizabeth feared a Spanish takeover of the channel ports.\nThe subsequent early English campaigns in France, however, were disorganised and ineffective. Peregrine Bertie, largely ignoring Elizabeth's orders, roamed northern France to little effect, with an army of 4,000 men. He withdrew in disarray in December 1590 following the failure of the Siege of Paris. The following year, John Norreys, led 3,000 men to\u00a0campaign in Brittany, which despite victory at Quenelec in June ended inconclusively.\nIn July, Elizabeth sent out another force under Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, to help Henry IV in besieging Rouen which Norreys joined. Essex however accomplished nothing and returned home in January 1592, and Henry abandoned the siege in April. As usual, Elizabeth lacked control over her commanders once they were abroad. \"Where he is, or what he doth, or what he is to do,\" she wrote of Essex, \"we are ignorant\". Norreys left for London to plead in person for more support. Elizabeth dithered, and in Norreys' absence in May 1592, a Catholic League and Spanish army almost destroyed the remains of his army at\u00a0Craon, north-west France. As for all such expeditions, Elizabeth was unwilling to invest in the supplies and reinforcements requested by the commanders.\nIn March 1593, Henry converted to Catholicism in Paris to secure his hold on the French crown. Elizabeth was distraught and shocked at this move, and she resented any further attempts by Henry to win her over and ordered all of her forces home. Despite this, the Catholic leaguers did not trust Henry and still opposed him - their Spanish allies meanwhile continued to campaign in Brittany and advanced on the major port of Brest. King Philip of Spain was intent on establishing advanced bases in western France from which his rebuilt navy could constantly threaten England. Norreys wrote to Elizabeth warning her about this threat - and after some hesitation saw the danger and so sent another force in 1594. Norreys with 4,000 men worked with his French counterpart Jean VI d'Aumont. This time success was achieved; after taking a number of towns, they laid siege to an encroaching Spanish fort near Brest which was overrun and destroyed. This was a decisive victory ending the threat, and not long after the Catholic league collapsed. Elizabeth hailed Norreys a hero, but then ordered him back to England along with his troops.\nIn 1595 Henry declared war on Spain and wanted England to form an alliance with France. Elizabeth however was not interested, owing to her mistrust of Henry and the fear that France was becoming more dominant. The Spanish however captured Calais in 1596, and with Spain now in sight of England once more, Elizabeth relented \u2013 the triple alliance was formed along with the Dutch Republic. Elizabeth however still hesitated, attempting to barter for either Boulogne or an indemnity in money, the latter of which was agreed. When Spanish forces seized Amiens in March 1597, Elizabeth sent a force of some 4,200 men under Thomas Baskerville to Picardy, joining Henry's forces. The Anglo-French force arrived, then besieged Amiens and drove off a relief army. The town then surrendered, following which French overtures for peace with Spain began. Henry wanted Elizabeth to be part of this peace but she refused, reminding him of the alliance with the Dutch. Henry ultimately went behind Elizabeth's back to sign the peace with Spain at Vervins. She thus accused the French king of 'perfidy and double-dealing'.\nIreland.\nAlthough Ireland was one of her two kingdoms, Elizabeth faced a hostile, and in places virtually autonomous, Irish population that adhered to Catholicism and was willing to defy her authority and plot with her enemies. Her policy there was to grant land to her courtiers and prevent the rebels from giving Spain a base from which to attack England. In the course of a series of uprisings, Crown forces pursued scorched-earth tactics, burning the land and slaughtering man, woman and child. During a revolt in Munster led by Gerald FitzGerald, Earl of Desmond, in 1582, an estimated 30,000 Irish people starved to death. The poet and colonist Edmund Spenser wrote that the victims \"were brought to such wretchedness as that any stony heart would have rued the same\". Elizabeth advised her commanders that the Irish, \"that rude and barbarous nation\", be well treated, but she or her commanders showed no remorse when force and bloodshed served their authoritarian purpose.\nBetween 1593 and 1603, Elizabeth faced her most severe test in Ireland during the Nine Years' War, a revolt that took place at the height of hostilities with Spain, who backed the rebel leader, Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone. In spring 1599, Elizabeth sent Robert Devereux to put the revolt down. To her frustration, he made little progress and returned to England in defiance of her orders. He was replaced by Charles Blount, who within three years defeated the rebels who were supported by the Spanish. The decisive battle took place at Kinsale in 1602; Elizabeth lauded the victory, hailing Blount a hero. The financial cost of the Irish war however was considerable and Elizabeth's realm only just avoided bankruptcy. O'Neill finally surrendered in 1603 at the Treaty of Mellifont, a few days after Elizabeth's death.\nOverseas trade.\nRussia.\nElizabeth continued to maintain the diplomatic relations with the Tsardom of Russia that were originally established by her half-brother, Edward VI. She often wrote to Tsar Ivan the Terrible on amicable terms, though the Tsar was often annoyed by her focus on commerce rather than on the possibility of a military alliance. Ivan even proposed to her once, and during his later reign, asked for a guarantee to be granted asylum in England should his rule be jeopardised. When this failed, he asked to marry Mary Hastings, which Elizabeth declined to speak to the Russian ambassador about. English merchant and explorer Anthony Jenkinson, who began his career as a representative of the Muscovy Company, became the Queen's special ambassador to the court of Tsar Ivan.\nUpon his death in 1584, Ivan was succeeded by his son Feodor I. Unlike his father, Feodor had no enthusiasm in maintaining exclusive trading rights with England. He declared his kingdom open to all foreigners, and dismissed the English ambassador Jerome Bowes, whose pomposity had been tolerated by Ivan. Elizabeth sent a new ambassador, Dr. Giles Fletcher, to demand from the regent Boris Godunov that he convince the Tsar to reconsider. The negotiations failed, due to Fletcher addressing Feodor with two of his many titles omitted. Elizabeth continued to appeal to Feodor in half appealing, half reproachful letters. She proposed an alliance, something which she had refused to do when offered one by Feodor's father, but was turned down.\nMuslim states.\nTrade and diplomatic relations developed between England and the Barbary states during the rule of Elizabeth. England established a trading relationship with Morocco in opposition to Spain, selling armour, ammunition, timber, and metal in exchange for Moroccan sugar, in spite of a papal ban. In 1600, Abd el-Ouahed ben Messaoud, the principal secretary to the Moroccan ruler Mulai Ahmad al-Mansur, visited England as an ambassador to the English court, to negotiate an Anglo-Moroccan alliance against Spain. Elizabeth \"agreed to sell munitions supplies to Morocco, and she and Mulai Ahmad al-Mansur talked on and off about mounting a joint operation against the Spanish\". Discussions, however, remained inconclusive, and both rulers died within two years of the embassy.\nDiplomatic relations were also established with the Ottoman Empire with the chartering of the Levant Company and the dispatch of the first English ambassador to the Sublime Porte, William Harborne, in 1578. For the first time, a treaty of commerce was signed in 1580. Numerous envoys were dispatched in both directions and epistolar exchanges occurred between Elizabeth and Sultan Murad III. In one correspondence, Murad entertained the notion that Protestantism and Islam had \"much more in common than either did with Roman Catholicism, as both rejected the worship of idols\", and argued for an alliance between England and the Ottoman Empire. To the dismay of Catholic Europe, England exported tin and lead (for cannon-casting) and munitions to the Ottoman Empire, and Elizabeth seriously discussed joint military operations with Murad III during the outbreak of war with Spain in 1585, as Francis Walsingham was lobbying for a direct Ottoman military involvement against the common Spanish enemy.\nAmerica.\nIn 1583, Humphrey Gilbert sailed west to establish a colony in Newfoundland. He never returned to England. Gilbert's half-brother Walter Raleigh explored the Atlantic Coast and claimed the territory of Virginia, perhaps named in honour of Elizabeth, the \"Virgin Queen\". This territory was much larger than the present-day state of Virginia, extending from New England to the Carolinas. In 1585, Raleigh returned to Virginia with a small group of people. They landed on Roanoke Island, off present-day North Carolina. After the failure of the first colony, Raleigh recruited another group and put John White in command. When Raleigh returned in 1590, there was no trace of the Roanoke Colony he had left, but it was the first English settlement in North America.\nEast India Company.\nFollowing successful privateering against Spanish and Portuguese vessels, English voyagers travelled the globe in search of riches. As a result, London merchants presented a petition to Elizabeth with the aim of delivering a decisive blow to the Spanish and Portuguese monopoly of far-eastern trade. On 31 December 1600 the merchants received its charter from Elizabeth, and the East India Company was formed to trade in the Indian Ocean region and China. James Lancaster commanded the first expedition the following year which was a success establishing its first factory at Bantum on Java in 1602. For a period of 15 years, the company was awarded a monopoly on English trade with all countries east of the Cape of Good Hope and west of the Straits of Magellan. The Company eventually controlled half of world trade and substantial territory in India in the 18th and 19th centuries.\nLater years.\nThe period after the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 brought new difficulties for Elizabeth that lasted until the end of her reign. The conflicts with Spain and in Ireland dragged on, the tax burden grew heavier, and the economy was hit by poor harvests and the cost of war. Prices rose and the standard of living fell. During this time, repression of Catholics intensified, and Elizabeth authorised commissions in 1591 to interrogate and monitor Catholic householders. To maintain the illusion of peace and prosperity, she increasingly relied on internal spies and propaganda. In her last years, mounting criticism reflected a decline in the public's affection for her.\nOne of the causes for this \"second reign\" of Elizabeth, as it is sometimes called, was the changed character of Elizabeth's governing body, the privy council in the 1590s. A new generation was in power. With the exception of William Cecil, Baron Burghley, the most important politicians had died around 1590: the Earl of Leicester in 1588; Francis Walsingham in 1590; and Christopher Hatton in 1591. Factional strife in the government, which had not existed in a noteworthy form before the 1590s, now became its hallmark. A bitter rivalry arose between Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, and Robert Cecil, son of Lord Burghley, with both being supported by their respective adherents. The struggle for the most powerful positions in the state marred the kingdom's politics. The Queen's personal authority was lessening, as is shown in the 1594 affair of Dr. Roderigo Lopes, her trusted physician. When he was wrongly accused by the Earl of Essex of treason out of personal pique, she could not prevent the doctor's execution, although she had been angry about his arrest and seems not to have believed in his guilt.\nDuring the last years of her reign, Elizabeth came to rely on the granting of monopolies as a cost-free system of patronage, rather than asking Parliament for more subsidies in a time of war. The practice soon led to price-fixing, the enrichment of courtiers at the public's expense, and widespread resentment. This culminated in agitation in the House of Commons during the parliament of 1601. In her \"Golden Speech\" of 30 November 1601 at Whitehall Palace to a deputation of 140 members, Elizabeth professed ignorance of the abuses, and won the members over with promises and her usual appeal to the emotions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Who keeps their sovereign from the lapse of error, in which, by ignorance and not by intent they might have fallen, what thank they deserve, we know, though you may guess. And as nothing is more dear to us than the loving conservation of our subjects' hearts, what an undeserved doubt might we have incurred if the abusers of our liberality, the thrallers of our people, the wringers of the poor, had not been told us!\nThis same period of economic and political uncertainty, however, produced an unsurpassed literary flowering in England. The first signs of a new literary movement had appeared at the end of the second decade of Elizabeth's reign, with John Lyly's \"Euphues\" and Edmund Spenser's \"The Shepheardes Calender\" in 1578. During the 1590s, some of the great names of English literature entered their maturity, including William Shakespeare and Christopher Marlowe. Continuing into the Jacobean era, the English theatre would reach its peak. The notion of a great Elizabethan era depends largely on the builders, dramatists, poets, and musicians who were active during Elizabeth's reign. They owed little directly to the Queen, who was never a major patron of the arts.\nAs Elizabeth aged, her image gradually changed. She was portrayed as Belphoebe or Astraea, and after the Armada, as Gloriana, the eternally youthful Faerie Queene of Edmund Spenser's poem. Elizabeth gave Edmund Spenser a pension; as this was unusual for her, it indicates that she liked his work. Her painted portraits became less realistic and more a set of enigmatic icons that made her look much younger than she was. In fact, her skin had been scarred by smallpox in 1562, leaving her half bald and dependent on wigs and cosmetics. Her love of sweets and fear of dentists contributed to severe tooth decay and loss to such an extent that foreign ambassadors had a hard time understanding her speech. Andr\u00e9 Hurault de Maisse, Ambassador Extraordinary from Henry IV of France, reported an audience with the Queen, during which he noticed, \"her teeth are very yellow and unequal\u00a0... and on the left side less than on the right. Many of them are missing, so that one cannot understand her easily when she speaks quickly.\" Yet he added, \"her figure is fair and tall and graceful in whatever she does; so far as may be she keeps her dignity, yet humbly and graciously withal.\" Walter Raleigh called her \"a lady whom time had surprised\".\nThe more Elizabeth's beauty faded, the more her courtiers praised it. Elizabeth was happy to play the part, but it is possible that in the last decade of her life she began to believe her own performance. She became fond and indulgent of the charming but petulant young Earl of Essex, who was Leicester's stepson and took liberties with her for which she forgave him. She repeatedly appointed him to military posts despite his growing record of irresponsibility. After Essex's desertion of his command in Ireland in 1599, Elizabeth had him placed under house arrest and the following year deprived him of his monopolies. In February 1601, Essex tried to raise a rebellion in London. He intended to seize the Queen but few rallied to his support, and he was beheaded on 25 February. Elizabeth knew that her own misjudgements were partly to blame for this turn of events. An observer wrote in 1602: \"Her delight is to sit in the dark, and sometimes with shedding tears to bewail Essex.\"\nDeath.\nElizabeth's senior adviser, Lord Burghley, died on 4 August 1598. His political mantle passed to his son Robert, who soon became the leader of the government. One task he addressed was to prepare the way for a smooth succession. Since Elizabeth would never name her successor, Robert Cecil was obliged to proceed in secret. He therefore entered into a coded negotiation with James VI of Scotland, who had a strong but unrecognised claim. Cecil coached the impatient James to humour Elizabeth and \"secure the heart of the highest, to whose sex and quality nothing is so improper as either needless expostulations or over much curiosity in her own actions\". The advice worked. James's tone delighted Elizabeth, who responded: \"So trust I that you will not doubt but that your last letters are so acceptably taken as my thanks cannot be lacking for the same, but yield them to you in grateful sort\". In historian J. E. Neale's view, Elizabeth may not have declared her wishes openly to James, but she made them known with \"unmistakable if veiled phrases\".\nThe Queen's health remained fair until the autumn of 1602, when a series of deaths among her friends plunged her into a severe depression. In February 1603, the death of Catherine Carey, Countess of Nottingham, the niece of her cousin and close friend Lady Knollys, came as a particular blow. In March, Elizabeth fell sick and remained in a \"settled and unremovable melancholy\", and sat motionless on a cushion for hours on end. When Robert Cecil told her that she must go to bed, she snapped: \"Must is not a word to use to princes, little man.\" She died on 24 March 1603, aged 69, at Richmond Palace, between two and three in the morning. A few hours later, Cecil and the council set their plans in motion and proclaimed James king of England.\nWhile it has become normative to record Elizabeth's death as occurring in 1603, following English calendar reform in the 1750s, at the time England observed New Year's Day on 25 March, commonly known as Lady Day. Thus Elizabeth died on the last day of the year 1602 in the old calendar. The modern convention is to use the old style calendar for the day and month while using the new style calendar for the year.\nElizabeth's coffin was carried downriver at night to Whitehall, on a barge lit with torches. At her funeral on 28 April, the coffin was taken to Westminster Abbey on a hearse drawn by four horses hung with black velvet. In the words of the chronicler John Stow:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Westminster was surcharged with multitudes of all sorts of people in their streets, houses, windows, leads and gutters, that came out to see the obsequy, and when they beheld her statue lying upon the coffin, there was such a general sighing, groaning and weeping as the like hath not been seen or known in the memory of man.\nElizabeth was interred in Westminster Abbey, in the vault of her grandfather, Henry VII. In 1606, her coffin was moved to a vault below a new monument erected by James I and placed on top of her half-sister Mary I's coffin. The Latin inscription on their tomb, , translates to \"Consorts in realm and tomb, here we sleep, Elizabeth and Mary, sisters, in hope of resurrection\".\nLegacy.\nElizabeth was lamented by many of her subjects, but others were relieved at her death. Expectations of King James started high but then declined. By the 1620s, there was a nostalgic revival of the cult of Elizabeth. Elizabeth was praised as a heroine of the Protestant cause and the ruler of a golden age. James was depicted as a Catholic sympathiser, presiding over a corrupt court. The triumphalist image that Elizabeth had cultivated towards the end of her reign, against a background of factionalism and military and economic difficulties, was taken at face value and her reputation inflated. Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, recalled: \"When we had experience of a Scottish government, the Queen did seem to revive. Then was her memory much magnified.\" Elizabeth's reign became idealised as a time when crown, church and parliament had worked in constitutional balance.\nThe picture of Elizabeth painted by her Protestant admirers of the early 17th century has proved lasting and influential. Her memory was also revived during the Napoleonic Wars, when the nation again found itself on the brink of invasion. In the Victorian era, the Elizabethan legend was adapted to the imperial ideology of the day, and in the mid-20th century, Elizabeth was a romantic symbol of the national resistance to foreign threat. Historians of that period, such as J. E. Neale (1934) and A. L. Rowse (1950), interpreted Elizabeth's reign as a golden age of progress. Neale and Rowse also idealised the Queen personally: she always did everything right; her more unpleasant traits were ignored or explained as signs of stress.\nRecent historians, however, have taken a more complicated view of Elizabeth. Her reign is famous for the defeat of the Armada, and for successful raids against the Spaniards, such as those on C\u00e1diz in 1587 and 1596, but some historians point to military failures on land and at sea. In Ireland, Elizabeth's forces ultimately prevailed, but their tactics stain her record. Rather than as a brave defender of the Protestant nations against Spain and the Habsburgs, she is more often regarded as cautious in her foreign policies. She offered very limited aid to foreign Protestants and failed to provide her commanders with the funds to make a difference abroad.\nElizabeth established an English church that helped shape a national identity and remains in place today. Those who praised her later as a Protestant heroine overlooked her refusal to drop all practices of Catholic origin from the Church of England. Historians note that in her day, strict Protestants regarded the Acts of Settlement and Uniformity of 1559 as a compromise. In fact, Elizabeth believed that faith was personal and did not wish, as Francis Bacon put it, to \"make windows into men's hearts and secret thoughts\".\nThough Elizabeth followed a largely defensive foreign policy, her reign raised England's status abroad. \"She is only a woman, only mistress of half an island,\" marvelled Pope Sixtus V, \"and yet she makes herself feared by Spain, by France, by the Empire, by all\". Under Elizabeth, the nation gained a new self-confidence and sense of sovereignty, as Christendom fragmented. Elizabeth was the first Tudor to recognise that a monarch ruled by popular consent. She therefore always worked with parliament and advisers she could trust to tell her the truth\u2014a style of government that her Stuart successors failed to follow. Some historians have called her lucky; she believed that God was protecting her. Priding herself on being \"mere English\", Elizabeth trusted in God, honest advice, and the love of her subjects for the success of her rule. In a prayer, she offered thanks to God that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[At a time] when wars and seditions with grievous persecutions have vexed almost all kings and countries round about me, my reign hath been peacable, and my realm a receptacle to thy afflicted Church. The love of my people hath appeared firm, and the devices of my enemies frustrate.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10129", "revid": "21327649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10129", "title": "Enceladus (disambiguation)", "text": "Enceladus is a moon of Saturn.\nEnceladus may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10130", "revid": "50519108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10130", "title": "Emperor Jimmu", "text": "Legendary first emperor of Japan\n was the legendary first emperor of Japan according to the and . His ascension is traditionally dated as 660 BC. In Japanese mythology, he was a descendant of the sun goddess Amaterasu, through her grandson Ninigi, as well as a descendant of the storm god Susanoo. He launched a military expedition from Hy\u016bga near the Seto Inland Sea, captured Yamato, and established this as his center of power. In modern Japan, Emperor Jimmu's legendary ascension is marked as National Foundation Day on February 11.\nThere is no evidence to suggest that Jimmu existed, and he is regarded by most modern scholars as a legendary figure.\nName and title.\nJimmu is recorded as Japan's first ruler in two early chronicles, (721) and (712). gives the dates of his reign as 660\u2013585 BC. In the reign of Emperor Kanmu (737\u2013806), the eighth-century scholar \u014cmi no Mifune retroactively designated rulers before Emperor \u014cjin as , a Japanese pendant to the Chinese imperial title \"Ti\u0101n-d\u00ec\" (\u5929\u5e1d), and gave several of them including Jimmu their posthumous names. Prior to this time, these rulers had been known as \"Sumera no mikoto\" (\u7687\u5c0a, \"divine highness\") or \"\u014ckimi\" (\u5927\u541b, \"great lord\"). This practice had begun under Empress Suiko, and took root after the Taika Reforms with the ascendancy of the Nakatomi clan.\nBoth the and the give Jimmu's name as or . \"Iware\" indicates a toponym (an old place name in the Nara region) whose precise purport is unclear. '-no-Mikoto' is an honorific, indicating divinity, nobility, or royalty.\nAmong his other names were: , and .\nThe Imperial House of Japan traditionally based its claim to the throne on its putative descent from the sun-goddess Amaterasu via Jimmu's great-grandfather Ninigi.\nLegendary narrative.\nIn Japanese mythology, the Age of the Gods is the period before Jimmu's accession.\nThe story of Jimmu seems to rework legends associated with the \u014ctomo clan (\u5927\u4f34\u6c0f), and its function was to establish that clan's links to the ruling family, just as those of Suijin arguably reflect Mononobe tales and the legends in \u014cjin's chronicles seem to derive from Soga clan traditions. Jimmu figures as a direct descendant of the sun goddess, Amaterasu via the side of his father, Ugayafukiaezu. Amaterasu had a son called Ame no Oshihomimi no Mikoto and through him a grandson named Ninigi-no-Mikoto. She sent her grandson to the Japanese islands where he eventually married Konohana-Sakuya-hime. Among their three sons was Hikohohodemi no Mikoto, also called Yamasachi-hiko, who married Toyotama-hime. She was the daughter of Ry\u016bjin, the Japanese sea god. They had a single son called Hikonagisa Takeugaya Fukiaezu no Mikoto. The boy was abandoned by his parents at birth and consequently raised by Tamayori-hime, his mother's younger sister. They eventually married and had four sons. The last of these, Hikohohodemi, became Emperor Jimmu.\nMigration.\nAccording to the chronicles and , Jimmu's brothers Itsuse no Mikoto, Inahi no Mikoto, and Mikeiri no Mikoto were born in Takachiho, the southern part of Ky\u016bsh\u016b in modern-day Miyazaki Prefecture. They moved eastward to find a location more appropriate for administering the entire country. Jimmu's older brother, Itsuse no Mikoto, originally led the migration, and led the clan eastward through the Seto Inland Sea with the assistance of local chieftain \"Sao Netsuhiko\". As they reached Naniwa (modern-day Osaka), they encountered another local chieftain, \"Nagasunehiko\" (\"the long-legged man\"), and Itsuse was killed in the ensuing battle. Jimmu realized that they had been defeated because they battled eastward against the sun, so he decided to land on the east side of Kii Peninsula and to battle westward. They reached Kumano, and, with the guidance of a three-legged crow , they moved to Yamato. There, they once again battled Nagasunehiko and were victorious. The record in the of Emperor Jimmu states that his armed forces defeated a group of before his enthronement. The Emishi were an ethnic group who lived in Honshu, particularly the T\u014dhoku region.\nIn Yamato, Nigihayahi, who also claimed descent from the Takamagahara gods, was protected by Nagasunehiko. However, when Nigihayahi met Jimmu, he accepted Jimmu's legitimacy. At this point, Jimmu is said to have ascended to the throne of Japan. Upon scaling a Nara mountain to survey the Seto Inland Sea he now controlled, Jimmu remarked that it was shaped like the \"heart\" rings made by mating dragonflies, archaically . A mosquito then tried to steal Jimmu's royal blood but since Jimmu was a god incarnate Emperor, , a dragonfly killed the mosquito. Japan thus received its classical name the Dragonfly Islands, .\nAccording to the , Jimmu died when he was 126 years old. The Emperor's posthumous name literally means \"divine might\" or \"god-warrior\". It is generally thought that Jimmu's name and character evolved into their present shape just before the time in which legends about the origins of the imperial dynasty were chronicled in the . There are accounts written earlier than either and that present an alternative version of the story. According to these accounts, Jimmu's dynasty was supplanted by that of \u014cjin, whose dynasty was supplanted by that of Keitai. The and the then combined these three legendary dynasties into one long and continuous genealogy.\nThe traditional site of Jimmu's grave is near Mount Unebi in Kashihara, Nara Prefecture.\nImperial Era veneration.\nVeneration of Jimmu was a central component of the imperial cult that formed following the Meiji Restoration. In 1873, a holiday called \"Kigensetsu\" was established on February 11. The holiday commemorated the anniversary of Jimmu's ascension to the throne 2,532 years earlier. After World War II, the holiday was criticized as too closely associated with the \"emperor system.\" It was suspended from 1948 to 1966, but later reinstated as National Foundation Day.\nBetween 1873 and 1945, an imperial envoy sent offerings every year to the supposed site of Jimmu's tomb. In 1890 Kashihara Shrine was established nearby, on the spot where Jimmu was said to have ascended to the throne.\nBefore and during World War II, expansionist propaganda made frequent use of the phrase \"hakk\u014d ichiu\", a term coined by Tanaka Chigaku based on a passage in the discussing Emperor Jimmu. Some media incorrectly attributed the phrase to Emperor Jimmu. For the 1940 \"Kigensetsu\" celebration, marking the supposed 2,600th anniversary of Jimmu's enthronement, the Peace Tower was constructed in Miyazaki.\nThat same year, numerous stone monuments relating to key events in Jimmu's life were erected around Japan. The sites at which these monuments were erected are known as Emperor Jimmu Sacred Historical Sites.\nIn 1940, Japan celebrated the 2600th anniversary of Jimmu's ascension and built a monument to Hakk\u014d ichiu despite the fact that all historians knew Jimmu was a mythical figure. In 1941, the Japanese government charged the one historian who dared to challenge Jimmu's existence publicly, .\nHistoricity.\nSince after World War II, when the prohibition on questioning the Kojiki and the Nihongi was lifted, documentary research in China and archaeological research in Japan has undermined much of the information in both the Kojiki and Nihon Shoki.460 No evidence has been found for Jimmu's existence, except the mention in the and . Today most modern scholars agree that the traditional founding of the imperial dynasty in 660 BC is a myth and that Jimmu is legendary.15 Emperor Sujin's historicity is considered possible by historians, while Emperor Kinmei is the first verifiable historical figure in the imperial lineage.\nThe dates of Jimmu reigning from 660 BC to 585 BC are improbable. According to Dr. Lu, the year 660 BC was probably selected by the writers of to put the founding of Japan on a kanoto-tori year.\nHowever, the stories of Jimmu may reflect real events of the mid to late Yayoi period. According to historian Peter Wetzler, Jimmu's conquest of Osaka and Nara may reflect an actual event. Still, the dates and many of the details are fictitious. Historian Kenneth G. Henshall stated that Jimmu's conquest may also reflect a time when the Yayoi people from continental Asia immigrated in masses starting from Kyushu and moving eastward during the Yayoi period.\nSome scholars suggest that there may have been a real person behind Jimmu. He could have been a local ruler who conquered the area near Kashihara after 62 BC.460 Some scholars believe he was present in Miyazaki during the first century\u00a0BC while others say he was there during the third or fourth century\u00a0AD. Nevertheless, there is a high probability that there was either a foreign or indigenous dynasty in the vicinity of Miyazaki Prefecture during the Kofun period.592\nAccording to Louis Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric, he may have been a fusion of emperors Sujin and Keitai. The Japanese historian Ino Okifu identifies Emperor Jimmu with the Chinese alchemist and explorer Xu Fu, a hypothesis supported by certain traditions in Japan and regarded as possible by some modern scholars. The Yayoi period, during which significant changes in Japanese metallurgy and pottery occurred, started around the time of his supposed arrival. However, the legend of Xu Fu's voyage also has numerous inconsistencies with the linguistic and anthropological history of Japan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
