{"id": "4620", "revid": "5844064", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4620", "title": "Bronze Age", "text": "Historical period (c. 3300\u20131200 BCE)\nThe Bronze Age is an archaeological and anthropological term defining a phase in the development of material culture among ancient societies in Asia, the Near East and Europe. An ancient civilisation is deemed to be part of the Bronze Age if it either produced bronze by smelting its own copper and alloying it with tin, arsenic, or other metals, or traded other items for bronze from producing areas elsewhere. The Bronze Age is the middle principal period of the three-age system, following the Stone Age and preceding the Iron Age. Conceived as a global era, the Bronze Age follows the Neolithic (\"New Stone\") period, with a transition period between the two known as the Chalcolithic (\"copper-Stone\") Age. These technical developments took place at different times in different places, and therefore each region's history is framed by a different chronological system.\nBronze Age cultures were the first to develop writing. According to archaeological evidence, cultures in Mesopotamia, which used cuneiform script, and Egypt, which used hieroglyphs, developed the earliest practical writing systems. In the archaeology of the Americas, a five-period system is conventionally used instead, which does not include a Bronze Age, though some cultures there did smelt copper and bronze. No evidence of metalworking has been found on the Australian continent prior to the establishment of European settlements in 1788. \nIn many areas bronze continued to be rare and expensive, mainly because of difficulties in obtaining enough tin, which occurs in relatively few places, unlike the very common copper. Some societies appear to have gone through much of the Bronze Age using bronze only for weapons or elite art, such as Chinese ritual bronzes, with ordinary farmers largely still using stone tools. However, this is hard to assess as the rarity of bronze meant it was keenly recycled.\nMetal use.\nBronze Age civilisations gained a technological advantage due to bronze's harder and more durable properties than other metals available at the time. While terrestrial iron is naturally abundant, the higher temperature required for smelting, , in addition to the greater difficulty of working with it, placed it out of reach of common use until the end of the 2nd millennium\u00a0BC. Tin's lower melting point of and copper's moderate melting point of placed both these metals within the capabilities of Neolithic pottery kilns, which date to 6000\u00a0BC and were able to produce temperatures of at least .\nThe Bronze Age is characterised by the widespread use of bronze, though the introduction and development of bronze technology were not universally synchronous. Bronze was independently discovered in the Maykop culture of the North Caucasus as early as the mid-4th millennium\u00a0BC, which makes them the producers of the oldest-known bronze. However, the Maykop culture only had arsenical bronze. Other regions developed bronze and its associated technology at different periods. Tin bronze technology requires systematic techniques: tin must be mined (mainly as the tin ore cassiterite) and smelted separately, then added to hot copper to make bronze alloy. The Bronze Age was a time of extensive use of metals and the development of trade networks.\nA 2013 report suggests that the earliest tin-alloy bronze was a foil dated to the mid-5th millennium\u00a0BC from a Vin\u010da culture site in Plo\u010dnik, Serbia, although this culture is not conventionally considered part of the Bronze Age; however, the dating of the foil has been disputed.\nNear East.\nWest Asia and the Near East were the first regions to enter the Bronze Age, beginning with the rise of the Mesopotamian civilization of Sumer in the mid-4th millennium\u00a0BC. Cultures in the ancient Near East practised intensive year-round agriculture; developed writing systems; invented the potter's wheel, created centralised governments (usually in the form of hereditary monarchies), formulated written law codes, developed city-states, nation-states and empires; embarked on advanced architectural projects; and introduced social stratification, economic and civil administration, slavery, and practised organised warfare, medicine, and religion. Societies in the region laid the foundations for astronomy, mathematics, and astrology.\nThe following dates are approximate.\nNear East Bronze Age divisions.\nThe Bronze Age in the Near East can be divided into Early, Middle and Late periods. The dates and phases below apply solely to the Near East, not universally. However, some archaeologists propose a \"high chronology\", which extends periods such as the Intermediate Bronze Age by 300 to 500\u2013600 years, based on material analysis of the southern Levant in cities such as Hazor, Jericho, and Beit She'an.\nAnatolia.\nThe Hittite Empire was established during the 18th century\u00a0BC in Hattusa, northern Anatolia. At its height in the 14th century\u00a0BC, the Hittite Kingdom encompassed central Anatolia, southwestern Syria as far as Ugarit, and upper Mesopotamia. After 1180\u00a0BC, amid general turmoil in the Levant, which is conjectured to have been associated with the sudden arrival of the Sea Peoples, the kingdom disintegrated into several independent \"Neo-Hittite\" city-states, some of which survived into the 8th century\u00a0BC.\nArzawa, in Western Anatolia, during the second half of the 2nd millennium\u00a0BC, likely extended along southern Anatolia in a belt from near the Turkish Lakes region to the Aegean coast. Arzawa was the western neighbor of the Middle and New Hittite Kingdoms, at times a rival and, at other times, a vassal.\nThe Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia defeated by the Hittites under the earlier Tudhaliya I c.\u20091400\u00a0BC. Arzawa has been associated with the more obscure Assuwa generally located to its north. It probably bordered it, and may have been an alternative term for it during some periods.\nEgypt.\nEarly Bronze dynasties.\nIn Ancient Egypt, the Bronze Age began in the Protodynastic Period c.\u20093150\u00a0BC. The archaic \"Early Bronze Age of Egypt\", known as the Early Dynastic Period of Egypt, immediately followed the unification of Lower and Upper Egypt, c.\u20093100\u00a0BC. It is generally taken to include the First and Second dynasties, lasting from the Protodynastic Period until c.\u20092686\u00a0BC, or the beginning of the Old Kingdom. With the First Dynasty, the capital moved from Abydos to Memphis with a unified Egypt ruled by an Egyptian god-king. Abydos remained the major holy land in the south. The hallmarks of ancient Egyptian civilization, such as art, architecture and religion, took shape in the Early Dynastic Period. Memphis, in the Early Bronze Age, was the largest city of the time. The Old Kingdom of the regional Bronze Age is the name given to the period in the 3rd millennium\u00a0BC when Egyptian civilization attained its first continuous peak of complexity and achievement\u2014the first of three \"Kingdom\" periods which marked the high points of civilization in the lower Nile Valley (the others being the Middle Kingdom and New Kingdom).\nThe First Intermediate Period of Egypt, often described as a \"dark period\" in ancient Egyptian history, spanned about 100 years after the end of the Old Kingdom from about 2181 to 2055\u00a0BC. Very little monumental evidence survives from this period, especially from the early part of it. The First Intermediate Period was a dynamic time when the rule of Egypt was roughly divided between two areas: Heracleopolis in Lower Egypt and Thebes in Upper Egypt. These two kingdoms eventually came into conflict, and the Theban kings conquered the north, reunifying Egypt under a single ruler during the second part of the Eleventh Dynasty.\nNubia.\nThe Bronze Age in Nubia started as early as 2300\u00a0BC. Egyptians introduced copper smelting to the Nubian city of Mero\u00eb in present-day Sudan c.\u20092600\u00a0BC. A furnace for bronze casting found in Kerma has been dated to 2300\u20131900\u00a0BC.\nMiddle Bronze dynasties.\nThe Middle Kingdom of Egypt spanned between 2055 and 1650\u00a0BC. During this period, the Osiris funerary cult rose to dominate popular Ancient Egyptian religion. The period comprises two phases: the Eleventh Dynasty, which ruled from Thebes, and the Twelfth and Thirteenth dynasties, centred on el-Lisht. The unified kingdom was previously considered to comprise the Eleventh and Twelfth Dynasties, but historians now consider part of the Thirteenth Dynasty to have belonged to the Middle Kingdom.\nDuring the Second Intermediate Period, Ancient Egypt fell into disarray a second time between the end of the Middle Kingdom and the start of the New Kingdom, best known for the Hyksos, whose reign comprised the Fifteenth and Sixteenth dynasties. The Hyksos first appeared in Egypt during the Eleventh Dynasty, began their climb to power in the Thirteenth Dynasty, and emerged from the Second Intermediate Period in control of Avaris and the Nile Delta. By the Fifteenth Dynasty, they ruled lower Egypt. They were expelled at the end of the Seventeenth Dynasty.\nLate Bronze dynasties.\nThe New Kingdom of Egypt, also referred to as the Egyptian Empire, existed during the 16th\u201311th centuries\u00a0BC. The New Kingdom followed the Second Intermediate Period and was succeeded by the Third Intermediate Period. It was Egypt's most prosperous time and marked the peak of Egypt's power. The later New Kingdom, comprising the Nineteenth and Twentieth dynasties (1292\u20131069\u00a0BC), is also known as the Ramesside period, after the eleven pharaohs who took the name of Ramesses.\nIranian plateau.\nElam was a pre-Iranian ancient civilization located east of Mesopotamia. In the Middle Bronze Age, Elam consisted of kingdoms on the Iranian plateau, centred in Anshan. From the mid-2nd millennium\u00a0BC, Elam was centered in Susa in the Khuzestan lowlands. Its culture played a crucial role in both the Gutian Empire and the Iranian Achaemenid dynasty that succeeded it.\nThe Oxus civilization was a Bronze Age Central Asian culture dated c.\u20092300\u20131700\u00a0BC and centred on the upper Amu Darya (). In the Early Bronze Age, the culture of the Kopet Dag oases and Altyndepe developed a proto-urban society. This corresponds to level IV at Namazga-Tepe. Altyndepe was a major centre even then. Pottery was wheel-turned. Grapes were grown. The height of this urban development was reached in the Middle Bronze Age c.\u20092300\u00a0BC, corresponding to level V at Namazga-Depe. This Bronze Age culture is called the Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex.\nThe Kulli culture, similar to that of the Indus Valley Civilisation, was located in southern Balochistan (Gedrosia) c.\u20092500\u20132000\u00a0BC. The economy was agricultural. Dams were found in several places, providing evidence for a highly developed water management system.\nKonar Sandal is associated with the hypothesized Jiroft culture, a 3rd-millennium\u00a0BC culture postulated based on a collection of artefacts confiscated in 2001.\nLevant.\nIn modern scholarship, the chronology of the Bronze Age Levant is divided into: \nThe term \"Neo-Syria\" is used to designate the early Iron Age.\nThe old Syrian period was dominated by the Eblaite first kingdom, Nagar and the Mariote second kingdom. The Akkadians conquered large areas of the Levant and were followed by the Amorite kingdoms, c.\u20092000\u20131600\u00a0BC, which arose in Mari, Yamhad, Qatna, and Assyria. From the 15th century\u00a0BC onward, the term Amurru is usually applied to the region extending north of Canaan as far as Kadesh on the Orontes River.\nThe earliest-known contact of Ugarit with Egypt (and the first exact dating of Ugaritic civilisation) comes from a carnelian bead identified with the Middle Kingdom pharaoh Senusret I, whose reign is dated to 1971\u20131926\u00a0BC. A stela and a statuette of the Egyptian pharaohs Senusret III and Amenemhet III have also been found. However, it is unclear when they first arrived at Ugarit. In the Amarna letters, messages from Ugarit c.\u20091350\u00a0BC written by Ammittamru I, Niqmaddu II, and his queen have been discovered. From the 16th to the 13th century\u00a0BC, Ugarit remained in constant contact with Egypt and Cyprus (Alashiya).\nMitanni was a loosely organised state in northern Syria and south-east Anatolia, emerging c.\u20091500\u20131300\u00a0BC. Founded by an Indo-Aryan ruling class that governed a predominantly Hurrian population, Mitanni came to be a regional power after the Hittite destruction of Kassite Babylon created a power vacuum in Mesopotamia. At its beginning, Mitanni's major rival was Egypt under the Thutmosids. However, with the ascent of the Hittite empire, Mitanni and Egypt allied to protect their mutual interests from the threat of Hittite domination. At the height of its power during the 14th century\u00a0BC, Mitanni had outposts centred on its capital, Washukanni, which archaeologists have located on the headwaters of the Khabur River. Eventually, Mitanni succumbed to the Hittites and later Assyrian attacks, eventually being reduced to a province of the Middle Assyrian Empire.\nThe Israelites were an ancient Semitic-speaking people of the Ancient Near East who inhabited part of Canaan during the tribal and monarchic periods (15th\u20136th centuries\u00a0BC), and lived in the region in smaller numbers after the fall of the monarchy. The name \"Israel\" first appears c.\u20091209\u00a0BC, at the end of the Late Bronze Age and the very beginning of the Iron Age, on the Merneptah Stele raised by the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah.\nThe Arameans were a Northwest Semitic semi-nomadic pastoral people who originated in what is now modern Syria (Biblical Aram) during the Late Bronze and early Iron Age. Large groups migrated to Mesopotamia, where they intermingled with the native Akkadian (Assyrian and Babylonian) population. The Aramaeans never had a unified empire; they were divided into independent kingdoms all across the Near East. After the Bronze Age collapse, their political influence was confined to Syro-Hittite states, which were entirely absorbed into the Neo-Assyrian Empire by the 8th century\u00a0BC.\nMesopotamia.\nThe Mesopotamian Bronze Age began c.\u20093500\u00a0BC and ended with the Kassite period c.\u20091500\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091155\u00a0BC). The usual tripartite division into an Early, Middle and Late Bronze Age is not used in the context of Mesopotamia. Instead, a division primarily based on art and historical characteristics is more common.\nThe cities of the Ancient Near East housed several tens of thousands of people. Ur, Kish, Isin, Larsa, and Nippur in the Middle Bronze Age and Babylon, Calah, and Assur in the Late Bronze Age similarly had large populations. The Akkadian Empire (2335\u20132154\u00a0BC) became the dominant power in the region. After its fall, the Sumerians enjoyed a renaissance with the Neo-Sumerian Empire. Assyria, along with the Old Assyrian Empire (c.\u20091800\u20131600\u00a0BC), became a regional power under the Amorite king Shamshi-Adad I. The earliest mention of Babylon (then a small administrative town) appears on a tablet from the reign of Sargon of Akkad in the 23rd century\u00a0BC. The Amorite dynasty established the city-state of Babylon in the 19th century\u00a0BC. Over a century later, it briefly took over the other city-states and formed the short-lived First Babylonian Empire during what is also called the Old Babylonian Period.\nAkkad, Assyria, and Babylonia used the written East Semitic Akkadian language for official use and as a spoken language. By that time, the Sumerian language was no longer spoken, but was still in religious use in Assyria and Babylonia, and would remain so until the 1st century\u00a0AD. The Akkadian and Sumerian traditions played a major role in later Assyrian and Babylonian culture. Despite this, Babylonia, unlike the more militarily powerful Assyria, was founded by non-native Amorites and often ruled by other non-indigenous peoples such as the Kassites, Aramaeans and Chaldeans, as well as by its Assyrian neighbours.\nAsia.\nCentral Asia.\nAgropastoralism.\nFor many decades, scholars made superficial reference to Central Asia as the \"pastoral realm\" or alternatively, the \"nomadic world\", in what researchers call the \"Central Asian void\": a 5,000-year span that was neglected in studies of the origins of agriculture. Foothill regions and glacial melt streams supported Bronze Age agro-pastoralists who developed complex east\u2013west trade routes between Central Asia and China that introduced wheat and barley to China and millet to Central Asia.\nBactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex.\nThe Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC), also known as the Oxus civilisation, was a Bronze Age civilisation in Central Asia, dated c.\u20092400\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091600\u00a0BC, located in present-day northern Afghanistan, eastern Turkmenistan, southern Uzbekistan and western Tajikistan, centred on the upper Amu Darya (Oxus River). Its sites were discovered and named by the Soviet archaeologist Viktor Sarianidi (1976). Bactria was the Greek name for the area of Bactra (modern Balkh), in what is now northern Afghanistan, and Margiana was the Greek name for the Persian satrapy of Margu\u0161, the capital of which was Merv in present-day Turkmenistan.\nA wealth of information indicates that the BMAC had close international relations with the Indus Valley, the Iranian plateau, and possibly even indirectly with Mesopotamia. All civilisations were familiar with lost wax casting.\nAccording to a 2019 study, the BMAC was not a primary contributor to later South-Asian genetics.\nSeima-Turbino phenomenon.\nThe Altai Mountains, marking a natural boundary between Siberia and Mongolia, have been identified as the point of origin of a cultural enigma termed the Seima-Turbino Phenomenon. It is conjectured that changes in climate in this region c.\u20092000\u00a0BC, and the ensuing ecological, economic, and political changes, triggered a rapid and massive migration westward into northeast Europe, eastward into China, and southward into Vietnam and Thailand across a frontier of some . This migration took place in just five to six generations and led to peoples from Finland in the west to Thailand in the east employing the same metalworking technology and, in some areas, horse breeding and riding. However, recent genetic testings of sites in south Siberia and Kazakhstan (Andronovo horizon) would rather support spreading of the bronze technology via Indo-European migrations eastwards, as this technology had been well known for quite a while in western regions.\nIt is further conjectured that the same migrations spread the Uralic group of languages across Europe and Asia, with extant members of the family including Hungarian, Finnish and Estonian.\nEast Asia.\nChina.\nIn China, the earliest bronze artefacts have been found in the Majiayao culture site (3100\u20132700\u00a0BC).\nThe term \"Bronze Age\" has been transferred to the archaeology of China from that of Western Eurasia, and there is no consensus or universally used convention delimiting the \"Bronze Age\" in the context of Chinese prehistory. The \"Early Bronze Age\" in China is sometimes taken to be coterminous with the reign of the Shang dynasty (16th\u201311th centuries\u00a0BC), and the Later Bronze Age with the subsequent Zhou dynasty (11th\u20133rd centuries\u00a0BC), from the 5th century, called Iron Age China although there is an argument to be made that the Bronze Age never properly ended in China, as there is no recognisable transition to an Iron Age. Together with the jade art that precedes it, bronze was seen as a fine material for ritual art when compared with iron or stone.\nBronze metallurgy in China originated in what is referred to as the Erlitou period, which some historians argue places it within the Shang. Others believe the Erlitou sites belong to the preceding Xia dynasty. The United States National Gallery of Art defines the Chinese Bronze Age as c.\u20092000\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009771\u00a0BC, a period that begins with the Erlitou culture and ends abruptly with the disintegration of Western Zhou rule.\nThere is reason to believe that bronze work developed inside of China apart from outside influence. However, the discovery of the Europoid Tarim mummies in Xinjiang has caused some archaeologists such as Johan Gunnar Andersson, Jan Romgard, and An Zhimin to suggest a possible route of transmission from the West eastwards. According to An Zhimin, \"It can be imagined that initially, bronze and iron technology took its rise in West Asia, first influenced the Xinjiang region, and then reached the Yellow River valley, providing external impetus for the rise of the Shang and Zhou civilizations.\" According to Jan Romgard, \"bronze and iron tools seem to have traveled from west to east as well as the use of wheeled wagons and the domestication of the horse.\" There are also possible links to Seima-Turbino culture, \"a transcultural complex across northern Eurasia\", the Eurasian steppe, and the Urals. However, the oldest bronze objects found in China so far were discovered at the Majiayao site in Gansu rather than at Xinjiang.\nThe production of Erlitou represents the earliest large-scale metallurgy industry in the Central Plains of China. The influence of the Seima-Turbino metalworking tradition from the north is supported by a series of recent discoveries in China of many unique perforated spearheads with downward hooks and small loops on the same or opposite side of the socket, which could be associated with the Seima-Turbino visual vocabulary of southern Siberia. The metallurgical centres of northwestern China, especially the Qijia culture in Gansu and Longshan culture in Shaanxi, played an intermediary role in this process.\nIron use in China dates as early as the Zhou dynasty (c.\u20091046\u00a0\u2013 256\u00a0BC), but remained minimal. Chinese literature authored during the 6th century\u00a0BC attests to knowledge of iron smelting, yet bronze continues to occupy the seat of significance in the archaeological and historical record for some time after this. W. C. White argues that iron did not supplant bronze \"at any period before the end of the Zhou dynasty (256\u00a0BC)\" and that bronze vessels make up the majority of metal vessels through the Eastern Han period, or to 221\u00a0BC.\nThe Chinese bronze artefacts generally are either utilitarian, like spear points or adze heads, or \"ritual bronzes\", which are more elaborate versions in precious materials of everyday vessels, as well as tools and weapons. Examples are the numerous large sacrificial tripods known as \"dings\"; there are many other distinct shapes. Surviving identified Chinese ritual bronzes tend to be highly decorated, often with the \"taotie\" motif, which involves stylised animal faces. These appear in three main motif types: those of demons, symbolic animals, and abstract symbols. Many large bronzes also bear cast inscriptions that are the bulk of the surviving body of early Chinese writing and have helped historians and archaeologists piece together the history of China, especially during the Zhou dynasty.\nThe bronzes of the Western Zhou document large portions of history not found in the extant texts that were often composed by persons of varying rank and possibly even social class. Further, the medium of cast bronze lends the record they preserve a permanence not enjoyed by manuscripts. These inscriptions can commonly be subdivided into four parts: a reference to the date and place, the naming of the event commemorated, the list of gifts given to the artisan in exchange for the bronze, and a dedication. The relative points of reference these vessels provide have enabled historians to place most of the vessels within a certain time frame of the Western Zhou period, allowing them to trace the evolution of the vessels and the events they record.\nJapan.\nThe Japanese archipelago saw the introduction of bronze during the early Yayoi period (c.\u2009300\u00a0BC), which saw the introduction of metalworking and agricultural practices brought by settlers arriving from the continent. Bronze and iron smelting spread to the Japanese archipelago through contact with other ancient East Asian civilisations, particularly immigration and trade from the ancient Korean peninsula, and ancient mainland China. Iron was mainly used for agricultural and other tools, whereas ritual and ceremonial artefacts were mainly made of bronze.\nKorea.\nOn the Korean Peninsula, the Bronze Age began c.\u20091000\u2013800\u00a0BC. Initially centred around Liaoning and southern Manchuria, Korean Bronze Age culture exhibits unique typology and styles, especially in ritual objects.\nThe Mumun pottery period is named after the Korean name for undecorated or plain cooking and storage vessels that form a large part of the pottery assemblage over the entire length of the period, but especially between 850 and 550\u00a0BC. The Mumun period is known for the origins of intensive agriculture and complex societies in both the Korean Peninsula and the Japanese Archipelago.\nThe Middle Mumun pottery period culture of the southern Korean Peninsula gradually adopted bronze production (c.\u2009700\u2013600\u00a0BC after a period when Liaoning-style bronze daggers and other bronze artefacts were exchanged as far as the interior part of the Southern Peninsula (c.\u2009900\u2013700\u00a0BC). The bronze daggers lent prestige and authority to the personages who wielded and were buried with them in high-status megalithic burials at south-coastal centres such as the Igeum-dong site. Bronze was an important element in ceremonies and for mortuary offerings until 100\u00a0BC.\nSouth Asia.\nIndus Valley.\nThe Bronze Age on the Indian subcontinent began c.\u20093300\u00a0BC with the beginning of the Indus Valley Civilization. Inhabitants of the Indus Valley, the Harappans, developed new techniques in metallurgy and produced copper, bronze, lead, and tin. The Late Harappan culture (1900\u20131400\u00a0BC), overlapped the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age; thus it is difficult to date this transition accurately. It has been claimed that a 6,000-year-old copper amulet manufactured in Mehrgarh in the shape of a wheel spoke is the earliest example of lost-wax casting in the world.\nThe civilisation's cities were noted for their urban planning, baked brick houses, elaborate drainage systems, water supply systems, clusters of large non-residential buildings, and new techniques in handicraft (carnelian products, seal carving) and metallurgy (copper, bronze, lead, and tin). The large cities of Mohenjo-daro and Harappa likely grew to contain between 30,000 and 60,000 people, and the civilisation during its florescence may have contained between one and five million people.\nSoutheast Asia.\nThe Vilabouly Complex in Laos is a significant archaeological site for dating the origin of bronze metallurgy in Southeast Asia.\nThailand.\nIn Ban Chiang, Thailand, bronze artefacts have been discovered that date to 2100\u00a0BC. However, according to the radiocarbon dating on the human and pig bones in Ban Chiang, some scholars propose that the initial Bronze Age in Ban Chiang was in the late 2nd millennium. In Nyaung-gan, Myanmar, bronze tools have been excavated along with ceramics and stone artefacts. Dating is still currently broad (2300\u2013500\u00a0BC). Ban Non Wat, excavated by Charles Higham, was a rich site with over 640 graves excavated that gleaned many complex bronze items that may have had social value connected to them.\nBan Chiang, however, is the most thoroughly documented site and has the clearest evidence of metallurgy when in Southeast Asia. With a rough date range from the late 3rd millennium\u00a0BC to the 1st millennium\u00a0AD, this site has artefacts such as burial pottery (dated 2100\u20131700\u00a0BC) and fragments of bronze and copper-base bangles. This technology suggested on-site casting from the beginning. The on-site casting supports the theory that bronze was first introduced in Southeast Asia from a different country. Some scholars believe that copper-based metallurgy was disseminated from northwest and central China south and southwest via areas such as Guangdong and Yunnan and finally into southeast Asia c.\u20091000\u00a0BC. Archaeology also suggests that Bronze Age metallurgy may not have been as significant a catalyst in social stratification and warfare in Southeast Asia as in other regions, and that social distribution shifted away from chiefdoms to a heterarchical network. Data analyses of sites such as Ban Lum Khao, Ban Na Di, Non-Nok Tha, Khok Phanom Di, and Nong Nor have consistently led researchers to conclude that there was no entrenched hierarchy.\nVietnam.\nDating to the Neolithic, the first bronze drums, called the Dong Son drums, were uncovered in and around the Red River Delta regions of northern Vietnam and Southern China. These relate to the Dong Son culture of Vietnam.\nArchaeological research in Northern Vietnam indicates an increase in rates of infectious disease following the advent of metallurgy; skeletal fragments in sites dating to the early and mid-Bronze Age evidence a greater proportion of lesions than in sites of earlier periods. There are a few possible implications of this. One is the increased contact with bacterial and/or fungal pathogens due to increased population density and land clearing/cultivation. Another implication is decreased levels of immunocompetence in the Metal Age due to changes in diet caused by agriculture. The last implication is that there may have been an emergence of infectious diseases that evolved into a more virulent form in the metal period.\nEurope.\nA few examples of named Bronze Age cultures in Europe roughly in relative order\u2014dates are approximate.\nThe chosen cultures overlapped in time and the indicated periods do not fully correspond to their estimated extents.\nSoutheast Europe.\nRadivojevic et al. (2013) reported the discovery of a tin bronze foil from the Plo\u010dnik archaeological site dated to c.\u20094650\u00a0BC as well as 14 other artefacts from Serbia and Bulgaria dated before 4000\u00a0BC, showing that early tin bronze was more common than previously thought and developed independently in Europe 1500 years before the first tin bronze alloys in the Near East. The production of complex tin bronzes lasted for about 500 years in the Balkans. The authors reported that evidence for the production of such complex bronzes disappears at the end of the 5th millennium\u00a0BC, coinciding with the \"collapse of large cultural complexes in north-eastern Bulgaria and Thrace\". Tin bronzes using cassiterite tin were reintroduced to the area some 1500 years later.\nThe oldest golden artefacts in the world are dated between 4600 and 4200\u00a0BC, and were found in the Necropolis of Varna. These artefacts are on display in the Varna Archaeological Museum.\nThe Dabene Treasure was unearthed from 2004 to 2007 near Karlovo in central Bulgaria. The treasure consists of 20,000 gold jewellery items from 18 to 23 carats. The most important of them was a dagger made of gold and platinum with an unusual edge. The treasure was dated to the end of the 3rd millennium\u00a0BC. Scientists suggest that the Karlovo valley used to be a major crafts centre that exported golden jewellery across Europe. It is considered one of the largest prehistoric golden treasures in the world.\nAegean.\nThe Aegean Bronze Age began c.\u20093200\u00a0BC, when civilisations first established a far-ranging trade network. This network imported tin and charcoal to Cyprus, where copper was mined and alloyed with tin to produce bronze. Bronze objects were then exported far and wide. Isotopic analysis of tin in some Mediterranean bronze artefacts suggests that they may have originated from Bronze Age Britain.\nKnowledge of navigation was well-developed by this time and reached a peak of skill not exceeded (except perhaps by Polynesian sailors) until 1730 when the invention of the chronometer enabled the precise determination of longitude.\nThe Minoan civilisation based in Knossos on the island of Crete appears to have coordinated and defended its Bronze Age trade. Ancient empires valued luxury goods in contrast to staple foods, leading to famine.\nAegean collapse.\nBronze Age collapse theories have described aspects of the end of the Bronze Age in this region. At the end of the Bronze Age in the Aegean region, the Mycenaean administration of the regional trade empire followed the decline of Minoan primacy. Several Minoan client states lost much of their population to famine and pestilence. This would indicate that the trade network may have failed, preventing the trade that would previously have relieved such famines and prevented illness caused by malnutrition. It is also known that in this era, the breadbasket of the Minoan empire\u2014the area north of the Black Sea\u2014also suddenly lost much of its population and thus probably some capacity to cultivate crops. Drought and famine in Anatolia may have also led to the Aegean collapse by disrupting trade networks, therefore preventing the Aegean from accessing bronze and luxury goods.\nThe Aegean collapse has been attributed to the exhaustion of the Cypriot forests causing the end of the bronze trade. These forests are known to have existed in later times, and experiments have shown that charcoal production on the scale necessary for the bronze production of the late Bronze Age would have exhausted them in less than 50 years.\nThe Aegean collapse has also been attributed to the fact that as iron tools became more common, the main justification for the tin trade ended, and that trade network ceased to function as it did formerly. The colonies of the Minoan empire then suffered drought, famine, war, or some combination of the three, and had no access to the distant resources of an empire by which they could easily recover.\nThe Thera eruption occurred c.\u20091600\u00a0BC, north of Crete. Speculation includes that a tsunami from Thera (more commonly known today as Santorini) destroyed Cretan cities. A tsunami may have destroyed the Cretan navy in its home harbour, which then lost crucial naval battles; so that in the LMIB/LMII event (c.\u20091450\u00a0BC) the cities of Crete burned and the Mycenaean civilisation conquered Knossos. If the eruption occurred in the late 17th century\u00a0BC as most chronologists believe, then its immediate effects belong to the Middle to Late Bronze Age transition, and not to the end of the Late Bronze Age, but it could have triggered the instability that led to the collapse first of Knossos and then of Bronze Age society overall. One such theory highlights the role of Cretan expertise in administering the empire, post-Thera. If this expertise was concentrated in Crete, then the Mycenaeans may have made political and commercial mistakes in administering the Cretan empire.\nArchaeological findings, including some on the island of Thera, suggest that the centre of the Minoan civilisation at the time of the eruption was actually on Thera rather than on Crete. According to this theory, the catastrophic loss of the political, administrative and economic centre due to the eruption, as well as the damage wrought by the tsunami to the coastal towns and villages of Crete, precipitated the decline of the Minoans. A weakened political entity with a reduced economic and military capability and fabled riches would have then been more vulnerable to conquest. Indeed, the Santorini eruption is usually dated to c.\u20091630\u00a0BC, while the Mycenaean Greeks first enter the historical record a few decades later, c.\u20091600\u00a0BC. The later Mycenaean assaults on Crete (c.\u20091450\u00a0BC) and Troy (c.\u20091250\u00a0BC) would have been a continuation of the steady encroachment of the Greeks upon the weakened Minoan world.\nCentral Europe.\nIn Central Europe, the Early Bronze Age Unetice culture (2300\u20131600\u00a0BC) includes numerous smaller groups like the Straubing, Adlerberg and Hatvan cultures. Some very rich burials, such as the one located at Leubingen with grave gifts crafted from gold, point to an increase of social stratification already present in the Unetice culture. Cemeteries of this period are small and rare. The Unetice culture was followed by the Middle Bronze Age (1600\u20131200\u00a0BC) tumulus culture, characterised by inhumation burials in tumuli barrows. In the eastern Hungarian K\u00f6r\u00f6s tributaries, the early Bronze Age first saw the introduction of the Mako culture, followed by the Otomani and Gyulavarsand cultures.\nThe late Bronze Age Urnfield culture (1300\u2013700\u00a0BC) was characterised by cremation burials. It included the Lusatian culture in eastern Germany and Poland (1300\u2013500\u00a0BC) that continues into the Iron Age. The Central European Bronze Age was followed by the Iron Age Hallstatt culture (700\u2013450\u00a0BC). Important sites include Biskupin in Poland, Nebra in Germany, Vr\u00e1ble in Slovakia, and Zug-Sumpf in Switzerland.\nGerman prehistorian Paul Reinecke described Bronze A1 (Bz A1) period (2300\u20132000\u00a0BC: triangular daggers, flat axes, stone wrist-guards, flint arrowheads) and Bronze A2 (Bz A2) period (1950\u20131700\u00a0BC: daggers with metal hilt, flanged axes, halberds, pins with perforated spherical heads, solid bracelets) and phases Hallstatt A and B (Ha A and B).\nSouthern Europe.\nThe Apennine culture was a technology complex in central and southern Italy spanning both the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age proper. The Camuni were an ancient people of uncertain origin who lived in Val Camonica, in present-day Lombardy, during the Iron Age, although groups of hunters, shepherds, and farmers are known to have lived in the area since the Neolithic.\nLocated in Sardinia and Corsica, the Nuragic civilisation lasted from the early Bronze Age (18th century\u00a0BC) to the 2nd century\u00a0AD, when the islands were already Romanised. They take their name from the characteristic Nuragic towers, which evolved from the pre-existing megalithic culture, which built dolmens and menhirs.\nThe towers are unanimously considered the best-preserved and largest megalithic remains in Europe. Their purpose is still debated: some scholars consider them monumental tombs, others as Houses of the Giants, other as fortresses, ovens for metal fusion, prisons, or finally temples for a solar cult. Near the end of the 3rd millennium\u00a0BC, Sardinia exported to Sicily a culture that built small dolmens, trilithic or polygonal shaped, that served as tombs, as in the Sicilian dolmen of \"Cava dei Servi\". From this region, they reached Malta and other countries of Mediterranean basin.\nThe Terramare was an early Indo-European civilisation in the area of what is now Pianura Padana in northern Italy, before the arrival of the Celts, and in other parts of Europe. They lived in square villages of wooden stilt houses. These villages were built on land, but generally near a stream, with roads forming a grid plan. The whole complex was of the nature of a fortified settlement. The Terramare culture was widespread in the Pianura Padana, especially along the Panaro river, between Modena and Bologna, and in the rest of Europe. The civilisation developed in the Middle and Late Bronze Age during the 17th\u201313th centuries\u00a0BC.\nThe Castellieri culture developed in Istria during the Middle Bronze Age. It lasted for more than a millennium, from the 15th century\u00a0BC until the Roman conquest in the 3rd century\u00a0BC. It takes its name from the fortified boroughs (\"Castellieri\", ) that characterised the culture.\nThe Canegrate culture developed from the mid-Bronze Age (13th century\u00a0BC) until the Iron Age in the Pianura Padana, in what are now western Lombardy, eastern Piedmont, and Ticino. It takes its name from the township of Canegrate, where, in the 20th century, some fifty tombs with ceramics and metal objects were found. The Canegrate culture migrated from the northwest part of the Alps and descended to Pianura Padana from the Swiss Alps passes and the Ticino.\nThe Golasecca culture developed starting from the late Bronze Age in the Po plain. It takes its name from Golasecca, a locality next to the Ticino, where in the early 19th century abbot Giovanni Battista Giani excavated its first findings comprising some 50 tombs with ceramics and metal objects. Remains of the Golasecca culture span an area of about south to the Alps, between the Po, Sesia, and Serio rivers, dating to the 9th\u20134th centuries\u00a0BC.\nWestern Europe.\nGreat Britain.\nIn Great Britain, the Bronze Age is considered to have been the period from c.\u20092100 to 750\u00a0BC. Migration brought new people to the islands from the continent. Tooth enamel isotope research on bodies found in early Bronze Age graves around Stonehenge indicates that at least some of the migrants came from the area of present-day Switzerland. Another example site is Must Farm near Whittlesey, host to the most complete Bronze Age wheel ever to be found. The Beaker culture displayed different behaviours from earlier Neolithic people, and cultural change was significant. Integration is thought to have been peaceful, as many of the early henge sites were seemingly adopted by the newcomers. The rich Wessex culture developed in southern Britain at this time. Additionally, the climate was deteriorating; where once the weather was warm and dry it became much wetter as the Bronze Age continued, forcing the population away from easily defended sites in the hills and into the fertile valleys. Large livestock farms developed in the lowlands and appear to have contributed to economic growth and inspired increasing forest clearances. The Deverel-Rimbury culture began to emerge in the second half of the Middle Bronze Age (c.\u20091400\u20131100\u00a0BC) to exploit these conditions. Devon and Cornwall were major sources of tin for much of western Europe and copper was extracted from sites such as the Great Orme mine in northern Wales. Social groups appear to have been tribal but with growing complexity and hierarchies becoming apparent.\nThe burials, which until this period had usually been communal, became more individual. For example, whereas in the Neolithic a large chambered cairn or long barrow housed the dead, Early Bronze Age people buried their dead in individual barrows (commonly known and marked on modern British Ordnance Survey maps as tumuli), or sometimes in cists covered with cairns.\nThe greatest quantities of bronze objects in England were discovered in East Cambridgeshire, with the most important finds being the 6,500-piece Isleham Hoard. Alloying of copper with tin to make bronze was practised soon after the discovery of copper. The techniques needed to deliberately alloy copper with zinc to form brass first arrived in Great Britain late in the first millennium BC. One copper mine at Great Orme in North Wales, reached a depth of 70 metres. At Alderley Edge in Cheshire, carbon dating has established mining at around 2280 to 1890\u00a0BC with a 95% probability. The earliest identified metalworking site (Sigwells, Somerset) came much later, dated by globular urn-style pottery to c.\u2009the 12th century\u00a0BC. The identifiable sherds from over 500 mould fragments included a perfect fit of the hilt of a sword in the Wilburton style held in Somerset County Museum.\nAtlantic Bronze Age.\nThe Atlantic Bronze Age as cultural geographic region is a cultural complex (c.\u20092100\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009\u00a0/ 800\u00a0/ 700 cal.\u00a0BC) that includes different cultures in the context of the Atlantic Iberian Peninsula (Portugal, Andaluc\u00eda, Galicia, Asturias, Cantabria, Pa\u00eds Vasco, Navarra and Castilla and Le\u00f3n), the Atlantic France, Britain and Ireland, while the Atlantic Bronze Age as cultural complex of the final phase of the Bronze Age period is dated between c.\u20091350 and 700\u00a0BC. It is marked by economic and cultural exchange. Commercial contacts extend to Denmark and the Mediterranean. The Atlantic Bronze Age was defined by many distinct regional centres of metal production, unified by a regular maritime exchange of products.\nIreland.\nThe Bronze Age in Ireland began c.\u20092000\u00a0BC when copper was alloyed with tin and used to manufacture Ballybeg type flat axes and associated metalwork. The preceding period is known as the Copper Age and is characterised by the production of flat axes, daggers, halberds and awls in copper. The period is divided into three phases: Early Bronze Age (2000\u20131500\u00a0BC), Middle Bronze Age (1500\u20131200\u00a0BC), and Late Bronze Age (1200\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009500\u00a0BC). Ireland is known for a relatively large number of Early Bronze Age burials. The country's stone circles and stone rows were built during this period.\nOne of the characteristic types of artefacts of the Early Bronze Age in Ireland is the flat axe. There are five main types of flat axes: Lough Ravel crannog (c.\u20092200\u00a0BC), Ballybeg (c.\u20092000\u00a0BC), Killaha (c.\u20092000\u00a0BC), Ballyvalley (c.\u20092000\u20131600\u00a0BC), Derryniggin (c.\u20091600\u00a0BC), and a number of metal ingots in the shape of axes.\nNorthern Europe.\nThe Bronze Age in Northern Europe spans the 2nd millennium\u00a0BC, (Unetice culture, Urnfield culture, Tumulus culture, Terramare culture and Lusatian culture) lasting until c.\u2009600\u00a0BC. The Northern Bronze Age was both a period and a Bronze Age culture in Scandinavian pre-history, c.\u20091700\u2013500\u00a0BC, with sites as far east as Estonia. Succeeding the Late Neolithic culture, its ethnic and linguistic affinities are unknown in the absence of written sources. It was followed by the Pre-Roman Iron Age.\nEven though Northern European Bronze Age cultures came relatively late, and came into existence via trade, sites present rich and well-preserved objects made of wool, wood and imported Central European bronze and gold. Many rock carvings depict ships, and the large stone burial monuments known as stone ships suggest that shipping played an important role. Thousands of rock carvings depict ships, most probably representing sewn plank-built canoes for warfare, fishing, and trade. These may have a history as far back as the neolithic period and continue into the Pre-Roman Iron Age, as shown by the Hjortspring boat. There are many mounds and rock carving sites from the period. Numerous artefacts of bronze and gold are found. No written language existed in the Nordic countries during the Bronze Age. The rock carvings have been dated through comparison with depicted artefacts.\nEastern Europe.\nThe Yamnaya culture (c.\u20093300\u20132600\u00a0BC) was a Late Copper Age/Early Bronze Age culture of the Pontic-Caspian steppe associated with early Indo-Europeans. It was followed on the steppe by the Catacomb culture (c.\u20092800\u20132200\u00a0BC) and the Poltavka culture (c.\u20092800\u20132200\u00a0BC). The closely related Corded Ware culture in the forest-steppe region to the north (c.\u20093000\u20132350\u00a0BC) spread eastwards with the Fatyanovo culture (c.\u20092900\u20132050\u00a0BC), which subsequently developed into the Abashevo culture (c.\u20092200\u20131850\u00a0BC) and the Sintashta culture (c.\u20092200\u20131750\u00a0BC). The earliest known chariots have been found in Sintashta burials and there is earlier evidence for chariot use in the Abashevo culture. The Sintashta culture expanded further eastwards into central Asia becoming the Andronovo culture, while the Srubnaya culture (c.\u20091900\u20131200\u00a0BC) continued the use of chariots in eastern Europe.\nCaucasus.\nArsenical bronze artefacts of the Maykop culture in the North Caucasus have been dated to around the 4th millennium\u00a0BC. This innovation resulted in the circulation of arsenical bronze technology through southern and eastern Europe.\nAfrica.\nSub-Saharan Africa.\nIron and copper smelting appeared around the same time in most parts of Africa. As such, most Classical African civilisations outside Egypt did not experience a distinct Bronze Age. Evidence for iron smelting appears earlier or at the same time as copper smelting in Nigeria c.\u2009900\u2013800\u00a0BC, Rwanda and Burundi c.\u2009700\u2013500\u00a0BC and Tanzania c.\u2009300\u00a0BC.\nThere is a longstanding debate about whether copper and iron metallurgy were independently developed in sub-Saharan Africa or introduced from the outside across the Sahara from North Africa or the Indian Ocean. Evidence for theories of independent development and outside introduction are scarce and the subject of active scholarly debate. Scholars have suggested that both the relative dearth of archaeological research in sub-Saharan Africa as well as long-standing prejudices have limited or biased our understanding of pre-historic metallurgy on the continent. One scholar characterised the state of historical knowledge: \"To say that the history of metallurgy in sub-Saharan Africa is complicated is perhaps an understatement.\"\nWest Africa.\nCopper smelting took place in West Africa prior to the appearance of iron smelting in the region. Evidence for copper smelting furnaces was found near Agadez, Niger that has been dated as early as 2200\u00a0BC. However, evidence for copper production in this region before 1000\u00a0BC is debated. Evidence of copper mining and smelting has been found at Akjoujt, Mauretania, that suggests small-scale production c.\u2009800\u2013400\u00a0BC.\nAmericas.\nThe Moche culture of South America independently discovered and developed bronze smelting. Bronze technology was developed further by the Inca and used for utilitarian objects and sculpture. A later appearance of limited bronze smelting in western Mexico suggests either contact of that region with Andean civilisations or separate discovery of the technology. The Calchaqu\u00ed people of northwestern Argentina had bronze technology.\nTrade.\nTrade and industry played a major role in the development of Bronze Age civilisations. With artefacts of the Indus Valley Civilisation found in ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt, it is clear that these civilisations were not only in touch with one another, but also trading. Early long-distance trade was limited almost exclusively to luxury goods like spices, textiles, and precious metals. Not only did this make cities with ample amounts of these products rich, but it also led to an intermingling of cultures for the first time in history.\nTrade routes were not just on land. The first and most extensive trade routes were along rivers such as the Nile, the Tigris, and the Euphrates, which led to the growth of cities on the banks of these rivers. The later domestication of camels also helped encourage trade routes overland, linking the Indus Valley with the Mediterranean. This further led to towns appearing where there was an inn or port where caravan routes ended.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4621", "revid": "46562226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4621", "title": "BBC News (British TV channel)", "text": "British 24-hour television news channel\nThe BBC News channel is a British free-to-air public broadcast television news channel owned and operated by the BBC. The channel is based at and broadcasts from Broadcasting House in the West End of London from which it is anchored during British daytime, with overnight broadcasts anchored from Washington, D.C. and Singapore. It was launched as BBC News 24 on 9 November 1997 at 17:30, as part of the BBC's foray into digital domestic television channels, becoming the first competitor to Sky News, which had been running since 1989.\nOn 22 February 2006, the channel was named \"News Channel of the Year\" at the Royal Television Society Television Journalism Awards for the first time in its history. The judges remarked that this was the year that the channel had \"really come into its own.\" The channel won the accolade for a second time in 2017. From May 2007, viewers in the UK could watch the channel via the BBC News website. In April 2008, the channel was renamed \"BBC News\" as part of a \u00a3550,000 rebranding of the BBC's news output, complete with a new studio and presentation.\nThe channel's international counterpart, formerly known as BBC World News, initially operated as a counterpart carrying international news, as well as selected programmes from the domestic service. Unlike BBC News in the UK, which is a free-to-air channel funded by the licence fee, the world feed is a pay television service distributed by BBC Studios and funded by advertising. Some of its programmes had been simulcast by the domestic BBC News channel, especially in the overnight hours.\nIn 2022, the BBC announced that it would further consolidate the programming and talent of the BBC News and World News channels as a cost-cutting move; these changes took place on 3 April 2023, with BBC World News being renamed \"BBC News\", and both channels restructured to use a common schedule with domestic opt-outs for UK-specific news coverage and programmes.\nHistory.\nRolling news began in the UK on 5 February 1989 when Sky News was launched and on 16 January 1995, the BBC launched an international news channel BBC World. However it was meant for global audiences and normally wasn't available to viewers in the UK. In May 1996, the BBC announced that it was to launch a UK rolling news service as part of its move into digital broadcasting.\nBBC News 24 went on air on 9 November 1997, nearly a year before digital television was launched in the UK and due to a lack of space on satellite, the channel was only available on cable, with an overnight shop window on BBC One when that channel was not on air. However, Sky News had complained about the costs associated with running a channel that only a minority could view from the licence fee. Sky News claimed that a number of British cable operators had been incentivised to carry News 24 (which, as a licence-fee funded channel was made available to such operators for free) in preference to the commercial Sky News. However, in September 1999 the European Commission ruled against a complaint made by Sky News that the publicly funded channel was unfair and illegal under EU law. The Commission ruled that the licence fee should be considered state aid but that such aid was justified due to the public service remit of the BBC and that it did not exceed actual costs.\nThe advent of digital television in the United Kingdom in autumn 1998 saw the channel launch on Sky's new digital satellite service and a month later it started to broadcast via digital terrestrial television. Initially it was difficult to obtain a digital satellite or terrestrial receiver without a subscription to Sky or ONdigital respectively, but following the demise of ITV Digital in 2002 and the subsequent launch of Freeview, the channel started to become much more widely available and the BBC Governors' annual report for 2005/2006 reported that average audience figures for fifteen-minute periods had reached 8.6% in multichannel homes. The 2004 report also claimed that the channel outperformed Sky News in both weekly and monthly reach in multichannel homes for the January 2004 period, and for the first time in two years moved ahead of Sky News in being perceived as the channel best for news.\nIn 2005, the Head of television news Peter Horrocks outlined plans to provide more funding and resources for the channel and shift the corporation's emphasis regarding news away from the traditional BBC One bulletins and across to the rolling news channel. The introduction of simulcasts of the main bulletins on the channel was to allow the news bulletins to pool resources rather than work against each other at key times in the face of competition, particularly from Sky News.\n2008 rebranding.\nOn 21 April 2008, BBC News 24 was renamed \"BBC News\" on the channel itself, and referred to as the \"BBC News Channel\" on other BBC services. This was part of the Creative Futures plan, launched in 2006, to bring all BBC News output under the single brand name.\nThe BBC News Channel moved from the Studio N8 set, which became home to BBC World News, to what was the home of the national news in Studio N6, allowing the channel to share its set with the \"BBC News at One\" and the \"BBC News at Ten\" \u2013 with other bulletins moving to Studio TC7.\nMove to Broadcasting House.\nThe channel relocated, along with the remaining BBC News services at Television Centre, to the newly refurbished Broadcasting House on 18 March 2013 at 13:00 GMT. Presentation and on-screen graphics were refreshed, with new full HD studios and a live newsroom backdrop. Moving cameras in the newsroom form part of the top of the hour title sequence and are used at the start of weather bulletins.\nConsolidation with BBC World News.\nOn 26 May 2022, as part of planned cuts and streamlining across the broadcaster, the BBC announced plans for consolidation of the domestic BBC News channel in the UK with BBC World News. The domestic and international versions would share content, while maintaining the ability to opt out from the shared feed for domestic coverage if warranted. The BBC promoted that the service would offer \"new flagship programmes built around high-profile journalists, and programmes commissioned for multiple platforms\".\nThe BBC announced a new presenter line-up for the merged service in February 2023, led by Matthew Amroliwala, Christian Fraser, Yalda Hakim, Lucy Hockings, and Maryam Moshiri. On 3 April 2023, the BBC World News channel rebranded as BBC News, formally marking the implementation of the unified service with the UK feed opting out for UK-specific programming, such as BBC television newscasts and \"Newsnight\", and coverage of UK-specific news not judged to be significant enough to warrant rolling coverage globally. Overall, the changes resulted in the layoffs of about 50 employees, including presenters David Eades, Joanna Gosling, and Tim Willcox.\nYalda Hakim left the channel to join Sky News in September 2023, meaning that Maryam Moshiri could have her own programme in the slot of Hakim's former Daily Global programme.\nIn February 2024, Ben Brown, Geeta Guru-Murthy, and Anita McVeigh rejoined the news channel after a year off air as chief presenters.\nDuring the 2024 general election campaign, BBC News temporarily unwound the unified service, and reverted to broadcasting a domestic feed of rolling coverage from 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. daily, as well as an additional UK-specific bulletin at 11 p.m. following \"Newsnight\". This continued through the State Opening of Parliament, after which the prior schedule was reinstated beginning 18 July. The 11 p.m. bulletin remained until October 2024, when it was replaced with \"World News America\". In January 2025, the UK feed dropped its simulcast of \"BBC Breakfast\" as a pilot, with world feed programming now carried in its timeslot; executive news editor Paul Royall considered the simulcast redundant, citing that the majority of its viewership came from BBC One and iPlayer.\nBBC News HD.\nOn 16 July 2013, the BBC announced that a high-definition (HD) simulcast of BBC News would be launched by early 2014. HD output from BBC News has been simulcast on BBC One HD and BBC Two HD since the move to Broadcasting House in March 2013. The channel launched on 10December 2013 (at an earlier date than originally planned) and rolled out nationwide over the next six months (as did BBC Four HD, CBBC HD and CBeebies HD).\nBBC News HD was removed from Freeview on 30 June 2022 due to the closure of the COM7 multiplex.\nThere are HD versions of BBC News on BBC iPlayer, Freesat channel 200, Sky channel 503, and Virgin Media channel 601.\nProgramming.\nBreaking news.\nThe BBC maintains guidelines for procedures to be taken for breaking news. With domestic news, the correspondent first recorded a \"generic minute\" summary (for use by all stations and channels) and then priority was to report on BBC Radio 5 Live, then on the BBC News channel and any other programmes that are on air. Since 5 Live's move to Manchester, this has been reversed. For foreign news, first a \"generic minute\" is recorded, then reports are to World Service radio, then the reporter talks to any other programmes that are on air.\nA key claim made by Lord Lambert in his report had been that the channel was slower to react to breaking news compared with its main rival Sky News. To counteract this, a new feature introduced with the 2003 relaunch was a \"breaking news sting\": a globe shown briefly onscreen to direct a viewer's attention to the breaking news.\nThe graphics relaunch in January 2007 saw the globe sting replaced by a red strapline to highlight the breaking story immediately.\nTo complement this, a permanent live news ticker had earlier been introduced in 2006: this had previously been in use only sporadically. News statements are shown as continuously scrolling upper-case text located at the bottom of the screen; some past ambiguities noted have included spelling the plural of MPs as \"MPS\", together with other occasional spelling and grammatical errors. The design of this ticker was slightly altered with the 2007 graphics redesign and from June turned red to indicate breaking news, as \"Newswatch\" reported viewers' confusion. The ticker was removed during trails and weather forecasts.\nA new set of graphics, including a change to font style, was officially launched in July 2019 although it was broadcast in error up to a couple of months before. The news ticker, which had been a long-running feature of the Channel, was replaced by a flipper as stories no longer scroll across the screen. The headlines now have a limited length and appear in full in turn. The word \"BREAKING\" may appear on screen and flash to indicate breaking news. Occasionally a breaking news sting may appear on the Channel to call attention to breaking news. This sting gained some notoriety in June 2017 when a technical error caused it to appear several times in a row, delaying the start of the \"BBC News at Ten\". Usually the BBC News Channel crosses over to live events, such as press conferences, without using the sting and the presenter on air introduces what viewers are seeing.\nBBC World News simulcasts.\nThe BBC began simulcasting the channel overnight on terrestrial channel BBC One with the launch of the channel, ending the tradition of a closedown but at the same time effectively making the service available to many more viewers. In the early 2000s, BBC Two also started simulcasting the channel, although the weekend morning show \"Weekend 24\" had been simulcast on the channel in the early days. During major breaking news events, the BBC News Channel has been broadcast on BBC One; examples of special broadcasts include the 11 September 2001 attacks, 7 July 2005 London bombings, the capture of Saddam Hussein, the death of Osama bin Laden and the death and funerals of Prince Philip and Elizabeth II. In 2020, shared programming between BBC One and the News Channel often included the UK Government's Coronavirus Daily Update. This was usually broadcast during late afternoons when the Government made announcements.\nCoverage of major events has also been simulcast on BBC World News. Currently, overnight viewers receive 25-minute editions of BBC News every hour, and on weekdays 23:00\u201302:00 receive \"Newsday\", live from Singapore and from London which also includes \"Business Today\" and \"Sportsday\" between 00:30 and 01:00 and also between 01:30 and 02:00.\nFrom 02:00 to 05:00 (00:00\u201306:00 on weekends) receive \"BBC World News\". \"The Briefing\" airs between 05:00 and 06:00 on weekdays.\nThese simulcasts were expanded as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The BBC introduced a streamlined schedule and the News Channel and BBC World News now share major parts of evening and weekend coverage. From August 2020 this was changed and made permanent to 10:00 to 12:00 and on weekdays 19:00 to 06:00, with opt-outs for \"BBC News at Ten\" and half an hour at 20:30, weekends 21:00 to 06:00, apart from the evening BBC One bulletin.\nWorld News is no longer simulcasted, given that the channel has been merged with the domestic provision, thereby any programming on the News Channel is broadcast as the channel says \"Around the world and across the UK\".\nBBC One, BBC Two and BBC World News simulcasts.\n\"BBC Breakfast\" has been simulcast since its launch in 2000 on BBC One and BBC News, replacing the individual breakfast shows that had run on both channels. Since May 2006 until 17 March 2020, the simulcast generally ran from 06:00 until 08:30 during the week. \"Breakfast\" on BBC One continued from MediaCityUK until 09:15 with entertainment and features, whilst BBC News usually went to Business Live until 09:00 and reverted to its traditional format from 09:00. Since 18 March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused changes to these arrangements. \"Business Live\", which had become \"Worklife\", is no longer on air. Weekdays, \"BBC Breakfast\" ran runs until 09:00 on both BBC One and the BBC News Channel and there is then an hour of news, which was called the \"BBC News at Nine\", on both channels. This continued as the first half of two hours of programming on the BBC News Channel, the second hour was usually taken by BBC Two presented by Victoria Derbyshire on Mondays to Wednesdays and was generally by Annita McVeigh on the other two days of the week.\nBBC Two simulcasts the News Channel on weekday mornings from 09:00 until 12:15 or 13:00. Coverage switches to BBC One in the form of the simulcast \"BBC News at One\". The \"BBC News at One\" may be broadcast on BBC One only however during periods of breaking news or major announcements in the House of Commons carried only on the News Channel, if it's an international story coverage will switch for the hour to simulcast with BBC World News. A similar arrangement applies for the \"BBC News at Six\", generally simulcast on both BBC One and the News Channel but, as ever, subject to change for breaking news for the News Channel.\nThe \"BBC News at Ten\" began simulcasting on the channel on 30 January 2006 as part of the \"Ten O'Clock Newshour\", followed by extended sport and business news updates. The bulletin was joined in being simulcast on 10 April 2006 when the \"BBC News at One\" (with British Sign Language in-vision signing) and \"BBC News at Six\" bulletins were added to the schedule following a similar format to the \"News at Ten\" in terms of content on the channel once each simulcast ends.\nDuring the summer, the hour-long programme \"News 24 Sunday\" was broadcast both on BBC One and the BBC News Channel at 09:00, to replace \"The Andrew Marr Show\", which is off air. It was presented by a news presenter, and came from the main News channel studio. The programme was made up mostly of interviews focusing on current affairs, and included a full paper review, a weather summary, and a news update at 09:00, 09:30 and 10:00. \"Sunday Morning Live\" and alternative programming now fill this slot.\nFrom 2013, a new programme was created for BBC Two for 11:00\u201312:00 weekdays, consisting of 30 minutes of domestic news and 30 minutes of BBC World News. On Wednesdays, when parliament is sitting the latter is replaced by the \"Daily Politics\" for coverage of Prime Minister's Questions (PMQ). In March 2016 the channel started showing \"Newsnight\" at 23:15.\nThe coverage from 10:00 to 13:00 on BBC Two and the News Channel is part of three-hour block of \"BBC World News\" simulcast due to the Coronavirus Pandemic. However, by the end of 2021 the simulcast had been cut back to a single hour on weekdays, between 10:00 and 11:00 with all-morning simulcasts continuing at the weekend. BBC World News produces the three-hour BBC News / BBC World News simulcast between 19:00 to 22:00 and 23:00 to 06:00, including one edition of \"The Papers\". From August 2020 this was changed and made permanent to 10:00 to 12:00 and on weekdays 19:00 to 06:00, with opt-outs for BBC News at Ten and half an hour at 20:30, weekends 21:00 to 06:00, these exclude BBC One bulletin.\nCurrent situation.\nBBC News currently simulcasts all of BBC Television's main BBC One news bulletins \u2013 BBC News at One, BBC News at Six and BBC News at Ten. On Wednesdays BBC News simulcasts much of \"Politics Live\" which is broadcast on BBC Two to provide coverage of Prime Minister's Questions. After the News at 10, \"Newsnight\" is also aired on the BBC News Channel. All network simulcasts are broadcast on the domestic frequency only. At the weekend, the channel simulcasts most of \"Breakfast\", but does not broadcast the BBC One news bulletins, but does carry \"Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg\".\nExclusive programmes.\nPrevious programming.\nOther programmes previous broadcast on BBC News Channel included \"Head 2 Head\", \"E24\", \"The Record Europe\", \"Politics Europe\" and \"News 24 Tonight\", a weekday evening programme which ran from 2005 to 2008, providing a round up of the day's news.\n2015 schedule changes.\nAs part of budget cuts, major changes to the channel were announced in late 2014 / early 2015. This included axing some bulletins and replacing them with \"Victoria Derbyshire\" and \"BBC Business Live\" with Sally Bundock and Ben Thompson in the morning. \"Outside Source with Ros Atkins\" \u2013 an \"interactive\" show already broadcast on BBC World News \u2013 aired Mondays-Thursday at (during major stories at 18:00) and 21:00 and a new edition of \"World News Today\" Friday-Sunday at 21:00 (during major stories at 19:00/20:00 Monday-Friday) adding to the 19:00 edition on BBC Four. \"HARDtalk\" was moved to 20:30 in May. The 00:00 edition was replaced on Sundays\u2013Thursday with \"Newsday\" and on Friday-Saturday a standard edition of \"BBC World News\".\nBBC World News shared programming history.\nOn 1 October 2007, BBC World News started broadcasting \"BBC World News America\" and \"World News Today\" at 00:00 and 03:00 GMT respectively. \"World News Today\" was simulcast on the BBC News channel at 03:00 GMT. \"BBC World News America\" used to be aired as a reduced length, time-delayed version at 00:30 GMT, with \"ABC World News Tonight with David Muir\" also being shown at 01:30 every Tuesday-Friday.\nFrom 13 June 2011, the weekday editions of BBC News at 01:00, 02:00, 03:00 and 04:00 were replaced with \"Newsday\". The programme acts as a morning news bulletin for the Asia-Pacific region and is broadcast as a double-headed news bulletin with Rico Hizon in Singapore and Babita Sharma in London. \"Asia Business Report\" and \"Sport Today\" are aired at the back of the first three hours of \"Newsday\". But Newsday changed to 23:00\u201302:00 on BBC News a year later meaning Mike Embley presents Tuesday-Friday \"BBC World News\" 23:00\u201302:00 with Kasia Madera on Saturdays and Daniela Ritorto 00:00\u201306:00 Sunday, 02:00\u201305:00 Friday/Monday.\n\"BBC World News\" and \"World Business Report\" air at 05:00. This was previously known as \"The World Today\", However, since November 2017 this was rebranded as \"The Briefing\" and \"Business Briefing\" on both channels and in lieu of commercials seen on the international broadcasts, the presenters gave a brief update on UK news for domestic audiences.\nIn June 2015, BBC News began simulcasting \"Outside Source with Ros Atkins\" on Mondays-Thursday at (during major stories 18:00) / at 21:00 and a new edition of \"World News Today\" Friday-Sunday at (during major stories Monday-Friday 19:00) 21:00. Since January 2017, they began simulcasting \"Beyond 100 Days\" (previously '100 Days\" and \"100 Days +) Monday to Thursday at 19:00, presented from London and Washington. During August, \"Beyond 100 Days\" is replaced by another edition of \"World News Today\".\nOn 26 May 2022, as part of planned cuts and streamlining to create a \"digital first\" broadcaster, the BBC announced plans to consolidate the BBC News and BBC World News networks into a single service under the \"BBC News\" name. The merged service was slated to launch in April 2023, with the BBC stating that it would offer \"new flagship programmes built around high-profile journalists, and programmes commissioned for multiple platforms\". The international version of the BBC News channel remains an advertising-supported service distributed by the corporation's commercial arm, BBC Studios. The domestic channel may opt out from the shared schedule to provide coverage of UK-specific breaking news, and would continue to carry UK-specific programmes (such as simulcasts of BBC One bulletins and \"Newsnight\") that are not cleared by the international channel.\nBy the end of 2022, sharing had extended to 23:00\u201306:00 UK time, BBC News and BBC World News simulcast for the first 25 minutes of each hour with world news shown all through the simulcasts. In addition, the 10:00 hour on weekdays was simulcast and at the weekend, simulcasts run throughout the morning UK-time. The two channels also simulcast between 19:00 and 22:00. UK-specific rolling coverage had, by now, been restricted to daytime hours.\nAs of Wednesday 15 January 2025, The UK feed has begun to simulcast the international feed from the hours of 05:00 to 13:00 BST until it breaks away for BBC News at One and the 13:30 Sportsday edition. UK Viewers are now able to watch the 06:30 and 07:30 editions of Business Today which were formally shown on the international feed only. The international feed breaks away at 10:30 BST to show HardTalk. At 17:30 BST Focus on Africa is shown whilst the UK feed stays with Verified Live. On occasions where there is a significant global story or if there is a delay to the network bulletin, the channel simulcasts the 18:00 editions of The World Today and the 22:00 editions of World News America, instead of BBC News at Ten and BBC News at Six. It is mentioned that in the case of major UK breaking news BBC Breakfast would be simulcast.\nSports.\nSince 5 March 2012, sports bulletins come from the \"BBC Sport Centre\" in MediaCityUK in Salford Quays, where the sports network BBC Radio 5 Live is also based.\nHeadlines are usually provided at 15 minutes past the hour with a full bulletin after the bottom-of-the-hour headlines. There are also extended sports bulletins per day, entitled \"Sportsday\" or \"Sport Today\" (when simulcasting with BBC World News) broadcast at 00:45, 01:45, 02:45, 03:45, 13:30, 18:30, 19:30 (weekends only), 22:30 (weekdays only). Each bulletin is read by a single sports presenter, with the exception of Saturday \"Sportsday\", which is double headed.\nThe channel's sports bulletins (internally known as Sport 24) have always had a separate, dedicated production gallery, which is also responsible for the graphics.\nBulletins during \"BBC Breakfast\" are presented by Sally Nugent or Mike Bushell, with the latter also appearing on other sports bulletins on the channel. As of March\u00a02019[ [update]] the main sports presenters on the channel are Olly Foster, Gavin Ramjaun, Katie Gornall, Chetan Pathak, Katherine Downes, Tulsen Tollett, Lizzie Greenwood-Hughes and John Watson.\nUntil March 2012, bulletins came from the News Channel studio at the quarter to the hour. Presenters for bulletins on the channel have included: Reshmin Chowdhury, Amanda Davies, Sean Fletcher, Matt Gooderick, Celina Hinchcliffe, Rachael Hodges, Damian Johnson, Adnan Nawaz and Olympic gold medallist turned journalist Matthew Pinsent.\nBusiness.\nBefore BBC News moved to Broadcasting House, an hourly business update was included during the weekday schedule from the BBC Business Unit. There were two shifts, from 08:30 to 14:00 and 14:00 to 23:00, presented by Penny Haslam, Maryam Moshiri, Ben Thompson, Adam Parsons, Susannah Streeter, Joe Lynam, Sara Coburn or Sally Eden. News Channel updates were usually broadcast at 40 minutes past the hour between 08:00 and 23:00. The 21:40 round-up was often earlier and the 22:40 bulletin is an extended round-up of the day's business news. Until May 2009, the business updates on the BBC News Channel were broadcast from one of the London Stock Exchange's studios in central London. From then until March 2013 the bulletins were provided from the channel's studio at BBC Television Centre. The business updates were axed in March 2013 as part of the BBC's Delivering Quality First plan. But after complaints returned in November 2013.\nStock market updates now only appear during the quarter-to-the-hour headlines. Rachel Horne is the main presenter from 13:30 to 18:00, with Vishala Sri-Pathma, Alice Baxter, Jamie Robertson, Aaron Heslehurst and Sally Bundock. There is normally an extended bulletin at 16:45 when the main business stories of the day are discussed on \"Afternoon Live\". Bundock and Thompson present \"Business Live\" on weekdays at 08:30. Declan Curry presented \"Your Money\", a weekly round-up on a Saturday morning.\nAlice Baxter and Sally Bundock presented \"World Business Report\".\nPresentation.\nGraphics.\nThe channel was criticised at launch for its style of presentation, with accusations of it being less authoritative than the BBC One news bulletins, with presenters appearing on-screen without jackets. Jenny Abramsky had originally planned to have a television version of the informal news radio channel BBC Radio 5 Live, or a TV version of Radio 4 News FM both of which she had run. The bright design of the set was also blamed for this \u2013 one insider reportedly described it as a \"car crash in a shower\" \u2013 and was subject to the network relaunch on 25 October 1999. The channel swapped studios with sister channel BBC World, moving to studio N8 within the newsroom, where it remained until 2008. New music and title sequences accompanied this set change, following the look of newly relaunched BBC One bulletins.\nGraphics and titles were developed by the Lambie-Nairn design agency and were gradually rolled out across the whole of BBC News, including a similar design for regional news starting with \"Newsroom South East\" and the three 'BBC Nations' \u2013 Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The similarity of main BBC News output was intended to increase the credibility of the channel as well as aiding cross-channel promotion.\nA graphics relaunch in January 2007 saw the channel updated, with redesigned headline straplines, a redesigned 'digital on-screen graphic' and repositioned clock. The clock was originally placed to the left hand side of the channel name though following complaints that this could only be viewed in widescreen, it was moved to the right in February 2007. Bulletins on BBC World News and BBC One also introduced similar graphics and title sequences on the same day.\nIn 2008, the graphics were again relaunched, using the style introduced in 2007 and a new colour scheme. The typeface of the on-screen text was changed from Helvetica to Gill Sans.\nIn 2013 the graphics were changed again, to coincide with the move to New Broadcasting House. The typeface was changed back to Helvetica.\nThese were updated again in July 2019 when the BBC redesigned its on-air look with the growth of television viewing on smartphones and tablets. These included again redesigned, larger headline straplines sharply contrasting with the background (drawing criticism for obscuring content) using the BBC Reith typeface with larger text. Despite this, the 2008 titles and music continue to be used for the updated local titles.\nThe Lambert Report.\nThe Lambert Report into the channel's performance in 2002 called upon News 24 to develop a better brand of its own, to allow viewers to differentiate between itself and similar channels such as Sky News. As a direct result of this, a brand new style across all presentation for the channel launched on 8 December 2003 at 09:00. Philip Hayton and Anna Jones were the first two presenters on the set, the relaunch of which had been put back a week due to previous power disruptions at Television Centre where the channel was based. The new designs also featured a dynamic set of titles for the channel; the globe would begin spinning from where the main story was taking place, while the headline scrolled around in a ribbon; this was occasionally replaced by the BBC News logo. The titles concluded with a red globe surrounded by a red stylised clamshell and BBC News ribbons forming above the BBC News logo.\nBulletins on BBC One moved into a new set in January 2003 although retained the previous ivory Lambie-Nairn titles until February 2004. News 24 updated the title colours slightly to match those of BBC One bulletins in time for the 50th anniversary of BBC television news on 5 July 2004.\nCountdown sequence.\nAn important part of the channel's presentation since launch has been the top of the hour countdown sequence, since there is no presentation system with continuity announcers so the countdown provides a link to the beginning of the next hour. A similar musical device is used on BBC Radio 5 Live, and mirrors the pips on BBC Radio 4.\nPrevious styles have included a series of fictional flags set to music between 1997 and 1999 before the major relaunch, incorporating the new contemporary music composed by David Lowe, and graphics developed by Lambie-Nairn. Various images, originally ivory numbers fully animated against a deep red background, were designed to fit the pace of the channel, and the music soon gained notoriety, and was often satirised and parodied in popular culture. Images of life around the UK were added in replacement later with the same music, together with footage of the newsroom and exterior of Television Centre. The 2003 relaunch saw a small change to this style with less of a metropolitan feel to the footage.\nA new sequence was introduced on 28 March 2005, designed and created by Red Bee Media and directed by Mark Chaudoir. The full version ran for 60 seconds, though only around 30 seconds were usually shown on air. The music was revised completely but the biggest change came in the footage used \u2013 reflecting the methods and nature of newsgathering, while a strong emphasis was placed on the BBC logo itself. Satellite dishes are shown transmitting and receiving red \"data streams\". In production of the countdown sequence, Clive Norman filmed images around the United Kingdom, Richard Jopson in the United States, while BBC News camerapeople filmed images from Iraq, Beijing (Tiananmen Square), Bund of Shanghai, Africa, as well as areas affected by the 2004 Asian tsunami and others.\nThe sequence has since seen several remixes to the music and a change in visuals to focus more on the well-known journalists, with less footage of camera crews and production teams. Changes have also seen the channel logo included during the sequences and at the end, as well as the fonts used for the time. The conclusion of the countdown was altered in 2008 to feature the new presentation style, rather than a data stream moving in towards the camera. Also in 2008, the graphic for the countdown changed, resembling the BBC One Rhythm and Movement idents, due to the logo being in a red square in the bottom left corner.\nTo coincide with the move of BBC News to Broadcasting House, on 18 March 2013 the countdown was updated again along with several other presentation elements. Three of the most striking features of the new countdown include music performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra, a redesign of the \"data streams\" and the ending of the sequence no longer fading to the BBC News globe and logo, but instead stopping with a time-lapse shot outside the corporation's headquarters. The countdown was also extended to 87 seconds, which was fully shown before the first hour from Broadcasting House. In 2019, the countdown started using the BBC's new Reith font but otherwise retained the same style.\nA full three-minute version of the countdown music was made available on BBC News Online and David Lowe's own website after a remix on 16May 2006.\nAn international version of the countdown was launched on BBC World News on 5 September 2005 featuring more international content and similar music. Various changes have been made to the music and visuals since then, with presentation following the style of BBC News. The visuals in the sequence were updated on 10 May 2010. In June 2011, further imagery was added relating to recent events, including the conflict in Libya and views of outside 10 Downing Street. In January 2013, as part of the relocation of BBC News to Broadcasting House in Central London, BBC World News received a new countdown in the same style as the BBC News Channel's updated countdown, with some minor differences.\nIn April 2021, a new \"sombre\" version of the countdown was played, with no \"data streams\" and slower shots of places within the UK, or in the case of the international version, timelapse shots across the world. Both were introduced to run up to programmes immediately following the death of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, and were used again following the death of Queen Elizabeth II in 2022.\nTo coincide with the integration of BBC World News into BBC News, the countdown sequence was slightly refreshed in April 2023 to follow the new \"Chameleon\" branding scheme used by BBC television since October 2021, with the countdown now centred between the BBC and \"News\" wordmarks at the top- and bottom-centre of the screen respectively.\nViewing audience figures.\nThe Daily Telegraph reported in November 2021, \"BBC News reaches 370,000 for its best performing slots\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4622", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4622", "title": "Bill Oddie", "text": "English conservationist, entertainer and ornithologist (born 1941)\nWilliam Edgar Oddie (born 7 July 1941) is an English actor, artist, birder, comedian, conservationist, musician, songwriter, television presenter and writer. He was a member of comedy trio The Goodies.\nA birder since his childhood in Quinton, Birmingham, Oddie has established a reputation as a naturalist, conservationist, and television presenter on wildlife issues. Some of his books are illustrated with his own paintings and drawings. His wildlife programmes for the BBC include \"Springwatch\" and \"Autumnwatch\", \"How to Watch Wildlife\", \"Wild in Your Garden\", \"Birding with Bill Oddie\", \"Britain Goes Wild with Bill Oddie\" and \"Bill Oddie Goes Wild\".\nEarly life.\nOddie was born on 7 July 1941 in Rochdale, Lancashire, but moved to Birmingham at a young age. He was raised by his father, Harry Oddie, and grandmother, Emily. His father was assistant chief accountant at the Midlands Electricity Board. His mother, Lilian, was diagnosed with schizophrenia and, during most of his youth, was hospitalised at the Barnsley Hall Hospital psychiatric facility. He was educated at Lapal Primary School, Halesowen Grammar School (now The Earls High School, Halesowen) and King Edward's School, Birmingham, an all-boys direct grant school, where he captained the school's rugby union team. He then studied English literature at Pembroke College, Cambridge.\nCareer.\nComedy.\nWhilst at Cambridge University Oddie appeared in several Footlights Club productions. One of these, a revue called \"A Clump of Plinths\", was so successful at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe that it was renamed \"Cambridge Circus\" and transferred to the West End in London, then to New Zealand, and to Broadway in September 1964. Meanwhile, still at Cambridge, Oddie wrote scripts for and appeared briefly in TV's \"That Was the Week That Was\".\nHe appeared in Bernard Braden's television series \"On The Braden Beat\" in 1964. Subsequently, he was a key member of the performers in the BBC radio series \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\", where many of his musical compositions were featured. Some were released on the album \"Distinctly Oddie\" (Polydor, 1967). He was one of the first performers to parody a rock song, arranging the traditional Yorkshire folk song \"On Ilkla Moor Baht'at\" in the style of Joe Cocker's hit rendition of the Beatles' \"With a Little Help from My Friends\" (released on John Peel's Dandelion Records in 1970 and featured in Peel's special box of most-treasured singles), and singing \"Andy Pandy\" in the style of a brassy soul number such as Wilson Pickett or Geno Washington might perform. In many shows he would do short impressions of Hughie Green.\nOn television Oddie was co-writer and performer in the comedy series \"Twice a Fortnight\" with Graeme Garden, Terry Jones, Michael Palin and Jonathan Lynn. Later he was co-writer and performer in the comedy series \"Broaden Your Mind\" with Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden, for which he became a cast member for the second series.\nOddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden then co-wrote and appeared in their television comedy series \"The Goodies\" (1970\u20131982). The Goodies also released records, including \"Father Christmas Do Not Touch Me\"/\"The In-Betweenies\", \"The Funky Gibbon\" (co-written by Oddie with Dave MacRae) and \"Black Pudding Bertha\", which were hit singles in 1974\u201375. They reformed, briefly, in 2005 for a successful 13-date tour of Australia.\nOddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden voiced characters on the 1983 animated children's programme \"Bananaman\".\nIn the Amnesty International show \"A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick)\", Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden sang their hit song \"Funky Gibbon\". They also appeared on \"Top of the Pops\" with the song. Together with Garden (who is a qualified medical doctor), Oddie co-wrote many episodes of the television comedy series \"Doctor in the House\", including most of the first season and all of the second season. He has occasionally appeared on the BBC Radio 4 panel game \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", on which Garden is and Brooke-Taylor was a regular panellist. In 1982 Garden and Oddie wrote, but did not perform in, a six-part science-fiction sitcom called \"Astronauts\" for Central and ITV. The show was set in an international space station in the near future.\nNatural history.\nOddie's first published work was an article about the birdlife of Birmingham's Bartley Reservoir in the West Midland Bird Club's 1962 Annual Report. (He is first credited in the 1956 report, in which reports of his bird observations are tagged with his initials \"WEO\".) He has since written a number of books about birds and birdwatching as well as articles for many specialist publications including \"British Birds\", \"Birdwatching Magazine\" and \"Birdwatch\".\nHe discussed bird-song recordings with Derek Jones in an August 1973 BBC Radio 4 programme called \"Sounds Natural\".\nIn the autumn of 1976, Oddie was involved in the successful identification of Britain's first-ever recorded Pallas's reed bunting on Fair Isle, Shetland.\nOne of Oddie's first forays into the world of television natural history was as a guest on \"Animal Magic\" in December 1977. Another early natural history radio appearance was in October 1978, as the guest on Radio 4's \"Through My Window\", discussing the birds of Hampstead Heath.\nOn 30 July 1985, he was the subject of a 50-minute \"Nature Watch Special: Bill Oddie\u00a0\u2013 Bird Watcher\", in which he was interviewed by Julian Pettifer at places where he had spent time birding, including Bartley Reservoir, the Christopher Cadbury Wetland Reserve at Upton Warren, RSPB Titchwell Marsh and Blakeney Point.\nOddie has since that time hosted a number of successful nature programmes for the BBC, many produced by Stephen Moss, including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe first broadcast, in 2004, of \"Britain Goes Wild\" set a record for its timeslot of 8\u00a0pm on BBC Two of 3.4\u00a0million viewers, one million more than the Channel 4 programme showing at that time. \"Britain Goes Wild\", renamed \"Springwatch\" the following year, became a wildlife broadcasting phenomenon, attracting over 4\u00a0million viewers.\nHe became president of the West Midland Bird Club in 1999, having been vice-president since 1991, and is a former member of the council of the RSPB. Oddie is also a President of the League Against Cruel Sports and a vice-president of the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers. He practised as a bird ringer but allowed his licence to lapse.\nIn 2003, Oddie set up a half-marathon to raise money for various wildlife charities in his birth town of Rochdale.\nIn 2011, Oddie featured as an investigator in \"Snares Uncovered: killers in the countryside\". The film was an expos\u00e9 of snaring in Scotland and was commissioned by the animal protection charity OneKind.\nMusic.\nOddie wrote original music at Cambridge University for the Footlights and later wrote comic songs for \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\". He also wrote a number of comic songs for The Goodies, most of which he also performed.\nIn the 1960s and early 1970s, Oddie released a number of singles and at least one album. One of the former, issued in 1970 on John Peel's Dandelion Records label (Catalogue No: 4786), was \"On Ilkla Moor Baht 'at\", performed in the style of Joe Cocker's \"With a Little Help from My Friends\". The B-side, \"Harry Krishna\", featured the Hare Krishna chant, substituting the names of contemporary famous people called Harry, including Harry Secombe, Harry Worth, Harry Lauder and Harry Corbett, as well as puns such as \"Harry [Hurry] along now\" and \"Harrystotle [Aristotle]\" and ending with \"Harry-ly [I really] must go now\". Both tracks appear on the compilation CD \"Life Too, Has Surface Noise: The Complete Dandelion Records Singles Collection 1969\u20131972\" (2007). In 1966 he was credited as the vocalist with Spencer's Washboard Kings on \"Five Feet Two\" (Rayrick LCR1001a). The vocalist on the B-side of this 45rpm single, \"If You Knew Susie\", was Jean Hart, Oddie's future wife.\nHe played the drums and saxophone and appeared as Cousin Kevin in a production of The Who's rock opera \"Tommy\" by London Symphonic Orchestra and English Chamber Choir at the Rainbow Theatre, Finsbury Park, London, on 13 and 14 December 1973. He has also contributed vocals to a Rick Wakeman album, \"Criminal Record\".\nHe recorded a single, \"Superspike\", with John Cleese and a group of UK athletes, billed the \"Superspike Squad\", to fund the latter's attendance at the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal. He co-produced the record with Stephen Shane.\nIn 1986 Oddie took part in the English National Opera production of the Gilbert and Sullivan comic opera \"The Mikado\", in which he appeared in the role of the Lord High Executioner, taking over the role from Eric Idle. During the early 1990s Oddie was a DJ for London-based jazz radio station 102.2 Jazz FM.\nIn 2007, Oddie appeared on the BBC series \"Play It Again\". In the episode he attempts to realise his dream of becoming a rock guitarist. Initially teacher Bridget Mermikides tries to teach him using traditional methods but he rebels: instead he turns to old friends Albert Lee, Dave Davies (of The Kinks) and Mark Knopfler for advice and strikes out on his own. He succeeds in the target of playing lead guitar for his daughter Rosie's band at her 21st birthday party and even manages to impress his erstwhile teacher.\nIn November 2010, he agreed, along with fellow members of The Goodies, to rerelease their 1970s hit \"The Funky Gibbon\" to raise funds for the International Primate Protection League's Save the Gibbon appeal.\nOther television and voice work.\nOddie appeared as the hapless window cleaner in the Eric Sykes' comedy story \"The Plank\" in 1967. He also presented the live children's Saturday morning entertainment show \"Saturday Banana\" (ITV/Southern Television) during the late 1970s. In the late 1980s he was a presenter of the BBC TV show \"Fax\" (a show about 'facts').\nIn 1981, he appeared as a Telethon celebrity in New Zealand, hosted by TV1. He voices Asterix in the UK dub of the 1989 animated film \"Asterix and the Big Fight\" (an animated adaptation of the books \"Asterix and the Big Fight\" and \"Asterix and the Soothsayer\", novelized as \"Operation Getafix\").\nIn 1992, he was a guest star in the US comedy television series \"Married... with Children\" for a three-part episode set in England.\nHe voiced the chimney sweep in the 1996 film \"The Willows in Winter\".\nIn 1997 and 1998, he appeared on the Channel 4 archaeological programme \"Time Team\", as the team excavated a Roman villa site in Turkdean, Gloucestershire.\nHe was the comp\u00e8re of a daytime BBC gameshow \"History Hunt\" (in 2003); and has appeared in the \"Doctor Who\" audio drama \"Doctor Who and the Pirates\". In 2004, he appeared on the first ever episode of the BBC series \"Who Do You Think You Are?\", in which he looked into his ancestry: he was visibly moved by its revelations. In 2005, he took part in \"Rolf on Art \u2013 the big event at Trafalgar Square\" and in September that year was also a celebrity guest along with Lynda Bellingham on the ITV1 programme \"Who Wants to Be a Millionaire\". He also gave opinions on 100 greatest cartoons on Channel 4 that year, talking about \"Tom and Jerry\" and cartoon incidents such as the \"Asses of Fire skit\" in \"\".\nIn 2006, Oddie appeared in the BBC show \"Never Mind the Buzzcocks\", and also appeared on the topical quiz show \"8 out of 10 Cats\". He was also the voice behind many B&amp;Q adverts throughout 2006/2007. On 25 May 2007, Oddie made a cameo appearance on Ronni Ancona's new comedy sketch show, \"Ronni Ancona &amp; Co\".\nAlso in 2007, three artists each painted a portrait of Oddie, as part of the BBC programme \"Star Portraits with Rolf Harris\". One of the artists, Mark Roscoe, later revealed a dislike of Oddie, claiming to have included hidden insults in his work.\nHe hosted the genealogy-based series \"My Famous Family\", broadcast on UKTV History in 2007. In 2008, Oddie was a guest on Jamie Oliver's television special \"Jamie's Fowl Dinners\", talking about free-range chickens.\nHe also appeared on \"Would I Lie To You?\" in 2011, where he revealed that he was saved from drowning by Freddy from popular children's series \"Rainbow\" and \"Rod, Jane and Freddy\" while on holiday in the Seychelles.\nIn February 2015, Oddie appeared in \"The Keith Lemon Sketch Show\" as the narrator of the sketch \"Ed Sheeran Watch\".\nHe appeared as a contestant on a celebrity edition of \"Fifteen to One\" in August 2015 and the following month he appeared on \"Through the Keyhole\".\nHe has appeared three times on the programme \"Pointless Celebrities\", the most recent appearance being in 2016.\nIn 2017, he appeared in three episodes of \"The Real Marigold Hotel\".\nIn 2018, he featured on the programme \"The Two Ronnies: In Their Own Words\". In 2019, he appeared on the show \"\".\nIn 2020, Oddie appeared in the documentary \"Celebrity Britain by Barge: Then &amp; Now\".\n2013 Australian tour.\nOddie undertook an Australian tour during June 2013 in all of the mainland states capital cities \u2013 Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth \u2013 in a series of one-off shows, \"An Oldie but a Goodie\". A video message from Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden was shown during the performances. Oddie made personal appearances on both \"The Project\" and \"Adam Hills Tonight\" TV shows during the tour; he also filmed a guest-programming spot for the ABC-TV's all-night music video show \"Rage\".\nPersonal life.\nFamily.\nIn 1966, Oddie married Jeanne Hart, and from this marriage he has two daughters, one of whom is the actress Kate Hardie. The couple later divorced.\nIn 1983, Oddie married Laura Beaumont-Giles. The couple have worked on a variety of projects for children, including film scripts, drama and comedy series, puppet shows and books. They have a daughter, Rosie, born in October 1985, and live in Hampstead, North West London. Rosie Oddie is a musician, also using the name Rosie Bones.\nMental health.\nOddie had experienced depression for most of his life before being diagnosed with clinical depression in 2001. In March 2009 he was reportedly admitted to Capio Nightingale psychiatric hospital in Marylebone for treatment. His then agent, David Foster, said: \"Bill gets these bouts every two or three years where he gets down for about two weeks and recovers. He sometimes goes into hospital or takes a break or has a change of scenery to recharge his batteries.\" In January 2010 Oddie spoke to the media, revealing that he had two separate stays in different hospitals, only being discharged \"in time for Christmas\". He said that he was dealing with depression and bipolar disorder, describing the period as \"probably the worst 12 months of my life\". Oddie stated that he was planning to meet BBC executives to discuss his return to television work.\nHis illness meant that Oddie did not appear in the 2009 and 2010 series of \"Springwatch\", although he made a guest appearance in the penultimate episode of the latter. He subsequently said he was dismissed from \"Springwatch\" and that this had caused the depressive illness.\nOddie presented the BBC Radio 4 Appeal programme on 10 August 2014 on behalf of the charity Bipolar UK. He revealed that as a consequence of his bipolar disorder he had attempted suicide during one of his depressive episodes. On the UK TV programme \"Who Do You Think You Are?\" he attributed his depression and bipolar disorder as an adult to his minimal and painful relationship with his mother.\nPolitical views.\nOddie supports the Green Party. In October 2014, on the BBC's \"Sunday Morning Live\", he stated that he wanted a limit on the number of children that British families can have, saying that he was \"very often ashamed\" to be British, calling them \"a terrible race\".\nHonours.\nIn 2002, Oddie became the third person to decline to appear on \"This Is Your Life\" but changed his mind a few hours later. On 16 October 2003 Oddie was made an OBE for his service to wildlife conservation in a ceremony at Buckingham Palace. He wore a camouflage shirt and crumpled jacket to receive his medal. In June 2004 Oddie and Johnny Morris were jointly profiled in the first of a three-part BBC Two series \"The Way We Went Wild\", about television wildlife presenters. In May 2005 he received the British Naturalists' Association's Peter Scott Memorial Award, from BNA president David Bellamy, \"in recognition of his great contribution to our understanding of natural history and conservation.\" He is a recipient of the RSPB Medal.\nOn 30 June 2009, he was proposed for inclusion in the Birmingham Walk of Stars, with the public invited to vote.\nBibliography.\nBill Oddie also co-wrote the Springwatch &amp; Autumnwatch book with Kate Humble and Simon King.\nCo-written with the other members of The Goodies:\nCo-written with Laura Beaumont:\nIn popular culture.\nIn the fictional world of comedy character Alan Partridge, Oddie is an unseen presence in Alan's life, buying him dressing gowns for Christmas and being part of a radicalised RSPB. He has also been referenced, often humorously, by the hosts of \"Top Gear\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4623", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4623", "title": "Britain and Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "4626", "revid": "45371308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4626", "title": "Broadway (Manhattan)", "text": "North-south avenue in New York\nBroadway () is a street and major thoroughfare in the U.S. state of New York. The street runs from Battery Place at Bowling Green in the south of Manhattan for through the borough, over the Broadway Bridge, and through the Bronx, exiting north from New York City to run an additional through the Westchester County municipalities of Yonkers, Hastings-on-Hudson, Dobbs Ferry, Irvington, Tarrytown, and Sleepy Hollow, after which the road continues, but is no longer called \"Broadway\". The latter portion of Broadway north of the George Washington Bridge/I-95 underpass comprises a portion of U.S. Route 9.\nIt is the oldest north\u2013south main thoroughfare in New York City, with much of the current street said to have begun as the Wickquasgeck trail before the arrival of Europeans. This then formed the basis for one of the primary thoroughfares of the Dutch New Amsterdam colony, which continued under British rule, although most of it did not bear its current name until the late 19th century. Some portions of Broadway in Manhattan are interrupted for continuous vehicle traffic, including Times Square, Herald Square, and Union Square, and instead used as pedestrian-only plazas. South of Columbus Circle, the road is one-way going southbound.\nBroadway in Manhattan is known widely as the heart of the American commercial theatrical industry, and is used as a metonym for it, as well as in the names of alternative theatrical ventures such as off-Broadway and off-off-Broadway.\nHistory.\nColonial history.\nBroadway was originally the Wickquasgeck trail, carved into the brush of Manhattan by its Native American inhabitants. This trail originally snaked through swamps and rocks along the length of Manhattan Island.\nUpon the arrival of the Dutch, the trail was widened and soon became the main road through the island from \"Nieuw Amsterdam\" at the southern tip. The Dutch explorer and entrepreneur David Pietersz. de Vries gives the first mention of it in his journal for the year 1642 (\"the Wickquasgeck Road over which the Indians passed daily\"). The Dutch called it the \"Heeren Wegh\" or \"Heeren Straat\", meaning \"Gentlemen's Way\" or \"Gentlemen's Street\" \u2013 echoing the name of a similar street in Amsterdam \u2013 or \"High Street\" or \"the Highway\"; it was renamed \"Broadway\" after the British took over the city, because of its unusual width. Although currently the name of the street is simply \"Broadway\", in a 1776 map of New York City, it is labeled as \"Broadway Street\".\n18th century.\nIn the 18th century, Broadway ended at the town commons north of Wall Street. The part of Broadway in what is now Lower Manhattan was initially known as Great George Street. Traffic continued up the East Side of the island via Eastern Post Road and the West Side via Bloomingdale Road, which opened in 1703, continued up to 117th Street and contributed to the development of the modern Upper West Side into an upscale area with mansions.\nIn her 1832 book \"Domestic Manners of the Americans\", Fanny Trollope wrote of her impressions of New York City in general and of Broadway in particular:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This noble street may vie with any I ever saw, for its length and breadth, its handsome shops, neat awnings, excellent \"trottoir\", and well-dressed pedestrians. It has not the crowded glitter of Bond Street equipages, nor the gorgeous fronted palaces of Regent Street; but it is magnificent in its extent, and ornamented by several handsome buildings, some of them surrounded by grass and trees.\n19th century.\nIn 1868, Bloomingdale Road between 59th Street (at the Grand Circle, now Columbus Circle) and 155th Streets would be paved and widened, becoming an avenue with landscaped medians. It was called \"Western Boulevard\" or \"The Boulevard\". An 1897 official map of the city shows a segment of what is now Broadway as \"Kingsbridge Road\" in the vicinity of Washington Heights.\nOn February 14, 1899, the name \"Broadway\" was extended to the entire Broadway / Bloomingdale / Boulevard / Kingsbridge complex.\n20th century.\nIn the 20th century, a 30-block stretch of Broadway, extending mainly between Times Square at 42nd Street and Sherman Square at 72nd Street, formed part of Manhattan's \"Automobile Row\". Before the first decade of the 20th century, the area was occupied mostly by equestrian industries and was \"thoroughly lifeless\", but by 1907, \"The New York Times\" characterized this section of Broadway as having \"almost a solid line of motor vehicle signs all the way from Times Square to Sherman Square\". In the late 1900s and early 1910s, several large automobile showrooms, stores, and garages were built on Broadway, including the U.S. Rubber Company Building at 58th Street, the B.F. Goodrich showroom at 1780 Broadway (between 58th and 57th Streets), the Fisk Building at 250 West 57th Street, and the Demarest and Peerless Buildings at 224 West 57th Street.\nBroadway once was a two-way street for its entire length. The present status, in which it runs one-way southbound south of Columbus Circle (59th Street), came about in several stages. On June 6, 1954, Seventh Avenue became southbound and Eighth Avenue became northbound south of Broadway. None of Broadway became one-way, but the increased southbound traffic between Columbus Circle (Eighth Avenue) and Times Square (Seventh Avenue) caused the city to re-stripe that section of Broadway for four southbound and two northbound lanes. Broadway became one-way from Columbus Circle south to Herald Square (34th Street) on March 10, 1957, in conjunction with Sixth Avenue becoming one-way from Herald Square north to 59th Street and Seventh Avenue becoming one-way from 59th Street south to Times Square (where it crosses Broadway). On June 3, 1962, Broadway became one-way south of Canal Street, with Trinity Place and Church Street carrying northbound traffic.\nAnother change was made on November 10, 1963, when Broadway became one-way southbound from Herald Square to Madison Square (23rd Street) and Union Square (14th Street) to Canal Street, and two routes \u2013 Sixth Avenue south of Herald Square and Centre Street, Lafayette Street, and Fourth Avenue south of Union Square \u2013 became one-way northbound. Finally, at the same time as Madison Avenue became one-way northbound and Fifth Avenue became one-way southbound, Broadway was made one-way southbound between Madison Square (where Fifth Avenue crosses) and Union Square on January 14, 1966, completing its conversion south of Columbus Circle.\n21st century.\nIn 2001, a one-block section of Broadway between 72nd Street and 73rd Street at Verdi Square was reconfigured. Its easternmost lanes, which formerly hosted northbound traffic, were turned into a public park when a new subway entrance for the 72nd Street station was built in the exact location of these lanes. Northbound traffic on Broadway is now channeled onto Amsterdam Avenue to 73rd Street, makes a left turn on the three-lane 73rd Street, and then a right turn on Broadway shortly afterward.\nIn August 2008, two traffic lanes from 42nd to 35th Streets were taken out of service and converted to public plazas. Bike lanes were added on Broadway from 42nd Street to Union Square.\nSince May 2009, the portions of Broadway through Duffy Square, Times Square, and Herald Square have been closed entirely to automobile traffic, except for cross traffic on the Streets and Avenues, as part of a traffic and pedestrianization experiment, with the pavement reserved exclusively for walkers, cyclists, and those lounging in temporary seating placed by the city. The city decided that the experiment was successful, and decided to make the change permanent in February 2010. Though the anticipated benefits to traffic flow were not as large as hoped, pedestrian injuries dropped dramatically and foot traffic increased in the designated areas; the project was popular with both residents and businesses. The current portions converted into pedestrian plazas are between West 47th and 42nd Streets within Times and Duffy Squares, and between West 35th and 33rd Streets in the Herald Square area. Additionally, portions of Broadway in Madison Square and Union Square have been dramatically narrowed, allowing ample pedestrian plazas to exist along the side of the road.\n2010s.\nA terrorist attempted to set off a bomb on Broadway in Times Square on May 1, 2010. The attempted bomber was sentenced to life in prison.\nIn May 2013, the NYCDOT decided to redesign Broadway between 35th and 42nd Streets for the second time in five years, owing to poor connections between pedestrian plazas and decreased vehicular traffic. With the new redesign, the bike lane is now on the right side of the street; it was formerly on the left side adjacent to the pedestrian plazas, causing conflicts between pedestrian and bicycle traffic.\nIn spring 2017, as part of a capital reconstruction of Worth Square, Broadway between 24th and 25th Streets was converted to a shared street, where through vehicles are banned and delivery vehicles are restricted to . Delivery vehicles go northbound from Fifth Avenue to 25th Street for that one block, reversing the direction of traffic and preventing vehicles from going south on Broadway south of 25th Street. The capital project expands on a 2008 initiative where part of the intersection of Broadway and Fifth Avenue was repurposed into a public plaza, simplifying that intersection. As part of the 2017 project, Worth Square was expanded, converting the adjoining block of Broadway into a \"shared street\".\nIn September 2019, the pedestrian space in the Herald Square area was expanded between 33rd and 32nd Streets alongside Greeley Square. Five blocks of Broadway\u2014from 50th to 48th, 39th to 39th, and 23rd to 21st Street\u2014were converted into shared streets in late 2021. The block between 40th and 39th Streets, known as Golda Meir Square, was closed to vehicular traffic at that time. \n2020s.\nDuring 2020, the section from 31st to 25th Street was converted to a temporary pedestrian-only street called NoMad Piazza as part of the New York City Department of Transportation's Open Streets program. Following the success of the pedestrian-only street, the Flatiron/23rd Street Partnership BID closed the section between 25th and 27th Streets to vehicular traffic again during 2021 and 2022.\nCity officials announced in March 2023 that the section of Broadway between 32nd and 21st Streets would be redesigned as part of a project called Broadway Vision. The section between 32nd and 25th Streets would receive a bidirectional bike lane and would be converted to a shared street. Cars would be banned permanently from 27th to 25th Street. That work was finished the same July. In March 2024, the DOT announced plans to convert the section between 17th and 21st Streets into a shared street.\nRoute description.\nBroadway runs the length of Manhattan Island, roughly parallel to the North River (the portion of the Hudson River bordering Manhattan), from Bowling Green at the south to Inwood at the northern tip of the island. South of Columbus Circle, it is a one-way southbound street. Since 2009, vehicular traffic has been banned at Times Square between 47th and 42nd Streets, and at Herald Square between 35th and 33rd Streets as part of a pilot program; the right-of-way is intact and reserved for cyclists and pedestrians. From the northern shore of Manhattan, Broadway crosses Spuyten Duyvil Creek via the Broadway Bridge and continues through Marble Hill (a discontiguous portion of the borough of Manhattan) and the Bronx into Westchester County. U.S. 9 continues to be known as Broadway until its junction with NY 117.\nLower Manhattan.\nThe section of lower Broadway from its origin at Bowling Green to City Hall Park is the historical location for the city's ticker-tape parades, and is sometimes called the \"Canyon of Heroes\" during such events. West of Broadway, as far as Canal Street, was the city's fashionable residential area until c.\u20091825; landfill has more than tripled the area, and the Hudson River shore now lies far to the west, beyond Tribeca and Battery Park City.\nBroadway marks the boundary between Greenwich Village to the west and the East Village to the east, passing Astor Place. It is a short walk from there to New York University near Washington Square Park, which is at the foot of Fifth Avenue. A bend in front of Grace Church allegedly avoids an earlier tavern; from 10th Street it begins its long diagonal course across Manhattan, headed almost due north.\nMidtown Manhattan.\nBecause Broadway preceded the grid that the Commissioners' Plan of 1811 imposed on the island, Broadway crosses midtown Manhattan diagonally, intersecting with both the east\u2013west streets and north\u2013south avenues. Broadway's intersections with avenues, marked by \"squares\" (some merely triangular slivers of open space), have induced some interesting architecture, such as the Flatiron Building.\nAt Union Square, Broadway crosses 14th Street, merges with Fourth Avenue, and continues its diagonal uptown course from the Square's northwest corner; Union Square is the only location wherein the physical section of Broadway is discontinuous in Manhattan (other portions of Broadway in Manhattan are pedestrian-only plazas). At Madison Square, the location of the Flatiron Building, Broadway crosses Fifth Avenue at 23rd Street, thereby moving from the east side of Manhattan to the west, and is discontinuous to vehicles for a one-block stretch between 24th and 25th Streets. At Greeley Square (West 32nd Street), Broadway crosses Sixth Avenue (Avenue of the Americas), and is discontinuous to vehicles until West 35th Street. Macy's Herald Square department store, one block north of the vehicular discontinuity, is located on the northwest corner of Broadway and West 34th Street and southwest corner of Broadway and West 35th Street; it is one of the largest department stores in the world.\nOne famous stretch near Times Square, where Broadway crosses Seventh Avenue in midtown Manhattan, is the home of many Broadway theatres, housing an ever-changing array of commercial, large-scale plays, particularly musicals. This area of Manhattan is often called the Theater District or the Great White Way, a nickname originating in the headline \"Found on the Great White Way\" in the February 3, 1902, edition of the \"New York Evening Telegram\". The journalistic nickname was inspired by the millions of lights on theater marquees and billboard advertisements that illuminate the area. After becoming the city's de facto red-light district in the 1960s and 1970s (as can be seen in the films \"Taxi Driver\" and \"Midnight Cowboy\"), since the late 1980s Times Square has emerged as a family tourist center, in effect being Disneyfied following the company's purchase and renovation of the New Amsterdam Theatre on 42nd Street in 1993.\n\"The New York Times\", from which the Square gets its name, was published at offices at 239 West 43rd Street; the paper stopped printing papers there on June 15, 2007.\nUpper West Side.\nAt the southwest corner of Central Park, Broadway crosses Eighth Avenue (called Central Park West north of 59th Street) at West 59th Street and Columbus Circle; on the site of the former New York Coliseum convention center is the new shopping center at the foot of the Time Warner Center, headquarters of Time Warner. From Columbus Circle northward, Broadway becomes a wide boulevard to 169th Street; it retains landscaped center islands that separate northbound from southbound traffic. The medians are a vestige of the central mall of \"The Boulevard\" that had become the spine of the Upper West Side, and many of these contain public seating.\nBroadway intersects with Columbus Avenue (known as Ninth Avenue south of West 59th Street) at West 65th and 66th Streets where the Juilliard School and Lincoln Center, both well-known performing arts landmarks, as well as the Manhattan New York Temple of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are located.\nBetween West 70th and 73rd Streets, Broadway intersects with Amsterdam Avenue (known as 10th Avenue south of West 59th Street). The wide intersection of the two thoroughfares has historically been the site of numerous traffic accidents and pedestrian casualties, partly due to the long crosswalks. Two small triangular plots of land were created at points where Broadway slices through Amsterdam Avenue. One is a tiny fenced-in patch of shrubbery and plants at West 70th Street called Sherman Square (although it and the surrounding intersection have also been known collectively as Sherman Square), and the other triangle is a lush tree-filled garden bordering Amsterdam Avenue from just above West 72nd Street to West 73rd Street. Named Verdi Square in 1921 for its monument to Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi, which was erected in 1909, this triangular sliver of public space was designated a Scenic Landmark by the Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1974, one of nine city parks that have received the designation. In the 1960s and 1970s, the area surrounding both Verdi Square and Sherman Square was known by local drug users and dealers as \"Needle Park\", and was featured prominently in the gritty 1971 dramatic film \"The Panic in Needle Park\", directed by Jerry Schatzberg and starring Al Pacino in his second onscreen role.\nThe original brick and stone shelter leading to the entrance of the 72nd Street subway station, one of the first 28 subway stations in Manhattan, remains located on one of the wide islands in the center of Broadway, on the south side of West 72nd Street. For many years, all traffic on Broadway flowed on either side of this median and its subway entrance, and its uptown lanes went past it along the western edge of triangular Verdi Square. In 2001 and 2002, renovation of the historic 72nd Street station and the addition of a second subway control house and passenger shelter on an adjacent center median just north of 72nd Street, across from the original building, resulted in the creation of a public plaza with stone pavers and extensive seating, connecting the newer building with Verdi Square, and making it necessary to divert northbound traffic to Amsterdam Avenue for one block. While Broadway's southbound lanes at this intersection were unaffected by the new construction, its northbound lanes are no longer contiguous at this intersection. Drivers can either continue along Amsterdam Avenue to head uptown or turn left on West 73rd Street to resume traveling on Broadway.\nSeveral notable apartment buildings are in close proximity to this intersection, including The Ansonia, its ornate architecture dominating the cityscape here. After the Ansonia first opened as a hotel, live seals were kept in indoor fountains inside its lobby. Later, it was home to the infamous Plato's Retreat nightclub. Immediately north of Verdi Square is the Apple Bank Building, formerly the Central Savings Bank, which was built in 1926 and designed to resemble the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Broadway is also home to the Beacon Theatre at West 74th Street, designated a national landmark in 1979 and still in operation as a concert venue after its establishment in 1929 as a vaudeville and music hall, and \"sister\" venue to Radio City Music Hall.\nAt its intersection with West 78th Street, Broadway shifts direction and continues directly uptown and aligned approximately with the Commissioners' grid. Past the bend are the historic Apthorp apartment building, built in 1908, and the First Baptist Church in the City of New York, incorporated in New York in 1762, its current building on Broadway erected in 1891. The road heads north and passes historically important apartment houses such as the Belnord, the Astor Court Building, and the Art Nouveau Cornwall.\nAt Broadway and 95th Street is Symphony Space, established in 1978 as home to avant-garde and classical music and dance performances in the former Symphony Theatre, which was originally built in 1918 as a premier \"music and motion-picture house\". At 99th Street, Broadway passes between the controversial skyscrapers of the Ariel East and West.\nAt 107th Street, Broadway merges with West End Avenue, with the intersection forming Straus Park with its Titanic Memorial by Augustus Lukeman.\nNorthern Manhattan and the Bronx.\nBroadway then passes the campus of Columbia University at 116th Street in Morningside Heights, in part on the tract that housed the Bloomingdale Insane Asylum from 1808 until it moved to Westchester County in 1894. Still in Morningside Heights, Broadway passes the park-like campus of Barnard College. Next, the Gothic quadrangle of Union Theological Seminary, and the brick buildings of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America with their landscaped interior courtyards, face one another across Broadway. On the next block is the Manhattan School of Music.\nBroadway then runs past the Manhattanville campus of Columbia University, and the main campus of CUNY\u2013City College near 135th Street; the Gothic buildings of the original City College campus are out of sight, a block to the east. Also to the east are the brownstones of Hamilton Heights. Hamilton Place is a surviving section of Bloomingdale Road, and originally the address of Alexander Hamilton's house, The Grange, which has been moved.\nBroadway achieves a verdant, park-like effect, particularly in the spring, when it runs between the uptown Trinity Church Cemetery and the former Trinity Chapel, now the Church of the Intercession near 155th Street.\nNewYork\u2013Presbyterian Hospital lies on Broadway near 166th, 167th, and 168th Streets in Washington Heights. The intersection with St. Nicholas Avenue at 167th Street forms Mitchell Square Park. At 178th Street, US 9 becomes concurrent with Broadway.\nBroadway crosses the Harlem River on the Broadway Bridge to Marble Hill. Afterward, it then enters the Bronx, where it is the eastern border of Riverdale and the western border of Van Cortlandt Park. At 253rd Street, NY 9A joins with US 9 and Broadway. (NY 9A splits off Broadway at Ashburton Avenue in Yonkers.)\nWestchester County.\nThe northwestern corner of the park marks the New York City limit and Broadway enters Westchester County in Yonkers, where it is now known as South Broadway. It trends ever westward, closer to the Hudson River, remaining a busy urban commercial street. In downtown Yonkers, it drops close to the river, becomes North Broadway and 9A leaves via Ashburton Avenue. Broadway climbs to the nearby ridgetop runs parallel to the river and the railroad, a few blocks east of both as it passes St. John's Riverside Hospital. The neighborhoods become more residential and the road gently undulates along the ridgetop. In Yonkers, Broadway passes the historic Philipse Manor house, which dates back to colonial times.\nIt remains Broadway as it leaves Yonkers for Hastings-on-Hudson, where it splits into separate north and south routes for . The trees become taller and the houses, many separated from the road by stone fences, become larger. Another National Historic Landmark, the John William Draper House, was the site of the first astrophotograph of the Moon.\nIn the next village, Dobbs Ferry, Broadway has various views of the Hudson River while passing through the residential section. Broadway passes by the Old Croton Aqueduct and nearby the shopping district of the village. After intersecting with Ashford Avenue, Broadway passes Mercy University, then turns left again at the center of town just past South Presbyterian Church, headed for equally comfortable Ardsley-on-Hudson and Irvington. Villa Lewaro, the home of Madam C. J. Walker, the first African-American millionaire, is along the highway here. At the north end of the village of Irvington, a memorial to writer Washington Irving, after whom the village was renamed, marks the turnoff to his home at Sunnyside. Entering into the southern portion of Tarrytown, Broadway passes by historic Lyndhurst mansion, a massive mansion built along the Hudson River built in the early 1800s.\nNorth of here, at the Kraft Foods technical center, the Tappan Zee Bridge becomes visible. After crossing under the Thruway and I-87 again, here concurrent with I-287, and then intersecting with the four-lane NY\u00a0119, where 119 splits off to the east, Broadway becomes the busy main thoroughfare of Tarrytown. Christ Episcopal Church, where Irving worshiped, is along the street. Many high-quality restaurants and shops are along this main road. \nTarrytown ends at Patriot's Park, where the village of Sleepy Hollow begins. At the eastern terminus of NY\u00a0448, Broadway slopes off to the left, downhill, to pass the visitors' center for Philipsburg Manor House. Broadway then crosses the https:// and then passes the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow and the historic Sleepy Hollow Cemetery which includes the resting place of Washington Irving and the setting for \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\".\nBroadway expands to four lanes at the trumpet intersection with NY\u00a0117, where it finally ends and U.S.\u00a09 becomes Albany Post Road (and Highland Avenue) at the northern border of Sleepy Hollow, New York.\nNicknamed sections.\nCanyon of Heroes.\n\"Canyon of Heroes\" is occasionally used to refer to the section of lower Broadway in the Financial District that is the location of the city's ticker-tape parades. The traditional route of the parade is northward from Bowling Green to City Hall Park. Most of the route is lined with tall office buildings along both sides, affording a view of the parade for thousands of office workers who create the snowstorm-like jettison of shredded paper products that characterize the parade.\nWhile typical sports championship parades have been showered with some 50 tons of confetti and shredded paper, the V-J Day parade on August 14\u201315, 1945 \u2013 marking the end of World War II \u2013 was covered with 5,438 tons of paper, based on estimates provided by the New York City Department of Sanitation.\nMore than 200 black granite strips embedded in the sidewalks along the Canyon of Heroes list honorees of past ticker-tape parades.\nGreat White Way.\nIn 1880, a stretch of Broadway between Union Square and Madison Square was illuminated by Brush arc lamps, making it among the first electrically lighted streets in the United States. By the 1890s, the portion from 23rd Street to 34th Street was so brightly illuminated by electrical advertising signs that people began calling it \"The Great White Way\". When the theater district moved uptown, the name was transferred to the Times Square area. Since then \"The Great White Way\" became a nickname for a section of Broadway in Midtown Manhattan, particularly the portion that encompasses the Theater District, between 42nd and 53rd Streets, and encompassing Times Square.\nThe phrase \"Great White Way\" has been attributed to Shep Friedman, columnist for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\" in 1901, who lifted the term from the title of a book about the Arctic by Albert Paine. The headline \"Found on the Great White Way\" appeared in the February 3, 1902, edition of the \"New York Evening Telegram\".\nA portrait of Broadway in the early part of the 20th century and \"The Great White Way\" late at night appeared in \"Artist In Manhattan\" (1940) written by the artist\u2013historian Jerome Myers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Early morn on Broadway, the same light that tips the mountain tops of the Colorado canyons gradually discloses the quiet anatomy, the bare skeletons of the huge iron signs that trellis the sky, now denuded of the attractions of the volcanic night. Almost lifeless, the tired entertainers of the night clubs and their friends straggle to their rooms, taximen compare notes and earnings, the vast street scene has had its curtain call, the play is over.\nDear old Broadway, for many years have I dwelt on your borders. I have known the quiet note of your dawn. Even earlier I would take my coffee at Martin's, at 54th Street\u2013now, alas, vanished\u2013where I would see creatures of the night life before they disappeared with the dawn.\nOne night a celebrated female impersonator came to the restaurant in all his regalia, directly from a club across the street. Several taximen began to poke fun at him. Unable any longer to bear their taunts, he got up and knocked all the taximen out cold. Then he went back to the club, only to lament under his bitter tears, \"See how they've ruined my dress!\"\nGone are the old-time Broadway oyster bars and chop houses that were the survivors of a tradition of their sporting patrons, the bon vivants of Manhattan. Gone are the days when the Hoffman House flourished on Madison Square, with its famous nudes by Bouguereau; when barrooms were palaces, on nearly every corner throughout the city; when Steve Brodie, jumping from Brooklyn Bridge, splashed the entire country with publicity; when Bowery concert halls dispensed schooners of beer for a nickel, with a stage show thrown in; when Theis's Music Hall still resounded on 14th Street with its great mechanical organ, the wonder of its day, a place of beauty, with fine paintings and free company and the frankest of female life. Across the street was Tammany Hall, and next to it Tony Pastor's, where stars of the stage were born. Tony himself, in dress clothes and top hat, sang his ballads, a gallant trouper introducing Lillian Russell and others to fame through his audience.\nTransportation.\nFrom south to north, Broadway at one point or another runs over or under various New York City Subway lines, including the IRT Lexington Avenue Line, the BMT Broadway Line, IRT Broadway\u2013Seventh Avenue Line, and IND Eighth Avenue Line (the IND Sixth Avenue Line is the only north\u2013south trunk line in Manhattan that does not run along Broadway).\nEarly street railways on Broadway included the Broadway and Seventh Avenue Railroad's Broadway and University Place Line (1864?) between Union Square (14th Street) and Times Square (42nd Street), the Ninth Avenue Railroad's Ninth and Amsterdam Avenues Line (1884) between 65th Street and 71st Street, the Forty-second Street, Manhattanville and St. Nicholas Avenue Railway's Broadway Branch Line (1885?) between Times Square and 125th Street, and the Kingsbridge Railway's Kingsbridge Line north of 169th Street. The Broadway Surface Railroad's Broadway Line, a cable car line, opened on lower Broadway (below Times Square) in 1893, and soon became the core of the Metropolitan Street Railway, with two cable branches: the Broadway and Lexington Avenue Line and Broadway and Columbus Avenue Line.\nThese streetcar lines were replaced with bus routes in the 1930s and 1940s. Before Broadway became one-way, the main bus routes along it were the New York City Omnibus Company's (NYCO) 6 (Broadway below Times Square), 7 (Broadway and Columbus Avenue), and 11 (Ninth and Amsterdam Avenues), and the Surface Transportation Corporation's M100 (Kingsbridge) and M104 (Broadway Branch). Additionally, the Fifth Avenue Coach Company's (FACCo) 4 and 5 used Broadway from 135th Street north to Washington Heights, and their 5 and 6 used Broadway between 57th Street and 72nd Street. With the implementation of one-way traffic, the northbound 6 and 7 were moved to Sixth Avenue.\nAs of 2017[ [update]], Broadway is served by:\nOther routes that use part of Broadway include:\nExpress service is provided by the between Dyckman Street in Manhattan and West 230th Street in the Bronx, and the between Van Cortlandt Park South in the Bronx and Main Street in Yonkers, using South Broadway to terminate. \nBee-Line buses also serve Broadway within Riverdale and Westchester County. Routes 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 13, and several others run on a portion of Broadway.\nNotable buildings.\nBroadway is lined with many famous and otherwise noted and historic buildings, such as:\nHistoric buildings on Broadway that are now demolished include:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "4628", "revid": "4460127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4628", "title": "Bilinear transform", "text": "Signal processing operation\nThe bilinear transform (also known as Tustin's method, after Arnold Tustin) is used in digital signal processing and discrete-time control theory to transform continuous-time system representations to discrete-time and vice versa.\nThe bilinear transform is a special case of a conformal mapping (namely, a M\u00f6bius transformation), often used for converting a transfer function formula_1 of a linear, time-invariant (LTI) filter in the continuous-time domain (often named an analog filter) to a transfer function formula_2 of a linear, shift-invariant filter in the discrete-time domain (often named a digital filter although there are analog filters constructed with switched capacitors that are discrete-time filters). It maps positions on the formula_3 axis, formula_4, in the s-plane to the unit circle, formula_5, in the z-plane. Other bilinear transforms can be used for warping the frequency response of any discrete-time linear system (for example to approximate the non-linear frequency resolution of the human auditory system) and are implementable in the discrete domain by replacing a system's unit delays formula_6 with first order all-pass filters.\nThe transform preserves stability and maps every point of the frequency response of the continuous-time filter, formula_7 to a corresponding point in the frequency response of the discrete-time filter, formula_8 although to a somewhat different frequency, as shown in the Frequency warping section below. This means that for every feature that one sees in the frequency response of the analog filter, there is a corresponding feature, with identical gain and phase shift, in the frequency response of the digital filter but, perhaps, at a somewhat different frequency. The change in frequency is barely noticeable at low frequencies but is quite evident at frequencies close to the Nyquist frequency.\nDiscrete-time approximation.\nThe bilinear transform is a first-order Pad\u00e9 approximant of the natural logarithm function that is an exact mapping of the \"z\"-plane to the \"s\"-plane. When the Laplace transform is performed on a discrete-time signal (with each element of the discrete-time sequence attached to a correspondingly delayed unit impulse), the result is precisely the Z transform of the discrete-time sequence with the substitution of\nformula_9\nwhere formula_10 is the numerical integration step size of the trapezoidal rule used in the bilinear transform derivation; or, in other words, the sampling period. The above bilinear approximation can be solved for formula_11 or a similar approximation for formula_12 can be performed.\nThe inverse of this mapping (and its first-order bilinear approximation) is\nformula_13\nThe bilinear transform essentially uses this first order approximation and substitutes into the continuous-time transfer function, formula_1\nformula_15\nThat is\nformula_16\nStability and minimum-phase property preserved.\nA continuous-time causal filter is stable if the poles of its transfer function fall in the left half of the complex s-plane. A discrete-time causal filter is stable if the poles of its transfer function fall inside the unit circle in the complex z-plane. The bilinear transform maps the left half of the complex s-plane to the interior of the unit circle in the z-plane. Thus, filters designed in the continuous-time domain that are stable are converted to filters in the discrete-time domain that preserve that stability.\nLikewise, a continuous-time filter is minimum-phase if the zeros of its transfer function fall in the left half of the complex s-plane. A discrete-time filter is minimum-phase if the zeros of its transfer function fall inside the unit circle in the complex z-plane. Then the same mapping property assures that continuous-time filters that are minimum-phase are converted to discrete-time filters that preserve that property of being minimum-phase.\nTransformation of a General LTI System.\nA general LTI system has the transfer function\nformula_17\nThe order of the transfer function \"N\" is the greater of \"P\" and \"Q\" (in practice this is most likely \"P\" as the transfer function must be proper for the system to be stable). Applying the bilinear transform\nformula_18\nwhere \"K\" is defined as either 2/\"T\" or otherwise if using frequency warping, gives\nformula_19\nMultiplying the numerator and denominator by the largest power of (\"z\" + 1)\u22121 present, (\"z\" + 1)\u2212\"N\", gives\nformula_20\nIt can be seen here that after the transformation, the degree of the numerator and denominator are both \"N\".\nConsider then the pole-zero form of the continuous-time transfer function\nformula_21\nThe roots of the numerator and denominator polynomials, \"\u03bei\" and \"pi\", are the zeros and poles of the system. The bilinear transform is a one-to-one mapping, hence these can be transformed to the z-domain using\nformula_22\nyielding some of the discretized transfer function's zeros and poles \"\u03be'i\" and \"p'i\"\nformula_23\nAs described above, the degree of the numerator and denominator are now both \"N\", in other words there is now an equal number of zeros and poles. The multiplication by (\"z\" + 1)\u2212\"N\" means the additional zeros or poles are\nformula_24\nGiven the full set of zeros and poles, the z-domain transfer function is then\nformula_25\nExample.\nAs an example take a simple low-pass RC filter. This continuous-time filter has a transfer function\nformula_26\nIf we wish to implement this filter as a digital filter, we can apply the bilinear transform by substituting for formula_27 the formula above; after some reworking, we get the following filter representation:\nThe coefficients of the denominator are the 'feed-backward' coefficients and the coefficients of the numerator are the 'feed-forward' coefficients used for implementing a real-time digital filter.\nTransformation for a general first-order continuous-time filter.\nIt is possible to relate the coefficients of a continuous-time, analog filter with those of a similar discrete-time digital filter created through the bilinear transform process. Transforming a general, first-order continuous-time filter with the given transfer function\nformula_28\nusing the bilinear transform (without prewarping any frequency specification) requires the substitution of\nformula_29\nwhere\nformula_30.\nHowever, if the frequency warping compensation as described below is used in the bilinear transform, so that both analog and digital filter gain and phase agree at frequency formula_31, then\nformula_32.\nThis results in a discrete-time digital filter with coefficients expressed in terms of the coefficients of the original continuous time filter:\nformula_33\nNormally the constant term in the denominator must be normalized to 1 before deriving the corresponding difference equation. This results in\nformula_34\nThe difference equation (using the Direct form I) is\nformula_35\nGeneral second-order biquad transformation.\nA similar process can be used for a general second-order filter with the given transfer function\nformula_36\nThis results in a discrete-time digital biquad filter with coefficients expressed in terms of the coefficients of the original continuous time filter:\nformula_37\nAgain, the constant term in the denominator is generally normalized to 1 before deriving the corresponding difference equation. This results in\nformula_38\nThe difference equation (using the Direct form I) is\nformula_39\nFrequency warping.\nTo determine the frequency response of a continuous-time filter, the transfer function formula_1 is evaluated at formula_41 which is on the formula_3 axis. Likewise, to determine the frequency response of a discrete-time filter, the transfer function formula_43 is evaluated at formula_44 which is on the unit circle, formula_5. The bilinear transform maps the formula_3 axis of the \"s\"-plane (which is the domain of formula_1) to the unit circle of the \"z\"-plane, formula_5 (which is the domain of formula_43), but it is not the same mapping formula_50 which also maps the formula_3 axis to the unit circle. When the actual frequency of formula_52 is input to the discrete-time filter designed by use of the bilinear transform, then it is desired to know at what frequency, formula_53, for the continuous-time filter that this formula_52 is mapped to.\nformula_55\nThis shows that every point on the unit circle in the discrete-time filter z-plane, formula_56 is mapped to a point on the formula_57 axis on the continuous-time filter s-plane, formula_58. That is, the discrete-time to continuous-time frequency mapping of the bilinear transform is\nformula_59\nand the inverse mapping is\nformula_60\nThe discrete-time filter behaves at frequency formula_61 the same way that the continuous-time filter behaves at frequency formula_62. Specifically, the gain and phase shift that the discrete-time filter has at frequency formula_61 is the same gain and phase shift that the continuous-time filter has at frequency formula_64. This means that every feature, every \"bump\" that is visible in the frequency response of the continuous-time filter is also visible in the discrete-time filter, but at a different frequency. For low frequencies (that is, when formula_65 or formula_66), then the features are mapped to a \"slightly\" different frequency; formula_67.\nOne can see that the entire continuous frequency range\n formula_68\nis mapped onto the fundamental frequency interval\n formula_69\nThe continuous-time filter frequency formula_70 corresponds to the discrete-time filter frequency formula_71 and the continuous-time filter frequency formula_72 correspond to the discrete-time filter frequency formula_73\nOne can also see that there is a nonlinear relationship between formula_53 and formula_75 This effect of the bilinear transform is called frequency warping. The continuous-time filter can be designed to compensate for this frequency warping by setting formula_59 for every frequency specification that the designer has control over (such as corner frequency or center frequency). This is called pre-warping the filter design.\nIt is possible, however, to compensate for the frequency warping by pre-warping a frequency specification formula_77 (usually a resonant frequency or the frequency of the most significant feature of the frequency response) of the continuous-time system. These pre-warped specifications may then be used in the bilinear transform to obtain the desired discrete-time system. When designing a digital filter as an approximation of a continuous time filter, the frequency response (both amplitude and phase) of the digital filter can be made to match the frequency response of the continuous filter at a specified frequency formula_77, as well as matching at DC, if the following transform is substituted into the continuous filter transfer function. This is a modified version of Tustin's transform shown above.\nformula_79\nHowever, note that this transform becomes the original transform\nformula_80\nas formula_81.\nThe main advantage of the warping phenomenon is the absence of aliasing distortion of the frequency response characteristic, such as observed with Impulse invariance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4631", "revid": "49285382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4631", "title": "Brian Boitano", "text": "United States figure skater\nBrian Anthony Boitano (born October 22, 1963) is an American figure skater from Sunnyvale, California. He is the 1988 Olympic champion, the 1986 and 1988 World Champion, and the 1985\u20131988 U.S. National Champion.\nBoitano turned professional following the 1988 season. Under new rules by the ISU, he returned to competition in 1993 and competed at the 1994 Winter Olympics, where he placed sixth. In 1996, he was inducted into the World Figure Skating Hall of Fame and the United States Figure Skating Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nBrian Boitano was born in 1963 and raised in Mountain View, California. Boitano is a graduate of Marian A. Peterson High School in Sunnyvale, California. He is of Italian American descent, with family from northern Italy. As an adult, he has lived in San Francisco.\nFigure skating career.\nEarly career.\nBeginning skating as a child, Brian Boitano won a gold medal at the Junior U.S. Championships in 1978 and first made his mark on the international scene when he won the bronze medal at the 1978 World Junior Figure Skating Championships, beating future rival Brian Orser for that medal.\nEarly in his career, Boitano was known primarily for his jumping. He, along with several other skaters, helped push the technical envelope of men's skating. In 1982, Boitano became the first American to land a triple Axel. In 1987, he introduced his signature jump, the 'Boitano triple Lutz', in which the skater raises his left arm above his head. He attempted a quadruple jump throughout the 1986\u201387 season and at the 1988 World Figure Skating Championships, but did not cleanly land the jump; he double-footed the landing on two occasions.\nAt the 1983 World Championships, he became the first skater to ever land all six triple jumps in competition. He would eventually include and successfully land eight triple jumps in his free skate program, the maximum number possible (see Zayak rule). He would jump two flip jumps and two triple Axels to compete with his rival, Brian Orser, who jumped one triple flip and one triple Axel. It was not until failing to defend his World title in 1987 that Boitano focused specifically on improving his artistry. Toward this end, he worked with renowned choreographer Sandra Bezic.\nBoitano placed second at the 1984 United States Figure Skating Championships, earning a place in the 1984 Winter Olympics. He placed 5th at the Olympics, setting the stage for his success over the next four years.\nWorld Champion.\nFollowing the 1984 Olympics, several skaters emerged as likely medal hopes following the retirement of Scott Hamilton.\nBoitano won the 1985 United States Figure Skating Championships, the first of his four titles. At the first World Championships of the post-Hamilton era in 1985, Alexander Fadeev won, with Brian Orser finishing in second place and Boitano in third place. He had injured tendons in his right ankle a few weeks before the 1986 U.S. Championships but went on to win his second national title. At the 1986 World Championships, Boitano took the title, while Fadeev had a disastrous free skate despite having been in an excellent position to win; Orser finished in second place once again.\nDuring the 1986\u201387 season, Boitano had introduced three new elements to his programs: the 'Tano triple lutz and a quadruple toe loop, as well as wearing a blindfold, although he never succeeded in landing a clean quadruple jump in competition. The 1987 World Championships were held in Cincinnati, giving the defending world champion a home-field advantage. The outcome of the event would set the tone for the 1988 Olympics. He fell on his quadruple toe loop attempt and placed second.\nAfter losing the world title to Orser at home, Boitano and his coach Linda Leaver decided that some changes needed to be made if he was to become the Olympic champion. He had always been good at the technical requirements (\"The first mark\"), but he was weak on the artistic (\"the second mark\"). He was a self-described \"jumping robot.\" In order to help his growth as an artist, he hired choreographer Sandra Bezic to choreograph his programs for the 1987\u20131988 Olympic season.\nBezic choreographed two programs that featured clean lines and accentuated the skating abilities of the 5' 11\" Boitano. The short program was based on Giacomo Meyerbeer's ballet \"Les Patineurs\", in which he plays a cocky young man showing off his tricks, using movements dating to the 19th century. In one moment, he wipes ice shavings, also called snow, off his skate blade and tosses it over his shoulder after landing a triple Axel combination. The free skating program was based on the film score, \"Napoleon\", detailing various phases of a soldier's life.\nBoitano debuted his new programs at 1987 Skate Canada, held in the Saddledome in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. This was where he would compete against Brian Orser for the Olympic title three months later. His new programs were received with standing ovations by the audience. Although Orser won the competition, Boitano skated clean, landing seven triple jumps, including a footwork section into a jump, but popped his planned second triple Axel. The team was so confident about the strength of his new programs that they omitted the quadruple toe loop which, if landed, could have put him a shoulder above Orser in technical merit.\nThe short program at the 1988 United States Figure Skating Championships proved to be a highlight. Boitano received marks of 6.0 from eight of the nine judges for presentation, the second mark. His free skate was flawed. Due to delays, he did not skate until after midnight. Still, he won the competition, and went into the Olympics as the national champion (U.S.), as did Orser (representing Canada).\n1988 Olympics: Battle of the Brians.\nGoing into the Olympics, Boitano and Brian Orser each had won a world title and each had an excellent, balanced repertoire. Boitano was known as the slightly better technician and Orser as the better artist.\n Adding to the rivalry, Boitano and Orser were both performing military-themed programs. Boitano's free skate was set to music from \"\", the television miniseries. For his free skate, Boitano wore a blue stretch suit with red braids and epaulets, and used military gestures and postures as much as his music allowed.\nThe Battle of the Brians at the 1988 Winter Olympics was the highlight of Boitano's amateur career. Boitano and Orser were effectively tied going into the free skating portion of the event and whoever won that portion would win the event. Alexander Fadeev had won the compulsory figures section of the competition, with Boitano second and Orser third. In the short program, Orser placed first and Boitano second. The free skating was, at the time, worth 50% of the score, and so Boitano's lead would not be enough to hold him in first place if he lost the free skate.\nBoitano skated a clean, technically excellent long program, with eight triple jumps, including two axels, and a triple flip-triple toe loop combination. Landing his second triple axel jump cleanly was probably a critical factor in the battle. Orser made one small mistake on a jump and omitted his planned second triple axel. Boitano won the battle in a 5\u20134 split. It was later discovered that the Canadian Figure Skating Association had engaged in \"vote trading\" with several countries on the judging panel, particularly East Germany and the USSR. This ultimately backfired, as the Soviet judge refused to follow this agreement and voting \"with his conscience,\" placing Boitano first. Had he followed his federation's directive, Boitano would have lost the gold medal. The judge was promptly suspended by his federation. Experts questioned why the scores were so close between the two skaters because Boitano had two triple axels, two triple flips and a triple triple combination, elements that were not included in Orser's program.\nWith his win, Boitano became the first Olympic champion to land the full complement of six types of triple jumps. Boitano won the gold medal, wearing skates with American flag appliqu\u00e9s. These are now part of the collections of the National Museum of American History at the Smithsonian Institution.\nFollowing the Olympics, both Orser and Boitano went to the 1988 World Championships, which Boitano won. Boitano turned professional soon after.\nProfessional career and return to amateur standing.\nFollowing the Olympics, Boitano went on to dominate competitions in the professional ranks, winning ten straight professional competitions, including five consecutive World Professional Championship titles and four consecutive wins at the Challenge of Champions. Boitano also appeared in \"Carmen on Ice\", for which he won an Emmy. He performed with Champions on Ice for many years. He wanted to return to amateur competition and make another run at the Olympics.\nIn June 1993, the International Skating Union (ISU) introduced a clause, commonly known as the \"Boitano rule,\" which allowed professionals to reinstate as \"amateur\" or \"eligible\" skaters. Many others joined Boitano, including Ukrainian Viktor Petrenko, 1988 bronze medalist and 1992 gold medalist. The ISU decision was the result of Boitano's active involvement during the early 1990s, when the International Olympic Committee lifted the remaining limits on athletes' remuneration. Previously, the committee had been accused of rejecting Western professionals, while allowing Eastern Bloc state-sponsored \"amateurs\" to compete. Boitano reinstated as an amateur to compete in the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.\nBoitano competed at the 1994 United States Figure Skating Championships, led after the short program, but lost to Scott Davis in the long program in a 6\u20133 split decision. Boitano was named to the Olympic team. Going into the Olympics as a medal favorite in a strong field, Boitano missed his triple Axel combination during the short program for the first time in his career. This mistake proved extremely costly, and knocked Boitano out of medal contention. He skated a good long program and finished 6th.\nBoitano returned to the professional ranks afterward. In 1996 he was inducted into the World Figure Skating Hall of Fame and the United States Figure Skating Hall of Fame.\nPersonal life.\nIn December 2013, Boitano was named to the United States delegation to the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia. In conjunction with that appointment, Boitano publicly came out as gay.\nThe Sochi games and Russia were the targets of criticism and LGBT activism because of a Russian anti-gay \"propaganda\" law passed in June 2013. In January 2014, Boitano told the Associated Press that he had never wanted to come out until he was named to the delegation.\nBoitano's older brother, Mark Boitano, is a real estate agent and former politician. He served as a member of the New Mexico Senate from 1997 to 2013.\nCelebrity and popular culture career.\n\"South Park\" song.\nA caricature of Boitano as a superhero appears as a semi-recurring character in the cartoon series \"South Park\". The film \"\" (1999) features a musical number titled \"What Would Brian Boitano Do?\". He was also featured in \"Jesus vs. Santa\".\nFood Network show.\nOn August 23, 2009, Food Network debuted a new series entitled \"What Would Brian Boitano Make?\", which borrows both its name and opening musical theme from the \"\" song. The show features Boitano preparing meals for his friends. The series was picked up for a ten-episode second season.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4632", "revid": "14604687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4632", "title": "British Queen", "text": ""}
{"id": "4633", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4633", "title": "List of political scandals in the United Kingdom", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is a list of political scandals in the United Kingdom in chronological order. Scandals implicating political figures or governments of the UK, often reported in the mass media, have long had repercussions for their popularity. Issues in political scandals have included alleged or proven financial and sexual matters, or various other allegations or actions taken by politicians that led to controversy. In British media and political discourse, such scandals have sometimes been referred to as political sleaze since the 1990s. Notable scandals include the Marconi scandal, Profumo affair and the 2009 expenses scandal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4634", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4634", "title": "Bombadier", "text": ""}
{"id": "4635", "revid": "34128202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4635", "title": "Bombardier Inc.", "text": "Canadian aerospace manufacturer\nBombardier Inc. () is a Canadian aerospace manufacturer which produces business jets. Headquartered in Montreal, the company was founded in 1942 in Valcourt by Joseph-Armand Bombardier to market his snowmobiles; it later became one of the world's biggest producers of aircraft and trains.\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s, the company diversified into public transport vehicles and commercial jets, and it became a multinational corporation. Bombardier grew particularly fast at the end of the 1980s, when the turnover multiplied sixfold within six years. At that time, it was North America's most important producer of railway vehicles, Canada's most important aerospace manufacturer and the worldwide leading snowmobile maker. The growth came mainly from buying failing government-owned companies at a low price and orchestrating a turnaround.\nHowever, the launch of the CSeries aircraft sent Bombardier into deep debt, pushing it to the brink of bankruptcy by 2015. As a result, the company sold nearly all of its operations except business jet manufacturing.\nBombardier manufactures two families of corporate jets, the Global series and the Challenger series. On May 18, 2021, the Global 7500/8000 series during testing became the first business jet to break the sound barrier and the fastest civil aircraft since the Concorde. With deliveries of 138 business jets in 2023, Bombardier was the number one manufacturer of business jets in the world.\nCorporate affairs.\nThe key trends of Bombardier are (as at the financial year ending December 31):\nDivested lines of business.\nCommercial aviation.\nIn 1986, Bombardier acquired Canadair for C$120 million from the Government of Canada after it recorded the largest corporate loss in Canadian history.\nIn 1989, the company acquired Short Brothers.\nBy 1990, the first product of the company, the Ski-Doo snowmobile, had become its weakest part gaging up deficits and high inventories.\nIn 1990, it acquired Learjet. In 1992, the company acquired de Havilland Canada from Boeing.\nIn 1995, the company founded Flexjet. In December 2013, the division was sold for $195 million.\nOn June 29, 2016, Bombardier delivered the first CSeries CS100 aircraft (now called the Airbus A220) to Swiss International Air Lines. Air Canada placed an order for the aircraft one day earlier.\nIn April 2016, Delta Air Lines placed an order for the aircraft. On September 26, 2017, after Boeing complained that Bombardier was selling the CS100 to Delta Air Lines below cost due to subsidies from the governments of Canada and Quebec, the United States Department of Commerce proposed a 219% tariff on the aircraft. Boeing's complaint stated that the CS100 planes were being sold at US$19.6 million each, below the US$33.2 million production cost. The governments of Canada and the United Kingdom threatened to stop ordering Boeing aircraft since the company was putting aerospace jobs at risk. On January 26, 2018, the United States International Trade Commission overturned the tariffs. Boeing did not appeal.\nIn July 2018, Airbus acquired a 50.01% stake in the CSeries for one Canadian dollar, with an option to acquire the remaining interest by 2024. Airbus built a second CSeries assembly line at its A320 assembly facility in Mobile, Alabama.\nIn November 2018, the company announced the sale of its turboprop passenger aircraft unit to an affiliate of Viking Air (which later became De Havilland Canada). It also announced 5,000 layoffs.\nIn March 2019, the company sold its Business Aircraft Training business to CAE Inc. for $645 million. The business included flight simulators and training devices for the Bombardier Learjet, Challenger, and Global product lines.\nOn June 25, 2019, Bombardier agreed with Mitsubishi Heavy Industries to sell the CRJ programme, a deal was expected to close in early 2020 subject to regulatory approval. Bombardier will retain the Mirabel assembly facility and produce the CRJ on behalf of Mitsubishi until the current order backlog is complete.\nIn October 2019, Bombardier announced the sale agreement of its remaining aerostructure division to US company Spirit AeroSystems. The division at time of sale involved component manufacture for new and after-market Bombardier group and Airbus group aircraft models, and also operated in aircraft maintenance, repair and overhaul. Due to how the 2020 pandemic affected the industry, the agreement was renegotiated with the sale to Spirit concluded finally in October 2020. Bombardier's former aerostructures division purchased by Spirit consisted at time of sale of operations in Belfast, UK; Casablanca, Morocco; and Dallas, USA.\nThe 2019 to 2020 aerostructures division sell-off was described at the time as supporting Bombardier's \"strategic decision to reposition itself as a pure-play business aircraft company\".\nIn February 2020, Airbus acquired an additional 25% stake in the A220 for US$591 million. This transaction was the final step to get Bombardier Aviation out of the commercial jet industry.\nBombardier Capital.\nBombardier Capital (BC), a subsidiary of Bombardier Inc., was formed during 1973 in Colchester, Vermont.\nBC provided secured financing for a dealer's inventory that was purchased from distributors or manufacturers of consumer and recreational products, especially Bombardier Recreational Products, in the United States, Canada and Europe. Their clients consisted of Sea-Doo and Ski-Doo dealers, as well as retailers in multiple industries, primarily manufactured housing, recreational boating and specialty and recreational vehicles. BC also provided a wide variety of domestic/international loans, asset management and leasing services for business aircraft and commercial/industrial products, including technology and telecommunication equipment.\nIn August 1997 CGI Inc. and BC announced a strategic agreement to offer their clients value-added services. CGI would offer information technology to BC's clients, and BC would provide project financing to CGI's clients.\nThat same year, BC began transitioning loan origination and servicing to Jacksonville, Florida.\nBombardier Capital's operations were located at 12735 Gran Bay Parkway West, Suite 1000 in the Flagler Center. BC ceased loan originations in 2001, then in 2005, BC sold their Inventory Finance Division to GE Commercial Finance before shutting down operations.\nMilitary.\nThe company acquired the rights to the Volkswagen Iltis in 1981. Production ceased in 1989.\nWhen UTDC was acquired by Bombardier in 1991 several military products were added:\nUTDC 24M32 - HLVW military trucks based on the Steyr 91 (Percheron)\nIn 2003, the company sold its arms industry division in Canada. Military Aviation Services was sold to SPAR Aerospace. Land-based arms industry products made by Urban Transportation Development Corporation ceased operations.\nPublic transport bus in Ireland.\nIn the late 1970s, in the Republic of Ireland, CI\u00c9 (now Bus \u00c9ireann and Dublin Bus) commissioned a range of single and double-decker buses to be designed and produced.\nCI\u00c9 looked for partners to build these buses in Ireland, eventually finding two: Bombardier, and the United States\u2013based General Automotive Corporation (GAC) from Ann Arbor, Michigan. The two companies formed a new company Bombardier Ireland Limited, 51% owned by Bombardier and 49% owned by GAC. In August 1983, Bombardier sold its shares to GAC, with the company renamed GAC Ireland Limited.\nThe prototypes were devised in Germany and production of 51 express coaches (KE type) and 366 double-decker buses (KD type) were assembled between 1980 and 1983 at a facility in Shannon, County Clare. They remained in service until 1997 and 2000, respectively. Some surviving examples are now exhibited at the National Transport Museum of Ireland at Howth Castle.\nRail equipment.\nThe company diversified into rail transport after the 1970s energy crisis reduced demand for snowmobiles.\nIn 1974, the company received its first order \u2013 to build MR-73 trains for Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de transport de Montr\u00e9al for use on the Montreal Metro.\nIn 1975, the company acquired Montreal Locomotive Works. It was sold to General Electric in 1988.\nIn 1982, the company won a contract from New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority to build 825 R62A cars for the New York City Subway for $663 million.\nIn 1985, the company ceased manufacturing locomotives and concentrated on producing passenger train rolling stock. It acquired a 45% stake in La Brugeoise et Nivelles (formerly BN Constructions Ferroviaires et M\u00e9talliques) based in Bruges in 1986, the assets of U.S. railcar manufacturers Budd Company and Pullman Company in 1987, and ANF Industrie based in Crespin, Nord, France in 1989. A series of acquisitions in the United Kingdom, Germany, Switzerland, Canada, and Mexico further increased operations.\nIn 1996, the company was selected as the lead developer for the Acela Express trains, the fastest trains in North America, in a $710 million contract. Problems with the trains resulted in lawsuits between the company and Amtrak.\nIn 2001, Bombardier acquired Adtranz (DaimlerChrysler Rail Systems), a manufacturer of trains which were widely used throughout Germany and Great Britain, becoming one of the largest manufacturers of railway rolling stock in the world. This division produced the Bombardier Turbostar.\nIn 2005, it launched the Bombardier Zefiro high-speed rail, with speeds of , for the Ministry of Railways (China).\nOn February 13, 2020, Alstom agreed to buy the Bombardier Transportation division for \u20ac7 billion. The acquisition deal was completed on January 29, 2021.\nBombardier Recreational Products.\nIn January 1934, a blizzard prevented Joseph-Armand Bombardier from reaching the nearest hospital in time to save his two-year-old son, Yvon, who died from appendicitis complicated by peritonitis.\nBombardier was a mechanic who dreamed of building a vehicle that could \"float on snow\". In 1935, in a repair shop in Valcourt, Quebec, he designed and produced the first snowmobile using a drive system he developed that revolutionized travel in snow and swampy conditions.\nIn 1937, he patented and sold 12 of the 7-passenger \"B7\" snow coaches. They were used in rural Quebec to take children to school, carry freight, deliver mail, and as ambulances. In 1941, Bombardier opened a factory in Valcourt.\nIn 1942, \"L'Auto-Neige Bombardier Limit\u00e9e\" (\"Bombardier Snow Car Limited\") was founded in Valcourt.\nDuring World War II, the Government of Canada issued wartime rationing regulations. Bombardier customers had to prove that snowmobiles were essential to their livelihood in order to buy one. The company then shifted its focus to the arms industry.\nIn 1947, during a blizzard in Saskatchewan, the company received positive press coverage when army snowmobiles resupplied isolated radio communication towers.\nIn 1948, the Government of Quebec passed a law requiring all roads to be cleared of snow; Bombardier's sales fell by nearly half in one year. Armand Bombardier therefore decided to diversify his business, first by producing tracked snowplows sized specifically for use on municipal sidewalks, replacing horse-drawn vehicles, then by making all-terrain vehicles for the mining, petroleum, and forestry industries.\nThe machines had removable front skis that could be replaced with front wheels for use on paved or hard surfaces, thus providing greater utility to his large snowmobiles. In 1951, the wooden bodies were replaced with sheet steel, and these vehicles were powered by Chrysler flathead six-cylinder engines and 3-speed manual transmissions.\nIn the early 1950s, Bombardier focused on developing a snowmobile for 1 or 2 passengers. A breakthrough occurred in 1957 when Bombardier developed a one-piece molded rubber continuous track with enough durability to provide snow-gripping traction for lightweight vehicles. The vehicle was called the \"Ski-Dog\" because it was meant to replace the dog sled for hunters and trappers. However, in 1958, \"Ski-Doo\" was accidentally painted on the first prototype, and immediately became the popular name.\nThe public soon discovered the great fun of speedy vehicles zooming over snow, and a new winter sport was born, centered in Quebec. In the first year, Bombardier sold 225 Ski-Doos; four years later, 8,210 were sold. Bombardier slowed promotion of the Ski-Doo line to prevent it from crowding out other company products, while still dominating the snowmobile industry against competitors Polaris Industries and Arctic Cat.\nIn 1963, Roski was created in Roxton Falls, Quebec as a manufacturer of composite parts for the Ski-Doo. In the 1960s, V-8 engines were added.\nOn February 18, 1964, J. Armand Bombardier died of cancer at age 56. Until then, he oversaw all areas of operation and controlled the research department, making all the drawings himself. The younger generation took over, led by Armand's sons and sons-in-law, reorganizing and decentralizing the company. The company adopted computer inventory, accounting, and billing. Distribution networks were improved and increased, and an incentive program was developed for sales staff. That year, a survey was mailed to Ski-Doo owners to find out how the product was being used. Germain Bombardier, who had been groomed by his father, took over the company upon his father's death in 1964. However, he quit and sold his shares in 1966 after a disagreement with other family members. Laurent Beaudoin, the son-in-law of the founder, then became president, a position he held until 1999. He had joined the company as controller in 1963 and was president for 25 years.\nIn 1967, the company was renamed \"Bombardier Limited\". By that time, the snowmobiles were very useful for the Inuit.\nIn 1968, Clayton Jacobson II invented the jet ski and the company licensed his patents to create the Sea-Doo personal watercraft.\nOn January 23, 1969, the company became a public company, listing on the Montreal Exchange and the Toronto Stock Exchange.\nIn 1969 to 1970, the standard round windows reminiscent of portholes were replaced with larger rectangular windows that provided more interior light. A change was made to the Chrysler Industrial 318 engines with the automatic Loadflite transmissions.\nIn 1970, the company acquired Rotax, an engine manufacturer based in Gunskirchen, Austria.\nIn 1971, Bombardier acquired Moto-Ski. Also in 1971, Bombardier launched Operation SnoPlan, a program to promote snowmobile safety after a mounting death toll due to snowmobile accidents.\nIn the 1970s, the company began producing Can-Am motorcycles, which included Rotax engines.\nIn 2003, the company sold Bombardier Recreational Products to a group of investors: Bain Capital (50%), Bombardier Family (35%) and Caisse de d\u00e9p\u00f4t et placement du Qu\u00e9bec (15%) for $875 million.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4636", "revid": "7639046", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4636", "title": "Break key", "text": "Key of a computer keyboard\nThe Break key (or the symbol \u238a) of a computer keyboard refers to breaking a telegraph circuit and originated with 19th century practice. In modern usage, the key has no well-defined purpose, but while this is the case, it can be used by software for miscellaneous tasks, such as to switch between multiple login sessions, to terminate a program, or to interrupt a modem connection.\nBecause the break function is usually combined with the pause function on one key since the introduction of the IBM Model M 101-key keyboard in 1985, the Break key is also called the Pause key. It can be used to pause some computer games.\nHistory.\nA standard telegraph circuit connects all the keys, sounders and batteries in a single series loop. Thus the sounders actuate only when both keys are down (closed, also known as \"marking\" \u2014 after the ink marks made on paper tape by early printing telegraphs). So the receiving operator has to hold their key down or close a built-in shorting switch in order to let the other operator send. As a consequence, the receiving operator could interrupt the sending operator by opening their key, breaking the circuit and forcing it into a \"spacing\" condition. Both sounders stop responding to the sender's keying, alerting the sender (a physical break in the telegraph line would have the same effect).\nThe teleprinter operated in a very similar fashion except that the sending station kept the loop closed (logic 1, or \"marking\") even during short pauses between characters. Holding down a special \"break\" key opened the loop, forcing it into a continuous logic 0, or \"spacing\", condition. When this occurred, the teleprinter mechanisms continually actuated without printing anything, as the all-0s character is the non-printing \"NUL\" in both Baudot and ASCII. The resulting noise got the sending operator's attention.\nThis practice carried over to teleprinter use as a terminal on time-sharing computers. A continuous spacing (logical 0) condition violates the rule that every valid character has to end with one or more logic 1 (marking) \"stop\" bits. The computer (specifically the UART) recognized this as a special \"break\" condition and generated an interrupt that typically stopped a running program or forced the operating system to prompt for a login. Similarly to teleprinters, video terminals kept the key which put transmission line to zero state.\nWith its function of interrupting terminal communication, the key was adopted by software terminal emulators and in applications which use serial protocols such as RS-232. This concept of interruption also extends to the boot process of computers, network devices and to halting operations in computer applications like command-line interfaces, debuggers and spreadsheets.\nSinclair.\nOn the ZX80 and ZX81 computers, the Break is accessed by pressing . On the ZX Spectrum it is accessed by . The Spectrum+ and later computers have a dedicated key. It does not trigger an interrupt but will halt any running BASIC program, or terminate the loading or saving of data to cassette tape. An interrupted BASIC program can usually be resumed with the codice_1 command. The Sinclair QL computer, without a key, maps the function to .\nBBC Micro.\nOn a BBC Micro computer, the key generates a hardware reset which would normally cause a warm restart of the computer. A cold restart is triggered by pressing . If a filing system is installed, will cause the computer to search for and load or run a file called codice_2 on the filing system's default device (e.g. floppy disk 0, network user BOOT). The latter two behaviours were inherited by the successor to Acorn MOS, RISC OS. These behaviours could be changed or exchanged in software, and were often used in rudimentary anti-piracy techniques.\nModern keyboards.\nOn many modern PCs, interrupts screen output by BIOS until another key is pressed. This is effective during boot in text mode and in a DOS box in Windows safe mode with 50 lines. On early keyboards without a key (before the introduction of 101/102-key keyboards) the Pause function was assigned to , and the Break function to ; these key-combinations still work with most programs, even on modern PCs with modern keyboards. Pressing the dedicated key on 101/102-key keyboards sends the same scancodes as pressing , then , then releasing them in the reverse order would do; additionally, an E1hex prefix is sent, which enables 101/102-key-aware software to discern the two situations, while older software usually just ignores the prefix. The key is different from all other keys in that it sends no scancodes at all on release in PS/2 modes 1 or 2, so it is impossible to determine whether this key is being held down with older devices. Also, it's not \"typematic\", that is, unlike the other keys, it doesn't send repeat scancodes while being held. In PS/2 mode 3 or USB HID mode, there is a release scancode, so it is possible to determine whether this key is being held down on modern computers.\nOn modern keyboards, the key is usually labeled \"Pause\" with \"Break\" below, sometimes separated by a line: , or \"Pause\" on the top of the keycap and \"Break\" on the front, or only \"Pause\" without \"Break\" at all. Keyboards with ISO/IEC 9995-7 markings including Canadian CSA keyboard use \u238a symbol for \"Break\" and \u2389 for \"Pause\". In most Windows environments, the key combination brings up the system properties.\nKeyboards without Break key.\nCompact and notebook keyboards often do not have a dedicated key.\nSubstitutes for :\nSubstitutes for :\nFor some Dell laptops, without a key, press the and select \"Interrupt\".\nUsage for breaking the program's execution.\nWhile both and combination are commonly implemented as a way of breaking the execution of a console application, they are also used for similar effect in integrated development environments. Although these two are often considered interchangeable, compilers and execution environments usually assign different signals to these. Additionally, in some kernels (e.g. miscellaneous DOS variants) is detected only at the time OS tries reading from a keyboard buffer and only if it's the only key sequence in the buffer, while is often translated instantly (e.g. by INT 1Bh under DOS). Because of this, is usually a more effective choice under these operating systems; sensitivity for these two combinations can be enhanced by the codice_3 CONFIG.SYS statement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4640", "revid": "46337890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4640", "title": "Bogie", "text": "Chassis for wheels and suspension under vehicles\nA bogie ( ) (or truck in North American English) comprises two or more wheelsets (two wheels on an axle), in a frame, attached under a vehicle by a pivot. Bogies take various forms in various modes of transport. A bogie may remain normally attached (as on many railroad cars and semi-trailers) or be quickly detachable (as for a dolly in a road train or in railway bogie exchange). It may include suspension components within it (as most rail and trucking bogies do), or be solid and in turn be suspended (as are most bogies of tracked vehicles). It may be mounted on a swivel, as traditionally on a railway carriage or locomotive, additionally jointed and sprung (as in the landing gear of an airliner), or held in place by other means (centreless bogies).\nAlthough \"bogie\" is the preferred spelling and first-listed variant in various dictionaries, bogey and bogy are also used.\nRailway.\nA \"bogie\" in the UK, or a \"railroad truck\", \"wheel truck\", or simply \"truck\" in North America, is a structure underneath a railway vehicle (wagon, coach or locomotive) to which axles (hence, wheels) are attached through bearings. In Indian English, \"bogie\" may also refer to an entire railway carriage. In South Africa, the term \"bogie\" is often alternatively used to refer to a freight or goods wagon (shortened from \"bogie wagon\").\nThe bogie was invented independently in the UK and USA to solve different problems. The first locomotive with a bogie was built by UK engineer William Chapman in 1812. However there was no great demand because railroads in the UK at the time tended to be very straight which English engineers saw as the most efficient way get between two points. In the USA the terrain was more challenging and curved lines were a necessity. The bogie was first used in America for horse-drawn wagons on the Quincy Granite Railroad in 1829. The first successful locomotive with a bogie to guide the locomotive into curves while also supporting the smokebox was built by John B. Jervis in 1831. In 1834, the American Ross Winans independently patented a bogie configuration for the rail car (passenger or cargo), allowing cars that had no practical limit in length, since he had \"two\" bogies, each with two-axles, each mounted at opposite ends of the car, on a swivel attached to the undercarriage. This led to a whole new \"form\" of rail car that likes of which are recognizable today, they are long cars, not the short stagecoach cars () which were initially required to keep the distance between axles short. These long cars carry more weight because the eight wheels distribute the load, smooth out the ride due to the independent suspension, and reduce friction on curves. The B&amp;O railroad, who Winans contracted with, was the first to adopt bogie rail cars in the 1830s. It took a while for the \"American\" style car to catch on in England. The first use of bogie coaches in Britain was in 1872 by the Festiniog Railway. The first standard gauge British railway to build coaches with bogies, instead of rigidly mounted axles, was the Midland Railway in 1874.\nPurpose.\nBogies serve a number of purposes:\nInstability can occur when a combination of bogie design, springing, vehicle and bogie wheelbase, and track dynamics, cause the bogie to oscillate at high speed \u2013 a phenomenon known as \"hunting\". If unchecked, derailment can occur. Cars experiencing hunting are removed immediately once the defect is discovered. A tendency for more than one vehicle to hunt will result in investigations with a view to re-designing.\nUsually, two bogies are fitted to each carriage, wagon or locomotive, one at each end. Another configuration is often used in articulated vehicles, which places the bogies (often Jacobs bogies) under the connection between the carriages or wagons.\nMost bogies have two axles, but some cars designed for superior riding qualities or heavy loads have more axles per bogie. Heavy-duty cars may have more than two bogies using span bolsters to equalize the load and connect the bogies to the cars.\nUsually, the train floor is at a level above the bogies, but the floor of the area between the bogies may be lowered to increase interior space while staying within height restrictions. Examples are container well cars, bi-level passenger cars or stepless-entry, low-floor cars on railways with near-ground-level platforms.\nComponents.\nKey components of a bogie include:\nThe connections of the bogie with the rail vehicle allow a certain degree of rotational movement around a vertical axis pivot (bolster), with side bearers preventing excessive movement. More modern, bolsterless bogie designs omit these features, instead taking advantage of the sideways movement of the suspension to permit rotational movement.\nLocomotives.\nDiesel and electric.\nModern diesel and electric locomotives are mounted on bogies. Those commonly used in North America include Type A, Blomberg, HT-C and Flexicoil trucks.\nSteam.\nOn a steam locomotive, the leading and trailing wheels may be mounted on bogies like Bissel trucks (also known as \"pony trucks\"). Articulated locomotives (e.g. Fairlie, Garratt or Mallet locomotives) have power bogies similar to those on diesel and electric locomotives.\nRollbock.\nA rollbock is a specialized type of bogie that is inserted under the wheels of a rail wagon/car, usually to convert for another track gauge. Transporter wagons carry the same concept to the level of a flatcar specialized to take other cars as its load.\nArchbar bogies.\nIn archbar or diamond frame bogies, the side frames are fabricated rather than cast.\nTramway.\nModern.\nTram bogies are much simpler in design because of their axle load, and the tighter curves found on tramways mean tram bogies almost never have more than two axles. Furthermore, some tramways have steeper gradients and vertical as well as horizontal curves, which means tram bogies often need to pivot on the horizontal axis, as well.\nSome articulated trams have bogies located under articulations, a setup referred to as a Jacobs bogie. Often, low-floor trams are fitted with nonpivoting bogies; many tramway enthusiasts see this as a retrograde step, as it leads to more wear of both track and wheels and also significantly reduces the speed at which a tram can round a curve.\nHistoric.\nIn the past, many different types of bogie (truck) have been used under tramcars (e.g. Brill, Peckham, maximum traction). A maximum traction truck has one driving axle with large wheels and one nondriving axle with smaller wheels. The bogie pivot is located off-centre, so more than half the weight rests on the driving axle.\nHybrid systems.\nThe retractable stadium roof on Toronto's Rogers Centre used modified off-the-shelf train bogies on a circular rail. The system was chosen for its proven reliability.\nRubber-tyred metro trains use a specialised version of railway bogies. Special flanged steel wheels are behind the rubber-tired running wheels, with additional horizontal guide wheels in front of and behind the running wheels, as well. The unusually large flanges on the steel wheels guide the bogie through standard railroad switches, and in addition keep the train from derailing in case the tires deflate.\nVariable gauge axles.\nTo overcome breaks of gauge some bogies are being fitted with variable gauge axles (VGA) so that they can operate on two different gauges. These include the SUW 2000 system from ZNTK Pozna\u0144.\nRadial steering truck.\nRadial-steering trucks, also known as radial bogies, allow the individual axles to align with curves in addition to the bogie frame as a whole pivoting. For non-radial bogies, the more axles in the assembly, the more difficulty it has negotiating curves, due to wheel flange to rail friction. For radial bogies, the wheel sets actively steer through curves, thus reducing wear at the wheel's flange-to-rail interface and improving adhesion.\nIn the US, radial steering has been implemented in EMD and GE locomotives. The EMD version, designated HTCR, was made standard equipment for the SD70 series, first sold in 1993. The HTCR in operation had mixed results and relatively high purchase and maintenance costs. EMD subsequently introduced the HTSC truck, essentially the HTCR stripped of radial components. GE introduced their version in 1995 as a buyer option for the AC4400CW and later Evolution Series locomotives. However, it also met with limited acceptance because of its relatively high purchase and maintenance costs, and customers have generally chosen GE Hi-Ad standard trucks for newer and rebuilt locomotives.\nA 19th century configuration of self-steering axles on rolling stock established the principle of radial steering. The Cleminson system involved three axles, each mounted on a frame that had a central pivot; the central axle could slide transversely. The three axles were connected by linkages that kept them parallel on the straight and moved the end ones radially on a curve, so that all three axles were continually at right angles to the rails. The configuration, invented by British engineer John James Davidge Cleminson, was first granted a patent in the UK in 1883. The system was widely used on British narrow-gauge rolling stock, such as on the Isle of Man and Manx Northern Railways. The Holdfast Bay Railway Company in South Australia, which later became the Glenelg Railway Company, purchased Cleminson-configured carriages in 1880 from the American Gilbert &amp; Bush Company for its broad-gauge line.\nArticulated bogie.\nAn articulated bogie (aka Jakob-type) is any one of a number of bogie designs that reduce weight, increase passenger comfort, and allow railway equipment to safely turn sharp corners, while reducing or eliminating the \"screeching\" normally associated with metal wheels rounding a bend in the rails. There are a number of such designs, and the term is also applied to train sets that incorporate articulation in the vehicle, as opposed to the bogies themselves.\nIf one considers a single bogie \"up close\", it resembles a small rail car with axles at either end. The same effect that causes the bogies to rub against the rails at longer radius causes each of the pairs of wheels to rub on the rails and cause the screeching. Articulated bogies add a second pivot point between the two axles (wheelsets) to allow them to rotate to the correct angle even in these cases.\nArticulated lorries (tractor-trailers).\nIn trucking, a bogie is the subassembly of axles and wheels that supports a semi-trailer, whether permanently attached to the frame (as on a single trailer) or making up the dolly that can be hitched and unhitched as needed when hitching up a second or third semi-trailer (as when pulling doubles or triples).\nTracked vehicles.\nSome tanks and other tracked vehicles have bogies as external suspension components (see armoured fighting vehicle suspension). This type of bogie usually has two or more road wheels and some type of sprung suspension to smooth the ride across rough terrain. Bogie suspensions keep much of their components on the outside of the vehicle, saving internal space. Although vulnerable to antitank fire, they can often be repaired or replaced in the field.\nSee also.\nArticles on bogies and trucks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated topics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4641", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4641", "title": "British Steel (1967\u20131999)", "text": "Steelmaking enterprise in the United Kingdom\nBritish Steel was a major British steel producer. It originated from the nationalised British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed in 1967, which was privatised as a public limited company, British Steel plc, in 1988. It was once a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index. The company merged with Koninklijke Hoogovens to form Corus Group in 1999.\nHistory.\nThe Labour Party came to power at the 1945 general election, pledging to bring several industries into state ownership. In 1946, it put the first steel development plan into practice with the aim of increasing capacity. It passed the Iron and Steel Act 1949, which meant nationalisation of the industry, as the government bought out the shareholders, and created the Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain. American Marshall Plan aid in 1948\u201350 reinforced modernisation efforts and provided funding for them. However, the nationalisation was reversed by the Conservative government after 1952.\nThe industry was re-nationalised in 1967 under another Labour government, becoming British Steel Corporation (BSC). But by then, 20 years of political manipulation had left companies, such as British Steel, with serious problems: a complacency with existing equipment, plants operating below full capacity (hence the low efficiency), poor-quality assets, outdated technology, government price controls, higher coal and oil costs, lack of funds for capital improvement, and increasing competition on the world market.\nBy the 1970s, the Labour government's main goal for the declining industry was to keep employment high. Since British Steel was a major employer in depressed regions, it was decided to keep many mills and facilities operating at a loss. In the 1980s, Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher re-privatised BSC as British Steel. Under private control, the company dramatically cut its workforce and underwent a radical reorganisation and massive capital investment to again become competitive in the world marketplace.\nAlasdair\u00a0M. Blair (1997), Professor of International Relations and Head of the Department of Politics and Public Policy at De Montfort University, has explored the history of British Steel since the Second World War to evaluate the impact of government intervention in a market economy. He suggests that entrepreneurship was lacking in the 1940s; the government could not persuade the industry to upgrade its plants. For generations, the industry had followed a piecemeal growth pattern that proved relatively inefficient in the face of world competition.\nNationalisation.\nBSC was formed from the assets of former private companies which had been nationalised, largely under the Labour government of Harold Wilson, on 28 July 1967. Wilson's was the second attempt at nationalisation; the post-war government of Clement Attlee had created the Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain in 1951 taking public ownership of 80 companies but this had been largely reversed by the following Conservative governments of the 1950s with only Britain's largest steel company, Richard Thomas and Baldwins, remaining in public ownership.\nBSC was established under the Iron and Steel Act 1967, which vested in the corporation the shares of the fourteen major UK-based steel companies then in operation, being:\nAt the time of its formation, BSC comprised around ninety per cent of the UK's steelmaking capacity; it had around 268,500 employees and around 200 wholly or partly-owned subsidiaries based in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Africa, South Asia, and South America.\nDorman Long, South Durham and Stewarts and Lloyds had merged as British Steel and Tube Ltd before vesting took place. BSC later arranged an exchange deal with Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds Ltd (GKN), the parent company of GKN Steel, under which BSC acquired Dowlais Ironworks at Merthyr Tydfil and GKN took over BSC's Brymbo Steelworks near Wrexham.\nRestructuring.\nAccording to Blair (1997), British Steel faced serious problems at the time of its formation, including obsolescent plants; plants operating under capacity and thus at low efficiency; outdated technology; price controls that reduced marketing flexibility; soaring coal and oil costs; lack of capital investment funds; and increasing competition on the world market. By the 1970s, the government adopted a policy of keeping employment high in the declining industry. This especially impacted BSC since it was a major employer in a number of depressed regions.\nOne of the arguments made in favour of nationalisation was that it would enable steel production to be rationalised. This involved concentrating investment on major integrated plants, placed near the coast for ease of access by sea, and closing older, smaller plants, especially those that had been located inland for proximity to coal supplies.\nFrom the mid-1970s, British Steel pursued a strategy of concentrating steelmaking in five areas: South Wales, South Yorkshire, Scunthorpe, Teesside and Scotland. This policy continued following the Conservative victory at the 1979 general election. Other traditional steelmaking areas faced cutbacks. Under the Labour government of James Callaghan, a review by Lord Beswick had led to the reprieve of the so-called 'Beswick plants', for social reasons, but subsequent governments were obliged under EU rules to withdraw subsidies. Major changes resulted across Europe, including in the UK:\nPrivatisation.\nThe Conservative manifesto for the 1987 general election noted that \"British Steel has more than doubled its productivity since 1979 and made a profit last year for the first time in over ten years.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We will continue the successful programme of privatisation.\u2014\u200a\nFollowing Margaret Thatcher's re-election, on 3 December 1987 the Conservative government formally announced in a statement by Kenneth Clarke, Minister of State for Trade and Industry, that it intended to privatise the British Steel Corporation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026 the Government are committed to returning successful state industries such as steel to the private sector as soon as practicable. It is quite apparent that the British Steel Corporation has now reached the stage where it would benefit from a return to a fully commercial environment. I am therefore pleased to announce that I am setting in hand the work necessary to privatise the corporation as soon as possible, subject to market conditions.\nI believe that early privatisation and full commercial freedom will enable the company and its work force to be best placed to go on to further achievements and to secure a firmly based competitive industry with a long-term future.\u2014\u200a\nOn 5 September 1988 the assets, rights and liabilities of British Steel Corporation were transferred to British Steel plc, registered under the Companies Act as company number 2280000, by the British Steel Act 1988.\nThe government retained a special share which carried no voting rights but until 31 December 1993, permitted the government to stop any one party controlling more than 15% of the shares.\nBritish Steel employees were given a free allocation of shares, and offered two free shares for each they purchased up to \u00a3165, discounted shares up to \u00a32,200, and priority on applying for shares up to \u00a310,000.\nDealing in shares opened on the London Stock Exchange on 5 December 1988.\nPost-privatisation.\nThe privatised company later merged with the Dutch steel producer Koninklijke Hoogovens to form Corus Group on 6 October 1999. Corus itself was taken over in March 2007 by the Indian steel operator Tata Steel.\nChairmen.\nIan MacGregor later became famous for his role as Chairman of the National Coal Board during the UK miners' strike (1984\u20131985). During the strike the \"Battle of Orgreave\" took place at British Steel's coking plant.\nSponsorships.\nIn 1971 British Steel sponsored Sir Chay Blyth in his record-making non-stop circumnavigation against the winds and currents, known as 'The Impossible Voyage'. In 1992 they sponsored the British Steel Challenge, the first of a series of 'wrong way' races for amateur crews.\nBritish Steel had agreed a sponsorship deal with Middlesbrough Football Club during the 1994\u201395 season, with a view to British Steel-sponsored Middlesbrough shirts making their appearance the following season. But the sponsorship deal was terminated before it commenced after it was revealed that British steel only made up a tiny fraction of steel used in construction of the stadium, and that the bulk of the steel had been imported from Germany.\nIn popular culture.\nThe English rock band XTC mentioned British Steel in their 1979 song Making Plans for Nigel.\nThe heavy metal band Judas Priest named their 1980 album \"British Steel\" after the British Steel Corporation. Lead singer Rob Halford explained in an interview that the 'sounds of heavy metal' have been with him since childhood, due to the close proximity of the BSC plant where he grew up.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4642", "revid": "1313511027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4642", "title": "BT Group", "text": "British multinational telecommunications holding company\nBT Group plc (formerly British Telecom) is a British multinational telecommunications holding company headquartered in London, England. It has operations in around 180 countries and is the largest provider of fixed-line, broadband and mobile services in the UK, and also provides subscription television and IT services.\nBT's origins date back to the founding in 1846 of the Electric Telegraph Company, the world's first public telegraph company, which developed a nationwide communications network. BT Group as it came to be started in 1912, when the General Post Office, a government department, took over the system of the National Telephone Company becoming the monopoly telecoms supplier in the United Kingdom. The Post Office Act of 1969 led to the GPO becoming a public corporation, Post Office Telecommunications. The \"British Telecom\" brand was introduced in 1980, and became independent of the Post Office in 1981, officially trading under the name. British Telecom was privatised in 1984, becoming \"British Telecommunications plc\", with some 50 percent of its shares sold to investors. The Government sold its remaining stake in further share sales in 1991 and 1993. BT holds a royal warrant and has a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange, and is a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index.\nBT controls a number of large subsidiaries. Its BT Enterprise division supplies telecoms services to corporate and government customers worldwide, and its BT Consumer division supplies telephony, broadband, and subscription television services in the United Kingdom to around 18\u00a0million customers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nElectrical telegraphy.\nA number of privately owned electrical telegraph companies operated in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland from 1846 onwards. Among them were:\nGeneral Post Office.\nThe Telegraph Act 1868 passed the control of all these to the Postal Telegraphs Department of the newly formed General Post Office (GPO). The Telegraph Act 1869 granted the GPO a monopoly over communications.\nWith the invention of the telephone by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876 the GPO began to provide telephone services from some of its telegraph exchanges. It was confirmed in 1880 that the 1869 Act included telephony even though the telephone had not been invented when the Act was first conceived. In 1882, the Postmaster-General, Henry Fawcett started to issue licences to operate a telephone service to private businesses and the telephone system grew under the GPO in some areas and private ownership in others. The GPO's main competitor, the National Telephone Company (NTC), emerged in this market by absorbing other private telephone companies. It controlled most of telephony in Britain before the 1880 ruling on the Telegraph Act 1869 mandated a nationalised service \u2013 which was instated in 1911 prior to the absorption of the NTC into the GPO in 1912.\nThe trunk network was unified under GPO control in 1896 and the local distribution network in 1912. A few municipally owned services remained outside of GPO control. These were Kingston upon Hull, Portsmouth and Guernsey. Hull still retains an independent operator, Kingston Communications, though it is no longer municipally controlled.\nThe assets of the National Telephone Company were acquired by the UK Government to form Post Office Telephones in late 1911. Post Office engineers in the inter-war period had considerable expertise in both telecommunications and hearing assistive devices. Transistors were invented by Bell Telephone Laboratories in the US in 1948, however it was not until the mid-1960s that a transistorised oscillator was introduced to make the calling sound on a telephone in the UK.\nPost Office Telecommunications.\nIn 1969 the GPO, a government department, became the Post Office, a nationalised industry separate from government. Post Office Telecommunications was set up as a division of the Post Office, in October 1969. The Post Office Act 1969 was passed to provide for greater efficiency in post and telephone services; rather than run a range of services, each organisation would be able to focus on their respective service, with dedicated management. By law, the Post Office retained the exclusive right to operate the UK national telecom network, (although since 1914 had licensed Hull City Council to operate its own local telephone network, Kingston Communications).\nThe 1970s was a period of great expansion for the Post Office. Most exchanges were modernised and expanded, and many services, such as STD and international dialling were extended. By the early 1970s, subscribers in most cities could dial direct to Western Europe, the US, and Canada; by the end of the decade, most of the world could be dialled direct. The System X digital switching platform was developed, and the first digital exchanges began to be installed. The Post Office also procured their own fleet of vans, based on the Commer FC model.\nPost Office Telecommunications researched and implemented data communications using packet switching in the 1970s, resulting in the EPSS, International Packet Switched Service, and Packet Switch Stream.\nBritish Telecom.\nIn 1979 the Conservatives decided that telecommunications should be fully separated from the Post Office. The \"British Telecom\" brand was introduced in 1980. On 1 October 1981, this became the official name of Post Office Telecommunications, which became a state-owned corporation independent of the Post Office under the provisions of the British Telecommunications Act 1981. In 1982 BT's monopoly on telecommunications was broken with the granting of a licence to Mercury Communications.\nPrivatisation.\nOn 19 July 1982, the Government announced its intention to sell shares in British Telecom to the public. On 1 April 1984, British Telecommunications was incorporated as a public limited company (plc) in anticipation of the passing of the Telecommunications Bill. This Bill received royal assent on 12 April as the Telecommunications Act 1984, and the transfer to British Telecommunications plc from British Telecom as a statutory corporation of its business, its property, its rights and liabilities took place on 6 August 1984. The remainder of the statutory corporation British Telecom was dissolved in 1994.\nInitially all shares in the new plc were owned by the Government. In November 1984, 50.2% of the new company was offered for sale to the public and employees. Shares were listed in London, New York, and Toronto and the first day of trading on was 3 December 1984. The Government sold half its remaining interest in December 1991 and the other half in July 1993. In July 1997, the new Labour Government relinquished its Special Share (\"Golden Share\"), retained at the time of the flotation, which had effectively given it the power to block a takeover of the company, and to appoint two non-executive directors to the Board.\nThe company changed its trading name to \"BT\" on 2 April 1991. In 1996 Peter Bonfield was appointed CEO and chairman of the executive committee, promising a \"rollercoaster ride\".\nDiversification.\nIn the early 1980s, BT Merlin was established as a business unit of British Telecom, at first to sell products such as phone systems to small businesses. In 1983, the growing \"office automation\" market was addressed through Merlin-branded desktop computers made by ICL, with built-in modems to communicate over the phone network. Later products included the Merlin Tonto \u2013 developed by ICL from the Sinclair QL home computer \u2013 and the Merlin M4000, a rebadged Logica computer.\nIn the 1990s, BT entered the Irish telecommunications market through a joint venture with the Electricity Supply Board, the Irish state owned power provider. This venture, entitled Ocean, found its main success through the launch of Ireland's first subscription-free dial-up ISP, oceanfree.net. As a telecoms company it found much less success, mainly targeting corporate customers. BT acquired 100% of this venture in 1999.\nOver the period 1980 to 2000, BT and other providers adopted Internet product strategies when it became commercially advantageous.\nAttempted global alliances.\nMCI.\nIn June 1994 BT and MCI Communications launched Concert Communications Services which was a $1 billion joint venture between the two companies. Its aim was to build a network which would provide easy global connectivity to multinational corporations.\nThis alliance progressed further on 3 November 1996 when the two companies announced that they had agreed to a merger, creating a global telecommunications company called Concert plc. The proposal gained approval from the European Commission, the US Department of Justice, and the US Federal Communications Commission and looked set to proceed.\nHowever, in light of pressure from investors reacting to the slide in BT's share price on the London Stock Exchange, BT reduced its bid price for MCI, releasing MCI from its exclusivity clause and allowing it to speak to other interested parties. On 1 October 1997, Worldcom made a rival bid for MCI which was followed by a counter-bid from GTE.\nBT sold its stake in MCI to Worldcom in 1998 for \u00a34,159 million. As part of the deal, BT also bought out from MCI its 24.9% interest in Concert Communications, thereby making Concert a wholly owned part of BT.\nThe reaction to the failure of the deal in the City of London was critical of then Chairman Iain Vallance and CEO Peter Bonfield, and the lack of confidence from the failed merger led to their removal.\nAT&amp;T.\nAs BT owned Concert in 1994, and still wanted access to the North American market, it needed a new partner. An AT&amp;T/BT option had been mooted in the past, but stopped on regulatory grounds due to their individual virtual monopolies in their home markets. By 1996, this had receded to the point where a deal was possible, and a deal was consummated in 1998.\nAt its height, the Concert managed network was extensive. Although Concert continued signing customers, its rate of revenue growth slowed, so that in 1999 David Dorman was made CEO with a brief to revive it.\nIn late 2000, the BT and AT&amp;T boards fell-out, partly due to each partner's excess debt and the resulting board room clear-outs, partly due to Concert's extensive annual losses. AT&amp;T recognized that Concert was a threat to its ambitions if left intact, and so negotiated a deal where Concert was split in two in 2001: North America and Eastern Asia went to AT&amp;T, the rest of the world and $400M to BT. BT's remaining Concert assets were merged into its BT Ignite, later BT Global Services group.\nBT Ireland.\nIn 2000, BT acquired Esat Telecom Group plc, and all its subsidiary companies, and Ireland On Line. It also purchased Telenor's minority shareholding in Esat Digifone. The Esat Telecom Group was split in two with the landline and internet operations were combining with Ocean to become part of BT Ignite. Esat Group was renamed Esat BT in July 2002, and eventually BT Ireland in April 2005. Esat Digifone became part of BT Wireless, before being spun off into a separate independent company mmo2 plc (now Telef\u00f3nica Europe). EsatBT installed the first DSL lines in Ireland, to try and compete heavily with former state telecoms company Eircom and operate one exchange, in Limerick.\n2001 debt crisis and sale, demerger.\nBy 2001, BT had a debt of \u00a330 billion, much of which was acquired during the bidding round for the 3rd generation mobile telephony (commonly known as 3G) licences. It had also failed in its series of proposed global mergers, and the funds flowing from its then virtual monopoly of the UK market place had been largely removed. It was also headed by two executives who had little support from the London Stock Exchange, particularly in light of a 60% drop in share price in sixteen months.\nPhilip Hampton joined as CFO, and in April 2001 Sir Iain Vallance was replaced as chairman by recognised turn around expert Sir Christopher Bland. In May 2001, BT carried out corporate Europe's largest ever rights issue, allowing it to raise \u00a35.9 billion. A few days before, it sold stakes in Japan Telecom, in mobile operator J-Phone Communications, and in Airtel of India to Vodafone. In June 2001, BT's directory business was sold as Yell Group to a combination of private equity firms Apax Partners and Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst for \u00a32.1 billion.\nA demerger followed in November 2001, when the former mobile telecommunications business of BT, BT Cellnet, was hived off as a separate business named \"mmO2\". This included BT owned or operated networks in other countries, including BT Cellnet (UK), Esat Digifone (Ireland), and Viag Interkom (Germany). All networks now owned or operated by mmO2 (except Manx Telecom) were renamed as O2. The de-merger was accomplished via a share-swap, all British Telecommunications plc shareholders received one mmO2 plc and one BT Group plc (of which British Telecommunications is now a wholly owned subsidiary) share for each share they owned. British Telecommunications plc was de-listed on 16 November, and the two new companies started trading on 19 November.\nAftermath, 2001 to 2006.\nAt the end of the series of sales, Sir Peter Bonfield resigned in October 2001. Bonfield was replaced by former Lucent CEO Ben Verwaayen.\nDuring Bonfield's tenure the share price went from \u00a34 to \u00a315, and back again to \u00a35. Bonfield's salary to 31 March 2001 was a basic of \u00a3780,000 (increasing to \u00a3820,000) plus a \u00a3481,000 bonus and \u00a350,000 of other benefits including pension. He also received a deferred bonus, payable in shares three years' later, of \u00a3481,000, and additional bonuses of \u00a33.3 million.\nmmO2 plc was replaced by O2 plc in a further share-swap in 2005, and subsequently bought in an agreed takeover by Telef\u00f3nica for \u00a318 billion and delisted. In 2004, BT launched Consult 21, a consultation organisation that was to aid BT 21CN in the eventual conversion to digital telephony.\nIn 2004, BT was awarded the contract to deliver and manage N3, a secure and fast broadband network for the NHS National Programme for IT (NPfIT) program, on behalf of the English National Health Service (NHS).\nIn 2005, BT made a number of acquisitions. In February 2005, BT acquired Infonet (now re-branded BT Infonet), a large telecoms company based in El Segundo, California, giving BT access to new geographies. It also acquired the Italian company Albacom. Then in April 2005, it bought Radianz from Reuters (now rebranded as BT Radianz), which expanded BT's coverage and provided BT with more buying power in certain countries.\nIn August 2006, BT acquired online electrical retailer Dabs.com for \u00a330.6\u00a0million. The BT Home Hub manufactured by Inventel was also launched in June 2006.\nIn October 2006, BT confirmed that it would be investing 75% of its total capital spending, put at \u00a310\u00a0billion over five years, in its new Internet Protocol (IP) based 21st century network (21CN). Annual savings of \u00a31\u00a0billion per annum were expected when the transition to the new network was to have been completed in 2010, with over 50% of its customers to have been transferred by 2008. That month the first customers on to 21CN was successfully tested at Adastral Park in Suffolk.\n2007 to 2012.\nIn January 2007, BT acquired Sheffield-based ISP, PlusNet plc, adding 200,000 customers. BT stated that PlusNet will continue to operate separately out of its Sheffield head-office. On 1 February 2007, BT announced agreed terms to acquire International Network Services Inc. (INS), an international provider of IT consultancy and software.\nIn February 2007, Sir Michael Rake succeeded Sir Christopher Bland. In April that year, they acquired COMSAT International, followed in October by the acquisition of Lynx Technology.\nBT acquired Wire One Communications in June 2008 and folded the company into \"BT Conferencing\", its existing conferencing unit, as a new video business unit\nIn July 2008, BT acquired the online business directory firm Ufindus for \u00a320\u00a0million in order to expand its position in the local information market in GB. On 28 July 2008, BT acquired Ribbit, of Mountain View, California, \"Silicon Valley's First Phone Company\". Ribbit provides Adobe Flash/Flex APIs, allowing web developers to incorporate telephony features into their software as a service (SaaS) applications.\nIn the early days of its fibre broadband rollout, BT said it would deliver fibre-to-the-premises (FTTP) to around 25% of the Country, with the rest catered for by the slower fibre-to-the-cabinet (FTTC), which uses copper wiring to deliver the final stretch of the connection. In 2014, with less than 0.7% of the company's fibre network being FTTP, BT dropped the 25% target, saying that it was \"far less relevant today\" because of improvements made to the headline speed of FTTC, which had doubled to 80\u00a0Mbit/s since its fibre broadband rollout was first announced. To supplement FTTC, BT offered an 'FTTP on Demand' product. In January 2015, BT stopped taking orders for the on-demand product.\nOn 1 April 2009, BT Engage IT was created from the merger of two previous BT acquisitions, Lynx Technology and Basilica. Apart from the name change not much else changed in operations for another 12 months. On 14 May 2009, BT said it was cutting up to 15,000 jobs in the coming year after it announced its results for the year to 31 March 2009. Then in July 2009, BT offered workers a long holiday for an up front sum of 25% of their annual wage or a one-off payment of \u00a31000 if they agree to go part-time.\nOn 6 April 2011, BT launched the first online not-for-profit fundraising service for UK charities called BT MyDonate as part of its investment to the community. The service will pass on 100% of all donations made through the site to the charity, and unlike other services which take a proportion as commission and charge charities for using their services, BT will only pass on credit/debit card charges for each donation. The service allows people to register to give money to charity or collect fundraising donations. BT developed MyDonate with the support of Cancer Research UK, Changing Faces, KidsOut, NSPCC and Women's Aid.\n2013 to 2020.\nIn March 2013, BT was allocated 4G spectrum in the UK following an auction and assignment by Ofcom, after paying \u00a3201.5m.\nOn 1 August 2013, BT launched its first television channels, BT Sport, to compete with rival broadcaster Sky Sports. Plans for the channels' launch came about when it was announced in June 2012 that BT had been awarded a package of broadcast rights for the Premier League from the 2013\u201314 to 2015\u201316 season, broadcasting 38 matches from each season. In February 2013, BT acquired ESPN Inc.'s UK and Ireland TV channels, continuing its expansion into sports broadcasting. ESPN America and ESPN Classic were both closed, while ESPN continued to be operated by BT. On 9 November 2013, BT announced it had acquired exclusive rights to the Champions League and Europa League for \u00a3897m, from the 2015 season, with some free games remaining including both finals.\nOn 1 November 2014, BT created a new central business services organisation to provide customer services and improve operational efficiency.\nOn 24 November 2014, shares in BT rose considerably on the announcement that the company was in talks to buy back O2, while at the same time confirmed it was also in talks to acquire EE. BT subsequently entered into exclusive talks to buy EE for \u00a312.5\u00a0billion on 15 December 2014 and confirmed on 5 February 2015, subject to regulatory approval. The deal combined BT's 10 million retail customers and EE's 24.5\u00a0million direct mobile subscribers. Deutsche Telekom would own 12% of BT, while Orange S.A. would own 4%.\nIn March 2015, BT launched a 4G service as BT Mobile BT Group CEO Gavin Patterson announced that BT plans to migrate all of its customers onto the IP network by 2025, switching off the company's ISDN network.\nOn 15 January 2016, BT received approval by the Competition and Markets Authority to acquire EE. The deal was officially completed on 29 January 2016 with Deutsche Telekom then owning 12% of BT, while Orange S.A. owned 4%.\nOn 1 February 2016, BT announced a new organisational structure to take effect from April 2016 after acquiring EE. The EE brand, network and high street stores became a second consumer division, operating alongside BT Consumer to serve customers with mobile services, broadband and TV and continued to deliver the Emergency Services Network contract awarded to EE in late 2015. There was to be a new BT Business and Public Sector division with around \u00a35bn of revenues to serve small and large businesses as well as the public sector in the UK and Ireland. It was to comprise the existing BT Business division along with EE's business division and those parts of BT Global Services that are UK focused. There will also be another new division; BT Wholesale and Ventures that will comprise the existing BT Wholesale division along with EE's MVNO business as well as some specialist businesses such as Fleet, Payphones and Directories. Gerry McQuade, Chief Sales and Marketing Officer, Business at EE, was to be its CEO. The June 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum set off the Brexit process.\nOn 8 June 2017, BT appointed KPMG as its new auditor to replace PwC in the wake of a fraud scandal in Italy that triggered a major profit warning earlier that year. Also in of that year, KPMG fired six US employees over a scandal that calls into question efforts to ensure that public company accounts are being properly scrutinised.\nOn 8 July 2017, \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that BT \"has called in consultants from McKinsey to conduct a review of its businesses in the hope of saving hundreds of millions of pounds per year. The work, dubbed 'Project Novator', is understood to include a potential merger of BT's struggling global services corporate networking and IT unit with its business and public sector division\". On 28 July 2017, BT again announced organisational changes to \"simplify its operating model, strengthen accountabilities and accelerate its transformation\" to bring together its BT Consumer and EE divisions into a new unified BT Consumer division to operate across three brands \u2013 BT, EE and Plusnet. It was to take effect from 1 April 2018.\nOn 18 April 2018, BT announced further organisational changes after unification of BT Consumer and EE divisions, bringing together its BT Business and Public Sector and BT Wholesale and Ventures divisions into a new unified division known as \"BT Enterprise\". It was to include BT's Ventures business which \"acts as an incubator for potential new growth areas of the company\" and to report as a single unit from 1 October 2018.\n2021 to present.\nIn February 2021, BT and EE launched a fixed-line home broadband service that can also use the mobile network. With the introduction of the Hybrid Connect device, customers who lost connection through their Smart Hub 2 would automatically be connected to EE's mobile network, giving them an uninterrupted connection that BT described as \"unbreakable\".\nIn June 2021, French telecommunications company Altice acquired a 12% stake in BT, increasing to 18% in December 2021 and 24.5% in May 2023. Patrick Drahi's purchase of 650 million shares cost about \u00a3960 million. Altice's increasing stake in BT Group posed questions around the national security of the United Kingdom's infrastructure, and the UK government opened an investigation in May 2022 to look into possible security implications. In August 2022, the government completed its investigation and ruled that Drahi would not be required to cut his stake in BT, concluding that the investment did not pose any national security risks.\nIn July 2023, BT announced the appointment of businesswoman Allison Kirkby as its chief executive, replacing Philip Jansen in February 2024.\nIn June 2024, Carlos Slim acquired a 3.2% equity stake in the group. Two months later, Sunil Mittal's Bharti Enterprises paid around \u00a33.2bn for Drahi's 24.5% stake.\nOperations.\nBT Group is a holding company; the majority of its businesses and assets are held by its wholly owned subsidiary British Telecommunications plc. BT's businesses are operated under special government regulation by the British telecoms regulator Ofcom (formerly Oftel). BT has been found to have significant market power in some markets following market reviews by Ofcom. In these markets, BT is required to comply with additional obligations such as meeting reasonable requests to supply services and not to discriminate.\nBT runs the telephone exchanges, trunk network and local loop connections for the vast majority of British fixed-line telephones. Apart from KCOM Group, which serves Kingston upon Hull, BT is the only UK telecoms operator to have a universal service obligation which means it must provide a fixed telephone line to any address in the UK, at a uniform price throughout the country. This requirement was introduced by the Electronic Communications (Universal Service) Order 2003, which also covers provision of directories, a directory enquiry service, and public call boxes. Legislation in 2018 added a minimum standard of fixed broadband service, subject to a cap on the cost of provision, which Ofcom implemented as a set of conditions applying to BT and KCOM in 2020. Reduced usage of public phone boxes led Ofcom to vary the conditions relating to them in 2022.\nAs well as continuing to provide service in those traditional areas in which BT has an obligation to provide services or is closely regulated, BT has expanded into more profitable products and services where there is less regulation. These are, principally, broadband internet service and bespoke solutions in telecommunications and information technology.\nBranding.\nIn 2019, a simplified BT logo and brand was launched to replace the previous multi-coloured globe logo. In April 2022, BT announced its intentions to focus on the EE brand for consumer products.\nCorporate affairs.\nBuildings and facilities.\nAs BT operates in around 180 countries, it owns and leases a range of buildings and facilities in the UK and around the world. In 2001, it sold some of its UK property portfolio for \u00a32.38\u00a0billion to Telereal Trillium in a 30-year leaseback. The deal included 6,700 properties and contributed towards alleviating its debt at the time, with the main advantage being flexibility as it allows BT to vacate property over time, so as to adapt to changing operational requirements.\nHeadquarters.\nUntil December 2021, BT Group's world headquarters and registered office was the BT Centre, a 10-storey office building at 81 Newgate Street in the City of London, opposite St Paul's tube station. In November 2021, BT relocated to new headquarters at One Braham, a brand new 18-storey building completed earlier in 2021. In March 2024, BT Group opened a new multi-million-pound hub and Welsh headquarters in Cardiff for 1,000 BT Group employees.\nBuildings and stations.\nSome of its UK buildings and stations are:\nTelecommunications towers.\nBT remains one of the largest owners of telecommunications towers in the UK and were a major node in its microwave network. Its BT Tower in London is notable for numerous reasons such as being the tallest building in the UK from its construction in the 1960s until the early 1980s, its revolving restaurant at the top known as 'Top of the Tower' in operation through the late 1960s and 1970s, and remains one of the UK's most important communications nerve centres, the heart of a vast broadcasting and communications network. It carries approximately 95% of the UK's TV content, including live broadcasts and 99% of all live football games as well as pioneering the first international HD, 3D and 4K television transmissions. It serves media production and distribution customers around the world and as part of the Things Connected Network launched in London, it became the highest building in the world to host an Internet of things (IoT) base station in September 2016. Some of its towers are:\nOther.\nSome of its other UK facilities are:\nDivisions.\nBT Group is organised into the following divisions:\nCorporate governance.\nBT's board of directors as of November 2021:\nBT's executive committee as of March 2018:\nPension fund.\nBT has the second largest defined benefit pension plan of any UK public company. The trustees valued the scheme at \u00a336.7\u00a0billion at the end of 2010; an actuarial valuation valued the deficit of the scheme at \u00a39.043\u00a0billion as of 31 December 2008.\nFollowing a change in the regulations governing inflation index linking, the deficit was estimated at \u00a35.2\u00a0billion in November 2010.\nThe BT Pension Scheme manages the defined benefit pension scheme. The scheme closed to new members in 2001 and closed to future accrual for almost all members in 2018. As at 30 June 2025, the scheme had \u00a335.7bn of assets under management, of which 49% was in government and corporate bonds. The scheme had 212,468 pensioner members receiving a pension, 46,108 deferred members no longer accruing extra benefits and 12 active members remaining accruing extra benefits. \nSponsorships.\nBT sponsored Scotland's domestic rugby union championship and cup competitions between 1999 and 2006.\nOn 31 July 2012, it was announced that BT agreed a three-year sponsorship deal with Ulster Rugby and sees BT become the Official Communications Partner. BT's logo will appear on the Ulster Rugby shirt sleeve for all friendlies, Heineken Cup and RaboDirect Pro12 matches as well as a significant brand presence at their home ground; Ravenhill Stadium.\nOn 29 July 2013, it was announced that BT had partnered up with Scottish Rugby Union in a four-year sponsorship deal with its two professional clubs; Edinburgh Rugby and Glasgow Warriors that will commence from August 2013. The deal involves BT Sport becoming the new shirt sponsor for both clubs as well as being promoted with BT Group at their respective home grounds; Scotstoun Stadium and Murrayfield Stadium.\nOn 13 May 2014, BT joined Sky, TalkTalk and Virgin Media as founding partners of Internet Matters, a not-for-profit organisation that provides online safety advice for parents and their children.\nOn 28 May 2014, it was announced that BT agreed a \u00a320\u00a0million four-year sponsorship deal with Scottish Rugby Union which includes BT securing the naming rights for Murrayfield Stadium which becomes BT Murrayfield Stadium, become sponsor of the Scotland sevens team, become principal and exclusive sponsor of Scotland's domestic league and cup competitions from next season, taking over the role from The Royal Bank of Scotland and become sponsor of Scottish Rugby's four new academies that aims to drive forward standards for young players who have aspirations to play professionally.\nOn 14 April 2015, it was announced that as part of BT's current \u00a320\u00a0million four-year sponsorship deal with Scottish Rugby Union that was announced in May 2014, BT has completed its sponsorship portfolio following an additional investment of \u00a33.6\u00a0million for the 3 years remaining of its sponsorship deal, to become the new shirt sponsor for the Scotland national teams.\nOn 27 January 2016, it was announced that BT, alongside YouTube will be the new joint headline sponsors in a three-year deal with Edinburgh International Television Festival. The two companies will \"share prominence across all branding of the 41st TV Festival, including the famous MacTaggart Lecture and will work closely with the festival organisers in their bid to reflect new trends in a rapidly transforming industry, from new ways of distributing content to technical innovations such as virtual reality\".\nBT is the founding and principal partner of the Wayne Rooney Foundation, which was established to improve the lives of children and young people. The Foundation will run events \"to raise vital funds to support the work of key organisations dedicated to supporting disadvantaged and vulnerable children and young people\". These organisations are four chosen charities which are, Manchester United Foundation, NSPCC, Claire House Children's Hospice and Alder Hey Children's Hospital. The first of these events was Wayne's testimonial match in August 2016 between Manchester United F.C. and Everton F.C. which raised \u00a31.2\u00a0million. The match was screened live through BT Sport with BT MyDonate being the official fundraising platform for the testimonial, with both online and text options for donations promoted during the match.\nOn 26 May 2017, it was announced that BT is to sponsor the 2017 British Urban Film Festival (BUFF) and sees BT host every event of the film festival, including the Awards at the BT Tower. BT will also broadcast the awards ceremony on BT.com and will have the opportunity to screen films acquired from the festival on its BT TV store platform.\nOn 6 September 2017, it was announced that BT had extended its current \u00a320\u00a0million four-year sponsorship deal with Scottish Rugby Union that was announced in May 2014, for a further three years beginning from June 2018. The new deal sees BT retain the naming rights to BT Murrayfield Stadium, alongside its role as principal partner of the Scotland national team and Scotland 7s. BT's logo will continue to be displayed on the front of Scotland rugby shirts across the world, in the Six Nations Championship, as well as the summer and autumn test matches. BT will also continue to be promoted at Edinburgh Rugby and Scotstoun Stadium in Glasgow.\nHistorical financial performance.\nBT's financial results have been as follows:\nControversies.\nWorld Wide Web hyperlink patent.\nIn 2001, BT discovered it owned a patent (https://) which it believed gave it patent rights on the use of hyperlink technology on the World Wide Web. The corresponding UK patent had already expired, but the US patent was valid until 2006. On 11 February 2002, BT began a court case relating to its claims in a US federal court against the internet service provider Prodigy Communications Corporation. In the case \"British Telecommunications plc v. Prodigy\", the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled on 22 August 2002 that the BT patent was not applicable to web technology and granted Prodigy's request for summary judgment of non-infringement.\nBehavioural targeting.\nIn early 2008 it was announced that BT had entered into a contract (along with Virgin Media and TalkTalk) with the spyware company Phorm (responsible under their 121Media guise for the Apropos rootkit) to intercept and analyse their users' click-stream data and sell the anonymised aggregate information as part of Phorm's OIX advertising service. The practice, known as \"behavioural targeting\" and condemned by critics as \"data pimping\", came under intense fire from various internet communities and other interested-parties who believe that the interception of data without the consent of users and web site owners is illegal under UK law (RIPA). At a more fundamental level, many have argued that the ISPs and Phorm have no right to sell a commodity (a user's data, and the copyrighted content of web sites) to which they have no claim of ownership. In response to questions about Phorm and the interception of data by the Webwise system Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the creator of the World Wide Web, indicated his disapproval of the concept and is quoted as saying of his data and web history:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's mine \u2013 you can't have it. If you want to use it for something, then you have to negotiate with me. I have to agree, I have to understand what I'm getting in return. I myself feel that it is very important that my ISP supplies internet to my house like the water company supplies water to my house. It supplies connectivity with no strings attached. My ISP doesn't control which websites I go to, it doesn't monitor which websites I go to.\u2014\u200a\nHuawei infrastructure access.\nBeginning in 2010 the UK intelligence community investigated Huawei, the Chinese supplier of BT's new fibre infrastructure with increasing urgency after the United States, Canada and Australia prevented the company from operating in their countries. Although BT had notified the UK government in 2003 of Huawei's interest in their \u00a310bn network upgrade contract, they did not raise the security implications as BT failed to explain that the Chinese company would have unfettered access to critical infrastructure. On 16 December 2012 the then prime minister David Cameron was supplied with an in-depth report indicating that the intelligence services had very grave doubts regarding Huawei, and that UK governmental, military, and civilian privacy may have been under serious threat.\nOn 7 June 2013, British lawmakers concluded that BT should not have allowed Huawei access to the UK's communications network without ministerial oversight, saying they were 'deeply shocked' that BT did not inform government that they were allowing Huawei and ZTE, both with ties to the Chinese military, unfettered access to critical national systems. Furthermore, ministers discovered that the agency with the responsibility to ensure Chinese equipment and code was threat-free was entirely staffed by Huawei employees. Subsequently, parliamentarians confirmed that in case of an attack on the UK there was nothing that could be done to stop Chinese infiltration.\nBy 2016 Huawei had put measures in place to ensure the integrity of UK national security. Specifically their UK work is now overseen by a board that includes directors from GCHQ, the Cabinet Office and the Home Office.\nZTE, another Chinese company that supplies extensive network equipment and subscriber hardware used with BT 'Infinity', was also under scrutiny by parliament's intelligence and security committee after the US, Canada, Australia and the European Union declared the company a security risk.\nIn 2020 following a government ruling, BT began removing Huawei equipment from its broadband and mobile networks in order to comply with new restrictions on the usage of Huawei equipment. As of 2023, the process is still ongoing.\nAlleged complicity with drone strikes in Yemen and Somalia.\nIn September 2012, BT entered into a $23\u00a0million deal with the US military to provide a key communications cable connecting RAF Croughton, a US military base on UK soil, with Camp Lemonnier, a large US base in Djibouti. Camp Lemonnier is used as a base for American drone attacks in Yemen and Somalia, and has been described by \"The Economist\" as \"the most important base for drone operations outside the war zone of Afghanistan.\"\nHuman rights groups including Reprieve and Amnesty International have criticised the use of armed drones outside declared war zones. Evidence produced by The Bureau of Investigative Journalism and Stanford University's International Human Rights &amp; Conflict Resolution Clinic suggest that drone strikes have caused substantial civilian casualties, and may be illegal under international law.\nIn 2013, BT was the subject of a complaint by Reprieve to the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills under the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, following their refusal to explain whether or not their infrastructure was used to facilitate drone strikes. The subsequent refusal of this complaint was appealed in May 2014, on the basis that the UK National Contact Point's decision did not follow the OECD Guidelines. The issue of bias was also raised, due to the appointment of Lord Ian Livingston as government minister for the department which was processing the complaint: Livingston had occupied a senior position at BT when the cable between RAF Croughton and Camp Lemonnier was originally built.\nOvercharging.\nIn February 2017, a review of the telecoms market by Ofcom found that BT's landline only contracts provided poor value to customers. Ofcom ordered BT to reduce their prices but stopped short of demanding that customers were compensated. In January 2021, Law firm Mishcon de Reya filed a claim with the Competition Appeal Tribunal against BT worth \u00a3600 million, accusing them of historic overcharging on landlines. The class action lawsuit claims BT have increased their prices for line-only services every year since 2009, whilst the wholesale cost for delivering these services has reduced. The claimants suggest that customers could be entitled to compensation of up to \u00a3500 each.\nBidding rules violation.\nIn 2020, BT was fined \u00a36.3m by the telecoms regulator Ofcom for violating the law on a large public sector deal in Northern Ireland. Under Ofcom's regulations, the BT network shall handle all wholesale customers similarly. In its report, Ofcom found that BT's network violated the rules by failing to supply Eir with the same details on its on-demand fiber-to-the-premises offering as its own rival team.\nOFCOM fines for non-functioning 999 calls.\nOn 25 June 2023, a \"catastrophic failure\" in BT's network resulted in nearly 14,000 attempted 999 emergency calls not being connected. Ofcom fined BT \u00a317.5 million, citing the telecom giant's lack of preparedness and poorly documented backup procedures.\nHistorical documents.\nRecords of the Post Office Corporation (Telecommunications division) 1969\u20131981 and its predecessors (including Post Office Telegraph and Telephone Service 1864\u20131969 and some private telegraph and telephone companies) are Public Records, and are held by BT Archives.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4644", "revid": "16577598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4644", "title": "Balmoral Castle", "text": "Royal residence in Aberdeenshire, Scotland\nBalmoral Castle () is a large estate house in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, and a residence of the British royal family. It is near the village of Crathie, west of Ballater and west of Aberdeen.\nThe estate and its original castle were bought from the Farquharson family in 1852 by Prince Albert, the husband of Queen Victoria. Soon afterwards, it was found that the house was too small, and the current Balmoral Castle was commissioned. The architect was William Smith of Aberdeen, and his designs were amended by Prince Albert. Balmoral remains the private property of the monarch and is not part of the Crown Estate. It was the summer residence of Queen Elizabeth II, who died there on 8 September 2022.\nThe castle is an example of Scottish baronial architecture, and is classified by Historic Environment Scotland as a category A listed building. The new castle was completed in 1856, and the old castle demolished shortly thereafter.\nSuccessive members of the royal family have added to the Balmoral Estate, and now it covers an area of of land. It is a working estate, including grouse moors, forestry and farmland, as well as managed herds of deer, Highland cattle, sheep and ponies.\nEtymology.\nBalmoral is pronounced or sometimes locally . It was first recorded as 'Bouchmorale' in 1451, and it was pronounced by local Scottish Gaelic speakers. The first element in the name is thought to be the Gaelic \"both\", meaning \"a hut\", but the second part is uncertain. Adam Watson and Elizabeth Allan wrote in \"The Place Names of Upper Deeside\" that the second part meant \"big spot (of ground)\". Alexander MacBain suggested this was originally the Pictish \"*mor-ial\", \"big clearing\" (cf. Welsh \"mawr-ial\"). Alternatively, the second part could be a saint's name.\nHistory.\nKing Robert II of Scotland (1316\u20131390) had a hunting lodge in the area. Historical records also indicate that a house at Balmoral was built by Sir William Drummond in 1390. The estate was later tenanted by Alexander Gordon, second son of the 1st Earl of Huntly. A tower house was built on the estate by the Gordons.\nIn 1662, the estate passed to Charles Farquharson of Inverey, brother of John Farquharson, the \"Black Colonel\". The Farquharsons were Jacobite sympathisers, and James Farquharson of Balmoral was involved in both the 1715 and 1745 Jacobite risings. He was wounded at the Battle of Falkirk (1746). The Farquharson estates were forfeited and passed to the Farquharsons of Auchendryne. In 1798, James Duff, 2nd Earl Fife, acquired Balmoral and leased the castle. Sir Robert Gordon, a younger brother of George Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen, acquired the lease in 1830. He made major alterations to the original castle at Balmoral, including baronial-style extensions that John Smith of Aberdeen designed.\nRoyal acquisition.\nQueen Victoria and Prince Albert first visited Scotland in 1842, five years after she acceded to the throne and two years after their marriage. During this first visit they stayed at Edinburgh, and at Taymouth Castle in Perthshire, the home of John Campbell, 2nd Marquess of Breadalbane. They returned in 1844 to stay at Blair Castle. In 1847, when they rented Ardverikie House by Loch Laggan. Frequent rain during the last trip led Sir James Clark, the queen's doctor, to recommend Deeside instead, for its healthier climate.\nSir Robert Gordon died in 1847, and his lease on Balmoral reverted to Lord Aberdeen. In February 1848, an arrangement was made for Prince Albert to acquire the remaining part of the lease on Balmoral, along with its furniture and staff, without having seen the property first.\nThe royal couple arrived for their first visit on 8 September 1848. Victoria found the house \"small but pretty\", and recorded in her diary that: \"All seemed to breathe freedom and peace, and to make one forget the world and its sad turmoils\". The surrounding hilly landscape reminded them of Thuringia, Albert's homeland in Germany.\nThe house was soon deemed too small, and in 1848, John and William Smith were commissioned to design new offices, cottages, and other ancillary buildings. Improvements to the woodlands, gardens and estate buildings were also being made, with the assistance of the landscape gardener James Beattie, and possibly the painter James Giles.\nMajor additions to the old house were considered in 1849, but by then negotiations were underway to purchase the estate from James Duff, 4th Earl Fife. After seeing a corrugated iron cottage at the Great Exhibition of 1851, Prince Albert ordered a prefabricated iron building for Balmoral from E. T. Bellhouse &amp; Co., to serve as a temporary ballroom and dining room. It was in use by 1 October 1851, and would serve as a ballroom until 1856.\nThe sale was completed in June 1852, the price being \u00a332,000 () and Prince Albert formally took possession that autumn. The neighbouring estate of Birkhall was also purchased at the same time, and the lease on Abergeldie Castle was secured accordingly. To mark the occasion, the \"Purchase Cairn\" was erected in the hills overlooking the castle, the first of many cairns on the estate.\nConstruction of the new house.\nSpace was needed for the growing family of Victoria and Albert, for additional staff, and for accommodation for visiting friends and official visitors such as cabinet members. Thus, extension of the existing structure would not provide enough space, and a larger house needed to be built. In early 1852, this was commissioned from William Smith. The son of John Smith (who designed the 1830 alterations of the original castle), William Smith, was the city architect of Aberdeen from 1852. On learning of the commission, William Burn sought an interview with the prince, apparently to complain that Smith previously had plagiarised his work; however, Burn was unsuccessful in depriving Smith of the appointment. William Smith's designs were amended by Prince Albert, who took a close interest in details such as turrets and windows.\nConstruction began in mid-1853, on a site some northwest of the original building that was considered to have a better vista. Another consideration was that during construction, the family would still be able to use the old house. Queen Victoria laid the foundation stone on 28 September 1853, during her annual autumn visit. By the autumn of 1855, the royal apartments were ready for occupancy, although the tower was still under construction and the servants had to be lodged in the old house. By coincidence, shortly after they arrived at the estate that autumn, news circulated about the fall of Sevastopol, ending the Crimean War, resulting in wild celebrations by royalty and locals alike. While visiting the estate soon afterwards, Prince Frederick of Prussia asked for the hand of Victoria, Princess Royal.\nThe new house was completed in 1856, and the old castle was later demolished. By autumn 1857, a new bridge across the Dee, designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel linking Crathie and Balmoral was finished.\nBalmoral Castle is built from granite quarried at Invergelder on the estate. It consists of two main blocks, each arranged around a courtyard. The southwestern block contains the main rooms, while the northeastern contains the service wings. At the southeast is an clock tower topped with turrets, one of which has a balustrade similar to a feature at Castle Fraser. Being similar in style to the demolished castle of the 1830s, the architecture of the new house is considered to be somewhat dated for its time when contrasted with the richer forms of Scots baronial being developed by William Burn and others during the 1850s. As an exercise in Scots baronial, it is sometimes described as too ordered, pedantic, and even Germanic as a consequence of Prince Albert's influence on the design.\nHowever, the purchase of a Scottish estate by Victoria and Albert and their adoption of a Scottish architectural style were influential for the ongoing revival of Highland culture. They decorated Balmoral with tartans and attended highland games at Braemar. Queen Victoria expressed an affinity for Scotland, even professing herself to be a Jacobite. Added to the work of Sir Walter Scott, this became a major factor in promoting the adoption of Highland culture by Lowland Scots. Historian Michael Lynch comments that \"the Scottishness of Balmoral helped to give the monarchy a truly British dimension for the first time\".\nVictoria and Albert at Balmoral.\nEven before the completion of the new house, the pattern of the life of the royal couple in the Highlands was soon established. Victoria took long walks of up to four hours daily, and Albert spent many days hunting deer and game. In 1849, diarist Charles Greville described their life at Balmoral as resembling that of the gentry rather than royalty. Victoria began a policy of commissioning artists to record Balmoral, its surroundings, and its staff. Over the years, numerous painters were employed at Balmoral, including Edwin and Charles Landseer, and Carl Haag.\nDuring the 1850s, new plantations were established near the house and exotic conifers were planted on the grounds. Prince Albert had an active role in these improvements, overseeing the design of parterres, the diversion of the main road north of the river via a new bridge, and plans for farm buildings. These buildings included a model dairy that he developed in 1861, the year of his death. Victoria completed the dairy. Subsequently, she also built several monuments to her husband on the estate. These include a pyramid-shaped cairn built a year after Albert's death, on top of \"Craig Lurachain\". A large statue of Albert with a dog and a gun by William Theed, was inaugurated on 15 October 1867, the twenty-eighth anniversary of their engagement.\nFollowing Albert's death, Victoria spent increasingly longer periods at Balmoral, staying for as long as four months a year during the early summer and autumn. She placed numerous mementoes of Albert on display.\nFew further changes were made to the grounds, except for some alterations to mountain paths, the erection of various cairns and monuments, and the addition of some cottages (\"Karim Cottage\" and \"Baile na Coille\") built for senior staff. It was during this period that Victoria began to depend on her servant, John Brown. He was a local ghillie from Crathie, who became one of her closest companions during her long mourning.\nIn 1887, Balmoral Castle was the birthplace of Victoria Eugenie, a granddaughter of Queen Victoria. She was born to Princess Beatrice, the fifth daughter of Victoria and Albert. Victoria Eugenie became queen of Spain when she married King Alfonso XIII in 1906.\nIn September 1896, Victoria welcomed Emperor Nicholas II of Russia and Empress Alexandra, a granddaughter of Victoria, to Balmoral. Four years later, Victoria made her last visit to the estate, three months before her death on 22 January 1901.\nAfter Victoria.\nAfter Victoria's death, the royal family continued to use Balmoral during annual autumn visits. George V had substantial improvements made during the 1910s and 1920s, including formal gardens to the south of the castle.\nDuring the Second World War, royal visits to Balmoral ceased. In addition, due to the conflict with Germany, \"Danzig Shiel\", a lodge built by Victoria in Ballochbuie, was renamed \"Garbh Allt Shiel\" and the \"King of Prussia's Fountain\" was removed from the grounds.\nIn the 1950s, Prince Philip added herbaceous borders and a water garden. During the 1980s, new staff buildings were built close to the castle.\nDeath of Queen Elizabeth II.\nQueen Elizabeth II had been at the castle since July 2022 for her annual summer holiday and had been receiving medical care there. In a break with tradition, Balmoral Castle, rather than Buckingham Palace, was the location of the appointment of British Prime Minister Liz Truss on 6 September 2022, due to concerns regarding the Queen's mobility issues. Elizabeth died at Balmoral two days later at the age of 96. She was the first monarch to die at Balmoral, and this was the first time a monarch had died in Scotland since James V died in 1542 at Falkland Palace. The Queen's coffin lay in repose in the ballroom of the castle for three days, to allow the Royal Family, estate staff and neighbours to pay their respects. On 11 September, the coffin was transported to the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh for the start of the state funeral proceedings.\nArchitecture.\nThough called a castle, Balmoral's primary function is that of a country house. It is a \"typical and rather ordinary\" country house from the Victorian period. The tower and \"pepper pot turrets\" are characteristic features of the residence's Scottish baronial style. The seven-storey tower is an architectural feature borrowed from medieval defensive tower houses. The \"pepper pot\" turrets were influenced by the style of 16th-century French ch\u00e2teaux. Other features of the Scottish baronial style are the crow-stepped gables, dormer windows, and battlemented porte-coch\u00e8re.\nOwnership.\nBalmoral is private property and, unlike the monarch's official residences, is not the property of the Crown. It was originally purchased privately by Prince Albert, for Queen Victoria, meaning that no revenues from the estate go to Parliament or the public purse, as would otherwise be the case for property owned outright by the monarch by the Civil List Act 1760. Along with Sandringham House in Norfolk, ownership of Balmoral was inherited by Edward VIII on his accession in 1936. When he abdicated later the same year, however, he retained ownership of them. A financial settlement was devised, under which Balmoral and Sandringham were purchased by Edward's brother and successor to the Crown, George VI.\nElizabeth II inherited the Balmoral estate from her father, and then after her death, ownership passed to her eldest son King Charles III, but the estate is managed by trustees under Deeds of Nomination and Appointment.\nEstate.\nExtent and operation.\nBalmoral Estate is within the Cairngorms National Park and is partly within the Deeside and Lochnagar National Scenic Area. The estate contains a wide variety of landscapes, from the Dee river valley to open mountains. There are seven Munros (hills in Scotland over ) within the estate, the highest being Lochnagar at . This mountain was the setting for a children's story, \"The Old Man of Lochnagar\", told originally by Charles III to his younger brothers, Andrew and Edward. The story was published in 1980, with royalties accruing to the Prince's Trust (now the King's Trust). The estate also incorporates the Delnadamph Lodge estate, bought by Elizabeth II in 1978. \nThe estate extends to Loch Muick in the southeast, where an old boat house and the Royal Bothy (hunting lodge), now named \"Glas-allt-Shiel\", built by Victoria, are located.\nThe working estate includes grouse moors, forestry, and farmland, as well as managed herds of deer, Highland cattle, and ponies. It also offers access to the public for fishing (paid) and hiking during certain seasons.\nApproximately of the estate are covered by trees, with almost used for forestry that yields nearly 10,000 tonnes of wood per year. \"Ballochbuie Forest\", one of the largest remaining areas of old Caledonian pine growth in Scotland, consists of approximately . It is managed with only minimal or no intervention. The principal mammal on the estate is the red deer with a population of 2,000 to 2,500 head.\nThe areas of Lochnagar and Ballochbuie were designated in 1998 by the Secretary of State for Scotland as Special Protection Areas (SPA) under the European Union (EU) Birds Directive. Bird species inhabiting the moorlands include red grouse, black grouse, ptarmigan, and the capercaillie. Ballochbuie is also protected as a Special Area of Conservation by the EU Habitats Directive, as \"one of the largest remaining continuous areas of native Caledonian Forest\". In addition, there are four sites of special scientific interest on the estate.\nThe royal family employs approximately 50 full-time and 50\u2013100 part-time staff to maintain the working estate.\nThere are approximately 150 buildings on the estate, including Birkhall, formerly home to Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, where King Charles III and Queen Camilla spent their honeymoon in 2005. Craigowan Lodge is regularly used by the family and friends of the royal family and has also been used while Balmoral Castle was being prepared for a royal visit. Six smaller buildings on the estate are let as holiday cottages. The hunting lodge of Inchnabobart has also been used by the royal family.\nPublic access to gardens and castle grounds.\nIn 1931, the gardens and castle grounds were opened to the public for the first time. They are now open daily between April and the end of July, after which royal family members arrive at the castle for their annual stay. The ballroom was the only room in the castle that could be viewed by the public until 2024.\nIn 2024, limited numbers of the public were able to view the interior and several rooms used by members of the royal family during a month-long summer tour programme. This was the first time since the castle was completed in 1855 that it was open to the public. In addition, the gift shop, restaurant and caf\u00e9 were redesigned and renovated, prioritising local Scottish craftsmanship and premium textiles.\nCraigowan Lodge.\nCraigowan Lodge is a seven-bedroom stone house approximately from the main castle in Balmoral. More rustic than the castle, the lodge was often used by Prince Charles and Diana, Princess of Wales when they visited. In May 1981, Charles and Diana posed for a photo at the lodge before their July 1981 wedding.\nIn the obituary of Prince Michael Andreevich of Russia in 2008, it was noted that his family spent most of World War II at Craigowan Lodge.\nThe lodge has been in the news periodically since 2005 because Elizabeth II and Prince Philip often spent the first few days of their summer holiday there. During the summer, the castle is a lucrative source of income from tourists. Sometimes, the Queen arrived at Balmoral before the tourist season was over.\nTam-Na-Ghar.\nTam-Na-Ghar is a three-bedroom cottage on the Balmoral estate. The property was passed down from Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother to Prince William. The cottage is built in the traditional style of Scottish lodges and has been used by William and his wife Catherine since before their marriage and in the years after alongside their children as a retreat when visiting Scotland. It is close to Birkhall, which King Charles III and Queen Camilla use.\nIn popular culture.\nParts of the films \"Mrs Brown\" (1997) and \"The Queen\" (2006) were based on events at Balmoral. In both films, substitute locations were used: Blairquhan Castle in \"The Queen\" and Duns Castle in \"Mrs Brown\". In the Netflix series \"The Crown\", Ardverikie House was used as a stand-in. In the sci-fi film \"The Day After Tomorrow\" (2004), three helicopters of the Royal Air Force crash in Scotland during an attempt to evacuate the Royal Family from Balmoral Castle.\nAn illustration of the castle features on the reverse of \u00a3100 notes issued by the Royal Bank of Scotland.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4647", "revid": "51005906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4647", "title": "Breton language", "text": "Celtic language spoken in France\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nBreton (, ; ; ) is a Southwestern Brittonic language of the Celtic language group spoken in Brittany, part of modern-day France. It is the only Celtic language still in use on the European mainland.\nBreton is an Insular Celtic language that was brought from Great Britain to Brittany by migrating Britons during the Early Middle Ages, making Breton most closely related to Cornish, another Southwestern Brittonic language. Welsh and the extinct Cumbric, both Western Brittonic languages, are more distantly related, and the Goidelic languages (Irish, Manx, Scottish Gaelic) have a slight connection due to both of their origins being from Insular Celtic.\nHaving declined from more than one million speakers around 1950 to 107,000 in 2024, Breton is classified as \"severely endangered\" by the UNESCO \"Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger\". Yet, the number of children attending bilingual classes rose 33% between 2006 and 2012 to 14,709.\nHistory and status.\nBreton is spoken in Lower Brittany (), roughly to the west of a line linking Plouha (west of Saint-Brieuc) and La Roche-Bernard (east of Vannes). It comes from a Brittonic language community that once extended from Great Britain to Armorica (present-day Brittany) and had even established a toehold in Galicia (in present-day Spain). Old Breton is attested from the 9th century. It was the language of the upper classes until the 12th century, after which it became the language of commoners in Lower Brittany. The nobility, followed by the bourgeoisie, adopted French. The written language of the Duchy of Brittany was Latin, switching to French in the 15th century. There exists a limited tradition of Breton literature. Some philosophical and scientific terms in Modern Breton come from Old Breton. The recognized stages of the Breton language are: Old Breton \u2013 c.\u2009800 to c.\u20091100, Middle Breton \u2013 c.\u20091100 to c.\u20091650, Modern Breton \u2013 c.\u20091650 to present.\nThe French monarchy was not concerned with the minority languages of France, spoken by the lower classes, and required the use of French for government business as part of its policy of national unity. During the French Revolution, the government introduced policies favouring French over the regional languages, which it pejoratively referred to as . The revolutionaries assumed that reactionary and monarchist forces preferred regional languages to try to keep the peasant masses under-informed. In 1794, Bertrand Bar\u00e8re submitted his \"report on the \" to the Committee of Public Safety in which he said that \"federalism and superstition speak Breton\".\nSince the 19th century, under the Third, Fourth and now Fifth Republics, the French government has attempted to stamp out minority languages\u2014including Breton\u2014in state schools, in an effort to build a national culture. Teachers humiliated students for using their regional languages, and such practices prevailed until the late 1960s.\nIn the early 21st century, due to the political centralization of France, the influence of the media, and the increasing mobility of people, only about 200,000 people are active speakers of Breton, a dramatic decline from more than 1 million in 1950. The majority of today's speakers are more than 60 years old, and Breton is now classified as an endangered language.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, half of the population of Lower Brittany knew only Breton; the other half were bilingual. By 1950, there were only 100,000 monolingual Bretons, and this rapid decline has continued, with likely no monolingual speakers left today. A statistical survey in 1997 found around 300,000 speakers in Lower Brittany, of whom about 190,000 were aged 60 or older. Few 15- to 19-year-olds spoke Breton. In 1993, parents were finally legally allowed to give their children Breton names.\nRevival efforts.\nIn 1925, Professor Roparz Hemon founded the Breton-language review . During its 19-year run, tried to raise the language to the level of a great international language. Its publication encouraged the creation of original literature in all genres, and proposed Breton translations of internationally recognized foreign works. In 1946, replaced . Other Breton-language periodicals have been published, which established a fairly large body of literature for a minority language.\nIn 1977, Diwan schools were founded to teach Breton by immersion. Since their establishment, Diwan schools have provided fully immersive primary school and partially immersive secondary school instruction in Breton for thousands of students across Brittany. This has directly contributed to the growing numbers of school-age speakers of Breton.\nThe \"Asterix\" comic series has been translated into Breton. According to the comic, the Gaulish village where Asterix lives is in the Armorica peninsula, which is now Brittany. Some other popular comics have also been translated into Breton, including \"The Adventures of Tintin\", , \"Titeuf\", \"H\u00e4gar the Horrible\", \"Peanuts\" and \"Yakari\".\nSome original media are created in Breton. The sitcom, , is in Breton. Radio Kerne, broadcasting from Finist\u00e8re, has exclusively Breton programming. Some movies (\"Lancelot du Lac\", \"Shakespeare in Love\", \"Marion du Faouet\", \"Sezneg\") and TV series (\"Columbo\", \"Perry Mason\") have also been translated and broadcast in Breton. Poets, singers, linguists, and writers who have written in Breton, including Yann-Ber Kalloc\u02bch, Roparz Hemon, A\u00f1jela Duval, Xavier de Langlais, P\u00ear-Jakez Helias, Youenn Gwernig, Glenmor, Vefa de Saint-Pierre and Alan Stivell are now known internationally.\nToday, Breton is the only living Celtic language that is not recognized by a national government as an official or regional language.\nThe first Breton dictionary, the \"Catholicon\", was also the first French dictionary. Edited by Jehan Lagadec in 1464, it was a trilingual work containing Breton, French and Latin. Today bilingual dictionaries have been published for Breton and languages including English, Dutch, German, Spanish and Welsh. A monolingual dictionary, was published in 1995. The first edition contained about 10,000 words, and the second edition of 2001 contains 20,000 words.\nIn the early 21st century, the (\"Public Office for the Breton language\") began a campaign to encourage daily use of Breton in the region by both businesses and local communes. Efforts include installing bilingual signs and posters for regional events, as well as encouraging the use of the Spilhennig to let speakers identify each other. The office also started an Internationalization and localization policy asking Google, Firefox and SPIP to develop their interfaces in Breton. In 2004, the Breton Wikipedia started, which counts more than 89,000 articles as of August 2025. In March 2007, the signed a tripartite agreement with Regional Council of Brittany and Microsoft for the consideration of the Breton language in Microsoft products. In October 2014, Facebook added Breton as one of its 121 languages after three years of talks between the and Facebook.\nFrance has twice chosen to enter the Eurovision Song Contest with songs in Breton; once in 1996 in Oslo with \" by Dan Ar Braz and the fifty piece band H\u00e9ritage des Celtes, and most recently in 2022 in Turin with \" by Alvan Morvan Rosius and vocal trio Ahez. These are two of five times France has chosen songs in one of its minority languages for the contest, the others being in 1992 (bilingual French and Antillean Creole), 1993 (bilingual French and Corsican), and 2011 (Corsican).\nGeographic distribution and dialects.\nBreton is spoken mainly in Lower Brittany, but also in a more dispersed way in Upper Brittany (where it is spoken alongside Gallo and French), and in areas around the world that have Breton emigrants.\nThe four traditional dialects of Breton correspond to medieval bishoprics rather than to linguistic divisions. They are (, of the county of L\u00e9on), (, of Tr\u00e9gor), (, of ), and (, of Vannes). was spoken up to the beginning of the 20th century in the region of Gu\u00e9rande and Batz-sur-Mer. There are no clear boundaries between the dialects because they form a dialect continuum, varying only slightly from one village to the next. , however, requires a little study to be intelligible with most of the other dialects. Due to this difficulty in intelligibility, the Glottolog project split the Gwenedeg dialects into a separate language entry from the KLT Breton dialects in v5.2 under the name Vannetais.\nOfficial status.\nNation.\nFrench is the sole official language of France. Supporters of Breton and other minority languages continue to argue for their recognition, and for their place in education, public schools, and public life.\nConstitution.\nIn July 2008, the legislature amended the French Constitution, adding article 75-1: (the regional languages belong to the heritage of France).\nThe European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, which obliges signatory states to recognize minority and regional languages, was signed by France in 1999 but has not been ratified. On 27 October 2015, the Senate rejected a draft constitutional law ratifying the charter.\nRegion.\nRegional and departmental authorities use Breton to a very limited extent. Some bilingual signage has also been installed, such as street name signs in Breton towns.\nUnder the Toubon Law, it is illegal for commercial signage to be in Breton alone. Signs must be bilingual or French only. Since commercial signage usually has limited physical space, most businesses have signs only in French.\n, the Breton language agency, was set up in 1999 by the Brittany region to promote and develop the daily use of Breton. It helped to create the campaign, to encourage enterprises, organisations and communes to promote the use of Breton, for example by installing bilingual signage or translating their websites into Breton.\nEducation.\nIn the late 20th century, the French government considered incorporating the independent Breton-language immersion schools (called ) into the state education system. This action was blocked by the French Constitutional Council based on the 1994 amendment to the Constitution that establishes French as the language of the republic. Therefore, no other language may be used as a language of instruction in state schools. The Toubon Law implemented the amendment, asserting that French is the language of public education.\nThe Diwan schools were founded in Brittany in 1977 to teach Breton by immersion. Since their establishment, Diwan schools have provided fully immersive primary school and partially immersive secondary school instruction in Breton for thousands of students across Brittany. This has directly contributed to the growing numbers of school-age speakers of Breton. The schools have also gained fame from their high level of results in school exams, including those on French language and literature. Breton-language schools do not receive funding from the national government, though the Brittany Region may fund them.\nAnother teaching method is a bilingual approach by (\"Two Languages\") in the State schools, created in 1979. (\"Awakening\") was created in 1990 for bilingual education in the Catholic schools.\nStatistics.\nIn 2018, 18,337 pupils (about 2% of all students in Brittany) attended , and schools, and their number has increased yearly. This was short of the goal of Jean-Yves Le Drian (president of the Regional Council), who aimed to have 20,000 students in bilingual schools by 2010, and of \"their recognition\" for \"their place in education, public schools, and public life\"; nevertheless he describes being encouraged by the growth of the movement.\nIn 2007, some 4,500 to 5,000 adults followed an evening or correspondence one Breton-language course. The transmission of Breton in 1999 was estimated to be 3 percent.\nOther forms of education.\nIn addition to bilingual education (including Breton-medium education) the region has introduced the Breton language in primary education, mainly in the department of Finist\u00e8re. These \"initiation\" sessions are generally one to three hours per week, and consist of songs and games.\nSchools in secondary education ( and ) offer some courses in Breton. In 2010, nearly 5,000 students in Brittany were reported to be taking this option. Additionally, the University of Rennes 2 has a Breton language department offering courses in the language along with a master's degree in Breton and Celtic Studies.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nVowels in Breton may be short or long. All unstressed vowels are short; stressed vowels can be short or long (vowel lengths are not noted in usual orthographies as they are implicit in the phonology of particular dialects, and not all dialects pronounce stressed vowels as long). An emergence of a schwa sound occurs as a result of vowel neutralization in post-tonic position, among different dialects.\nAll vowels can also be nasalized, which is noted by appending an 'n' letter after the base vowel, or by adding a combining tilde above the vowel (most commonly and easily done for \"a\" and \"o\" due to the Portuguese letters), or more commonly by non-ambiguously appending an \u27e8\u00f1\u27e9 letter after the base vowel (this depends on the orthographic variant).\nDiphthongs are .\nGrammar.\nNouns.\nBreton nouns are marked for gender and number. While Breton gender is fairly typical of gender systems across western Europe (with the exception of Basque and modern English), Breton number markers demonstrate rarer behaviors.\nGender.\nBreton has two genders: masculine () and feminine (), having largely lost its historic neuter () as has also occurred in the other Celtic languages as well as across the Romance languages. Certain suffixes (\"-ach/-aj, -(a)dur, -er, -lec\u02bch, -our, -ti, -va\") are masculine, while others (\"-enti, -er, -ez, -ezh, -ezon, -i\", \"-eg\", \"-ell\", and the singulative \"-enn\") are feminine. The suffix \"-eg\" can be masculine or feminine.\nThere are certain non-determinant factors that influence gender assignment. Biological sex is applied for animate referents. Metals, time divisions (except for \"hour\", \"night\" and \"week\") and mountains tend to be masculine, while rivers, cities and countries tend to be feminine.\nHowever, gender assignment to certain words often varies between dialects.\nNumber.\nNumber in Breton is primarily based on an opposition between singular and plural. However, the system is full of complexities in how this distinction is realized.\nAlthough modern Breton has lost the dual number as a productive grammatical category, remnants of its use are preserved in certain nouns referring to paired body parts, such as the eyes, ears, cheeks, legs, armpits, arms, hands, knees, thighs, and wings. These forms typically feature a prefix (daou-, di-, or div-), which is etymologically derived from the numeral two. The dual number is no longer a productive feature of Breton grammar and survives only in a lexicalized form. Certain words, such as \"daoulagad\" ('eyes') and \"divskouarn\" ('ears'), are historically dual in origin. These forms can nevertheless undergo pluralization once more, yielding \"daoulagado\u00f9\" ('pairs of eyes') and \"diskouarno\u00f9\" ('pairs of ears').\nLike other Brythonic languages, Breton has a singulative suffix that is used to form singulars out of collective nouns, for which the morphologically less complex form is the plural. Thus, the singulative of the collective \"mice\" is \"mouse\". \"Breton exhibits a more complex system than Welsh in this respect. Collective nouns can undergo pluralization, yielding forms with meanings distinct from the base collective. For example, \"pesk\" ('fish', singular) forms the collective plural \"pesked\" ('fish'), which may then be singulativized as \"peskedenn\" to denote an individual fish from a group. This singulative of the plural can in turn be pluralized once more, producing \"peskedenno\u00f9\" ('fishes').\"\n\"In addition, the Breton plural system is complicated by the existence of two distinct pluralizing functions. Alongside the 'default' plural, there is a second formation used to convey a sense of variety or diversity. As a result, a single noun may yield two semantically different plurals; for example, \"park\" ('park') forms \"parko\u00f9\" ('parks') and \"parkeier\" ('various different parks').\" Ball reports that the latter pluralizer is used only for inanimate nouns. Certain formations have been lexicalized to have meanings other than that which might be predicted solely from the morphology: \"water\" pluralized forms which means not \"waters\" but instead \"rivers\", while now has come to mean \"running waters after a storm\". Certain forms have lost the singular from their paradigm: means \"news\" and is not used, while has become the regular plural, 'different news items'.\nMeanwhile, certain nouns can form doubly marked plurals with lexicalized meanings \u2013 \"child\" is pluralized once into \"children\" and then pluralized a second time to make \"groups of children\".\nThe diminutive suffix also has the somewhat unusual property of triggering double marking of the plural: means \"little child\", but the doubly pluralized means \"little children\"; boat has a singular diminutive and a simple plural , thus its diminutive plural is the doubly pluralized .\nAs seen elsewhere in many Celtic languages, the formation of the plural can be hard to predict, being determined by a mix of semantic, morphological and lexical factors.\nThe most common plural marker is , with its variant ; most nouns that use this marker are inanimates but collectives of both inanimate and animate nouns always use it as well.\nMost animate nouns, including trees, take a plural in . However, in some dialects the use of this affix has become rare. Various masculine nouns including occupations as well as the word (\"Englishman\", plural ) take the suffix , with a range of variants including , , and .\nThe rare pluralizing suffixes / and are used for a few nouns. When they are appended, they also trigger a change in the vowel of the root: triggers a vowel harmony effect whereby some or all preceding vowels are changed to ( \"cousin\" \u2192 \"cousins\"; \"crow\" \u2192 \"crows\"; \"partridge\" \u2192 \"partridges\"); the changes associated with / are less predictable.\nVarious nouns instead form their plural merely with ablaut: or in the stem being changed to : \"wing\" \u2192 \"wings\"; \"tooth\" \u2192 \"teeth\"; \"rope\" \u2192 \"ropes\".\nAnother set of nouns have lexicalized plurals that bear little if any resemblance to their singulars. These include \"girl\" \u2192 , \"pig\" \u2192 , \"cow\" \u2192 , and \"dog\" \u2192 .\nIn compound nouns, the head noun, which usually comes first, is pluralized.\nVerbal aspect.\nAs in other Celtic languages as well as English, a variety of verbal constructions is available to express grammatical aspect, for example: showing a distinction between progressive and habitual actions:\nInflected prepositions.\nAs in other modern Celtic languages, Breton pronouns are fused into preceding prepositions to produce a sort of inflected preposition. Below are some examples in Breton, Cornish, Welsh, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx, along with English translations.\nIn the examples above the Goidelic languages (Irish, Scottish Gaelic, and Manx) use the preposition meaning \"at\" to show possession, whereas the Brittonic languages use \"with\". The Goidelic languages, however, do use the preposition \"with\" to express \"belong to\" (Irish , Scottish , Manx , The book belongs to me).\nThe Welsh examples are in literary Welsh. The order and preposition may differ slightly in colloquial Welsh (Formal , North Wales , South Wales ).\nInitial consonant mutations.\nBreton has four initial consonant mutations: though modern Breton lost the nasal mutation of Welsh (but for rare words such the word \"door\": \"dor\" \"an nor\"), it also has a \"hard\" mutation, in which voiced stops become voiceless, and a \"mixed\" mutation, which is a mixture of hard and soft mutations.\nWord order.\nNormal word order, like the other Insular Celtic languages, is at its core VSO (verb-subject-object), which is most apparent in embedded clauses. However, Breton finite verbs in main clauses are additionally subject to V2 word order in which the finite main clause verb is typically the second element in the sentence. In fact, starting a sentence with a finite verb is generally ungrammatical in Breton. Noun phrases, adverbial phrases, verbal nouns, and the negative particle \"ne\" can stand in sentence-initial position to satisfy the V2 requirement. That makes it perfectly possible to put the subject or the object at the beginning of the sentence, largely depending on the focus of the speaker. The following options are possible (all with a little difference in meaning):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVocabulary.\nBreton uses much more borrowed vocabulary than its relatives further north; by some estimates a full 40% of its core vocabulary consists of loans from French.\nOrthography.\nThe first extant Breton texts, contained in the Leyde manuscript, were written at the end of the 8th century: 50 years prior to the Strasbourg Oaths, considered to be the earliest example of French. Like many medieval orthographies, Old- and Middle Breton orthography was at first not standardised, and the spelling of a particular word varied at authors' discretion. In 1499, however, the \"Catholicon\", was published; as the first dictionary written for both French and Breton, it became a point of reference on how to transcribe the language. The orthography presented in the \"Catholicon\" was largely similar to that of French, in particular with respect to the representation of vowels, as well as the use of both the Latinate digraph \u27e8qu\u27e9\u2014a remnant of the sound change &gt; in Latin\u2014and Brittonic \u27e8cou-\u27e9 or \u27e8cu-\u27e9 to represent before front vowels.\nAs phonetic and phonological differences between the dialects began to magnify, many regions, particularly the Vannes country, began to devise their own orthographies. Many of these orthographies were more closely related to the French model, albeit with some modifications. Examples of these modifications include the replacement of Old Breton -\u27e8z\u27e9 with -\u27e8h\u27e9 to denote word-final (an evolution of Old Breton in the Vannes dialect) and use of -\u27e8h\u27e9 to denote the initial mutation of (today this mutation is written \u27e8c\u02bch\u27e9). and thus needed another transcription.\nIn the 1830s Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Le Gonidec created a modern phonetic system for the language.\nDuring the early years of the 20th century, a group of writers known as elaborated and reformed Le Gonidec's system. They made it more suitable as a super-dialectal representation of the dialects of Cornouaille, Leon and Tr\u00e9gor (known as from , and in Breton). This KLT orthography was established in 1911. At the same time writers of the more divergent Vannetais dialect developed a phonetic system also based on that of Le Gonidec.\nFollowing proposals made during the 1920s, the KLT and Vannetais orthographies were merged in 1941 to create an orthographic system to represent all four dialects. This (\"wholly unified\") orthography was significant for the inclusion of the digraph \u27e8zh\u27e9, which represents a in Vannetais and corresponds to a in the KLT dialects.\nIn 1955 Fran\u00e7ois Falc\u02bchun and the group Emgleo Breiz proposed a new orthography. It was designed to use a set of graphemes closer to the conventions of French. This (\"University Orthography\", known in Breton as ) was given official recognition by the French authorities as the \"official orthography of Breton in French education\". It was opposed in the region and was used only by the magazine and the publishing house Emgleo Breiz, which disappeared in 2015.\nIn the 1970s, a new standard orthography was devised \u2013 the or . This system is based on the derivation of the words.\nToday the majority of writers continue to use the \"Peurunvan orthography\", and it is the version taught in most Breton-language schools.\nAlphabet.\nBreton is written in the Latin script. \"Peurunvan\", the most commonly used orthography, consists of the following letters:\n a, b, ch, c\u02bch, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, r, s, t, u, v, w, y, z\nThe circumflex, grave accent, trema and tilde appear on some letters. These diacritics are used in the following way:\n \u00e2, \u00ea, \u00ee, \u00f4, \u00fb, \u00f9, \u00fc, \u00f1\nDifferences between and.\nBoth orthographies use the above alphabet, although \u27e8\u00e9\u27e9 is used only in .\nDifferences between the two systems are particularly noticeable in word endings. In Peurunvan, final obstruents, which are devoiced in absolute final position and voiced in sandhi before voiced sounds, are represented by a grapheme that indicates a voiceless sound. In OU they are written as voiced but represented as voiceless before suffixes: \"big\", \"bigger\".\nIn addition, Peurunvan maintains the KLT convention, which distinguishes noun/adjective pairs by nouns written with a final voiced consonant and adjectives with a voiceless one. No distinction is made in pronunciation, e.g. \"Breton language\" vs. \"Breton (adj)\".\nPronunciation of the Breton alphabet.\nC (as a single letter), Q and X appear mainly in loanwords. \u27e8ks\u27e9 or \u27e8gz\u27e9 may be used to represent /ks/ or /\u0261z/.\nNotes:\nSample texts.\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights\n \"Hon Tad,\"\n \"c\u02bchwi hag a zo en Ne\u00f1v,\"\n \"ra vo santelaet hoc\u02bch anv.\"\n \"Ra zeuio ho Rouantelezh.\"\n \"Ra vo graet ho youl war an douar evel en ne\u00f1v.\"\n \"Roit dimp hiziv bara hor beva\u00f1s.\"\n \"Distaolit dimp hon dleo\u00f9\"\n \"evel m'hor bo ivez distaolet d'hon dleourion.\"\n \"Ha n'hon lezit ket da vont gant an temptadur,\"\n \"met hon dieubit eus an Droug.\"\nWords and phrases in Breton.\nVisitors to Brittany may encounter words and phrases (especially on signs and posters) such as the following:\nBorrowing from Breton by other languages.\nThe English words and have been borrowed from French, which took them from Breton. However, this is uncertain: for instance, is or (\"long stone\"), (\"straight stone\") (two words: noun + adjective) in Breton. \"Dolmen\" is a misconstructed word (it should be ). Some studies state that these words were borrowed from Cornish. can be directly translated from Welsh as \"long stone\" (which is exactly what a or is). The Cornish surnames Mennear, Minear and Manhire all derive from the Cornish (\"long stone\"), as does \"settlement by the long stone\".\nThe French word (\"to jabber in a foreign language or an unintelligible manner\") is derived from Breton (\"bread\") and (\"wine\"). The French word (\"large seagull\") is derived from Breton , which shares the same root as English \"gull\" (Welsh , Cornish ).\n.bzh.\n.bzh is an approved Internet generic top-level domains intended for Brittany and the Breton culture and languages. In 2023, the Breton internet extension .bzh had more than 12,000 registrations. Alongside the promotion of the .bzh internet extension, the www.bzh association promotes other services to develop Brittany's image on the web: campaign for a Breton flag emoji (), and email service.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nOverviews\nHistorical development\nExternal links.\nDictionaries\nLearning"}
{"id": "4648", "revid": "44248157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4648", "title": "Broch", "text": "Type of Iron Age drystone hollow-walled structure\nIn archaeology, a broch is an Iron Age drystone hollow-walled structure found in Scotland. Brochs belong to the classification \"complex Atlantic roundhouse\" devised by Scottish archaeologists in the 1980s.\nBrochs are roundhouse buildings found throughout Atlantic Scotland. The word broch is derived from the Lowland Scots 'brough', meaning fort. In the mid-19th century, Scottish antiquaries called brochs 'burgs', after Old Norse borg, with the same meaning. Brochs are often referred to as d\u00f9ns in the west, and they are the most spectacular of a complex class of buildings found in northern Scotland. There are approximately 571 candidate broch sites throughout the country, according to the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland.\nThe origin of brochs is still subject to ongoing research. While most archaeologists believed 80 years ago that brochs were built by immigrants, there is now little doubt that the hollow-walled broch tower was an invention in what is now Scotland. The first brochs may have been built circa 300 BCE, and there is evidence to suggest that they were used primarily for defensive or offensive purposes.\nThe distribution of brochs is centred on northern Scotland, with the densest concentrations found in Caithness, Sutherland, and the Northern Isles. A few examples occur in the Scottish Borders and on the west coast of Dumfries and Galloway, and near Stirling. The original interpretation of brochs was that they were defensive structures, places of refuge for the community and their livestock. They were sometimes regarded as the work of Danes or Picts, and from the 1930s to the 1960s, archaeologists regarded them as castles where local landowners held sway over a subject population.\nHowever, the castle theory fell from favour among Scottish archaeologists in the 1980s, due to a lack of supporting archaeological evidence. These archaeologists suggested defensibility was never a major concern in the siting of a broch, and argued that they may have been the \"stately homes\" of their time, objects of prestige and very visible demonstrations of superiority for important families. Once again, however, there is a lack of archaeological proof for this reconstruction, and the sheer number of brochs makes it problematic. The article concludes by stating that the purpose of brochs may have been a combination of defensive, offensive, and symbolic functions.\nOrigin and definition.\nThe word \"broch\" is derived from Lowland Scots 'brough', meaning (among other things) fort. In the mid-19th century Scottish antiquaries called brochs 'burgs', after Old Norse ', with the same meaning. Place names in Scandinavian Scotland such as Burgawater and Burgan show that Old Norse ' is the older word used for these structures in the north. Brochs are often referred to as \"d\u00f9n\" in the west. Antiquarians began to use the spelling \"broch\" in the 1870s.\nA precise definition for the word has proved elusive. Brochs are the most spectacular of a complex class of roundhouse buildings found throughout Atlantic Scotland. The Shetland Amenity Trust lists about 120 sites in Shetland as candidate brochs, while the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland (RCAHMS) identifies a total of 571 candidate broch sites throughout the country. Researcher Euan MacKie, using a restricted definition, has proposed a much smaller total for Scotland of 104.\nThe origin of brochs is a subject of continuing research. Eighty years ago most archaeologists believed that brochs, usually regarded as the 'castles' of Iron Age chieftains, were built by immigrants who had been pushed northward after being displaced first by the intrusions of Belgic tribes into what is now southeast England at the end of the 2nd century BC and later by the Roman invasion of southern Britain beginning in AD 43. Yet there is now little doubt that the hollow-walled broch tower was an invention in what is now Scotland; even the kinds of pottery found inside them that most resembled south British styles were local hybrid forms. \nThe first of the modern review articles on the subject (MacKie 1965) did not, as is commonly believed, propose that brochs were built by immigrants, but rather that a hybrid culture formed from the blending of a small number of immigrants with the native population of the Hebrides produced them in the 1st century BC, basing them on earlier, simpler, promontory forts. This view contrasted, for example, with that of Sir W. Lindsay Scott, who argued,\n following V. Gordon Childe (1935), for a wholesale migration into Atlantic Scotland of people from southwest England.\nMacKie's theory has fallen from favour too, mainly because starting in the 1970s there was a general move in archaeology away from 'diffusionist' explanations towards those pointing to exclusively indigenous development. Meanwhile, the increasing number \u2013 albeit still pitifully few \u2013 of radiocarbon dates for the primary use of brochs (as opposed to their later, secondary use) still suggests that most of the towers were built in the 1st centuries BC and AD. A few may be earlier, notably the one proposed for Old Scatness Broch in Shetland, where a sheep bone dating to between 390 and 200 BC has been reported.\nThe other broch claimed to be substantially older than the 1st century BC is Crosskirk in Caithness, but a recent review of the evidence suggests that it cannot plausibly be assigned a date earlier than the 1st centuries BC/AD.\nDistribution.\nThe distribution of brochs is centred on northern Scotland. Caithness, Sutherland and the Northern Isles have the densest concentrations, but there are many examples in the west of Scotland and the Hebrides. Although mainly concentrated in the northern Highlands and the Islands, a few examples occur in the Borders (for example Edin's Hall Broch and Bow Castle Broch), on the west coast of Dumfries and Galloway, and near Stirling. In a c.\u20091560 sketch there appears to be a broch by the river next to Annan Castle in Dumfries and Galloway. This small group of southern brochs has never been satisfactorily explained.\nPurposes.\nThe original interpretation of brochs, favoured by 19th-century antiquarians, was that they were defensive structures, places of refuge for the community and their livestock. They were sometimes regarded as the work of Danes or Picts. From the 1930s to the 1960s, archaeologists such as V. Gordon Childe and later John Hamilton regarded them as castles where local landowners held sway over a subject population.\nThe castle theory fell from favour among Scottish archaeologists in the 1980s, due to a lack of supporting archaeological evidence. These archaeologists suggested defensibility was never a major concern in the siting of a broch, and argued that they may have been the \"stately homes\" of their time, objects of prestige and very visible demonstrations of superiority for important families (Armit 2003). Once again, however, there is a lack of archaeological proof for this reconstruction, and the sheer number of brochs, sometimes in places with a lack of good land, makes it problematic.\nBrochs' close groupings and profusion in many areas may indeed suggest that they had a primarily defensive or even offensive function. Some of them were sited beside precipitous cliffs and were protected by large ramparts, artificial or natural: a good example is at Burland near Gulberwick in Shetland, on a clifftop and cut off from the mainland by huge ditches. Often they are at key strategic points. In Shetland they sometimes cluster on each side of narrow stretches of water: the Broch of Mousa, for instance, is directly opposite another at Burraland in Sandwick. In Orkney there are more than a dozen on the facing shores of Eynhallow Sound, and many at the exits and entrances of the great harbour of Scapa Flow. In Sutherland quite a few are placed along the sides and at the mouths of deep valleys. Writing in 1956 John Stewart suggested that brochs in Shetland were forts put up by a military society to scan and protect the countryside and seas.\nFinally, some archaeologists consider broch sites individually, doubting that there ever was a single common purpose for which every broch was constructed. There are differences in the positions, dimensions and likely status of broch in the various areas in which brochs are found. For example, the broch \"villages\" which occur at a few places in Orkney have no parallel in the Western Isles.\nStructures.\nGenerally, brochs have a single entrance with bar-holes, door-checks and lintels. There are mural cells and there is a scarcement (ledge), perhaps for timber-framed lean-to dwellings lining the inner face of the wall. Also there is a spiral staircase winding upwards between the inner and outer wall and connecting the galleries. Brochs vary from in internal diameter, with walls. On average, the walls only survive to a few metres in height. There are five extant examples of towers with significantly higher walls: Dun Carloway on Lewis, Dun Telve and Dun Troddan in Glenelg, Mousa in Shetland and Dun Dornaigil in Sutherland, all of whose walls exceed in height.\nMousa's walls are the best preserved and are still tall; it is not clear how many brochs originally stood so high. A frequent characteristic is that the walls are galleried: with an open space between, the outer and inner wall skins are separate but tied together with linking stone slabs; these linking slabs may in some cases have served as steps to higher floors. It is normal for there to be a cell breaking off from the passage beside the door; this is known as the guard cell. It has been found in some Shetland brochs that guard cells in entrance passageways are close to large door-check stones. Although there was much argument in the past, it is now generally accepted among some archaeologists that brochs were roofed, perhaps with a conical timber framed roof covered with a locally sourced thatch. The evidence for this assertion is still very scanty, although excavations at Dun Bharabhat, Lewis, may support it. The main difficulty with the interpretation continues to be identifying potential sources of structural timber, though bog and driftwood may have been sources.\nVery few of the brochs on the islands of Orkney and Shetland have cells on the ground floor. Most brochs have scarcements (ledges) which may have allowed the construction of a wooden first floor (spotted by the antiquary George Low in Shetland in 1774), and excavations at Loch na Berie on the Isle of Lewis may show signs of a further, second floor (e.g. stairs on the first floor, which head upwards). Some brochs such as Dun Dornaigil and Culswick in Shetland have unusual triangular lintels above the entrance door.\nAs in the case of Old Scatness in Shetland (near Jarlshof) and Burroughston on Shapinsay, brochs were sometimes located close to arable land and a source of water (some have wells or natural springs rising within their central space). Sometimes, on the other hand, they were sited in wilderness areas (e.g. Levenwick and Culswick in Shetland, Castle Cole in Sutherland). Brochs are often built beside the sea (Carn Liath, Sutherland); sometimes they are on islands in lochs (e.g. Clickimin in Shetland).\nAbout 20 Orcadian broch sites include small settlements of stone buildings surrounding the main tower. Examples include Howe, near Stromness, Gurness Broch in the north west of Mainland, Orkney, Midhowe on Rousay and Lingro near Kirkwall (destroyed by a farmer in the 1980s). There are \"broch village\" sites in Caithness, but elsewhere they are unknown.\nMost brochs are unexcavated. The end of the broch building period seems to have come around AD 100\u2013200. Those that have been properly examined show that they continued to be in use for many centuries, with the interiors often modified and changed, and that they underwent many phases of habitation and abandonment.\nHeritage status.\nThe Crucible of Iron Age Shetland's Mousa, Old Scatness and Jarlshof sites are on the United Kingdom \"Tentative List\" of possible nominations for the UNESCO World Heritage Programme list of sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common heritage of humankind. This list, published in July 2010, includes sites that may be nominated for inscription over the next 5\u201310 years.\nNew broch planned.\nThe Caithness Broch Project was set up in 2013 as a project in experimental archaeology to build a broch using traditional techniques such as drystone walling. Purposes of the project include possible insights into the purpose of brochs, preservation of local skills in techniques such as drystone wall building, and to attract tourists. As of 2022[ [update]] a site had not been acquired, and the funding required, estimated at \u00a31m\u2013\u00a33m, had not yet been arranged.\nReferences and footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4649", "revid": "35999521", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4649", "title": "Billy Crystal", "text": "American comedian, actor and filmmaker (born 1948)\nWilliam Edward Crystal (born March 14, 1948) is an American comedian, actor, and filmmaker. He is known as a standup comedian and for his film and stage roles. Crystal has received numerous accolades, including six Primetime Emmy Awards and a Tony Award as well as nominations for three Grammy Awards and three Golden Globe Awards. He was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1991, the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor in 2007, the Critics' Choice Lifetime Achievement Award in 2022, and the Kennedy Center Honors in 2023.\nCrystal gained prominence for television roles as Jodie Dallas on the ABC sitcom \"Soap\" from 1977 to 1981 and as a cast member and frequent host of \"Saturday Night Live\" from 1984 to 1985. Crystal then became known for his roles in films such as \"Running Scared\" (1986), \"Throw Momma from the Train\" (1987), \"The Princess Bride\" (1987), \"When Harry Met Sally...\" (1989), \"City Slickers\" (1991), \"Forget Paris\" (1995), \"Father's Day\" (1997), \"Analyze This\" (1999), its sequel \"Analyze That\" (2002), and \"Parental Guidance\" (2012). Crystal is the voice of Mike Wazowski in Pixar's \"Monsters, Inc.\" franchise. He has hosted the Academy Awards 9 times, beginning in 1990 and most recently in 2012.\nCrystal made his Broadway debut in his one man show \"700 Sundays\" in 2004, for which he won the Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event. Crystal returned to the show again in 2014 which was filmed by HBO and received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special nomination. He wrote and starred in the Broadway musical \"Mr. Saturday Night\" based on his film of the same name in 2022, for which he was Tony-nominated for Best Actor in a Musical and Best Book of a Musical. He has written five books including his memoir \"Still Foolin' Em\" (2013).\nEarly life and education.\nWilliam Edward Crystal was born at Doctors Hospital on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, and initially raised in the Bronx. As a toddler, he moved with his family to 549 East Park Avenue in Long Beach, New York, on Long Island. Crystal and his older brothers Joel, who later became an art teacher, and Richard, nicknamed Rip, were the sons of Helen (\"n\u00e9e\" Gabler), a housewife, and Jack Crystal, who owned and operated the Commodore Music Store, founded by Crystal's grandfather, Julius Gabler. Crystal's father was also a jazz promoter, a producer, and an executive for an affiliated jazz record label, Commodore Records, founded by Crystal's uncle, musician and songwriter Milt Gabler.\nCrystal is Jewish (his ancestors emigrated from Austria, Russia, and Lithuania), and he grew up attending Temple Emanu-El in Long Beach, where he had his bar mitzvah. The three young brothers would entertain by reprising comedy routines from the likes of Bob Newhart, Rich Little and Sid Caesar records their father would bring home. Jazz artists such as Arvell Shaw, Pee Wee Russell, Eddie Condon, and Billie Holiday were often guests in the home. With the decline of Dixieland jazz and the rise of discount record stores, in 1963, Crystal's father lost his business and died later that year at the age of 54 after having a heart attack. His mother died in 2001.\nAfter graduating from Long Beach High School in 1965, Crystal attended Marshall University in Huntington, West Virginia, on a baseball scholarship. Crystal never played baseball at Marshall because the program was suspended during his first year. Crystal did not return to Marshall as a sophomore, instead deciding to stay in New York to be close to his future wife. He studied acting at HB Studio. Crystal attended Nassau Community College with her and later transferred to New York University, where he was a film and television directing major. Crystal graduated from NYU in 1970 with a BFA from its then School of Fine Arts. One of his instructors was Martin Scorsese, while Oliver Stone and Christopher Guest were among his classmates.\nCareer.\n1969\u20131985: Stand-up, \"Soap\", and \"SNL\".\nIn 1969, Crystal joined various improv troupes. He spent over four years in a comedy improv group with two friends. They played colleges and coffee houses and Crystal worked as a substitute teacher on Long Island. Crystal later became a solo act and performed regularly at \"The Improv\" and \"Catch a Rising Star\". In 1976, he appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson and on an episode of \"All in the Family\". Crystal was on the dais for the Dean Martin celebrity roast of Muhammad Ali on February 19, 1976, where he performed impressions of both Ali and sportscaster Howard Cosell. This began a lifelong friendship between Ali and Crystal.\nCrystal was scheduled to appear on the first episode of \"NBC Saturday Night\" on October 11, 1975 (the show was renamed \"Saturday Night Live\" on March 26, 1977), but his sketch was cut. Crystal did perform on episode 17 of that first season, doing a monologue of an old jazz man capped by the line \"Can you dig it? I knew that you could.\" Host Ron Nessen introduced him as \"Bill Crystal.\" Crystal made a guest appearance on \"The Love Boat\" Season 2 Episode 5, which aired on October 20, 1978. He also made game show appearances such as \"The Hollywood Squares,\" \"All Star Secrets\" and \"The $20,000 Pyramid.\" To this day, Crystal holds the Pyramid franchise's record for getting his contestant partner to the top of the pyramid in the winner's circle in the fastest time: 26 seconds.\nCrystal's earliest prominent role was as Jodie Dallas on \"Soap,\" one of the first unambiguously gay characters in the cast of an American television series. He continued in the role during the series's entire 1977\u20131981 run.\nIn 1982, Crystal hosted his own variety show, \"The Billy Crystal Comedy Hour\" on NBC. When Crystal arrived to shoot the fifth episode, he learned it had been canceled after only the first two aired. After hosting \"Saturday Night Live\" twice, on March 17, 1984, and the show's ninth season finale on May 5, Crystal joined the regular cast for the 1984\u201385 season. His most famous recurring sketch was his parody of Fernando Lamas, a smarmy talk-show host whose catchphrase, \"You look... mahvelous!\", became a media sensation, including ads for Diet Pepsi. Also in the 1980s, Crystal starred in an episode of Shelley Duvall's \"Faerie Tale Theatre\" as the smartest of the three little pigs.\nCrystal's first film role was in Joan Rivers's 1978 film \"Rabbit Test\", the story of the \"world's first pregnant man.\" Crystal appeared briefly in the Rob Reiner \"rockumentary\" \"This Is Spinal Tap\" (1984) as Morty The Mime, a waiter dressed as a mime at one of Spinal Tap's parties. He shared the scene with a then-unknown, non-speaking Dana Carvey, stating famously that \"Mime is money.\"\n1986\u20131999: Oscar host and leading man status.\nDue to the success of Crystal's standup and \"SNL\" career, in 1985, he released an album of his stand-up material titled \"Mahvelous!\". The title track \"You Look Marvelous\", written by Crystal and Paul Shaffer, had an accompanying music video that debuted on MTV. Both the song and video features Crystal in character as his \"SNL\" persona of talk show host Fernando Lamas. The video features Lamas cruising around in what was at the time the world's longest stretch limousine, built by custom-coach designer and builder Vini Bergeman, surrounded by models in bikinis. The single peaked at No. 58 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the US and No. 17 in Canada. The album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Recording at the 1986 Grammy Awards. He later starred in the action comedy \"Running Scared\" (1986) opposite Gregory Hines. Film critic of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" Roger Ebert praised the two for their on-screen chemistry writing, \"But Crystal and Hines...don't need a plot because they have so much good dialogue and such a great screen relationship.\"\nDuring this time, Crystal hosted the Academy Awards broadcast a total of nine times, from 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2004 and 2012. His hosting was critically praised, resulting in two Primetime Emmy Award wins for hosting and writing the 63rd Academy Awards and an Emmy win for writing the 64th Academy Awards. \"San Francisco Chronicle\" columnist John Carman raved about Crystal's performance for the 70th Academy Awards writing, \"It was the best Oscar show in two decades...Crystal was back in razor form.\" \"The Seattle Times\" television editor Kay McFadden praised Crystal commenting that \"he possesses nearly impeccable timing and judgment.\"\nCrystal reunited with director Rob Reiner in \"The Princess Bride\" (1987), in a comedic supporting role as \"Miracle Max.\" Reiner got Crystal to accept the part by saying, \"How would you like to play Mel Brooks?\" Reiner also allowed Crystal to ad-lib, and his parting shot, \"Have fun storming the castle!\" is a frequently quoted line. Critic Roger Ebert described Crystal as a highlight of the film writing \"the funniest sequences in the film stars Billy Crystal and Carol Kane, both unrecogizable behind makeup, as an ancient wizard and crone who specialize in bringing the dead back to life.\" Reiner directed Crystal for a third time in the romantic comedy \"When Harry Met Sally...\" (1989). Crystal starred alongside Meg Ryan, Bruno Kirby and Carrie Fisher in a script written by Nora Ephron. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" praised the film and Crystal's performance writing, \"Crystal's lustrous, deeply-shaded performance is certain to win him legions of new fans; indeed, his prowess as a comic reaches its deepest human dimension here.\" Crystal was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy losing to Morgan Freeman in \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (1989). The film has since become an iconic classic for the genre and is Crystal's most celebrated film. In 2019, the BBC named the film the greatest romantic comedy of all time.\nIn 1991, Crystal created and produced the HBO six-part comedy miniseries \"Sessions\" starring Michael McKean and Elliott Gould. The \"Los Angeles Times\" praised the project describing it as \"swankily written, elegantly staged and perfectly cast.\" Crystal then starred in the award-winning buddy comedy \"City Slickers\" (1991), which proved very successful both commercially and critically and for which Crystal was nominated for his second Golden Globe. The film was followed by a sequel, which was less successful. The name of his company is Face Productions. \"Entertainment Weekly\" praised Crystal's performance writing, \"It's also the first movie ever to do the talented Billy Crystal justice...he's far more pleasureful to watch in this sort of dramatic-comedy role than, say, Robin Williams, because his comfy, urban-shlemiel personality helps ground the jokes.\" Following the significant success of these films, Crystal wrote, directed, and starred in \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (1992) and \"Forget Paris\" (1995). In the former, Crystal played a serious role in aging makeup, as an egotistical comedian who reflects back on his career.\nIn 1992, Crystal narrated \"Dr. Seuss Video Classics: Horton Hatches the Egg\". He was originally asked to voice Buzz Lightyear in \"Toy Story\" (1995) but turned it down, a decision he later regretted due to the popularity of the series. Crystal later films include a supporting roles in Kenneth Branagh's William Shakespeare epic \"Hamlet\" (1996), and Woody Allen's critically acclaimed comedy ensemble film \"Deconstructing Harry\" (1997). Crystal starred opposite Robin Williams in \"Father's Day\" (1997) and both comedians had an unscripted cameo in the third season of \"Friends\" (1997). He also had success alongside Robert De Niro in Harold Ramis's mobster comedy \"Analyze This\" (1999). In 1996, Crystal was the guest star of the third episode of \"Muppets Tonight\" and hosted three Grammy Awards Telecasts: the 29th Grammys; the 30th Grammys; and the 31st Grammys. Crystal was a guest on the first and the last episode of \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno,\" which concluded February 6, 2014, after 22 seasons on the air.\n2000\u20132014: Later film work and Broadway debut.\nCrystal directed the made-for-television movie \"61*\" (2001) based on Roger Maris's and Mickey Mantle's race to break Babe Ruth's single-season home run record in 1961. This earned Crystal an Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Special. More recent performances include roles in \"America's Sweethearts\" (2001), the sequel \"Analyze That\" (2002), and \"Parental Guidance\" (2012). Crystal later went on to provide the voice of Mike Wazowski in the blockbuster Pixar film \"Monsters, Inc.\" (2001), \"Cars\" (2006), during the epilogue in the end credits, and to reprise his voice role in the prequel, \"Monsters University\" (2013). Crystal also provided the voice of Calcifer in the English version of Hayao Miyazaki's \"Howl's Moving Castle\" (2004). He won the 2005 Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event for \"700 Sundays\", a two-act, one-man play, which Crystal conceived and wrote about his parents and his childhood growing up on Long Island. Crystal toured throughout the US with the show in 2006 and then Australia in 2007. Following the initial success of the play, he wrote the book \"700 Sundays\" for Warner Books, which was published on October 31, 2005. In conjunction with the book and the play that also paid tribute to his uncle Milt Gabler, Crystal produced two CD compilations: \"Billy Crystal Presents: The Milt Gabler Story\", which featured his uncle's most influential recordings from Billie Holiday's \"Strange Fruit\" to \"Rock Around the Clock\" by Bill Haley &amp; His Comets; and \"Billy Remembers Billie\" featuring Crystal's favorite Holiday recordings.\nCrystal returned as the host for the 2012 Oscar ceremony, after Eddie Murphy resigned from hosting. His nine times is second only to Bob Hope's 19 in most ceremonies hosted. At the 83rd Academy Awards ceremony in 2011, Crystal appeared as a presenter for a digitally inserted Bob Hope and before doing so was given a standing ovation. The ceremony's hosts were James Franco and Anne Hathaway who received largely negative reviews, with Film critic Roger Ebert writing that \"when Crystal came onstage about two hours into the show, he got the first laughs of the broadcast\". Crystal's hosting gigs have regularly included an introductory video segment in which he comedically inserts himself into scenes of that year's nominees in addition to a song following his opening monologue. In 2013, Crystal released his autobiographical memoir \"Still Foolin' Em\". The audiobook version was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album at the 2014 Grammy Awards.\nIn the fall of 2013, Crystal brought the show, \"700 Sundays\" back to Broadway for a two-month run at the Imperial Theatre. HBO filmed the January 3\u20134, 2014 performances for a special, which debuted on their network on April 19, 2014, entitled \"Billy Crystal: 700 Sundays\". The televised special received three Primetime Emmy Award nominations including Outstanding Variety Special, and Outstanding Writing for a Variety Special.\nIn 2014, Crystal paid tribute to his close friend Robin Williams at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards. In his tribute, Crystal talked about their friendship, saying, \"As genius as he was on stage, he was the greatest friend you could ever imagine. Supportive. Protective. Loving. It's very hard to talk about him in the past because he was so present in all of our lives. For almost 40 years, he was the brightest star in the comedy galaxy\u2026 [His] beautiful light will continue to shine on us forever. And the glow will be so bright, it'll warm your heart. It'll make your eyes glisten. And you'll think to yourselves: Robin Williams. What a concept.\" Crystal stated that paying tribute to Williams so publicly and so soon after Williams had died was one of \"the hardest things I've had to do\" and that \"I was really worried that I wasn't going to get through it.\" Crystal soon after appeared on \"The View\" where he and Whoopi Goldberg shared stories about Williams, reminiscing about their friendship, and their collaborations together on \"Comic Relief\".\n2015\u2013present: Return to Broadway.\nIn 2015, Crystal co-starred alongside Josh Gad on the FX comedy series \"The Comedians\", which ran for just one season before being canceled. His series received mixed reviews with many critics noting the chemistry developed further as the series went on. The series was compared to backstage shows such as \"The Larry Sanders Show\" and \"30 Rock\". Kate Kulzick of \"The A.V. Club\" wrote \"The odd-couple pairing of Crystal and Gad works well, with their generational divide providing many of the show's early highlights...The friendly rapport that develops between the fictionalized Billy and Josh allows them to relax a bit and get to know each other better\".\nIn 2016, Crystal gave one of the eulogies for Muhammad Ali at his funeral. In his remembrance of Ali, Crystal talked about his admiration for Ali as a boxer, and humanitarian. He also shared stories of their unlikely friendship after Crystal did a series of impersonations of him. Crystal stated of Ali's legacy, \"Only once in a thousand years or so, do we get to hear a Mozart, or see a Picasso, or read a Shakespeare. Ali was one of them. And yet, at his heart, he was still a kid from Louisville who ran with the gods and walked with the crippled and smiled at the foolishness of it all.\"\nIn the fall of 2021, Crystal reprised the role of Buddy Young Jr., in a theatrical musical staging of \"Mr. Saturday Night\" at the Barrington Stage Company in Pittsfield, MA. In 2022, Crystal adapted his 1992 movie \"Mr. Saturday Night\" into a Broadway musical with the same name. Crystal stars in the musical reprising his role from the film alongside David Paymer. The production began previews on Broadway at the Nederlander Theatre on March 29, 2022, prior to officially opening on April 27. Crystal earned the Drama League Award for Contribution to the Theater Award for \"his extraordinary work on stages across the country and commitment to mentorship in the field.\" Crystal performed a number with the ensemble from his musical at the 75th Tony Awards. Crystal also performed what he described as Yiddish scat singing. Crystal went into the crowd teaching Lin-Manuel Miranda and Samuel L. Jackson as well as the rest of the audience. \"The New York Times\" praised Crystal on his bit, describing it as a highlight of the telecast writing, \"one of the few moments that broke through...is when [Crystal] brought it out into the audience, and threw it up to the balcony, he showed how precision, delivery and command of a room can make even the oldest, silliest material impossibly compelling.\"\nIn 2023, Crystal was celebrated by the Kennedy Center Honors. Tributes came from Rob Reiner, Meg Ryan, Whoopi Goldberg, Robert De Niro, Jay Leno, and Bob Costas. Lin-Manuel Miranda and Marc Shaiman did a tribute to Crystal's \"Oscar Medleys\" to the tunes of \"Too Marvelous for Words\", \"It Had to Be You\" (the theme from \"When Harry Met Sally...\"), and \"My Favorite Things\" from \"The Sound of Music\". Crystal attended the 97th Academy Awards where he served as a presenter for Best Picture with his \"When Harry met Sally...\" co-star Meg Ryan.\nActing credits and accolades.\nCrystal has received numerous accolades including six Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program as the host of the \"31st Annual Grammy Awards\" (1989), \"63rd Academy Awards\" (1991), and \"70th Academy Awards\" (1998) and the Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series for writing his comedy special \"Midnight Train to Moscow\" (1990), and the \"63rd Academy Awards\" and \"64th Academy Awards\" (1992). For his Broadway debut, his one man show \"700 Sundays\" (2005), Crystal won the Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event, and the Drama Desk Award. He received further Tony nominations for Best Actor in a Musical and Best Book of a Musical for \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (2022).\nCrystal received nominations for three Grammy Awards for Best Comedy Album for \"You Look Marvelous\" (1986), Best Spoken Word Album for \"Still Foolin' Em\" (2014), and Best Musical Theatre Album for \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (2023). He also received three Golden Globe Award nominations for Best Actor in a Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for his performances in the romantic comedy \"When Harry Met Sally...\" (1989), the western comedy \"City Slickers\" (1991), and Crystal's directorial debut \"Mr. Saturday Night\" (1992).\nCrystal has also received numerous honors including a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1991, and was awarded with the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor in 2007 where he was honored by Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg, Robert De Niro, Martin Short, and Rob Reiner at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington D.C. Crystal was made one of the Disney Legends in 2013 and also received the Critics' Choice Lifetime Achievement Award in 2022 and the Kennedy Center Honors in 2023.\nPersonal life.\nOn June 4, 1970, Crystal married his high school sweetheart, Janice Goldfinger. Crystal has long credited his parents, \"who always looked like they loved being together\", with setting an example for his own marriage. They have two daughters: actress Jennifer and Lindsay, a producer, and are grandparents. They lived in the Pacific Palisades neighborhood of Los Angeles, California. In January 2025, their home was destroyed in the Palisades Fire.\nCrystal received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree from New York University in 2016 and spoke at the commencement at Yankee Stadium.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 1986, Crystal started hosting \"Comic Relief\" on HBO with Robin Williams and Whoopi Goldberg. Founded by Bob Zmuda, Comic Relief raises money for homeless people in the United States.\nOn September 6, 2005, on \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\", Crystal and Jay Leno were the first celebrities to sign a Harley-Davidson motorcycle to be auctioned off for Gulf Coast relief.\nCrystal has participated in the Simon Wiesenthal Center Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles. His personal history is featured in the \"Finding Our Families, Finding Ourselves\" exhibit in the genealogy wing of the museum.\nPolitical views.\nCrystal is a supporter of the Democratic Party and has appeared in advertisements on behalf of the party.\nCrystal was an outspoken critic of Donald Trump during the latter's 2016 presidential campaign. Crystal supported Hillary Clinton in the 2016 election.\nSports.\nOn March 12, 2008, Crystal signed a one-day minor league contract to play with the New York Yankees, and he was invited to the team's major league spring training. Crystal wore uniform number 60 in honor of his upcoming 60th birthday. On March 13, in a spring training game against the Pittsburgh Pirates, Crystal led off as the designated hitter. He managed to make contact, fouling a fastball up the first base line, but was eventually struck out by Pirates pitcher Paul Maholm on six pitches and was later replaced in the batting order by Johnny Damon. Crystal was released on March 14, his 60th birthday.\nCrystal's boyhood idol was Yankee Hall of Fame legend Mickey Mantle, who had signed a program for him when Crystal attended a game where Mantle had hit a home run. Years later on \"The Dinah Shore Show\", in one of his first television appearances, Crystal met Mantle in person and had Mantle re-sign the same program. Crystal would be good friends with Mantle until Mantle's death in 1995. He and Bob Costas together wrote the eulogy Costas read at Mantle's funeral, and George Steinbrenner then invited Crystal to emcee the unveiling of Mantle's monument at Yankee Stadium. In his 2013 memoir \"Still Foolin' 'Em\", Crystal said that after the ceremony, near the Yankees clubhouse, he was punched in the stomach by Joe DiMaggio, who was angry at Crystal for not having introduced him to the crowd as the \"Greatest living player.\"\nCrystal also was well known for his impressions of Yankees Hall of Famer turned broadcaster Phil Rizzuto. Rizzuto, known for his quirks calling games, did not travel to Anaheim, California, in 1996 to call the game for WPIX. Instead, Crystal joined the broadcasters in the booth and pretended to be Rizzuto for a few minutes during the August 31 game.\nAlthough a lifelong Yankees fan, he is a part-owner of the Arizona Diamondbacks, even earning a World Series ring in 2001 when the Diamondbacks beat his beloved Yankees.\nIn \"City Slickers\", Crystal wore a New York Mets baseball cap. In the 1986 film \"Running Scared\", his character is an avid Chicago Cubs fan, wearing a Cubs jersey in several scenes. In the 2012 film \"Parental Guidance\", Crystal's character is the announcer for the Fresno Grizzlies, a Minor League Baseball team, who aspires to announce for their Major League affiliate, the San Francisco Giants.\nCrystal appeared in Ken Burns's 1994 documentary \"Baseball\", telling personal stories about his life-long love of baseball, including meeting Casey Stengel as a child and Ted Williams as an adult.\nCrystal is also a longtime Los Angeles Clippers fan and season ticket holder.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4650", "revid": "49662468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4650", "title": "Black hole", "text": "Compact astronomical body\nA black hole is an astronomical body so compact that its gravity prevents anything from escaping, even light. Albert Einstein's theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass will form a black hole. The boundary of no escape is called the event horizon. In general relativity, a black hole's event horizon seals an object's fate but produces no locally detectable change when crossed. In many ways, a black hole acts like an ideal black body, as it reflects no light. Quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit Hawking radiation, with the same spectrum as a black body of a temperature inversely proportional to its mass. This temperature is of the order of billionths of a kelvin for stellar black holes, making it essentially impossible to observe directly.\nObjects whose gravitational fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. In 1916, Karl Schwarzschild found the first modern solution of general relativity that would characterise a black hole. Due to his influential research, the Schwarzschild metric is named after him. David Finkelstein, in 1958, first published the interpretation of \"black hole\" as a region of space from which nothing can escape. Black holes were long considered a mathematical curiosity; it was not until the 1960s that theoretical work showed they were a generic prediction of general relativity. The first black hole known was Cygnus X-1, identified by several researchers independently in 1971.\nBlack holes typically form when massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed, it can grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. Supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses may form by absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, or via direct collapse of gas clouds. There is consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centres of most galaxies.\nThe presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as visible light. Matter falling toward a black hole can form an accretion disk of infalling plasma, heated by friction and emitting light. In extreme cases, this creates a quasar, some of the brightest objects in the universe. Stars passing too close to a supermassive black hole can be shredded into streamers that shine very brightly before being \"swallowed\". If other stars are orbiting a black hole, their orbits can be used to determine the black hole's mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives such as neutron stars. In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems and established that the radio source known as Sagittarius A*, at the core of the Milky Way galaxy, contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3million solar masses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was briefly proposed by English astronomical pioneer and clergyman John Michell and independently by French scientist Pierre-Simon Laplace. Both scholars proposed very large stars, analogous to modern models of supermassive black holes.\nMichell's idea, in a short part of a letter published in 1784, calculated that a star with the same density but 500 times the radius of the sun would not let any emitted light escape; the surface escape velocity would exceed the speed of light. Michell correctly noted that such supermassive but non-radiating bodies might be detectable through their gravitational effects on nearby visible bodies.\nIn 1796, Laplace mentioned that a star could be invisible if it were sufficiently large while speculating on the origin of the Solar System in his book . Franz Xaver von Zach asked Laplace for a mathematical analysis, which Laplace provided and published in a journal edited by von Zach.\nScholars of the time were initially excited by the proposal that giant but invisible 'dark stars' might be hiding in plain view, but enthusiasm dampened in the early 19th century, when light was discovered to be wavelike. Since light was understood as a wave rather than a particle, it was unclear what, if any, influence gravity would have on escaping light waves.\nGeneral relativity.\nIn 1911, Albert Einstein published a paper about the properties of acceleration in special relativity, noting that an object accelerating through space outside of a gravitational field would be physically indistinguishable from an object in a static gravitational field. The paper also predicted the deflection of light by massive bodies. In 1915, Einstein refined these ideas into his general theory of relativity, which explained how matter affects spacetime, which in turn affects the motion of other matter. This theory formed the basis for black hole physics, although Einstein himself would later try, and fail, to refute the idea that black holes could exist.\nOnly a few months after Einstein published the field equations describing general relativity, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution describing the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass. A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties. At a certain radius from the center of the mass, the Schwarzschild solution became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this radius, which later became known as the Schwarzschild radius, was not understood at the time.\nIn 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates. In 1933, Georges Lema\u00eetre realised that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was a non-physical coordinate singularity. Arthur Eddington commented on the possibility of a star with mass compressed to the Schwarzschild radius in a 1926 book, noting that Einstein's theory allows us to rule out overly large densities for visible stars like Betelgeuse because the extreme force of gravity would make light unable to escape from the star, redshift the star's entire light spectrum out of existence, and \"produce so much curvature of the spacetime metric that space would close up around the star, leaving us outside (i.e., nowhere).\"\nIn 1931, using special relativity, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1.4\u00a0M\u2609) has no stable solutions. His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse. They were partially correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star, which is itself stable.\nIn 1939, based on Chandrasekhar's reasoning, Robert Oppenheimer and George Volkoff predicted that neutron stars above another mass limit, now known as the Tolman\u2013Oppenheimer\u2013Volkoff limit, would collapse further, concluding that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes. Their original calculations, based on the Pauli exclusion principle, gave it as 0.7\u00a0M\u2609. Subsequent consideration of neutron-neutron repulsion mediated by the strong force raised the estimate to approximately 1.5\u00a0M\u2609 to 3.0\u00a0M\u2609. Observations of the neutron star merger GW170817, which is thought to have generated a black hole shortly afterward, have refined the TOV limit estimate to ~2.17\u00a0M\u2609.\nOppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped.380\u2013381 This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. John Wheeler later described black holes viewed from an external reference frame as \"frozen stars\" because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time due to gravitational time dilation, never to fully collapse.\nAlso in 1939, Einstein attempted to prove that black holes were impossible in his publication \"On a Stationary System with Spherical Symmetry Consisting of Many Gravitating Masses\", using his theory of general relativity to defend his argument. Months later, Oppenheimer and his student Hartland Snyder provided the Oppenheimer\u2013Snyder model in their paper \"On Continued Gravitational Contraction\", which predicted the existence of black holes. In the paper, which made no reference to Einstein's recent publication, Oppenheimer and Snyder used Einstein's own theory of general relativity to show the conditions on how a black hole could develop, for the first time in contemporary physics.\nIn 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, calling it \"a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction\". In this sense, events that occur inside of the black hole cannot affect events that occur outside of the black hole. Finkelstein created a new reference frame to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A similar concept had already been found by Martin Kruskal, but its significance had not been fully understood at the time.\nGolden age.\nThe era from the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s was the \"golden age of black hole research\", when general relativity and black holes became mainstream subjects of research.258\nIn this period, more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the cylindrically symmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged.\nIn 1967, Werner Israel found that the Schwarzschild solution was the only possible solution for a nonspinning, uncharged black hole, and couldn't have any additional parameters. In that sense, a Schwarzschild black hole would be defined by its mass alone, and any two Schwarzschild black holes with the same mass would be identical. Israel later found that Reissner-Nordstrom black holes were only defined by their mass and electric charge, while Brandon Carter discovered that Kerr black holes only had two degrees of freedom, mass and spin. Together, these findings became known as the no-hair theorem, which states that a stationary black hole is completely described by the three parameters of the Kerr\u2013Newman metric: mass, angular momentum, and electric charge.\nAt first, it was suspected that the strange mathematical singularities found in each of the black hole solutions only appeared due to the assumption that a black hole would be perfectly spherically symmetric, and therefore the singularities would not appear in generic situations where black holes would not necessarily be symmetric. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinski, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions, although they would later reverse their positions. However, in 1965, Roger Penrose proved that general relativity without quantum mechanics requires that singularities appear in all black holes. Shortly afterwards, Hawking generalized Penrose's solution to find that in all but a few physically infeasible scenarios, a cosmological Big Bang singularity is inevitable unless quantum gravity intervenes. For his work, Penrose received half of the 2020 Nobel Prize in Physics, Hawking having died in 2018.\nAstronomical observations also made great strides during this era. In 1967, Antony Hewish and Jocelyn Bell Burnell discovered pulsars and by 1969, these were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars. Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities, but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse. Based on observations in Greenwich and Toronto in the early 1970s, Cygnus X-1, a galactic X-ray source discovered in 1964, became the first astronomical object commonly accepted to be a black hole.\nWork by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics. These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory implies that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, predicting the effect now known as Hawking radiation.\nModern research and observation.\nThe first strong evidence for black holes came from combined X-ray and optical observations of Cygnus X-1 in 1972. The x-ray source, located in the Cygnus constellation, was discovered through a survey by two suborbital rockets, as the blocking of x-rays by Earth's atmosphere makes it difficult to detect them from the ground. Unlike stars or pulsars, Cygnus X-1 was not associated with any prominent radio or optical source. In 1972, Louise Webster, Paul Murdin, and, independently, Charles Thomas Bolton, found that Cygnus X-1 was actually in a binary system with the supergiant star HDE 226868. Using the emission patterns of the visible star, both research teams found that the mass of Cygnus X-1 was likely too large to be a white dwarf or neutron star, indicating that it was probably a black hole. Further research strengthened their hypothesis.\nWhile Cygnus X-1, a stellar-mass black hole, was generally accepted by the scientific community as a black hole by the end of 1973, it would be decades before a supermassive black hole would gain the same broad recognition. Although, as early as the 1960s, physicists such as Donald Lynden-Bell and Martin Rees had suggested that powerful quasars in the center of galaxies were powered by accreting supermassive black holes, little observational proof existed at the time. However, the Hubble Space Telescope, launched decades later, found that supermassive black holes were not only present in these active galactic nuclei, but that supermassive black holes in the center of galaxies were ubiquitous: Almost every galaxy had a supermassive black hole at its center, many of which were quiescent. In 1999, David Merritt proposed the M\u2013sigma relation, which related the dispersion of the velocity of matter in the center bulge of a galaxy to the mass of the supermassive black hole at its core. Subsequent studies confirmed this correlation. Around the same time, based on telescope observations of the velocities of stars at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, independent work groups led by Andrea Ghez and Reinhard Genzel concluded that the compact radio source in the center of the galaxy, Sagittarius A*, was likely a supermassive black hole. In 2020, Ghez and Genzel won the Nobel Prize in Physics for their prediction.\nOn 11 February 2016, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration announced the first direct detection of gravitational waves, named GW150914, representing the first observation of a black hole merger. At the time of the merger, the black holes were approximately 1.4 billion light-years away from Earth and had masses of 30 and 35 solar masses. The mass of the resulting black hole was approximately 62\u200asolar masses, with an additional three solar masses radiated away as gravitational waves. The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) detected the gravitational waves by using two mirrors spaced four kilometers apart to measure microscopic changes in length. In 2017, Rainer Weiss, Kip Thorne, and Barry Barish, who had spearheaded the project, were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for their work. Since the initial discovery in 2015, hundreds more gravitational waves have been observed by LIGO and another interferometer, Virgo.\nOn 10 April 2019, the first direct image of a black hole and its vicinity was published, following observations made by the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) in 2017 of the supermassive black hole in Messier 87's galactic centre. The observations were carried out by eight observatories in six geographical locations across four days and totaled five petabytes of data. In 2022, the Event Horizon Telescope collaboration released an image of the black hole in the center of the Milky Way galaxy, Sagittarius A*; The data had been collected in 2017. Detailed analysis of the motion of stars recorded by the Gaia mission produced evidence in 2022 and 2023 of a black hole named Gaia BH1 in a binary with a Sun-like star about away. Gaia BH1 is currently the closest known black hole to Earth. Two more black holes have since been found from Gaia data, one in a binary with a red giant and the other in a binary with a G-type star.\nEtymology.\nIn December 1967, a student reportedly suggested the phrase \"black hole\" at a lecture by John Wheeler; Wheeler adopted the term for its brevity and \"advertising value\", and Wheeler's stature in the field ensured it quickly caught on, leading some to credit Wheeler with coining the phrase.\nHowever, the term was used by others around that time. Science writer Marcia Bartusiak traces the term \"black hole\" to physicist Robert H. Dicke, who in the early 1960s reportedly compared the phenomenon to the Black Hole of Calcutta, notorious as a prison where people entered but never left alive.\nThe term \"black hole\" was used in print by \"Life\" and \"Science News\" magazines in 1963, and by science journalist Ann Ewing in her article \"'Black Holes' in Space\", dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science held in Cleveland, Ohio.\nProperties and structure.\nA black hole is generally defined as a region of spacetime for which no information-carrying signals or objects can escape. However, physicists do not have a precisely-agreed-upon definition of a black hole. From a local perspective, a black hole can be viewed as a region with a gravitational pull, or, equivalently, spacetime curvature so intense that nothing can escape. A black hole may also be defined as a region where the escape velocity is greater than the speed of light, or where space is falling inwards faster than the speed of light. The formula for escape velocity is formula_1, where M represents mass, G is the gravitational constant, and R is the radius from the center of the mass. From a global perspective, a black hole can be understood as a region of the universe for which no causal influences can reach the outside.\nThe no-hair theorem postulates that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, electric charge, and angular momentum; the black hole is otherwise featureless. If the conjecture is true, any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable from one another. The degree to which the conjecture is true for real black holes is currently an unsolved problem.\nThese properties are unique because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass of a black hole can be estimated by analyzing the motion of objects near the black hole, such as stars or gas. A black hole's angular momentum (or spin) can be measured from far away by analyzing the electromagnetic spectrum of the accretion disk\u2014The faster the black hole is spinning, the closer matter can get to the event horizon without falling in, and the redder that matter appears due to gravitational redshift. Properties of black holes can also be detected from the gravitational waves they emit.\nBecause a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in, and every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon is lost. Additionally, because the Hawking radiation emitted from a black hole is thermal, it cannot carry any information about what fell into the black hole, causing the information to seemingly vanish as the black hole radiates away. Since this seemingly violates the law of conservation of energy, it has been called the black hole information loss paradox.\nPhysical parameters.\nThe simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild, who discovered the solution in 1916. According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric. This means there is no observable difference at a distance between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. Contrary to the popular notion of a black hole \"sucking in everything\" in its surroundings, from far away, the external gravitational field of a black hole is identical to that of any other body of the same mass.\nSolutions describing more general black holes also exist. Non-rotating charged black holes are described by the Reissner\u2013Nordstr\u00f6m metric, while the Kerr metric describes a non-charged rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the Kerr\u2013Newman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum.\nWhile the mass of a black hole can theoretically take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. The total electric charge\u00a0\"Q\" and the total angular momentum\u00a0\"J\" are expected to satisfy the inequality\nformula_2\nfor a black hole of mass \"M\". Black holes with the minimum possible mass satisfying this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside. Because these singularities make the universe inherently unpredictable, many physicists believe they could not exist. The weak cosmic censorship hypothesis, proposed by Sir Roger Penrose, rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter. However, this theory has not yet been proven, and some physicists believe that naked singularities could exist. It is also unknown whether black holes could even become extremal, forming naked singularities, since natural processes counteract increasing spin and charge when a black hole becomes near-extremal.\nCharge.\nMost black holes are believed to have an approximately neutral charge. For example, Michal Zaja\u010dek, Arman Tursunov, Andreas Eckart, and Silke Britzen found the electric charge of Sagittarius A*, the black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, to be at least ten orders of magnitude below the theoretical maximum. If a black hole were to become charged, particles with an opposite sign of charge would be pulled in by the extra electromagnetic force, while particles with the same sign of charge would be repelled, neutralizing the black hole. This effect may not be as strong if the black hole is also spinning. The presence of charge can reduce the diameter of the black hole by up to 38% and moves the innermost stable circular orbit inwards, regardless whether the particles in the ISCO are electrically charged or electrically neutral.\nThe charge Q for a nonspinning black hole is bounded by\nformula_3\nwhere G is the gravitational constant and M is the black hole's mass.\nSpin.\nUnlike charge, rotation is expected to be a universal feature of compact astrophysical objects, with many black holes spinning at near the maximum rate. For example, the Milky Way's central black hole Sagittarius A* rotates at about 90% of the maximum rate. The supermassive black hole in the center of the M87 galaxy appears to have an angular momentum very close to the maximum allowed value. That uncharged limit is\nformula_4\nallowing definition of a dimensionless spin parameter such that\nformula_5\nMass.\nBlack holes can have a wide range of masses. The minimum mass of a black hole formed by stellar gravitational collapse is governed by the maximum mass of a neutron star and is believed to be approximately two-to-four solar masses. However, theoretical primordial black holes, believed to have formed soon after the Big Bang, could be far smaller, with masses as little as at formation. These very small black holes are sometimes called micro black holes.\nBlack holes formed by stellar collapse are called stellar black holes. Estimates of their maximum mass at formation vary, but generally range from 10 to 100 solar masses, with higher estimates for black holes progenated by low-metallicity stars. These black holes can also gain mass via accretion of nearby matter. Stellar black holes are often found in binaries with stars. These binaries can be categorized as either low-mass or high-mass; This classification is based on the mass of the companion star, not the compact object itself. Stellar black holes are also sometimes found in binaries with other compact objects, such as white dwarfs, neutron stars, and other black holes.\nBlack holes that are larger than stellar black holes but smaller than supermassive black holes are called intermediate-mass black holes, with masses of approximately to solar masses. These black holes seem to be rarer than their stellar and supermassive counterparts, with relatively few candidates having been observed. Physicists have speculated that such black holes may form from collisions in globular and star clusters or at the center of low-mass galaxies. They may also form as the result of mergers of smaller black holes, with several LIGO observations finding merged black holes within the 110-350 solar mass range.\nThe black holes with the largest masses are called supermassive black holes, with masses more than times that of the Sun. These black holes are believed to exist at the centers of almost every large galaxy, including the Milky Way. Scientists have speculated that these black holes formed via the collapse of large population III stars, direct collapse of large amounts of matter, or the merging of many smaller black holes. Some scientists have proposed a subcategory of even larger black holes, called ultramassive black holes, with masses greater than - solar masses. It is unlikely that black holes with masses greater than 50-100 billion times that of the Sun could exist now, as black hole growth is limited by the age of the universe.\nRadius.\nFor a nonspinning, uncharged black hole, the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is proportional to the mass, \"M\", through\nformula_6\nwhere \"r\"s is the Schwarzschild radius and M\u2609 is the mass of the Sun. For a black hole with nonzero spin or electric charge, the radius is smaller, until an extremal black hole could have an event horizon close to\nformula_7\nhalf the radius of a nonspinning, uncharged black hole of the same mass.\nExternal geometry.\nErgosphere.\nGeneral relativity predicts that any rotating mass will slightly \"drag\" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. This will cause the spacetime around the mass to rotate around it, similar to a vortex. The rotating spacetime will then drag any matter and light in it into rotation around the spinning mass as well. This effect, called \"frame dragging\", gets stronger closer to the spinning mass.\nNear a rotating black hole, this effect becomes very strong. In fact, rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stay still, called the ergosphere. This is because frame dragging is so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stay still.\nThe ergosphere of a black hole is a volume bounded by the black hole's event horizon and the \"ergosurface\", which coincides with the event horizon at the poles but is at a much greater distance around the equator.\nMatter and radiation can escape from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered with. The extra energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole, slowing down the rotation of the black hole. A variation of the Penrose process in the presence of strong magnetic fields, the Blandford\u2013Znajek process, is considered a likely mechanism for the enormous luminosity and relativistic jets of quasars and other active galactic nuclei.\nAccretion disk.\nDue to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disk-like structure around the object. As the disk's angular momentum is transferred outward due to internal processes, its matter falls farther inward, converting its gravitational energy into heat and releasing a large flux of x-rays. The temperature of these disks can range from thousands to millions of Kelvin, and temperatures can differ throughout a single accretion disk. Accretion disks can also emit in other parts of the electromagnetic spectrum, depending on the disk's turbulence and magnetization and the black hole's mass and angular momentum. \nAccretion disks can be defined as geometrically thin or geometrically thick. Geometrically thin disks are mostly confined to the black hole's equatorial plane and have a well-defined edge at the innermost stable circular orbit (ISCO), while geometrically thick disks are supported by internal pressure and temperature and can extend inside the ISCO. Disks with high rates of electron scattering and absorption, appearing bright and opaque, are called \"optically thick\"; \"Optically thin\" disks are more translucent and produce fainter images when viewed from afar. Accretion disks of black holes accreting beyond the Eddington limit are often referred to as \"polish donuts\" due to their thick, toroidal shape that resembles that of a donut.\nQuasar accretion disks are expected to generally appear blue in color. The disk for a stellar black hole, on the other hand, would likely look orange, yellow, or red, with its inner regions being the brightest. Theoretical research suggests that the hotter a disk is, the bluer it should be, although this is not always supported by observations of real astronomical objects. Accretion disk colors may also be altered by the Doppler effect, with the part of the disk travelling towards an observer appearing bluer and brighter and the part of the disk travelling away from the observer appearing redder and dimmer.\nRelativistic jets.\nSome black holes have relativistic jets--thin streams of plasma travelling away from the black hole at more than one-tenth of the speed of light. These jets can extend as far as millions of parsecs from the black hole itself. \nBlack holes of any mass can have jets. However, they are typically observed around spinning black holes with strongly-magnetized accretion disks. Relativistic jets were more common in the early universe, when galaxies and their corresponding supermassive black holes were rapidly gaining mass. All black holes with jets also have an accretion disk, but the jets are usually brighter than the disk. Supermassive black holes with jets are often called \"quasars\", and their stellar-mass companions are referred to as \"microquasars\".\nThe mechanism of formation of jets is not yet known, but several options have been proposed. One method proposed to fuel these jets is the Blandford-Znajek process, which suggests that the dragging of magnetic field lines by a black hole's rotation could launch jets of matter into space. The Penrose process, which involves extraction of a black hole's rotational energy, has also been proposed as a potential mechanism of jet propulsion.\nInnermost stable circular orbit (ISCO).\nIn Newtonian gravity, test particles can stably orbit at arbitrary distances from a central object. In general relativity, however, there exists a smallest possible radius for which a massive particle can orbit stably. Any infinitesimal inward perturbations to this orbit will lead to the particle spiraling into the black hole, and any outward perturbations will, depending on the energy, cause the particle to spiral in, move to a stable orbit further from the black hole, or escape to infinity. This orbit is called the innermost stable circular orbit, or ISCO. The location of the ISCO depends on the spin of the black hole and the spin of the particle itself. In the case of a Schwarzschild black hole (spin zero) and a particle without spin, the location of the ISCO is:\nformula_8\nThe radius of this orbit changes slightly based on particle spin. The ISCO moves inward for charged black holes. For spinning black holes, the ISCO is moved inwards for particles orbiting in the same direction that the black hole is spinning (prograde) and outwards for particles orbiting in the opposite direction (retrograde). For example, the ISCO for a particle orbiting retrograde can be as far out as about formula_9, while the ISCO for a particle orbiting prograde can be as close as at the event horizon itself.\nPlunging region.\nThe final observable region of spacetime around a black hole is called the plunging region. In this area it is no longer possible for matter to follow circular orbits or to stop a final descent into the black hole. Instead, it will rapidly plunge toward the black hole at close to the speed of light, growing increasingly hot and producing a characteristic, detectable thermal emission. However, light and thermal radiation emitted from this region can still escape from the black hole's gravitational pull.\nPhoton sphere.\nThe photon sphere is a spherical boundary where photons that move on tangents to that sphere would be trapped in an unstable, circular orbit around the black hole.\nFor Schwarzschild black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. Non-Schwarzschild black holes have a photon sphere radius at least 1.5 times that of the event horizon, but the photon sphere's radius is never larger than the radius of the black hole's shadow. Their orbits would likely be unstable, so any small perturbation, such as a particle of infalling matter, would cause an instability that would grow over time. This would either set the photon on an outward trajectory, causing it to escape from the black hole's orbit, or on an inward spiral, where it would eventually cross the event horizon.\nFor a rotating, uncharged black hole, the radius of the photon sphere depends on the spin parameter and whether the photon is orbiting prograde or retrograde. For a photon orbiting prograde, the photon sphere will be 1-3 Schwarzschild radii from the center of the black hole, while for a photon orbiting retrograde, the photon sphere will be between 3-5 Schwarzschild radii from the center of the black hole. The exact location of the photon sphere depends on the magnitude of the black hole's rotation. For a charged, nonrotating black hole, there will only be one photon sphere, and the radius of the photon sphere will decrease for increasing black hole charge. For non-extremal, charged, rotating black holes, there will always be two photon spheres, with the exact radii depending on the parameters of the black hole.\nWhile light can still escape from the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Therefore, any light that reaches an outside observer from the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects between the photon sphere and the event horizon.\nEvent horizon.\nThe defining feature of a black hole is the existence of an event horizon, a boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can pass only inward towards the center of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach or affect an outside observer, making it impossible to determine whether such an event occurred.\nAs predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass. At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.\nTo a distant observer, a clock near a black hole would appear to tick more slowly than one further from the black hole. This effect, known as gravitational time dilation, would also cause an object falling into a black hole to appear to slow as it approached the event horizon, never quite reaching the horizon from the perspective of an outside observer. All processes on this object would appear to slow down, and any light emitted by the object to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift. The falling object would fade away until it could no longer be seen, disappearing from view within less than a second.\nOn the other hand, an observer falling into a black hole would not notice any of these effects as they cross the event horizon. Their own clocks appear to them to tick normally, and they cross the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour. In general relativity, it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations, due to Einstein's equivalence principle.\nFor non-rotating black holes, the geometry of the event horizon is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes, the event horizon is oblate.\nInternal geometry.\nCauchy horizon.\nBlack holes that are rotating and/or charged have an inner horizon, often called the Cauchy horizon, inside of the black hole. The inner horizon is divided up into two segments: an ingoing section and an outgoing section.\nAt the ingoing section of the Cauchy horizon, radiation and matter that fall into the black hole would build up at the horizon, causing the curvature of spacetime to go to infinity. This would cause an observer falling in to experience tidal forces. This phenomenon is often called mass inflation, since it is associated with a parameter dictating the black hole's internal mass growing exponentially, and the buildup of tidal forces is called the mass-inflation singularity or Cauchy horizon singularity. Some physicists have argued that in realistic black holes, accretion and Hawking radiation would stop mass inflation from occurring.\nAt the outgoing section of the inner horizon, infalling radiation would backscatter off of the black hole's spacetime curvature and travel outward, building up at the outgoing Cauchy horizon. This would cause an infalling observer to experience a gravitational shock wave and tidal forces as the spacetime curvature at the horizon grew to infinity. This buildup of tidal forces is called the shock singularity.\nBoth of these singularities are weak, meaning that an object crossing them would only be deformed a finite amount by tidal forces, even though the spacetime curvature would still be infinite at the singularity. This is as opposed to a strong singularity, where an object hitting the singularity would be stretched and squeezed by an infinite amount. They are also null singularities, meaning that a photon could travel parallel to the them without ever being intercepted.\nSingularity.\nMathematical models of black holes based on general relativities have singularities at their centers\u2014points where the curvature of spacetime becomes infinite, and geodesics terminate within a finite proper time. However, it is unknown whether these singularities truly exist in real black holes. Some physicists believe that singularities do not exist, and that their existence, which would make spacetime unpredictable, signals a breakdown of general relativity and a need for a more complete understanding of quantum gravity. Others believe that such singularities could be resolved within the current framework of physics, without having to introduce quantum gravity. There are also physicists, including Kip Thorne and Charles Misner, who believe that not all singularities can be resolved, and that some likely still exist in the real universe despite the effects of quantum gravity. Finally, still others believe that singularities do not exist, and that their existence in general relativity does not matter, since general relativity is already believed to be an incomplete theory.\nAccording to general relativity, every black hole has a singularity inside. For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point; for a rotating black hole it is smeared out to form a ring singularity that lies in the plane of rotation. In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. All of the mass of the black hole ends up in the singularity. Since the singularity has nonzero mass in an infinitely small space, it can be thought of as having infinite density.\nObservers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity once they cross the event horizon. As they fall further into the black hole, they will be torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the \"noodle effect\". Eventually, they will reach the singularity and be crushed into an infinitely small point.\nBefore the 1970s, most physicists believed that the interior of a Schwarzschild black hole curved inwards towards a sharp point at the singularity. However, in the late 1960s, Soviet physicists Vladimir Belinskii, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz discovered that this model was only true when the spacetime inside the black hole had not been perturbed. Any perturbations, such as those caused by matter or radiation falling in, would cause space to oscillate chaotically near the singularity. Any matter falling in would experience intense tidal forces rapidly changing in direction, all while being compressed into an increasingly small volume. Physicists termed these oscillations \"Mixmaster dynamics\", after a brand of mixer that was popular at the time that Belinskii, Khalatnikov, and Lifshitz made their discovery, because they have a similar effect on matter near a singularity as an electric mixer would have on dough.\nIn the case of a charged (Reissner\u2013Nordstr\u00f6m) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole. The possibility of travelling to another universe is, however, only theoretical, since any perturbation would destroy this possibility. It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (returning to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which leads to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox. However, processes inside the black hole, such as quantum gravity effects or mass inflation, might prevent closed timelike curves from arising.\nSome models of gravity seeking to solve technical issues with general relativity do not include black hole singularities. These theoretical black holes without singularities are called \"regular\", or \"nonsingular\", black holes. For example, the fuzzball model, based on string theory, states that black holes are actually made up of quantum microstates and need not have a singularity or an event horizon. The theory of loop quantum gravity proposes that the curvature and density at the center of a black hole is large, but not infinite.\nFormation.\nBlack holes are formed by gravitational collapse of massive stars, either by direct collapse or during a supernova explosion in a process called \"fallback\". Black holes can result from the merger of two neutron stars or a neutron star and a black hole. Other more speculative mechanisms include primordial black holes created from density fluctuations in the early universe, the collapse of dark stars, a hypothetical object powered by annihilation of dark matter, or from hypothetical self-interacting dark matter.\nGravitational collapse.\nGravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. At the end of a star's life, it will run out of hydrogen to fuse, and will start fusing more and more massive elements, until it gets to iron. Since the fusion of any heavier elements would require more energy than they would release, the star can no longer perform nuclear fusion. If the iron core of the star is too massive, the star will no longer be able to support itself and will undergo gravitational collapse.\nThe collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, allowing the condensation of matter into an exotic denser state. Degeneracy pressure occurs from the Pauli exclusion principle\u2014Particles will resist being in the same place as each other. Smaller progenitor stars, with masses less than about 8\u00a0M\u2609, will be held together by the degeneracy pressure of electrons and will become a white dwarf. For more massive progenitor stars, electron degeneracy pressure is no longer strong enough to resist the force of gravity and the star will be held together by neutron degeneracy pressure, which can occur at much higher densities, forming a neutron star. If the star is still too massive, even neutron degeneracy pressure will not be able to resist the force of gravity and the star will collapse into a black hole. Which type forms depends on the mass of the remnant of the original star left if the outer layers have been blown away (for example, in a Type II supernova). The mass of the remnant, the collapsed object that survives the explosion, can be substantially less than that of the original star. Remnants exceeding 5\u00a0M\u2609 are produced by stars that were over 20\u00a0M\u2609 before the collapse.\nThe gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103\u00a0M\u2609. These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centres of most galaxies. It has further been suggested that massive black holes with typical masses of ~105\u00a0M\u2609 could have formed from the direct collapse of gas clouds in the young universe. These massive objects have been proposed as the seeds that eventually formed the earliest quasars observed already at redshift formula_10, less than approximately one billion years after the Big Bang. Some candidates for such objects have been found in observations of the young universe.\nWhile most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer would see the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.\nPrimordial black holes and the Big Bang.\nIn the current epoch of the universe, conditions needed to form black holes are rare and are mostly only found in stars. However, in the early universe, conditions may have allowed for black hole formations via other means. Fluctuations of spacetime soon after the Big Bang may have formed areas that were denser then their surroundings. Initially, these regions would not have been compact enough to form a black hole, but eventually, the curvature of spacetime in the regions become large enough to cause them to collapse into a black hole. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the scale of these fluctuations. Various models predict the creation of primordial black holes ranging in size from a Planck mass (~) to hundreds of thousands of solar masses. Primordial black holes with masses less than would have evaporated by now due to Hawking radiation.\nDespite the early universe being extremely dense, it did not re-collapse into a black hole during the Big Bang, since the universe was expanding rapidly and did not have the gravitational differential necessary for black hole formation. Models for the gravitational collapse of objects of relatively constant size, such as stars, do not necessarily apply in the same way to rapidly expanding space such as the Big Bang.\nHigh-energy collisions.\nIn principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy particle collisions that achieve sufficient density, although no such events have been detected.\nThese hypothetical micro black holes, which could form from the collision of cosmic rays and Earth's atmosphere or in particle accelerators like the Large Hadron Collider, would not be able to aggregate additional mass. Instead, they would evaporate in about 10\u221225 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth.\nEvolution.\nGrowth.\nOnce a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its surroundings. This growth process is one possible way through which some supermassive black holes may have been formed, although the formation of supermassive black holes is still an open field of research. A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes found in globular clusters. Black holes can also merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. This is thought to have been important, especially in the early growth of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the aggregation of many smaller objects. The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes.\nRestrictions have been proposed to limit the growth rate of black holes. In theory, at a certain rate of accretion, the outward radiation pressure will become as strong as the inward gravitational force, and the black hole will be unable to accrete any faster. This limit is called the Eddington limit. However, in practicality, many black holes accrete beyond this rate due to their non-spherical geometry or instabilities in the accretion disk. Accretion beyond the limit is called Super-Eddington accretion and may have been commonplace in the early universe. Additionally, mergers of supermassive black holes may take a long time: As a binary of supermassive black holes approach each other, most nearby stars are ejected, leaving little for the remaining black holes to gravitationally interact with that would allow them to get closer to each other. This phenomenon has been called the final parsec problem, as the distance at which this happens is usually around one parsec.\nAccretion of matter.\nWhen a black hole accretes matter, the gas in the inner accretion disk orbits at very high speeds because of its proximity to the black hole. The resulting friction is so significant that it heats the inner disk to temperatures at which it emits vast amounts of electromagnetic radiation (mainly X-rays). These bright X-ray sources may be detected by telescopes. By the time the matter of the disk reaches the ISCO, it will have given off a significant amount of energy: Between 5.7% and 42% of its mass will have been converted to energy, depending on the black hole's spin. Most of this energy (about 90%) is released in a relatively small area, within about 20 black hole radii. In many cases, accretion disks are accompanied by relativistic jets that are emitted along the black hole's poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood, in part due to insufficient data.\nAs such, many of the universe's most energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion disks of supermassive black holes. Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion. It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes.\nStars have been observed to get torn apart by tidal forces in the immediate vicinity of supermassive black holes in galaxy nuclei, in what is known as a tidal disruption event (TDE). Some of the material from the disrupted star forms an accretion disk around the black hole, which emits observable electromagnetic radiation.\nEvaporation.\nIn 1974, Stephen Hawking predicted that black holes emit small amounts of thermal radiation at a temperature of formula_11, where formula_12 is the reduced Planck constant, formula_13 is the speed of light, formula_14 is the gravitational constant, formula_15 is the mass of the black hole and formula_16 is the Boltzmann constant. This effect has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to black holes, Hawking determined that a black hole should continuously emit thermal blackbody radiation. This theory was supported by previous work by Jacob Bekenstein, who theorized that black holes should have a finite entropy proportional to their surface area, and therefore should also have a temperature. It is also analogous to a special relativistic effect called the Unruh effect, which predicts that an accelerating observer should detect a higher temperature of their surroundings than a nonaccelerating observer. The temperature experienced by an accelerating observer is the same as an observer near the horizon of a black hole with an equivalent surface gravity. This result is in accordance with the equivalence principle, which states that the effects of acceleration in flat spacetime should be the same as the effects of the equivalent acceleration due to gravity in curved spacetime.\nSince Hawking's publication, many others have mathematically verified the result through different approaches. If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time as they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles. The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes.\nA stellar black hole of 1\u00a0M\u2609 has a Hawking temperature of 62\u00a0nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7\u00a0K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrinking. To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7\u00a0K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole would need a mass less than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimetre.\nIf a black hole is very small, the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. A black hole with the mass of a car would have a diameter of about 10\u221224\u00a0m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity of more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster. For a very small black hole, quantum gravity effects are expected to play an important role and could hypothetically make the black hole stable, although current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate this is the case.\nThe Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak and would thus be exceedingly difficult to detect from Earth. A possible exception is the burst of gamma rays emitted in the last stage of the evaporation of primordial black holes. Searches for such flashes have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of low mass primordial black holes, with modern research predicting that primordial black holes must make up less than a fraction of of the universe's total mass. NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope, launched in 2008, has searched for these flashes, but has not yet found any.\nIf black holes evaporate via Hawking radiation, a non-accreting solar mass black hole will evaporate (beginning once the temperature of the cosmic microwave background drops below that of the black hole) over a period of 1064 years. A supermassive black hole with a mass of 1011\u00a0M\u2609 will evaporate in around 2\u00d710100 years. During the collapse of a supercluster of galaxies, supermassive black holes are predicted to grow to up to 1014\u00a0M\u2609. Even these would evaporate over a timescale of up to 10106 years. It is unknown exactly what would happen at the end of a black hole's evaporation. Some physicists theorize that it would leave behind a remnant, such as a naked singularity.\nObservational evidence.\nMillions of black holes with around 30 solar masses derived from stellar collapse are expected to exist in the Milky Way. Even a dwarf galaxy like Draco should have hundreds. Only a few of these have been detected.\nBy nature, black holes do not themselves emit any electromagnetic radiation other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation, so astrophysicists searching for black holes must generally rely on indirect observations.\nDirect interferometry.\nThe Event Horizon Telescope (EHT) is an active program that directly observes the immediate environment of black holes' event horizons, such as the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. In April 2017, EHT began observing the black hole at the centre of Messier 87. Using petabytes of data from eight different radio observatories over a ten-day observation period, the EHT team created a composite image of the black hole, which they debuted in April 2019. The black hole\u2019s shadow appears as a dark circle in the centre of the image, bordered by the orange-red ring of its accretion disk. The bottom half of the disk is brighter than the top due to Doppler beaming: Material at the bottom of the disk, which is travelling towards the viewer at relativistic speeds, appears brighter than the material at the top of the disk, which is travelling away from the viewer. In April 2023, the EHT team presented an image of the shadow of the Messier 87 black hole and its high-energy jet, viewed together for the first time.\nOn 12 May 2022, the EHT released the first image of Sagittarius A*, the supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way galaxy. The EHT team had previously detected magnetic field lines around the black hole, confirming theoretical predictions of magnetic fields around black holes. The imaging of Sagittarius A* was done concurrently with the imaging of the Messier 87 (M87*) black hole. Like M87*, Sagittarius A*\u2019s shadow and accretion disk can be seen in the EHT image, with the size of the shadow matching theoretical projections.Although the image of Sagittarius A* was created through the same process as for M87*, it was significantly more complex to image Sagittarius A* because of the instability of its surroundings. Because Sagittarius A* is one thousand times less massive as M87*, its accretion disk has a much shorter orbital period, so the environment around Sagittarius A* was rapidly changing as the EHT team was trying to image it. Additionally, turbulent plasma lies between Sagittarius A* and Earth, preventing resolution of the image at longer wavelengths.\nDetection of gravitational waves from merging black holes.\nOn 14 September 2015, the LIGO gravitational wave observatory made the first-ever successful direct observation of gravitational waves. The signal was consistent with theoretical predictions for the gravitational waves produced by the merger of two black holes: one with about 36 solar masses, and the other around 29 solar masses. This observation provides the most concrete evidence for the existence of black holes to date. For instance, the gravitational wave signal suggests that the separation of the two objects before the merger was just 350\u00a0km, or roughly four times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to the inferred masses. The objects must therefore have been extremely compact, leaving black holes as the most plausible interpretation.\nMore importantly, the signal observed by LIGO also included the start of the post-merger ringdown, the signal produced as the newly formed compact object settles down to a stationary state. Arguably, the ringdown is the most direct way of observing a black hole. From the LIGO signal, it is possible to extract the frequency and damping time of the dominant mode of the ringdown. From these, it is possible to infer the mass and angular momentum of the final object, which match independent predictions from numerical simulations of the merger. The frequency and decay time of the dominant mode are determined by the geometry of the photon sphere. Hence, observation of this mode confirms the presence of a photon sphere; however, it cannot exclude possible exotic alternatives to black holes that are compact enough to have a photon sphere.\nThe observation also provides the first observational evidence for the existence of stellar-mass black hole binaries. Furthermore, it is the first observational evidence of stellar-mass black holes weighing 25 solar masses or more.\nSince then, many more gravitational wave events have been observed.\nStars orbiting Sagittarius A*.\nThe proper motions of stars near the centre of our own Milky Way provide strong observational evidence that these stars are orbiting a supermassive black hole. Since 1995, astronomers have tracked the motions of 90 stars orbiting an invisible object coincident with the radio source Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motions to Keplerian orbits, the astronomers were able to infer, in 1998, that a M\u2609 object must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 light-years to cause the motions of those stars.\nSince then, one of the stars\u2014called S2\u2014has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data, astronomers were able to refine the calculations of the mass to M\u2609 and a radius of less than 0.002 light-years for the object causing the orbital motion of those stars. The upper limit on the object's size is still too large to test whether it is smaller than its Schwarzschild radius. Nevertheless, these observations strongly suggest that the central object is a supermassive black hole as there are no other plausible scenarios for confining so much invisible mass into such a small volume. Additionally, there is some observational evidence that this object might possess an event horizon, a feature unique to black holes.\nIn 2020, Andrea Ghez and Reinhard Genzel shared one-half of the Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery that Sagittarius A* was a supermassive black hole.\nX-ray binaries.\nX-ray binaries are binary star systems that emit a majority of their radiation in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions cannot derive from an ordinary star and are generally thought to result when compact object accretes matter from a ordinary star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides an opportunity for studying the central object and to determine if it might be a black hole. By studying Doppler shifts in the spectrum of the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and to obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the Tolman\u2013Oppenheimer\u2013Volkoff limit (the maximum mass a star can have without collapsing) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole.\nThe first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton, Louise Webster, and Paul Murdin in 1972. Observations of rotation broadening of the optical star reported in 1986 lead to a mass estimate of 16 solar masses with 7 solar masses as the lower bound. Additional observations and analysis lead to a 2011 report for the mass of for the black hole and for the optical companion.\nIn a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients, the companion star is of relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates of the black hole mass. These systems actively emit X-rays for only several months once every 10\u201350 years. During the period of low X-ray emission, called quiescence, the accretion disk is extremely faint, allowing detailed observation of the companion star during this period. Numerous black hole candidates have been measured by this method.\nQuasi-periodic oscillations.\nThe X-ray emissions from accretion disks sometimes flicker at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of candidate black holes.\nGalactic nuclei.\nAstronomers use the term \"active galaxy\" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the high levels of activity in the centers of these galaxies, regions called active galactic nuclei (AGN), may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes, which can be millions of times more massive than stellar ones. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of interstellar gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets perpendicular to the accretion disk.\nAlthough supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy.\nIt is now widely accepted that the centre of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole. The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M\u2013sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and that of the galaxy itself.\nMicrolensing.\nAnother way the black hole nature of an object may be tested is through observation of effects caused by a strong gravitational field in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected, such as light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. Microlensing occurs when the sources are unresolved and the observer sees a small brightening. The turn of the millennium saw the first 3 candidate detections of black holes in this way, and in January 2022, astronomers reported the first confirmed detection of a microlensing event from an isolated black hole.\nAnother possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars orbiting the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*.\nAlternatives.\nWhile there is a strong case for supermassive black holes, the model for stellar-mass black holes assumes of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star: objects observed to have more mass are assumed to be black holes. However, the properties of extremely dense matter are poorly understood. New exotic phases of matter could allow other kinds of massive objects. A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars, and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars. Some extensions of the Standard Model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars. These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass.\nSince the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes. The average density of a 108\u00a0M\u2609 black hole is comparable to that of water. Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates.\nA few theoretical objects have been conjectured to match observations of astronomical black hole candidates identically or near-identically, but which function via a different mechanism. These include the gravastar, the black star, related nestar and the dark-energy star.\nOpen questions.\nEntropy and thermodynamics.\n\"S\" = \"A\" The formula for the Bekenstein\u2013Hawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant (\u0127). In Planck units, this reduces to \"S\" =.\nIn 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge. This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of an isolated system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease in the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area.\nThe link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery in 1974 that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy.\nOne puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume.\nAlthough general relativity can be used to perform a semiclassical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities, such as mass, charge, and pressure. Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the Bekenstein\u2013Hawking entropy. Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity.\nInformation loss paradox.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nIs physical information lost in black holes?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nBecause, according to the no-hair theorem, a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. When black holes were thought to persist forever, this information loss was not problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside, but represented on the event horizon in accordance with the holographic principle. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever.\nThe question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community. In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of a property called unitarity, and it has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy, though this has also been disputed. Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem.\nOne attempt to resolve the black hole information paradox is known as black hole complementarity.[] In 2012, the \"firewall paradox\" was introduced with the goal of demonstrating that black hole complementarity fails to solve the information paradox. According to quantum field theory in curved spacetime, a single emission of Hawking radiation involves two mutually entangled particles. The outgoing particle escapes and is emitted as a quantum of Hawking radiation; the infalling particle is swallowed by the black hole. Assume a black hole formed a finite time in the past and will fully evaporate away in some finite time in the future. Then, it will emit only a finite amount of information encoded within its Hawking radiation. According to research by physicists like Don Page and Leonard Susskind, there will eventually be a time by which an outgoing particle must be entangled with all the Hawking radiation the black hole has previously emitted.\nThis seemingly creates a paradox: a principle called \"monogamy of entanglement\" requires that, like any quantum system, the outgoing particle cannot be fully entangled with two other systems at the same time; yet here the outgoing particle appears to be entangled both with the infalling particle and, independently, with past Hawking radiation. In order to resolve this contradiction, physicists may eventually be forced to give up one of three time-tested principles: Einstein's equivalence principle, unitarity, or local quantum field theory. One possible solution, which violates the equivalence principle, is that a \"firewall\" destroys incoming particles at the event horizon. In general, which\u2014if any\u2014of these assumptions should be abandoned remains a topic of debate.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nPopular reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUniversity textbooks and monographs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReview papers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nVideos.\n[[Category:Black holes| ]]\n[[Category:Articles containing video clips]]\n[[Category:Concepts in astronomy]]\n[[Category:Galaxies]]\n[[Category:Gravitational singularities]]\n[[Category:General relativity]]"}
{"id": "4651", "revid": "3240788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4651", "title": "Beta decay", "text": "Type of radioactive decay\nIn nuclear physics, beta decay (\u03b2-decay) is a type of radioactive decay in which an atomic nucleus emits a beta particle (fast energetic electron or positron), transforming into an isobar of that nuclide. For example, beta decay of a neutron transforms it into a proton by the emission of an electron accompanied by an antineutrino; or, conversely a proton is converted into a neutron by the emission of a positron with a neutrino in what is called \"positron emission\". Neither the beta particle nor its associated (anti-)neutrino exist within the nucleus prior to beta decay, but are created in the decay process. By this process, unstable atoms obtain a more stable ratio of protons to neutrons. The probability of a nuclide decaying due to beta and other forms of decay is determined by its nuclear binding energy. The binding energies of all existing nuclides form what is called the nuclear band or valley of stability. For either electron or positron emission to be energetically possible, the energy release or \"Q\" value must be positive.\nBeta decay is a consequence of the weak force, which is characterized by relatively long decay times. Nucleons are composed of up quarks and down quarks, and the weak force allows a quark to change its flavour by means of a virtual W boson leading to creation of an electron/antineutrino or positron/neutrino pair. For example, a neutron, composed of two down quarks and an up quark, decays to a proton composed of a down quark and two up quarks.\nElectron capture is sometimes included as a type of beta decay, because the basic nuclear process, mediated by the weak force, is the same. In electron capture, an inner atomic electron is captured by a proton in the nucleus, transforming it into a neutron, and an electron neutrino is released.\nDescription.\nThe two types of beta decay are known as \"beta minus\" and \"beta plus\". In beta minus (\u03b2\u2212) decay, a neutron is converted to a proton, and the process creates an electron and an electron antineutrino; while in beta plus (\u03b2+) decay, a proton is converted to a neutron and the process creates a positron and an electron neutrino. \u03b2+ decay is also known as positron emission.\nBeta decay conserves a quantum number known as the lepton number, or the number of electrons and their associated neutrinos (other leptons are the muon and tau particles). These particles have lepton number +1, while their antiparticles have lepton number \u22121. Since a proton or neutron has lepton number zero, \u03b2+ decay (a positron, or antielectron) must be accompanied with an electron neutrino, while \u03b2\u2212 decay (an electron) must be accompanied by an electron antineutrino.\nAn example of electron emission (\u03b2\u2212 decay) is the decay of carbon-14 into nitrogen-14 with a half-life of about 5,700 years:\n C \u2192 N + + \nIn this form of decay, the original element becomes a new chemical element in a process known as nuclear transmutation. This new element has an unchanged mass number A, but an atomic number Z that is increased by one. As in all nuclear decays, the decaying element (in this case C) is known as the \"parent nuclide\" while the resulting element (in this case N) is known as the \"daughter nuclide\".\nAnother example is the decay of hydrogen-3 (tritium) into helium-3 with a half-life of about 12.3 years:\n H \u2192 He + + \nAn example of positron emission (\u03b2+ decay) is the decay of magnesium-23 into sodium-23 with a half-life of about 11.3\u00a0s:\n Mg \u2192 Na + + \n\u03b2+ decay also results in nuclear transmutation, with the daughter element having an atomic number that is decreased by one.\nThe beta spectrum, or distribution of energy values for the beta particles, is continuous. The total energy of the decay process is divided between the electron, the antineutrino, and the recoiling nuclide. In the figure to the right, an example of an electron with 0.40\u00a0MeV energy from the beta decay of 210Bi is shown. In this example, the total decay energy is 1.16\u00a0MeV, so the antineutrino has the remaining energy: 1.16\u202fMeV \u2212 0.40\u202fMeV = 0.76\u202fMeV. An electron at the far right of the curve would have the maximum possible kinetic energy, leaving the energy of the neutrino to be only its small rest mass.\nHistory.\nDiscovery and initial characterization.\nRadioactivity was discovered in 1896 by Henri Becquerel in uranium, and subsequently observed by Marie and Pierre Curie in thorium and in the newly discovered elements polonium and radium. In 1899, Ernest Rutherford separated radioactive emissions into two types: alpha and beta (now beta minus), based on penetration of objects and ability to cause ionization. Alpha rays could be stopped by thin sheets of paper or aluminium, whereas beta rays could penetrate several millimetres of aluminium. In 1900, Paul Villard identified a still more penetrating type of radiation, which Rutherford identified as a fundamentally new type in 1903 and termed gamma rays. Alpha, beta, and gamma are the first three letters of the Greek alphabet.\nIn 1900, Becquerel measured the mass-to-charge ratio (\"m\"/\"e\") for beta particles by the method of J.J.\u00a0Thomson used to study cathode rays and identify the electron. He found that \"m\"/\"e\" for a beta particle is the same as for Thomson's electron, and therefore suggested that the beta particle is in fact an electron.\nIn 1901, Rutherford and Frederick Soddy showed that alpha and beta radioactivity involves the transmutation of atoms into atoms of other chemical elements. In 1913, after the products of more radioactive decays were known, Soddy and Kazimierz Fajans independently proposed their radioactive displacement law, which states that beta (i.e., )\u00a0emission from one element produces another element one place to the right in the periodic table, while alpha emission produces an element two places to the left.\nNeutrinos.\nThe study of beta decay provided the first physical evidence for the existence of the neutrino. In both alpha and gamma decay, the resulting alpha or gamma particle has a narrow energy distribution, since the particle carries the energy from the difference between the initial and final nuclear states. However, the kinetic energy distribution, or spectrum, of beta particles measured by Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn in 1911 and by Jean Danysz in 1913 showed multiple lines on a diffuse background. These measurements offered the first hint that beta particles have a continuous spectrum. In 1914, James Chadwick used a magnetic spectrometer with one of Hans Geiger's new counters to make more accurate measurements which showed that the spectrum was continuous. The results, which appeared to be in contradiction to the law of conservation of energy, were validated by means of calorimetric measurements in 1929 by Lise Meitner and Wilhelm Orthmann. If beta decay were simply electron emission as assumed at the time, then the energy of the emitted electron should have a particular, well-defined value. For beta decay, however, the observed broad distribution of energies suggested that energy is lost in the beta decay process. This spectrum was puzzling for many years.\nA second problem is related to the conservation of angular momentum. Molecular band spectra showed that the nuclear spin of nitrogen-14 is 1 (i.e., equal to the reduced Planck constant) and more generally that the spin is integral for nuclei of even mass number and half-integral for nuclei of odd mass number. This was later explained by the proton-neutron model of the nucleus. Beta decay leaves the mass number unchanged, so the change of nuclear spin must be an integer. However, the electron spin is 1/2, hence angular momentum would not be conserved if beta decay were simply electron emission.\nFrom 1920 to 1927, Charles Drummond Ellis (along with Chadwick and colleagues) further established that the beta decay spectrum is continuous. In 1933, Ellis and Nevill Mott obtained strong evidence that the beta spectrum has an effective upper bound in energy. Niels Bohr had suggested that the beta spectrum could be explained if conservation of energy was true only in a statistical sense, thus this principle might be violated in any given decay. However, the upper bound in beta energies determined by Ellis and Mott ruled out that notion. Now, the problem of how to account for the variability of energy in known beta decay products, as well as for conservation of momentum and angular momentum in the process, became acute.\nIn a famous letter written in 1930, Wolfgang Pauli attempted to resolve the beta-particle energy conundrum by suggesting that, in addition to electrons and protons, atomic nuclei also contained an extremely light neutral particle, which he called the neutron. He suggested that this \"neutron\" was also emitted during beta decay (thus accounting for the known missing energy, momentum, and angular momentum), but it had simply not yet been observed. In 1931, Enrico Fermi renamed Pauli's \"neutron\" the \"neutrino\" ('little neutral one' in Italian). In 1933, Fermi published his landmark theory for beta decay, where he applied the principles of quantum mechanics to matter particles, supposing that they can be created and annihilated, just as the light quanta in atomic transitions. Thus, according to Fermi, neutrinos are created in the beta-decay process, rather than contained in the nucleus; the same happens to electrons. The neutrino interaction with matter was so weak that detecting it proved a severe experimental challenge. Further indirect evidence of the existence of the neutrino was obtained by observing the recoil of nuclei that emitted such a particle after absorbing an electron. Neutrinos were finally detected directly in 1956 by the American physicists Clyde Cowan and Frederick Reines in the Cowan\u2013Reines neutrino experiment. The properties of neutrinos were (with a few minor modifications) as predicted by Pauli and Fermi.\ndecay and electron capture.\nIn 1934, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric and Ir\u00e8ne Joliot-Curie bombarded aluminium with alpha particles to effect the nuclear reaction He\u00a0+\u00a0Al\u00a0\u2192 P\u00a0+\u00a0n, and observed that the product isotope P emits a positron identical to those found in cosmic rays (discovered by Carl David Anderson in 1932). This was the first example of \u00a0decay (positron emission), which they termed artificial radioactivity since P is a short-lived nuclide which does not exist in nature. In recognition of their discovery, the couple were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1935.\nThe theory of electron capture was first discussed by Gian-Carlo Wick in a 1934 paper, and then developed by Hideki Yukawa and others. K-electron capture was first observed in 1937 by Luis Alvarez, in the nuclide 48V. Alvarez went on to study electron capture in 67Ga and other nuclides.\nNon-conservation of parity.\nIn 1956, Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen Ning Yang noticed that there was no evidence that parity was conserved in weak interactions, and so they postulated that this symmetry may not be preserved by the weak force. They sketched the design for an experiment for testing conservation of parity in the laboratory. Later that year, Chien-Shiung Wu and coworkers showed experimentally that an asymmetrical beta emission from Co proved that parity is not conserved in beta decay. This surprising result overturned long-held assumptions about parity and the weak force. In recognition of their theoretical work, Lee and Yang were awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1957. However Wu, who was female, was not awarded the Nobel prize.\n\u03b2\u2212 decay.\nIn \u00a0decay, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number increased by one, while emitting an electron () and an electron antineutrino (). \u00a0decay generally occurs in neutron-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:\n X \u2192 X\u2032 + + \nwhere A and Z are the mass number and atomic number of the decaying nucleus, and X and X\u2032 are the initial and final elements, respectively.\nAnother example is when the free neutron (n) decays by \u00a0decay into a proton ():\nAt the fundamental level (as depicted in the Feynman diagram on the right), this is caused by the conversion of the negatively charged (\u2212 \"e\") down quark to the positively charged (+ \"e\") up quark, which is promoted by a virtual boson; the boson subsequently decays into an electron and an electron antineutrino:\n\u03b2+ decay.\nIn \u00a0decay, or positron emission, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with atomic number decreased by one, while emitting a positron () and an electron neutrino (). \u00a0decay generally occurs in proton-rich nuclei. The generic equation is:\n X \u2192 X\u2032 + + \nThis may be considered as the decay of a proton inside the nucleus to a neutron:\n p \u2192 n + + \nHowever, \u00a0decay cannot occur in an isolated proton because it requires energy, due to the mass of the neutron being greater than the mass of the proton. \u00a0decay can only happen inside nuclei when the daughter nucleus has a greater binding energy (and therefore a lower total energy) than the mother nucleus. The difference between these energies goes into the reaction of converting a proton into a neutron, a positron, and a neutrino and into the kinetic energy of these particles. This process is opposite to negative beta decay, in that the weak interaction converts a proton into a neutron by converting an up quark into a down quark resulting in the emission of a or the absorption of a . When a boson is emitted, it decays into a positron and an electron neutrino:\nElectron capture (K-capture/L-capture).\nIn all cases where \u00a0decay (positron emission) of a nucleus is allowed energetically, so too is electron capture allowed. This is a process during which a nucleus captures one of its atomic electrons, resulting in the emission of a neutrino:\n X + \u2192 X\u2032 + \nCapture of a free electron is allowed, but physical conditions make this generally negligible outside stars.\nAn example of electron capture is one of the decay modes of krypton-81 into bromine-81:\n Kr + \u2192 Br + \nAll emitted neutrinos are of the same energy. In proton-rich nuclei where the energy difference between the initial and final states is less than 2\"m\"e\"c\"2, \u00a0decay is not energetically possible, and electron capture is the sole decay mode.\nIf the captured electron comes from the innermost electron shell of the atom, called the K-shell, it is called K-capture. If it comes from the second or L-shell, the process is called L-capture, and so on, with higher level labels increasing with the alphabet.\nElectron capture is a competing (simultaneous) decay process for all nuclei that can undergo \u03b2+ decay. The converse, however, is not true: electron capture is the \"only\" type of decay that is allowed in proton-rich nuclides that do not have sufficient energy to emit a positron and neutrino.\nNuclear transmutation.\nIf the proton or neutron is part of an atomic nucleus, the above described decay processes transmute one chemical element into another. For example:\nBeta decay does not change the number\u00a0(A) of nucleons in the nucleus, but changes only its charge\u00a0Z. Thus the set of all nuclides with the same\u00a0A can be introduced; these \"isobaric\" nuclides may turn into each other via beta decay. For a given A there is one that is most stable. It is said to be beta stable, because it presents a local minimum of the mass excess: if such a nucleus has (\"A\", \"Z\") numbers, the neighbour nuclei (\"A\", \"Z\"\u22121) and (\"A\", \"Z\"+1) have higher mass excess and can beta decay into (\"A\", \"Z\"), but not vice versa. For all odd mass numbers A, there is only one known beta-stable isobar. For even\u00a0A, there are up to three different beta-stable isobars experimentally known; for example, Sn, Te, and Xe are all beta-stable. There are about 350 known beta-decay stable nuclides.\nCompetition of beta decay types.\nUsually unstable nuclides are clearly either \"neutron rich\" or \"proton rich\", with the former undergoing beta decay and the latter undergoing electron capture (or more rarely, due to the higher energy requirements, positron decay). However, in a few cases of odd-proton, odd-neutron radionuclides, it may be energetically favorable for the radionuclide to decay to an even-proton, even-neutron isobar either by undergoing beta-positive or beta-negative decay.\nThree types of beta decay in competition are illustrated by the single isotope [&lt;noinclude /&gt;[copper-64|Cu]&lt;noinclude /&gt;] (29 protons, 35 neutrons), which has a half-life of about 12.7 hours. This isotope has one unpaired proton and one unpaired neutron, so either the proton or the neutron can decay. This particular nuclide is almost equally likely to undergo proton decay (by positron emission, 18% or by electron capture, 43%; both forming Ni) or neutron decay (by electron emission, 39%; forming Zn).\nStability of naturally occurring nuclides.\nMost naturally occurring nuclides on earth are beta stable. Nuclides that are not beta stable have half-lives ranging from under a second to periods of time significantly greater than the age of the universe. One common example of a long-lived isotope is the odd-proton odd-neutron nuclide [&lt;noinclude /&gt;[potassium-40|K]&lt;noinclude /&gt;], which undergoes all three types of beta decay (, and electron capture) with a half-life of .\nConservation rules for beta decay.\nBaryon number is conserved.\nformula_1\nwhere\nBeta decay just changes neutron to proton or, in the case of positive beta decay (electron capture) proton to neutron so the number of individual quarks doesn't change. It is only the baryon flavor that changes, here labelled as the isospin.\nUp and down quarks have total isospin formula_4 and isospin projections\nformula_5\nAll other quarks have \"I\" = 0.\nIn general\nformula_6\nLepton number is conserved.\nformula_7\nso all leptons have assigned a value of +1, antileptons \u22121, and non-leptonic particles 0.\nformula_8\nAngular momentum.\nFor allowed decays, the net orbital angular momentum is zero, hence only spin quantum numbers are considered.\nThe electron and antineutrino are fermions, spin-1/2 objects, therefore they may couple to total formula_9 (parallel) or formula_10 (anti-parallel).\nFor forbidden decays, orbital angular momentum must also be taken into consideration.\nEnergy release.\nThe Q value is defined as the total energy released in a given nuclear decay. In beta decay, Q is therefore also the sum of the kinetic energies of the emitted beta particle, neutrino, and recoiling nucleus. (Because of the large mass of the nucleus compared to that of the beta particle and neutrino, the kinetic energy of the recoiling nucleus can generally be neglected.) Beta particles can therefore be emitted with any kinetic energy ranging from 0 to Q. A typical Q is around 1\u00a0MeV, but can range from a few keV to a few tens of MeV.\nSince the rest mass of the electron is 511\u00a0keV, the most energetic beta particles are ultrarelativistic, with speeds very close to the speed of light.\nIn the case of 187Re, the maximum speed of the beta particle is only 9.8% of the speed of light.\nThe following table gives some examples:\nTritium \u03b2\u2212 decay is being used in the KATRIN experimental search, which could have detected sterile neutrinos.\n\u03b2\u2212 decay.\nConsider the generic equation for beta decay\n X \u2192 X\u2032 + + .\nThe Q value for this decay is\n formula_11,\nwhere formula_12 is the mass of the nucleus of the X atom, formula_13 is the mass of the electron, and formula_14 is the mass of the electron antineutrino. In other words, the total energy released is the mass energy of the initial nucleus, minus the mass energy of the final nucleus, electron, and antineutrino. The mass of the nucleus mN is related to the standard atomic mass m by\nformula_15\nThat is, the total atomic mass is the mass of the nucleus, plus the mass of the electrons, minus the sum of all \"electron\" binding energies Bi for the atom. This equation is rearranged to find formula_12, and formula_17 is found similarly. Substituting these nuclear masses into the Q-value equation, while neglecting the nearly zero antineutrino mass and the difference in electron binding energies, which is very small for high-Z atoms, we have\nformula_18\nThis energy is carried away as kinetic energy by the electron and antineutrino.\nBecause the reaction will proceed only when the Q\u00a0value is positive, \u03b2\u2212 decay can occur when the mass of atom X is greater than the mass of atom X\u2032.\n\u03b2+ decay.\nThe equations for \u03b2+ decay are similar, with the generic equation\n X \u2192 X\u2032 + + \ngiving\nformula_19\nHowever, in this equation, the electron masses do not cancel, and we are left with\nformula_20\nBecause the reaction will proceed only when the Q\u00a0value is positive, \u03b2+ decay can occur when the mass of atom X exceeds that of X\u2032 by at least twice the mass of the electron.\nElectron capture.\nThe analogous calculation for electron capture must take into account the binding energy of the electrons. This is because the atom will be left in an excited state after capturing the electron, and the binding energy of the captured innermost electron is significant. Using the generic equation for electron capture\n X + \u2192 X\u2032 + \nwe have\nformula_21\nwhich simplifies to\nformula_22\nwhere \"B\"n is the binding energy of the captured electron.\nBecause the binding energy of the electron is much less than the mass of the electron, nuclei that can undergo \u03b2+ decay can always also undergo electron capture, but the reverse is not true.\nBeta emission spectrum.\nBeta decay can be considered as a perturbation as described in quantum mechanics, and thus Fermi's Golden Rule can be applied. This leads to an expression for the kinetic energy spectrum \"N\"(\"T\") of emitted betas as follows:\nformula_23\nwhere T is the kinetic energy, CL is a shape function that depends on the forbiddenness of the decay (it is constant for allowed decays), \"F\"(\"Z\", \"T\") is the Fermi Function (see below) with \"Z\" the charge of the final-state nucleus, \"E\" = \"T\" + \"mc\"2 is the total energy, formula_24 is the momentum, and Q is the \"Q\" value of the decay. The kinetic energy of the emitted neutrino is given approximately by Q minus the kinetic energy of the beta.\nAs an example, the beta decay spectrum of 210Bi (originally called RaE) is shown to the right.\nFermi function.\nThe Fermi function that appears in the beta spectrum formula accounts for the Coulomb attraction / repulsion between the emitted beta and the final state nucleus. Approximating the associated wavefunctions to be spherically symmetric, the Fermi function can be analytically calculated to be:\nformula_25\nwhere p is the final momentum, \u0393 the Gamma function, and (if \u03b1 is the fine-structure constant and \"r\"N the radius of the final state nucleus) &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, formula_26 (+ for electrons, \u2212 for positrons), and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nFor non-relativistic betas (\"Q\" \u226a \"m\"e\"c\"2), this expression can be approximated by:\nformula_27\nOther approximations can be found in the literature.\nKurie plot.\nA Kurie plot (also known as a Fermi\u2013Kurie plot) is a graph used in studying beta decay developed by Franz N. D. Kurie, in which the square root of the number of beta particles whose momentum (or energy) lies within a certain narrow range, divided by the Fermi function, is plotted against beta-particle energy. It is a straight line for allowed transitions and some forbidden transitions, in accord with the Fermi beta-decay theory. The energy-axis (x-axis) intercept of a Kurie plot corresponds to the maximum energy imparted to the electron/positron (the decay's Q\u00a0value). With a Kurie plot one can find the limit on the effective mass of a neutrino.\nHelicity (polarization) of neutrinos, electrons and positrons emitted in beta decay.\nAfter the discovery of parity non-conservation (see \"\u00a7 History\"), it was found that, in beta decay, electrons are emitted mostly with negative helicity, i.e., they move, naively speaking, like left-handed screws driven into a material (they have negative longitudinal polarization). Conversely, positrons have mostly positive helicity, i.e., they move like right-handed screws. Neutrinos (emitted in positron decay) have negative helicity, while antineutrinos (emitted in electron decay) have positive helicity.\nThe higher the velocity (energy) of the particles, the higher their \"helicity\" polarization; this reflects the absolute \"chirality\" selection in W boson decay.\nTypes of beta decay transitions.\nBeta decays can be classified according to the angular momentum (L\u00a0value) and total spin (S\u00a0value) of the emitted radiation. Since total angular momentum must be conserved, including orbital and spin angular momentum, beta decay occurs by a variety of quantum state transitions to various nuclear angular momentum or spin states, known as \"Fermi\" or \"Gamow\u2013Teller\" transitions. When beta decay particles carry no angular momentum (\"L\" = 0), the decay is referred to as \"allowed\", otherwise it is \"forbidden\".\nOther decay modes, which are rare, are known as bound state decay and double beta decay.\nFermi transitions.\nA Fermi transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, leading to an angular momentum change formula_28 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition). In the non-relativistic limit, the nuclear part of the operator for a Fermi transition is given by\nformula_29\nwith formula_30 the weak vector coupling constant, formula_31 the isospin raising and lowering operators, and formula_32 running over all protons and neutrons in the nucleus.\nGamow\u2013Teller transitions.\nA Gamow\u2013Teller transition is a beta decay in which the spins of the emitted electron (positron) and anti-neutrino (neutrino) couple to total spin &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, leading to an angular momentum change formula_33 between the initial and final states of the nucleus (assuming an allowed transition).\nIn this case, the nuclear part of the operator is given by\nformula_34\nwith formula_35 the weak axial-vector coupling constant, and formula_36 the spin Pauli matrices, which can produce a spin-flip in the decaying nucleon.\nForbidden transitions.\nWhen \"L\" &gt; 0, the decay is referred to as \"forbidden\". Nuclear selection rules require high L\u00a0values to be accompanied by changes in nuclear spin\u00a0(J) and parity\u00a0(\u03c0). The selection rules for the Lth forbidden transitions are:\nformula_37\nwhere \u0394\"\u03c0\" = 1 or \u22121 corresponds to no parity change or parity change, respectively. The special case of a transition between isobaric analogue states, where the structure of the final state is very similar to the structure of the initial state, is referred to as \"superallowed\" for beta decay, and proceeds very quickly. The following table lists the \u0394J and \u0394\u03c0 values for the first few values of\u00a0L:\nRare decay modes.\nBound-state \u03b2\u2212 decay.\nA very small minority of free neutron decays (about four per million) are \"two-body decays\": the proton, electron and antineutrino are produced, but the electron fails to gain the 13.6\u00a0eV energy necessary to escape the proton, and therefore simply remains bound to it, as a neutral hydrogen atom. In this type of beta decay, in essence all of the neutron decay energy is carried off by the antineutrino.\nFor fully ionized atoms (bare nuclei), it is possible in likewise manner for electrons to fail to escape the atom, and to be emitted from the nucleus into low-lying atomic bound states (orbitals). This can in theory occur for neutral atoms, as a new bound state is always opened by the decay, but rarely is appreciable.\nBound-state \u03b2\u2212 decays were predicted by Daudel, Jean, and Lecoin in 1947, and the phenomenon in fully ionized atoms was first observed for 163Dy66+ in 1992 by Jung et al. of the Darmstadt Heavy-Ion Research Center. Though neutral 163Dy is stable, fully ionized 163Dy66+ undergoes \u03b2\u2212 decay into the K and L shells with a half-life of 47 days. The resulting nucleus \u2013 163Ho66+ \u2013 is stable only in this almost fully ionized state and will decay via electron capture into 163Dy in the neutral state. Likewise, while being stable in the neutral state, the fully ionized 205Tl81+ undergoes bound-state \u03b2\u2212 decay to 205Pb81+ with a half-life of days. The half-lives of neutral 163Ho and 205Pb are respectively 4570 years and years. In addition, it is estimated that \u03b2\u2212 decay is energetically impossible for natural atoms but theoretically possible when fully ionized also for 193Ir, 194Au, 202Tl, 215At, 243Am, and 246Bk.\nAnother possibility is that a fully ionized atom undergoes greatly accelerated \u03b2 decay, as observed for 187Re by Bosch et al., also at Darmstadt. Neutral 187Re does undergo \u03b2\u2212 decay, with half-life years, but for fully ionized 187Re75+ this is shortened to only 32.9 years. This is because, in addition to the large increase in decay energy, 187Re75+ is energetically allowed to undergo \u03b2\u2212 decay to the first-excited state in 187Os75+, a process energetically disallowed for natural 187Re. Similarly, neutral 241Pu undergoes \u03b2\u2212 decay with a half-life of 14.3 years, but in its fully ionized state the beta-decay half-life of 241Pu94+ decreases to 4.2 days. For comparison, the variation of decay rates of other nuclear processes due to chemical environment is less than 1%. Moreover, current mass determinations cannot decisively determine whether 222Rn is energetically possible to undergo \u03b2\u2212 decay (the decay energy given in AME2020 is (\u22126 \u00b1 8) keV), but in either case it is predicted that \u03b2\u2212 will be greatly accelerated for fully ionized 222Rn86+.\nDouble beta decay.\nSome nuclei can undergo double beta decay (2\u03b2) where the charge of the nucleus changes by two units. Double beta decay is difficult to study, as it has an extremely long half-life. In nuclei for which both \u03b2\u00a0decay and 2\u03b2 are possible, the rarer 2\u03b2 process is effectively impossible to observe. However, in nuclei where \u03b2\u00a0decay is forbidden but 2\u03b2 is allowed, the process can be seen and a half-life measured. Thus, 2\u03b2 is usually studied only for beta stable nuclei. Like single beta decay, double beta decay does not change A; thus, at least one of the nuclides with some given A has to be stable with regard to both single and double beta decay.\n\"Ordinary\" 2\u03b2 results in the emission of two electrons and two antineutrinos. If neutrinos are Majorana particles (i.e., they are their own antiparticles), then a decay known as neutrinoless double beta decay will occur. Most neutrino physicists believe that neutrinoless 2\u03b2 has never been observed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4652", "revid": "1316949152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4652", "title": "Blitzkrieg", "text": "Military strategy pioneered by Nazi Germany\nBlitzkrieg\" (Lightning/Flash Warfare)\" is a word used to describe a combined arms surprise attack, using a rapid, overwhelming force concentration that may consist of armored and motorized or mechanized infantry formations, together with artillery, air assault, and close air support. The intent is to break through an opponent's lines of defense, dislocate the defenders, confuse the enemy by making it difficult to respond to the continuously changing front, and defeat them in a decisive : a battle of annihilation.\nDuring the interwar period, aircraft and tank technologies matured and were combined with the systematic application of the traditional German tactic of (maneuver warfare), involving the deep penetrations and the bypassing of enemy strong points to encircle and destroy opposing forces in a (cauldron battle/battle of encirclement). During the invasion of Poland, Western journalists adopted the term \"blitzkrieg\" to describe that form of armored warfare. The term had appeared in 1935, in the German military periodical (\"German Defence\"), in connection to quick or lightning warfare.\nGerman maneuver operations were successful during the campaigns of 1939\u20131941, involving the invasions of Belgium, the Netherlands, and France and, by 1940, the term \"blitzkrieg\" was being extensively used in Western media. Blitzkrieg operations capitalised on surprise penetrations, such as that in the Ardennes forest, the Allies' general lack of preparedness, and their inability to match the pace of the German attack. During the Battle of France, the French made attempts to reform defensive lines along rivers but were frustrated when German forces arrived first and pressed on. \nDespite being common in German and English-language journalism during World War II, the word was never used as an official military term by the Wehrmacht, except for propaganda, and it was never officially adopted as a concept or doctrine. According to David Reynolds, \"Hitler himself called the term Blitzkrieg 'a completely idiotic word' ()\". Some senior German officers, including Kurt Student, Franz Halder, and Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg, even disputed the idea that it was a military concept. Kielmansegg asserted that what many regarded as blitzkrieg was nothing more than \"ad hoc solutions that simply popped out of the prevailing situation\". Kurt Student described it as ideas that \"naturally emerged from the existing circumstances\" as a response to operational challenges. \nIn 2005, the historian Karl-Heinz Frieser summarized blitzkrieg as the result of German commanders using the latest technology in the most advantageous way, according to traditional military principles, and employing \"the right units in the right place at the right time\". Modern historians now understand blitzkrieg as the combination of traditional German military principles, methods and doctrines of the 19th century with the military technology of the interwar period. Modern historians use the term casually as a generic description for the style of maneuver warfare practised by Germany during the early part of World War II, rather than as an explanation. According to Frieser, in the context of the thinking of Heinz Guderian on mobile combined arms formations, blitzkrieg can be used as a synonym for modern maneuver warfare on the operational level.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nCommon interpretation.\nThe traditional meaning of \"blitzkrieg\" is that of German tactical and operational methodology during the first half of the Second World War that is often hailed as a new method of warfare. The word, meaning \"lightning war\" or \"lightning attack\" in its strategic sense describes a series of quick and decisive short battles to deliver a knockout blow to an enemy state before it can fully mobilize. Tactically, blitzkrieg is a coordinated military effort by tanks, motorized infantry, artillery and aircraft, to create an overwhelming local superiority in combat power, to defeat the opponent and break through its defences. \"Blitzkrieg\" as used by Germany had considerable psychological or \"terror\" elements, such as the \"Jericho Trompete\", a noise-making siren on the Junkers Ju 87 dive bomber, to affect the morale of enemy forces. The devices were largely removed when the enemy became used to the noise after the Battle of France in 1940, and instead, bombs sometimes had whistles attached. It is also common for historians and writers to include psychological warfare by using fifth columnists to spread rumours and lies among the civilian population in the theatre of operations.\nOrigin of term.\nThe origin of the term \"blitzkrieg\" is obscure. It was never used in the title of a military doctrine or handbook of the German Army or Air Force, and no \"coherent doctrine\" or \"unifying concept of blitzkrieg\" existed; German High Command mostly referred to the group of tactics as \"Bewegungskrieg\" (Maneuver Warfare). The term seems to have been rarely used in the German military press before 1939, and recent research at the German \"Milit\u00e4rgeschichtliches Forschungsamt\", at Potsdam, found it in only two military articles from the 1930s. Both used the term to mean a swift strategic knockout, rather than a radically new military doctrine or approach to war.\nThe first article (1935) dealt primarily with supplies of food and materiel in wartime. The term \"blitzkrieg\" was used in reference to German efforts to win a quick victory in the First World War but was not associated with the use of armored, mechanized or air forces. It argued that Germany must develop self-sufficiency in food because it might again prove impossible to deal a swift knockout to its enemies, which would lead to a long war.\nIn the second article (1938), launching a swift strategic knockout was described as an attractive idea for Germany but difficult to achieve on land under modern conditions (especially against systems of fortification like the Maginot Line) unless an exceptionally high degree of surprise could be achieved. The author vaguely suggested that a massive strategic air attack might hold out better prospects, but the topic was not explored in detail.\nA third relatively early use of the term in German occurred in \"Die Deutsche Kriegsst\u00e4rke\" (German War Strength) by Fritz Sternberg, a Jewish Marxist political economist and refugee from Nazi Germany, published in 1938 in Paris and in London as \"Germany and a Lightning War\". Sternberg wrote that Germany was not prepared economically for a long war but might win a quick war (\"Blitzkrieg\"). He did not go into detail about tactics or suggest that the German armed forces had evolved a radically new operational method. His book offered scant clues as to how German lightning victories might be won.\nIn English and other languages, the term had been used since the 1920s. The term was first used in the publications of Ferdinand Otto Miksche, first in the magazine \"Army Quarterly\", and in his 1941 book \"Blitzkrieg\", in which he defined the concept. In September 1939, \"Time\" magazine termed the German military action as a \"war of quick penetration and obliteration \u2013 \"Blitzkrieg\", lightning war\". After the invasion of Poland, the British press commonly used the term to describe German successes in that campaign. J. P. Harris called the term \"a piece of journalistic sensationalism \u2013 a buzz-word with which to label the spectacular early successes of the Germans in the Second World War\". The word was later applied to the bombing of Britain, particularly London, hence \"The Blitz\".\nThe German popular press followed suit nine months later, after the Fall of France in 1940; thus, although the word had first been used in Germany, it was popularized by British journalism. Heinz Guderian referred to it as a word coined by the Allies: \"as a result of the successes of our rapid campaigns our enemies\u00a0... coined the word \"Blitzkrieg\"\". After the German failure in the Soviet Union in 1941, the use of the term began to be frowned upon in Nazi Germany, and Hitler then denied ever using the term and said in a speech in November 1941, \"I have never used the word \"Blitzkrieg\", because it is a very silly word\". In early January 1942, Hitler dismissed it as \"Italian phraseology\".\nMilitary evolution, 1919\u20131939.\nGermany.\nIn 1914, German strategic thinking derived from the writings of Carl von Clausewitz (1 June 1780 \u2013 16 November 1831), Helmuth von Moltke the Elder (26 October 1800 \u2013 24 April 1891) and Alfred von Schlieffen (28 February 1833 \u2013 4 January 1913), who advocated maneuver, mass and envelopment to create the conditions for a decisive battle (). During the war, officers such as Willy Rohr developed tactics to restore maneuver on the battlefield. Specialist light infantry (\"Stosstruppen\", \"storm troops\") were to exploit weak spots to make gaps for larger infantry units to advance with heavier weapons, exploit the success and leave isolated strong points to the troops that were following up. Infiltration tactics were combined with short hurricane artillery bombardments, which used massed artillery. Devised by Colonel Georg Bruchm\u00fcller, the attacks relied on speed and surprise, rather than on weight of numbers. The tactics met with great success in Operation Michael, the German spring offensive of 1918 and restored temporarily the war of movement once the Allied trench system had been overrun. The German armies pushed on towards Amiens and then Paris and came within before supply deficiencies and Allied reinforcements halted the advance.\nThe historian James Corum criticised the German leadership for failing to understand the technical advances of the First World War, conducting no studies of the machine gun prior to the war and giving tank production the lowest priority during the war. After Germany's defeat, the Treaty of Versailles limited the Reichswehr to a maximum of 100,000 men, which prevented the deployment of mass armies. The German General Staff was abolished by the treaty but continued covertly as the \"Truppenamt\" (Troop Office) and was disguised as an administrative body. Committees of veteran staff officers were formed within the \"Truppenamt\" to evaluate 57 issues of the war to revise German operational theories. By the time of the Second World War, their reports had led to doctrinal and training publications, including H. Dv. 487, \"F\u00fchrung und Gefecht der verbundenen Waffen\" (\"Command and Battle of the Combined Arms)\", known as \"Das Fug\" (1921\u20131923) and \"Truppenf\u00fchrung\" (1933\u20131934), containing standard procedures for combined-arms warfare. The \"Reichswehr\" was influenced by its analysis of pre-war German military thought, particularly infiltration tactics since at the end of the war, they had seen some breakthroughs on the Western Front and the maneuver warfare which dominated the Eastern Front.\nOn the Eastern Front, the war did not bog down into trench warfare since the German and the Russian Armies fought a war of maneuver over thousands of miles, which gave the German leadership unique experience that was unavailable to the trench-bound Western Allies. Studies of operations in the East led to the conclusion that small and coordinated forces possessed more combat power than large uncoordinated forces.\nAfter the war, the \"Reichswehr\" expanded and improved infiltration tactics. The commander in chief, Hans von Seeckt, argued that there had been an excessive focus on encirclement and emphasised speed instead. Seeckt inspired a revision of \"Bewegungskrieg\" (maneuver warfare) thinking and its associated \"Auftragstaktik\" in which the commander expressed his goals to subordinates and gave them discretion in how to achieve them. The governing principle was \"the higher the authority, the more general the orders were\"; it was the responsibility of the lower echelons to fill in the details. Implementation of higher orders remained within limits that were determined by the training doctrine of an elite officer corps.\nDelegation of authority to local commanders increased the tempo of operations, which had great influence on the success of German armies in the early war period. Seeckt, who believed in the Prussian tradition of mobility, developed the German army into a mobile force and advocated technical advances that would lead to a qualitative improvement of its forces and better coordination between motorized infantry, tanks, and planes.\nBritain.\nThe British Army took lessons from the successful infantry and artillery offensives on the Western Front in late 1918. To obtain the best co-operation between all arms, emphasis was placed on detailed planning, rigid control and adherence to orders. Mechanization of the army, as part of a combined-arms theory of war, was considered a means to avoid mass casualties and the indecisive nature of offensives. The four editions of \"Field Service Regulations\" that were published after 1918 held that only combined-arms operations could create enough fire power to enable mobility on a battlefield. That theory of war also emphasised consolidation and recommended caution against overconfidence and ruthless exploitation.\nDuring the Sinai and Palestine campaign, operations involved some aspects of what would later be called blitzkrieg. The decisive Battle of Megiddo included concentration, surprise and speed. Success depended on attacking only in terrain favouring the movement of large formations around the battlefield and tactical improvements in the British artillery and infantry attack. General Edmund Allenby used infantry to attack the strong Ottoman front line in co-operation with supporting artillery, augmented by the guns of two destroyers. Through constant pressure by infantry and cavalry, two Ottoman armies in the Judean Hills were kept off-balance and virtually encircled during the Battles of Sharon and Nablus (Battle of Megiddo).\nThe British methods induced \"strategic paralysis\" among the Ottomans and led to their rapid and complete collapse. In an advance of , captures were estimated to be \"at least prisoners and 260 guns\". Liddell Hart considered that important aspects of the operation had been the extent to which Ottoman commanders were denied intelligence on the British preparations for the attack through British air superiority and air attacks on their headquarters and telephone exchanges, which paralyzed attempts to react to the rapidly-deteriorating situation.\nFrance.\nNorman Stone detects early blitzkrieg operations in offensives by French Generals Charles Mangin and Marie-Eug\u00e8ne Debeney in 1918. However, French doctrine in the interwar years became defence-oriented. Colonel Charles de Gaulle advocated concentration of armor and airplanes. His opinions appeared in his 1934 book \"Vers l'Arm\u00e9e de m\u00e9tier\" (\"Towards the Professional Army\"). Like von Seeckt, de Gaulle concluded that France could no longer maintain the huge armies of conscripts and reservists that had fought the First World War, and he sought to use tanks, mechanized forces and aircraft to allow a smaller number of highly trained soldiers to have greater impact in battle. His views endeared him little to the French high command, but, according to historian Henrik Bering, were studied with great interest by Heinz Guderian.\nRussia and Soviet Union.\nIn 1916, General Alexei Brusilov had used surprise and infiltration tactics during the Brusilov Offensive. Later, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky (1893\u20131937), Georgii Isserson (1898\u20131976) and other members of the Red Army developed a concept of deep battle from the experience of the Polish\u2013Soviet War of 1919\u20131920. Those concepts would guide the Red Army doctrine throughout the Second World War. Realising the limitations of infantry and cavalry, Tukhachevsky advocated mechanized formations and the large-scale industrialisation that they required. Robert Watt (2008) wrote that blitzkrieg has little in common with Soviet deep battle. In 2002, H. P. Willmott had noted that deep battle contained two important differences from blitzkrieg by being a doctrine of total war, not of limited operations, and rejecting decisive battle in favour of several large simultaneous offensives.\nThe \"Reichswehr\" and the Red Army began a secret collaboration in the Soviet Union to evade the Treaty of Versailles occupational agent, the Inter-Allied Commission. In 1926 war games and tests began at Kazan and Lipetsk, in the Soviet Russia. The centers served to field-test aircraft and armored vehicles up to the battalion level and housed aerial- and armoured-warfare schools through which officers rotated.\nNazi Germany.\nAfter becoming Chancellor of Germany in 1933, Adolf Hitler ignored the provisions of the Treaty of Versailles. Within the Wehrmacht, which was established in 1935, the command for motorized armored forces was named the \"Panzerwaffe\" in 1936. The \"Luftwaffe\", the German air force, was officially established in February 1935, and development began on ground-attack aircraft and doctrines. Hitler strongly supported the new strategy. He read Guderian's 1937 book \"Achtung \u2013 Panzer!\" and upon observing armored field exercises at Kummersdorf, he remarked, \"That is what I want \u2013 and that is what I will have\".\nGuderian.\nGuderian summarized combined-arms tactics as the way to get the mobile and motorized armored divisions to work together and support each other to achieve decisive success. In his 1950 book, \"Panzer Leader\", he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this year, 1929, I became convinced that tanks working on their own or in conjunction with infantry could never achieve decisive importance. My historical studies, the exercises carried out in England and our own experience with mock-ups had persuaded me that the tanks would never be able to produce their full effect until the other weapons on whose support they must inevitably rely were brought up to their standard of speed and of cross-country performance. In such formation of all arms, the tanks must play primary role, the other weapons being subordinated to the requirements of the armor. It would be wrong to include tanks in infantry divisions; what was needed were armored divisions which would include all the supporting arms needed to allow the tanks to fight with full effect.\nGuderian believed that developments in technology were required to support the theory, especially by equipping armored divisions, tanks foremost, with wireless communications. Guderian insisted in 1933 to the high command that every tank in the German armored force must be equipped with a radio. At the start of World War II, only the German Army was thus prepared with all tanks being \"radio-equipped\". That proved critical in early tank battles in which German tank commanders exploited the organizational advantage over the Allies that radio communication gave them.\nAll Allied armies would later copy that innovation. During the Polish campaign, the performance of armored troops, under the influence of Guderian's ideas, won over a number of skeptics who had initially expressed doubt about armored warfare, such as von Rundstedt and Rommel.\nRommel.\nAccording to David A. Grossman, by the Twelfth Battle of Isonzo (October\u2013November 1917), while he was conducting a light-infantry operation, Rommel had perfected his maneuver-warfare principles, which were the very same ones that were applied during the blitzkrieg against France in 1940 and were repeated in the Coalition ground offensive against Iraq in the 1991 Gulf War. During the Battle of France and against his staff advisor's advice, Hitler ordered that everything should be completed in a few weeks. Fortunately for the Germans, Rommel and Guderian disobeyed the General Staff's orders (particularly those of General Paul Ludwig Ewald von Kleist) and forged ahead making quicker progress than anyone had expected, on the way \"inventing the idea of Blitzkrieg\".\nIt was Rommel who created the new archetype of Blitzkrieg by leading his division far ahead of flanking divisions. MacGregor and Williamson remark that Rommel's version of blitzkrieg displayed a significantly better understanding of combined-arms warfare than that of Guderian. General Hermann Hoth submitted an official report in July 1940 which declared that Rommel had \"explored new paths in the command of Panzer divisions\".\nMethods of operations.\n\"Schwerpunkt\".\n\"Schwerpunktprinzip\" was a heuristic device (conceptual tool or thinking formula) that was used in the German Army from the nineteenth century to make decisions from tactics to strategy about priority. \"Schwerpunkt\" has been translated as \"center of gravity\", \"crucial\", \"focal point\" and \"point of main effort\". None of those forms is sufficient to describe the universal importance of the term and the concept of \"Schwerpunktprinzip\". Every unit in the army, from the company to the supreme command, decided on a \"Schwerpunkt\" by \"schwerpunktbildung\", as did the support services, which meant that commanders always knew what was the most important and why. The German army was trained to support the \"Schwerpunkt\" even when risks had to be taken elsewhere to support the point of main effort and to attack with overwhelming firepower. \"Schwerpunktbildung\" allowed the German Army to achieve superiority at the \"Schwerpunkt\", whether attacking or defending, to turn local success at the \"Schwerpunkt\" into the progressive disorganisation of the opposing force and to create more opportunities to exploit that advantage even if the Germans were numerically and strategically inferior in general. In the 1930s, Guderian summarized that as \"Klotzen, nicht kleckern!\" (roughly \"splash, don't spill\")\nPursuit.\nHaving achieved a breakthrough of the enemy's line, units comprising the \"Schwerpunkt\" were not supposed to become decisively engaged with enemy front line units to the right and the left of the breakthrough area. Units pouring through the hole were to drive upon set objectives behind the enemy front line. During the Second World War, German Panzer forces used their motorized mobility to paralyze the opponent's ability to react. Fast-moving mobile forces seized the initiative, exploited weaknesses and acted before the opposing forces could respond. Central to that was the decision cycle (tempo). Through superior mobility and faster decision-making cycles, mobile forces could act faster than the forces opposing them.\nDirective control was a fast and flexible method of command. Rather than receiving an explicit order, a commander would be told of his superior's intent and the role that his unit was to fill in that concept. The method of execution was then a matter for the discretion of the subordinate commander. The staff burden was reduced at the top and spread among tiers of command with knowledge about their situation. Delegation and the encouragement of initiative aided implementation, and important decisions could be taken quickly and communicated verbally or with only brief written orders.\nMopping-up.\nThe last part of an offensive operation was the destruction of unsubdued pockets of resistance, which had been enveloped earlier and bypassed by the fast-moving armored and motorized spearheads. The \"Kesselschlacht\" (\"cauldron battle\") was a concentric attack on such pockets. It was there that most losses were inflicted upon the enemy, primarily through the mass capture of prisoners and weapons. During Operation Barbarossa, huge encirclements in 1941 produced nearly 3.5 million Soviet prisoners, along with masses of equipment.\nAir power.\nClose air support was provided in the form of the dive bomber and medium bomber, which would support the focal point of attack from the air. German successes are closely related to the extent to which the German \"Luftwaffe\" could control the air war in early campaigns in Western and Central Europe and in the Soviet Union. However, the \"Luftwaffe\" was a broadly based force with no constricting central doctrine other than its resources should be used generally to support national strategy. It was flexible and could carry out both operational-tactical, and strategic bombing.\nFlexibility was the strength of the \"Luftwaffe\" in 1939 to 1941. Paradoxically, that became its weakness. While Allied Air Forces were tied to the support of the Army, the \"Luftwaffe\" deployed its resources in a more general operational way. It switched from air superiority missions to medium-range interdiction, to strategic strikes to close support duties, depending on the need of the ground forces. In fact, far from it being a specialist panzer spearhead arm, less than 15 percent of the \"Luftwaffe\" was intended for close support of the army in 1939.\nStimulants.\nMethamphetamine use among troops, especially Temmler's 3 mg Pervitin tablets, likely contributed to the Wehrmacht's \"blitzkrieg\" success by enabling synchronized, high-endurance operations with minimal rest.\nLimitations and countermeasures.\nEnvironment.\nThe concepts associated with the term \"blitzkrieg\" (deep penetrations by armor, large encirclements, and combined arms attacks) were largely dependent upon terrain and weather conditions. Wherever the ability for rapid movement across \"tank country\" was not possible, armored penetrations often were avoided or resulted in failure. The terrain would ideally be flat, firm, unobstructed by natural barriers or fortifications, and interspersed with roads and railways. If it were instead hilly, wooded, marshy, or urban, armor would be vulnerable to infantry in close-quarters combat and unable to break out at full speed. Additionally, units could be halted by mud (thawing along the Eastern Front regularly slowed both sides) or extreme snow. Operation Barbarossa helped confirm that armor effectiveness and the requisite aerial support depended on weather and terrain. The disadvantages of terrain could be nullified if surprise was achieved over the enemy by an attack in areas that had been considered natural obstacles, as occurred during the Battle of France in which the main German offensive went through the Ardennes. Since the French thought that the Ardennes unsuitable for massive troop movement, particularly for tanks, the area was left with only light defences, which were quickly overrun by the \"Wehrmacht\". The Germans quickly advanced through the forest and knocked down the trees that the French had thought would impede them.\nAir superiority.\nThe influence of air forces over forces on the ground changed significantly over the course of the Second World War. Early German successes were conducted when Allied aircraft could not make a significant impact on the battlefield. In May 1940, there was near parity in numbers of aircraft between the \"Luftwaffe\" and the Allies, but the \"Luftwaffe\" had been developed to support Germany's ground forces, had liaison officers with the mobile formations and operated a higher number of sorties per aircraft. In addition, the Germans' air parity or superiority allowed the unencumbered movement of ground forces, their unhindered assembly into concentrated attack formations, aerial reconnaissance, aerial resupply of fast moving formations and close air support at the point of attack. The Allied air forces had no close air support aircraft, training or doctrine. The Allies flew 434 French and 160 British sorties a day but methods of attacking ground targets had yet to be developed and so Allied aircraft caused negligible damage. Against the Allies' 600 sorties, the \"Luftwaffe\" on average flew 1,500 sorties a day.\nOn 13 May, \"Fliegerkorps\" VIII flew 1,000 sorties in support of the crossing of the Meuse. The following day the Allies made repeated attempts to destroy the German pontoon bridges, but German fighter aircraft, ground fire and \"Luftwaffe\" flak batteries with the panzer forces destroyed 56 percent of the attacking Allied aircraft, and the bridges remained intact.\nAllied air superiority became a significant hindrance to German operations during the later years of the war. By June 1944, the Western Allies had the complete control of the air over the battlefield, and their fighter-bomber aircraft were very effective at attacking ground forces. On D-Day, the Allies flew 14,500 sorties over the battlefield area alone, not including sorties flown over Northwestern Europe. Against them the \"Luftwaffe\" flew some 300 sorties on 6 June. Though German fighter presence over Normandy increased over the next days and weeks, it never approached the numbers that the Allies commanded. Fighter-bomber attacks on German formations made movement during daylight almost impossible.\nSubsequently, shortages soon developed in food, fuel and ammunition and severely hampered the German defenders. German vehicle crews and even flak units experienced great difficulty moving during daylight. Indeed, the final German offensive operation in the west, Operation Wacht am Rhein, was planned to take place during poor weather to minimise interference by Allied aircraft. Under those conditions, it was difficult for German commanders to employ the \"armored idea\", if at all.\nCounter-tactics.\nBlitzkrieg is vulnerable to an enemy that is robust enough to weather the shock of the attack and does not panic at the idea of enemy formations in its rear area. That is especially true if the attacking formation lacks the reserve to keep funnelling forces into the spearhead or the mobility to provide infantry, artillery and supplies into the attack. If the defender can hold the shoulders of the breach, it has the opportunity to counter-attack into the flank of the attacker and potentially to cut it off the van, as what happened to Kampfgruppe Peiper in the Ardennes.\nDuring the Battle of France in 1940, the 4th Armoured Division (Major-General Charles de Gaulle) and elements of the 1st Army Tank Brigade (British Expeditionary Force) made probing attacks on the German flank and pushed into the rear of the advancing armored columns at times. That may have been a reason for Hitler to call a halt to the German advance. Those attacks combined with Maxime Weygand's hedgehog tactic would become the major basis for responding to blitzkrieg attacks in the future. Deployment in depth, or permitting enemy or \"shoulders\" of a penetration, was essential to channelling the enemy attack; artillery, properly employed at the shoulders, could take a heavy toll on attackers. Allied forces in 1940 lacked the experience to develop those strategies successfully, which resulted in the French armistice with heavy losses, but those strategies characterized later Allied operations.\nAt the Battle of Kursk, the Red Army used a combination of defence in great depth, extensive minefields and tenacious defense of breakthrough shoulders. In that way, they depleted German combat power even as German forces advanced. The reverse can be seen in the Russian summer offensive of 1944, Operation Bagration, which resulted in the destruction of Army Group Center. German attempts to weather the storm and fight out of encirclements failed because of the Soviets' ability to continue to feed armored units into the attack, maintain the mobility and strength of the offensive and arrive in force deep in the rear areas faster than the Germans could regroup.\nLogistics.\nAlthough effective in quick campaigns against Poland and France, mobile operations could not be sustained by Germany in later years. Strategies based on maneuver have the inherent danger of the attacking force overextending its supply lines and can be defeated by a determined foe who is willing and able to sacrifice territory for time in which to regroup and rearm, as the Soviets did on the Eastern Front, as opposed to, for example, the Dutch, who had no territory to sacrifice. Tank and vehicle production was a constant problem for Germany. Indeed, late in the war, many panzer \"divisions\" had no more than a few dozen tanks.\nAs the end of the war approached, Germany also experienced critical shortages in fuel and ammunition stocks as a result of Anglo-American strategic bombing and blockade. Although the production of \"Luftwaffe\" fighter aircraft continued, they could not fly because of lack of fuel. What fuel there was went to panzer divisions, and even then, they could not operate normally. Of the Tiger tanks lost against the US Army, nearly half of them were abandoned for lack of fuel.\nMilitary operations.\nSpanish Civil War.\nGerman volunteers first used armor in live field-conditions during the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939). Armor commitment consisted of Panzer Battalion 88, a force built around three companies of Panzer I tanks that functioned as a training cadre for Spain's Nationalists. The Luftwaffe deployed squadrons of fighters, dive-bombers and transport aircraft as the \"Condor Legion\". Guderian said that the tank deployment was \"on too small a scale to allow accurate assessments to be made\". (The true test of his \"armored idea\" would have to wait for the Second World War.) However, the \"Luftwaffe\" also provided volunteers to Spain to test both tactics and aircraft in combat, including the first combat use of the \"Stuka\".\nDuring the war, the \"Condor Legion\" undertook the 1937 bombing of Guernica, which had a tremendous psychological effect on the populations of Europe. The results were exaggerated, and the Western Allies concluded that the \"city-busting\" techniques were now part of the German way in war. The targets of the German aircraft were actually the rail lines and bridges, but lacking the ability to hit them with accuracy (only three or four Ju 87s saw action in Spain), the \"Luftwaffe\" chose a method of carpet bombing, resulting in heavy civilian casualties.\nPoland, 1939.\nAlthough journalists popularized the term \"Blitzkrieg\" during the September 1939 invasion of Poland, the historians Matthew Cooper and J. P. Harris have written that German operations during the campaign were consistent with traditional methods. The Wehrmacht strategy was more in line with \"Vernichtungsgedanke\", a focus on envelopment to create pockets in broad-front annihilation. The German generals dispersed Panzer forces among the three German concentrations with little emphasis on independent use. They deployed tanks to create or destroy close pockets of Polish forces and to seize operational-depth terrain in support of the largely unmotorized infantry, which followed.\nThe Wehrmacht used available models of tanks, Stuka dive-bombers and concentrated forces in the Polish campaign, but the majority of the fighting involved conventional infantry and artillery warfare, and most Luftwaffe action was independent of the ground campaign. Matthew Cooper wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Throughout the Polish Campaign, the employment of the mechanised units revealed the idea that they were intended solely to ease the advance and to support the activities of the infantry... Thus, any strategic exploitation of the armoured idea was still-born. The paralysis of command and the breakdown of morale were not made the ultimate aim of the... German ground and air forces, and were only incidental by-products of the traditional maneuvers of rapid encirclement and of the supporting activities of the flying artillery of the Luftwaffe, both of which had as their purpose the physical destruction of the enemy troops. Such was the \"Vernichtungsgedanke\" of the Polish campaign.\nJohn Ellis wrote that \"there is considerable justice in Matthew Cooper's assertion that the panzer divisions were not given the kind of \"strategic\" mission that was to characterize authentic armored blitzkrieg, and were almost always closely subordinated to the various mass infantry armies\". Steven Zaloga wrote, \"Whilst Western accounts of the September campaign have stressed the shock value of the panzer and Stuka attacks, they have tended to underestimate the punishing effect of German artillery on Polish units. Mobile and available in significant quantity, artillery shattered as many units as any other branch of the Wehrmacht.\"\nLow Countries and France, 1940.\nThe German invasion of France, with subsidiary attacks on Belgium and the Netherlands, consisted of two phases, Operation Yellow (\"Fall Gelb\") and Operation Red (\"Fall Rot\"). Yellow opened with a feint conducted against the Netherlands and Belgium by two armored corps and paratroopers. Most of the German armored forces were placed in Panzer Group Kleist, which attacked through the Ardennes, a lightly defended sector that the French planned to reinforce if necessary before the Germans could bring up heavy and siege artillery. There was no time for the French to send such reinforcement, as the Germans did not wait for siege artillery but reached the Meuse and achieved a breakthrough at the Battle of Sedan in three days.\nPanzer Group Kleist raced to the English Channel, reached the coast at Abbeville and cut off the BEF, the Belgian Army and some of the best-equipped divisions of the French Army in northern France. Armored and motorized units under Guderian, Rommel and others advanced far beyond the marching and horse-drawn infantry divisions and far in excess of what Hitler and the German high command had expected or wished. When the Allies counter-attacked at Arras by using the heavily armored British Matilda I and Matilda II tanks, a brief panic ensued in the German High Command.\nHitler halted his armored and motorized forces outside the port of Dunkirk, which the Royal Navy had started using to evacuate the Allied forces. Hermann G\u00f6ring promised that the Luftwaffe would complete the destruction of the encircled armies, but aerial operations failed to prevent the evacuation of the majority of the Allied troops. In Operation Dynamo, some French and British troops escaped.\nCase Yellow surprised everyone by overcoming the Allies' 4,000 armored vehicles, many of which were better than their German equivalents in armor and gunpower. The French and British frequently used their tanks in the dispersed role of infantry support, rather than by concentrating force at the point of attack, to create overwhelming firepower.\nThe French armies were much reduced in strength and the confidence of their commanders shaken. With much of their own armor and heavy equipment lost in Northern France, they lacked the means to fight a mobile war. The Germans followed their initial success with Operation Red, a triple-pronged offensive. The XV Panzer Corps attacked towards Brest, XIV Panzer Corps attacked east of Paris, towards Lyon and the XIX Panzer Corps encircled the Maginot Line. The French, hard pressed to organise any sort of counter-attack, were continually ordered to form new defensive lines and found that German forces had already bypassed them and moved on. An armored counter-attack, organized by Colonel Charles de Gaulle, could not be sustained, and he had to retreat.\nPrior to the German offensive in May, Winston Churchill had said, \"Thank God for the French Army\". The same French Army collapsed after barely two months of fighting. That was in shocking contrast to the four years of trench warfare on which French forces had engaged during the First World War. French Prime Minister Paul Reynaud, analyzed the collapse in a speech on 21 May 1940:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The truth is that our classic conception of the conduct of war has come up against a new conception. At the basis of this... there is not only the massive use of heavy armoured divisions or cooperation between them and airplanes, but the creation of disorder in the enemy's rear by means of parachute raids.\nThe Germans had not used paratroopry attacks in France and made only one large drop in the Netherlands to capture three bridges; some small glider-landings were conducted in Belgium to take bottlenecks on routes of advance before the arrival of the main force (the most renowned being the landing on Fort Eben-Emael in Belgium).\nEastern Front, 1941\u20131944.\nUse of armored forces was crucial for both sides on the Eastern Front. Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, involved a number of breakthroughs and encirclements by motorized forces. Its goal, according to F\u00fchrer Directive 21 (18 December 1940), was \"to destroy the Russian forces deployed in the West and to prevent their escape into the wide-open spaces of Russia\". The Red Army was to be destroyed west of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers, which were about east of the Soviet border, to be followed by a mopping-up operation. The surprise attack resulted in the near annihilation of the Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily (VVS, Soviet Air Force) by simultaneous attacks on airfields, allowing the Luftwaffe to achieve total air supremacy over all the battlefields within the first week. On the ground, four German panzer groups outflanked and encircled disorganized Red Army units, and the marching infantry completed the encirclements and defeated the trapped forces. In late July, after 2nd Panzer Group (commanded by Guderian) captured the watersheds of the Dvina and Dnieper rivers near Smolensk, the panzers had to defend the encirclement, because the marching infantry divisions remained hundreds of kilometers to the west.\nThe Germans conquered large areas of the Soviet Union, but their failure to destroy the Red Army before the winter of 1941-1942 was a strategic failure and made German tactical superiority and territorial gains irrelevant. The Red Army had survived enormous losses and regrouped with new formations far to the rear of the front line. During the Battle of Moscow (October 1941 to January 1942), the Red Army defeated the German Army Group Center and for the first time in the war seized the strategic initiative.\nIn the summer of 1942, Germany launched another offensive and this time focusing on Stalingrad and the Caucasus in the southern Soviet Union. The Soviets again lost tremendous amounts of territory, only to counter-attack once more during winter. The German gains were ultimately limited because Hitler diverted forces from the attack on Stalingrad and drove towards the Caucasus oilfields simultaneously. The \"Wehrmacht\" became overstretched. Although it won operationally, it could not inflict a decisive defeat as the durability of the Soviet Union's manpower, resources, industrial base and aid from the Western Allies began to take effect.\nIn July 1943, the \"Wehrmacht\" conducted Operation Zitadelle (Citadel) against a salient at Kursk, which Soviet troop heavily defended. Soviet defensive tactics had by now hugely improved, particularly in the use of artillery and air support. By April 1943, the Stavka had learned of German intentions through intelligence supplied by front-line reconnaissance and Ultra intercepts. In the following months, the Red Army constructed deep defensive belts along the paths of the planned German attack. The Soviets made a concerted effort to disguise their knowledge of German plans and the extent of their own defensive preparations, and the German commanders still hoped to achieve operational surprise when the attack commenced.\nThe Germans did not achieve surprise and could not outflank or break through into enemy rear areas during the operation. Several historians assert that Operation Citadel was planned and intended to be a blitzkrieg operation. Many of the German participants who wrote about the operation after the war, including Erich von Manstein, make no mention of blitzkrieg in their accounts. In 2000, Niklas Zetterling and Anders Frankson characterised only the southern pincer of the German offensive as a \"classical blitzkrieg attack\". Pier Battistelli wrote that the operational planning marked a change in German offensive thinking away from blitzkrieg and that more priority was given to brute force and fire power than to speed and maneuver.\nIn 1995, David Glantz stated that blitzkrieg was at Kursk for the first time defeated in summer, and the opposing Soviet forces mounted a successful counter-offensive. The Battle of Kursk ended with two Soviet counter-offensives and the revival of deep operations. In the summer of 1944, the Red Army destroyed Army Group Centre in Operation Bagration by using combined-arms tactics for armor, infantry and air power in a coordinated strategic assault, known as deep operations, which led to an advance of in six weeks.\nWestern Front, 1944\u20131945.\nAllied armies began using combined-arms formations and deep-penetration strategies that Germany had used in the opening years of the war. Many Allied operations in the Western Desert and on the Eastern Front, relied on firepower to establish breakthroughs by fast-moving armored units. The artillery-based tactics were also decisive in Western Front operations after 1944's Operation Overlord, and the British Commonwealth and American armies developed flexible and powerful systems for using artillery support. What the Soviets lacked in flexibility, they made up for in number of rocket launchers, guns and mortars. The Germans never achieved the kind of fire concentrations that their enemies were achieving 1944.\nAfter the Allied landings in Normandy (June 1944), the Germans began a counter-offensive to overwhelm the landing force with armored attacks, but they failed because of a lack of co-ordination and to Allied superiority in anti-tank defense and in the air. The most notable attempt to use deep-penetration operations in Normandy was Operation Luttich at Mortain, which only hastened the Falaise Pocket and the destruction of German forces in Normandy. The Mortain counter-attack was defeated by the American 12th Army Group with little effect on its own offensive operations.\nThe last German offensive on the Western front, the Battle of the Bulge (Operation Wacht am Rhein), was an offensive launched towards the port of Antwerp in December 1944. Launched in poor weather against a thinly-held Allied sector, it achieved surprise and initial success as Allied air-power was grounded due to cloud cover. Determined defense by American troops in places throughout the Ardennes, the lack of good roads and German supply shortages caused delays. Allied forces deployed to the flanks of the German penetration, and as soon as the skies cleared, Allied aircraft returned to the battlefield. Allied counter-attacks soon forced back the Germans, who abandoned much equipment for lack of fuel.\nPost-war controversy.\nBlitzkrieg had been called a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA), but many writers and historians have concluded that the Germans did not invent a new form of warfare but applied new technologies to traditional ideas of \"Bewegungskrieg\" (maneuver warfare) to achieve decisive victory.\nStrategy.\nIn 1965, Captain Robert O'Neill, Professor of the History of War at the University of Oxford produced an example of the popular view. In \"Doctrine and Training in the German Army 1919\u20131939\", O'Neill wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What makes this story worth telling is the development of one idea: the blitzkrieg. The German Army had a greater grasp of the effects of technology on the battlefield, and went on to develop a new form of warfare by which its rivals when it came to the test were hopelessly outclassed.\nOther historians wrote that blitzkrieg was an operational doctrine of the German armed forces and a strategic concept on which the leadership of Nazi Germany based its strategic and economic planning. Military planners and bureaucrats in the war economy appear rarely, if ever, to have employed the term \"blitzkrieg\" in official documents. That the German army had a \"blitzkrieg doctrine\" was rejected in the late 1970s by Matthew Cooper. The concept of a blitzkrieg \"Luftwaffe\" was challenged by Richard Overy in the late 1970s and by Williamson Murray in the mid-1980s. That Nazi Germany went to war on the basis of \"blitzkrieg economics\" was criticized by Richard Overy in the 1980s, and George Raudzens described the contradictory senses in which historians have used the word. The notion of a German blitzkrieg concept or doctrine survives in popular history and many historians still support the thesis.\nFrieser wrote that after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan in 1914, the German army concluded that decisive battles were no longer possible in the changed conditions of the twentieth century. Frieser wrote that the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (OKW), which was created in 1938 had intended to avoid the decisive battle concepts of its predecessors and planned for a long war of exhaustion (\"Ermattungskrieg\"). It was only after the improvised plan for the Battle of France in 1940 was unexpectedly successful that the German General Staff came to believe that \"Vernichtungskrieg\" was still feasible. German thinking reverted to the possibility of a quick and decisive war for the Balkan campaign and Operation Barbarossa.\nDoctrine.\nMost academic historians regard the notion of blitzkrieg as military doctrine to be a myth. Shimon Naveh wrote, \"The striking feature of the blitzkrieg concept is the complete absence of a coherent theory which should have served as the general cognitive basis for the actual conduct of operations\". Naveh described it as an \"ad hoc solution\" to operational dangers, thrown together at the last moment. Overy disagreed with the idea that Hitler and the Nazi regime ever intended a blitzkrieg war because the once-popular belief that the Nazi state organized its economy to carry out its grand strategy in short campaigns was false. Hitler had intended for a rapid unlimited war to occur much later than 1939, but Germany's aggressive foreign policy forced the state into war before it was ready. The planning of Hitler and the \"Wehrmacht\" in the 1930s did not reflect a blitzkrieg method but the opposite. J. P. Harris wrote that the Wehrmacht never used the word, and it did not appear in German army or air force field manuals. The word was coined in September 1939 by a \"Times\" newspaper reporter. Harris also found no evidence that German military thinking developed a blitzkrieg mentality. Karl-Heinz Frieser and Adam Tooze reached similar conclusions to Overy and Naveh that the notions of blitzkrieg economy and strategy are myths. Frieser wrote that surviving German economists and General Staff officers denied that Germany went to war with a blitzkrieg strategy. Robert M. Citino argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Blitzkrieg\" was not a doctrine, or an operational scheme, or even a tactical system. In fact, it simply doesn't exist, at least not in the way we usually think it does. The Germans never used the term \"Blitzkrieg\" in any precise sense, and almost never used it outside of quotations. It simply meant a rapid and decisive victory (lightning war)... The Germans didn't invent anything new in the interwar period, but rather used new technologies like tanks and air and radio-controlled command to restore an old way of war that they still found to be valid, \"Bewegungskrieg.\"\nHistorian Victor Davis Hanson states that \"Blitzkrieg\" \"played on the myth of German technological superiority and industrial dominance\" and adds that German successes, particularly that of its Panzer divisions were \"instead predicated on the poor preparation and morale of Germany's enemies\". Hanson also reports that at a Munich public address in November 1941, Hitler had \"disowned\" the concept of \"Blitzkrieg\" by calling it an \"idiotic word\". Further, successful \"Blitzkrieg\" operations were predicated on superior numbers, air support and were possible for only short periods of time without sufficient supply lines. For all intents and purposes, \"Blitzkrieg\" ended at the Eastern Front once the German forces had given up Stalingrad, after they faced hundreds of new T-34 tanks, when the Luftwaffe became unable to assure air dominance, and after the stalemate at Kursk. To that end, Hanson concludes that German military success was not accompanied by the adequate provisioning of its troops with food and materiel far from the source of supply, which contributed to its ultimate failure. Despite its later disappointments as German troops extended their lines at too great a distance, the very specter of armored \"Blitzkrieg\" forces initially proved victorious against the Polish, Dutch, Belgian and French Armies early in the war.\nEconomics.\nIn the 1960s, Alan Milward developed a theory of blitzkrieg economics: Germany could not fight a long war and chose to avoid comprehensive rearmament and armed in breadth to win quick victories. Milward described an economy positioned between a full war economy and a peacetime economy. The purpose of the blitzkrieg economy was to allow the German people to enjoy high living standards in the event of hostilities and avoid the economic hardships of the First World War.\nOvery wrote that blitzkrieg as a \"coherent military and economic concept has proven a difficult strategy to defend in light of the evidence\". Milward's theory was contrary to Hitler's and German planners' intentions. The Germans, aware of the errors of the First World War, rejected the concept of organizing its economy to fight only a short war. Therefore, focus was given to the development of armament in depth for a long war, instead of armament in breadth for a short war. Hitler claimed that relying on surprise alone was \"criminal\" and that \"we have to prepare for a long war along with surprise attack\". During the winter of 1939\u20131940, Hitler demobilized many troops from the army to return as skilled workers to factories because the war would be decided by production, not a quick \"Panzer operation\".\nIn the 1930s, Hitler had ordered rearmament programs that cannot be considered limited. In November 1937, he had indicated that most of the armament projects would be completed by 1943\u20131945. The rearmament of the \"Kriegsmarine\" was to have been completed in 1949 and the \"Luftwaffe\" rearmament program was to have matured in 1942, with a force capable of strategic bombing with heavy bombers. The construction and the training of motorized forces and a full mobilization of the rail networks would not begin until 1943 and 1944, respectively. Hitler needed to avoid war until these projects were complete but his misjudgements in 1939 forced Germany into war before rearmament was complete.\nAfter the war, Albert Speer claimed that the German economy achieved greater armaments output not because of diversions of capacity from civilian to military industry but by streamlining of the economy. Overy pointed out some 23 percent of German output was military by 1939. Between 1937 and 1939, 70 percent of investment capital went into the rubber, synthetic fuel, aircraft and shipbuilding industries. Hermann G\u00f6ring had consistently stated that the task of the Four Year Plan was to rearm Germany for total war. Hitler's correspondence with his economists also reveals that his intent was to wage war in 1943\u20131945, when the resources of central Europe had been absorbed into Nazi Germany.\nLiving standards were not high in the late 1930s. Consumption of consumer goods had fallen from 71 percent in 1928 to 59 percent in 1938. The demands of the war economy reduced the amount of spending in non-military sectors to satisfy the demand for the armed forces. On 9 September, G\u00f6ring, as Head of the \"Reich Defense Council\", called for complete \"employment\" of living and fighting power of the national economy for the duration of the war. Overy presents that as evidence that a \"blitzkrieg economy\" did not exist.\nAdam Tooze wrote that the German economy was being prepared for a long war. The expenditure for the war was extensive and put the economy under severe strain. The German leadership were concerned less with how to balance the civilian economy and the needs of civilian consumption but to figure out how to best prepare the economy for total war. Once war had begun, Hitler urged his economic experts to abandon caution and expend all available resources on the war effort, but the expansion plans only gradually gained momentum in 1941. Tooze wrote that the huge armament plans in the pre-war period did not indicate any clear-sighted blitzkrieg economy or strategy.\n\"Heer\".\nFrieser wrote that the () was not ready for blitzkrieg at the start of the war. A blitzkrieg method called for a young, highly skilled mechanized army. In 1939\u20131940, 45 percent of the army was 40 years old and 50 percent of the soldiers had only a few weeks' training. The German Army, contrary to the blitzkrieg legend, was not fully motorized and had only 120,000 vehicles, compared to the 300,000 of the French Army. The British also had an \"enviable\" contingent of motorized forces. Thus, \"the image of the German 'Blitzkrieg' army is a figment of propaganda imagination\". During the First World War, the German army used 1.4 million horses for transport and in the Second World War 2.7 million horses. Only ten percent of the army was motorized in 1940.\nHalf of the German divisions available in 1940 were combat ready, but they were less well-equipped than the British and French or the Imperial German Army of 1914. In the spring of 1940, the German army was semi-modern in which a small number of well-equipped and \"elite\" divisions were offset by many second and third rate divisions\". In 2003, John Mosier wrote that while the French soldiers in 1940 were better trained than German soldiers, as were the Americans later and that the German Army was the least mechanized of the major armies, its leadership cadres were larger and better and that the high standard of leadership was the main reason for the successes of the German army in World War II, as it had been in World War I.\n\"Luftwaffe\".\nJames Corum wrote that it was a myth that the \"Luftwaffe\" had a doctrine of terror bombing in which civilians were attacked to break the will or aid the collapse of an enemy by the \"Luftwaffe\" in \"blitzkrieg\" operations. After the bombing of Guernica in 1937 and the Rotterdam Blitz in 1940, it was commonly assumed that terror bombing was a part of \"Luftwaffe\" doctrine. During the interwar period, the \"Luftwaffe\" leadership rejected the concept of terror bombing in favour of battlefield support and interdiction operations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The vital industries and transportation centers that would be targeted for shutdown were valid military targets. Civilians were not to be targeted directly, but the breakdown of production would affect their morale and will to fight. German legal scholars of the 1930s carefully worked out guidelines for what type of bombing was permissible under international law. While direct attacks against civilians were ruled out as \"terror bombing\", the concept of the attacking the vital war industries \u2013 and probable heavy civilian casualties and breakdown of civilian morale \u2013 was ruled as acceptable.\nCorum continued: General Walther Wever compiled a doctrine known as \"The Conduct of the Aerial War\". This document, which the \"Luftwaffe\" adopted, rejected Giulio Douhet's theory of terror bombing. Terror bombing was deemed to be \"counter-productive\", increasing rather than destroying the enemy's will to resist. Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the \"Luftwaffe's\" main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces. The bombings of Guernica, Rotterdam and Warsaw were tactical missions in support of military operations and were not intended as strategic terror attacks.\nJ. P. Harris wrote that most Luftwaffe leaders from Goering through the general staff believed, as did their counterparts in Britain and the United States, that strategic bombing was the chief mission of the air force and that given such a role, the Luftwaffe would win the next war and that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nearly all lectures concerned the strategic uses of airpower; virtually none discussed tactical co-operation with the Army. Similarly in the military journals, emphasis centred on 'strategic' bombing. The prestigious Milit\u00e4rwissenschaftliche Rundschau, the War Ministry's journal, which was founded in 1936, published a number of theoretical pieces on future developments in air warfare. Nearly all discussed the use of strategic airpower, some emphasising that aspect of air warfare to the exclusion of others. One author commented that European military powers were increasingly making the bomber force the heart of their airpower. The manoeuvrability and technical capability of the next generation of bombers would be 'as unstoppable as the flight of a shell.\nThe Luftwaffe ended up with an air force consisting mainly of relatively short-range aircraft, but that does not prove that the German air force was solely interested in \"tactical\" bombing. It happened because the German aircraft industry lacked the experience to build a long-range bomber fleet quickly and because Hitler was insistent on the very rapid creation of a numerically large force. It is also significant that Germany's position in the centre of Europe to a large extent obviated the need to make a clear distinction between bombers suitable only for \"tactical\" purposes and those necessary for strategic purposes in the early stages of a likely future war.\nFuller and Liddell Hart.\nThe British theorists John Frederick Charles Fuller and Captain Basil Henry Liddell Hart have often been associated with the development of blitzkrieg, but that is a matter of controversy. In recent years historians have uncovered that Liddell Hart distorted and falsified facts to make it appear as if his ideas has been adopted. After the war Liddell Hart imposed his own perceptions after the event by claiming that the mobile tank warfare has been practiced by the \"Wehrmacht\" was a result of his influence. By manipulation and contrivance, Liddell Hart distorted the actual circumstances of the blitzkrieg formation, and he obscured its origins. By his indoctrinated idealization of an ostentatious concept, he reinforced the myth of blitzkrieg. Imposing retrospectively his own perceptions of mobile warfare upon the shallow concept of blitzkrieg, he \"created a theoretical imbroglio that has taken 40 years to unravel\". Blitzkrieg was not an official doctrine, and historians in recent times have come to the conclusion that it did not exist as such:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was the opposite of a doctrine. Blitzkrieg consisted of an avalanche of actions that were sorted out less by design and more by success. In hindsight\u2014and with some help from Liddell Hart\u2014this torrent of action was squeezed into something it never was: an operational design.\nThe early 1950s literature transformed blitzkrieg into a historical military doctrine, which carried the signature of Liddell Hart and Guderian. The main evidence of Liddell Hart's deceit and \"tendentious\" report of history can be found in his letters to Erich von Manstein, Heinz Guderian, and the relatives and associates of Erwin Rommel. Liddell Hart, in letters to Guderian, \"imposed his own fabricated version of blitzkrieg on the latter and compelled him to proclaim it as original formula\". Kenneth Macksey found Liddell Hart's original letters to Guderian in the latter's papers. Liddell Hart requested Guderian to give him credit for \"impressing him\" with his ideas of armored warfare. When Liddell Hart was questioned about this in 1968 and the discrepancy between the English and German editions of Guderian's memoirs, \"he gave a conveniently unhelpful though strictly truthful reply. ('There is nothing about the matter in my file of correspondence with Guderian himself except... that I thanked him... for what he said in that additional paragraph'.)\".\nDuring the First World War, Fuller had been a staff officer attached to the new tank corps. He developed Plan 1919 for massive independent tank operations, which he claimed were subsequently studied by the German military. It is variously argued that Fuller's wartime plans and post-war writings were inspirations or that his readership was low and German experiences during the war received more attention. The German view of themselves as the losers of the war may be linked to the senior and experienced officers' undertaking a thorough review in studying and rewriting of all of their Army doctrine and training manuals.\nFuller and Liddell Hart were \"outsiders\". Liddell Hart was unable to serve as a soldier after 1916 after being gassed on the Somme, and Fuller's abrasive personality resulted in his premature retirement in 1933. Their views had limited impact in the British army; the War Office permitted the formation of an Experimental Mechanized Force on 1 May 1927, composed of tanks, motorized infantry, self-propelled artillery and motorized engineers but the force was disbanded in 1928 on the grounds that it had served its purpose. A new experimental brigade was intended for the next year and became a permanent formation in 1933, during the cuts of the 1932/33\u20131934/35 financial years.\nContinuity.\nIt has been argued that blitzkrieg was not new, and that the Germans did not invent something called blitzkrieg in the 1920s and 1930s. Rather, the German concept of wars of movement and concentrated force were seen in wars of Prussia and the German Wars of Unification. The first European general to introduce rapid movement, concentrated power and integrated military effort was Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus during the Thirty Years' War. The appearance of the aircraft and tank in the First World War, called an RMA, offered the German military a chance to get back to the traditional war of movement as practiced by Moltke the Elder. The so-called \"blitzkrieg campaigns\" of 1939 to around 1942 were well within that operational context.\nAt the outbreak of war, the German army had no radically new theory of war. The operational thinking of the German army had not changed significantly since the First World War or since the late 19th century. J. P. Harris and Robert M. Citino point out that the Germans had always had a marked preference for short decisive campaigns but were unable to achieve short-order victories in First World War conditions. The transformation from the stalemate of the First World War into tremendous initial operational and strategic success in the Second World War was partly the employment of a relatively-small number of mechanized divisions, most importantly the Panzer divisions, and the support of an exceptionally powerful air force.\nGuderian.\nHeinz Guderian is widely regarded as being highly influential in developing the military methods of warfare used by Germany's tank men at the start of the Second World War. That style of warfare brought the maneuver back to the fore and placed an emphasis on the offensive. Along with the shockingly-rapid collapse in the armies that opposed it, that came to be branded as blitzkrieg warfare.\nAfter Germany's military reforms of the Guderian emerged as a strong proponent of mechanized forces. Within the Inspectorate of Transport Troops, Guderian and colleagues performed theoretical and field exercise work. Guderian met with opposition from some in the General Staff, who were distrustful of the new weapons and who continued to view the infantry as the primary weapon of the army. Among them, Guderian claimed, was Chief of the General Staff Ludwig Beck (1935\u20131938), who he alleged was skeptical that armored forces could be decisive. That claim has been disputed by later historians. James Corum wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Guderian expressed a hearty contempt for General Ludwig Beck, chief of the General Staff from 1935 to 1938, whom he characterized as hostile to ideas of modern mechanised warfare: [Corum quoting Guderian] \"He [Beck] was a paralysing element wherever he appeared... [S]ignificantly of his way of thought was his much-boosted method of fighting which he called delaying defence\". This is a crude caricature of a highly competent general who authored Army Regulation 300 (Troop Leadership) in 1933, the primary tactical manual of the German Army in World War II, and under whose direction the first three panzer divisions were created in 1935, the largest such force in the world of the time.\nBy Guderian's account, he single-handedly created the German tactical and operational methodology. Between 1922 and 1928 Guderian wrote a number of articles concerning military movement. As the ideas of making use of the combustible engine in a protected encasement to bring mobility back to warfare developed in the German army, Guderian was a leading proponent of the formations that would be used for this purpose. He was later asked to write an explanatory book, which was titled \"Achtung Panzer!\" (1937) in which he explained the theories of the tank men and defended them.\nGuderian argued that the tank would be the decisive weapon of the next war. \"If the tanks succeed, then victory follows\", he wrote. In an article addressed to critics of tank warfare, he wrote that \"until our critics can produce some new and better method of making a successful land attack other than self-massacre, we shall continue to maintain our beliefs that tanks\u2014properly employed, needless to say\u2014are today the best means available for land attack\".\nAddressing the faster rate at which defenders could reinforce an area than attackers could penetrate it during the First World War, Guderian wrote that \"since reserve forces will now be motorized, the building up of new defensive fronts is easier than it used to be; the chances of an offensive based on the timetable of artillery and infantry co-operation are, as a result, even slighter today than they were in the last war.\" He continued, \"We believe that by attacking with tanks we can achieve a higher rate of movement than has been hitherto obtainable, and\u2014what is perhaps even more important\u2014that we can keep moving once a breakthrough has been made\". Guderian additionally required for tactical radios to be widely used to facilitate coordination and command by having one installed in all tanks.\nGuderian's leadership was supported, fostered and institutionalized by his supporters in the Reichswehr General Staff system, which worked the Army to greater and greater levels of capability through massive and systematic Movement Warfare war games in the 1930s. Guderian's book incorporated the work of theorists such as Ludwig Ritter von Eimannsberger, whose book, \"The Tank War\" (\"Der Kampfwagenkrieg\") (1934) gained a wide audience in the German Army. Another German theorist, Ernst Volckheim, wrote a huge amount on tank and combined arms tactics and was influential to German thinking on the use of armored formations, but his work was not acknowledged in Guderian's writings.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4653", "revid": "46144122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4653", "title": "The Beano", "text": "British weekly children's comic magazine\nThe Beano (formerly The Beano Comic) is a British anthology comic magazine created by Scottish publishing company DC Thomson. Its first issue was published on 30 July 1938, and it published its 4000th issue in August 2019. Popular and well-known comic strips and characters include \"Dennis the Menace\", \"Minnie the Minx\", \"The Bash Street Kids\", \"Roger the Dodger\", \"Billy Whizz\", \"Lord Snooty and His Pals\", \"Ivy the Terrible\", \"General Jumbo\", \"Jonah\", and \"Biffo the Bear\".\n\"The Beano\" was planned as a pioneering children's magazine that contained mostly comic strips, in the style of American newspaper gag-a-days, as opposed to the more text-based story papers that were immensely popular before the Second World War. In the present, its legacy is its misbehaving characters, escapist tales and anarchic humour with an audience of all ages. \"Beano\" is a multimedia franchise with spin-off books and Christmas annuals, a website, theme park rides, games, cartoon adaptations, and a production company.\n\"The Beano\" is the best-selling comic magazine outside Japan, having sold over 2 billion copies since its inception, and is the world\u2019s longest-running comic magazine and has been published weekly since 1938, alongside its sister comic \"The Dandy\" until 2012. \nIt has had three characters as the mascot throughout the years: Big Eggo (1938\u20131948), Biffo the Bear (1948\u20131974), and the current, Dennis the Menace and Gnasher (1974\u2013present).\nHistory.\nCreation (1920s\u20131939).\nThroughout the 1920s, DC Thomson dominated the British comics industry. Dubbed \"the big five\", the publisher's most successful comics were \"Adventure\" (1921), \"The Rover\" and \"The Wizard\" (1922), \"The Skipper\" (1930) and \"The Hotspur\" (1933). These were weekly issued boys' magazines for preteen males, containing anthologies by DC Thomson's creator staff designed in various formats and genres. They became popular throughout the United Kingdom, notably in English industrial cities, helped through the company's ability to view sales and promotions in the areas much more easily than the rival publishers in London. Although many were about \"super men\" the young readers could idolise, the rest of the stories would be comic strips inspired by the gag-a-day strips in American newspapers full of stylised characters, slapstick and puns.\nOverseeing the magazines was the Managing Editor of Children's Publications, R. D. Low, who first joined the company in 1913. Almost a decade into the big five's success, the stories shifted to comedic and included more comic strips, which gave Low an idea of creating a new \"big five\" which focused on the funnies more than drama. The suggestion was approved; editors Bill Blain and (sub-editor) Albert Barnes of \"The Wizard\" and \"The Hotspur\", respectively, joined Low's project. The new team placed a newspaper advertisement into \"The Daily Telegraph\" asking for artists and/or comic ideas. With the help of the advertisement responses and employed artists at DC Thomson, \"The Dandy\" was published in 1937, the New Big Five's first member. For \"The Beano\" (initially called \"The Beano Comic\" until issue 412), Low received comic strip suggestions by Reg Carter, an English illustrator in Sussex who had created funnies for several British comics and designed humorous postcards. After an in-person interview, Low and Carter planned the front cover for \"The Beano\"'s first issue, eventually creating the character Big Eggo (originally named Oswald the Ostrich). It would be in colour whilst the inside of the magazine would be black and white, a tactic used for \"The Dandy\"'s first issue (black and white stories inside, colourful Korky the Cat strip on the front). Joining the \"Big Eggo\" strip would be many funnies, such as Hugh McNeill's \"Ping the Elastic Man\", James Jewell's \"Wee Peem\", Allan Morley's \"Big Fat Joe\", Eric Roberts' \"Rip Van Wink\", Dudley D. Watkins' \"Lord Snooty and His Pals\", and Roland Davies' \"Contrary Mary\". Despite the aim to make a new comic series full of American-inspired comic strips, \"The Beano\" also contained short stories, serial fiction and adventure stories similar to the Big Five's magazines; \"Morgyn the Mighty\" was previously in \"The Rover\". \"Tin-Can Tommy\" and \"Brave Captain Kipper\" were reprints, co-produced by the Italian art agency Torelli Bros.\nWorth 2d with a free prize of a \"whoopee mask\", issue 1 of \"The Beano\" was released on 26 July 1938 for the 30th, selling roughly 443,000 copies. Like \"The Dandy\", its name is from a Low-led DC Thomson office party called The DB Club (The Dandy Beano Club). DC Thomson had several office party clubs that hosted different types of staff gatherings to choose from (e.g. The Prancers would hike hills), but Low's DB Club preferred playing golf and dining throughout Dundee. The two magazines also followed the one-word titles of other comics by rival companies, such as Amalgamated Press' \"Crackers\", \"Sparkler\", \"Puck\" and some books from its \"Union Jack\" series (\"The Marvel\", \"The Magnet\" and \"The Gem\"); and Target Publications' \"Chuckler\", \"Rattler\" and \"Dazzler\". \"Beano\" editor-in-chief was George Moonie, former sub-editor of \"The Wizard\", who would be editor until the summer of 1959. He later explained DC Thomson was a competitive company that wanted to make the best children's literature in the United Kingdom, but there was also competition within itself as \"Beano\" offices was determined to beat \"The Dandy\"'s popularity.\nWorld War Two, reaching million sales (1939\u20131945).\nDrastic changes occurred behind the scenes of \"The Beano\" during the Second World War: George Moonie and editing partner Ron Fraser left to join the Royal Marines and Air Force respectively, both not returning until c. 1946. Stuart Gilchrist became sole editor-in-chief after Moonie's other sub-editor Freddie Simpson became ill and resigned. Contact was also lost with Torelli Bros. so in-house creations of \"Tin-Can Tommy\" began from issue 69 by Sam Fair. Paper rationing caused the rest of Low's New Big Five to be cancelled (it stopped at three published, the third member being \"The Magic Comic\" (1939), which ended with 80 issues in 1941), and \"The Beano\" to fluctuate its page count instead of its usual 28. Eventually, \"The Beano\" became a fortnightly magazine (alternating with The Dandy comic) until 23 July 1949.\nComic strips would encourage readers to help their parents and other adults with the war effort, and to be optimistic about the war's outcome. New comic strips mocked Mussolini and propagandist William Joyce, \"Lord Snooty and His Pals\" stories would be about the protagonists outsmarting the Axis leaders, and other stories would be about characters recycling paper. \"Big Eggo\" front covers were often about Eggo pranking servicemen during the Blitz, and Pansy Potter received a medal for single-handedly capturing a Nazi U-boat. Issue 192 would debut a 16-part prose story about a boy and his mother being evacuated to the United States and becoming the enemy of a Chicago gangster's widow.\nIssues published weekly every Tuesday in 1938, and when the magazine changed distribution to every two weeks, the day remained unchanged. From issue 366, the day changed to Friday until issue 375 which began the Thursday publication day schedule.\nPost-war changes (1945\u20131988).\nDecember 1945 marked a milestone: issue 272 became the first \"Beano\" issue to sell over a million copies. The end of the war also ushered in a new era for the comic, debuting superhero Jack Flash, the debut of Biffo the Bear as new cover star and a new generation of trouble-making kids: Dennis the Menace, Minnie the Minx, The Bash Street Kids, and Roger the Dodger. DC Thomson also introduced new comic magazines like \"The Beezer\" and \"The Topper\" that a few \"Beano\" artists also created characters and stories for.\nAfter the war saw a drift away from text stories and adventure comics, with the last text story published in 1955; adventure comics lasted longer with 1975 being the last year to feature them as \"General Jumbo\"'s eighth series drew to a close in issue 1734.\nGeorge Moonie resigned as editor-in-chief in 1959 to develop comics for girls. Sub-editor of \"The Beezer\" Harry Cramond succeeded Moonie until retiring in 1984, described as the most influential editor in \"The Beano\"'s history. He oversaw new merchandising, high sales, and the thousandth and two thousandth issues. DC Thomson's \"Beano\" offices featured on documentary television and Cramond's successor Euan Kerr guest-starred on television for the magazine's 50th anniversary.\nMove to full colour (1988\u2013present).\n\"The Beano\" began to advertise outside of DC Thomson's products in 1988 in order to keep both it and \"The Dandy\" \"pocket money\" cheap, beginning with issue 2407. Issue 2674 in 1993 was the first issue to feature every page in colour.\nA notable revamp was the 50th birthday issue, which had an abnormally larger page count with more coloured sections and printed on wider sheets. A decade later, issues gained eight extra pages with computer-based art. In the 21st century, there were seven changes within a five-year span: logo updates, fonts assigned for certain design roles, and the magazine started using glossy paper.\nFrom issue 3442 in 2008 (and as of 2020), the day the comic was released was changed to Wednesday.\nOutside of the magazine, \"Beano\"'s brand expanded into a multimedia franchise. Theme park tie-ins, a website, spin-off magazines, and animated television programmes starring the popular comic characters (several for Dennis the Menace) became common, keeping \"The Beano\" in popular culture. The turn of the millennium began a sales decline and led to friendly rival \"The Dandy\" being discontinued in 2012. Eventually, \"The Beano\" recovered after the creation of its magazine subscription service, which also shipped internationally.\nStories.\nPlots and dialogue are written into a script by an (often) uncredited DC Thomson writer, a formerly common practice for DC Thomson magazines. Uncredited artists assigned to a strip(s) will design all its stories into a \"series\" that the chief editor will arrange into an order to publish for each issue. Strips are sometimes ghostwritten by other artists who imitate the original designer's style, which is helpful if artists retire or die unexpectedly, otherwise the strip is discontinued. \"When I started I was drawing two pages a week and thinking 'Phew, that's quite a lot'. Now I do 10 or 12 pages a week. You have to do more all the time to stay where you are,\" explained Nigel Parkinson. From March 2016, authors and illustrators are now credited in issues.\nThere have been over a thousand stories throughout the magazine's history told through various ways. Since November 1975, the magazine has contained only comic strips in the style of American newspaper \"funnies\", but it began with other genres. The last genre to leave \"Beano\" was adventure stories: short tales eleven-pictures long in text comics format. The stories were either dramatic or dramedies, but heavily featured hobbies and interests young boys had (war and the military, hunting, sailing, jungle men). They also stood out because the illustrations of backgrounds, animals and human characters were photorealistic. Although artists like Dudley D. Watkins drew for a few series, the most prolific illustrator was Irish artist Paddy Brennan, who notably drew for \"The Daring Deeds of Sinbad the Sailor\", \"Red Rory of the Eagles\" and \"General Jumbo\" in the 1950s. Comic adventure stories were a hybrid: adventure stories presented as a comic strip.\nProse stories were a page of text with an illustration at the top. Some stories were about animals with artwork by former Big Five illustrator Richard \"Toby\" Baines, but the longest-running prose character in the magazine's history was Prince Ivor, who first starred in \"Follow the Secret Hand\". The last prose story to appear was \"Ace From Space\" in 1955.\nAlthough comic strips have featured in \"The Beano\" since issue 1, their contents has changed throughout. Anthropomorphic animals were common stars that would partake in human activities, and the punchlines occurred from the failures to do so. Misbehaving children showed most popular with \"Lord Snooty and His Pals\" becoming the first longest-running strip when it concluded in 1991, but the most well known that continue to appear in issues are \"Dennis the Menace\", \"Minnie the Minx\", \"The Bash Street Kids\", and \"Roger the Dodger\". Some adult-starring characters also misbehaved but they were usually portrayed as incompetent, notably Jonah. In the late 20th century, merging comic strip characters in the same vicinity became common in the franchise, such as the video game \"Beanotown Racing\", but characters living together in \"Beanotown\" became a prominent feature of comic strips into the present.\nDue to the initial target audience of \"The Beano\" being schoolboys, masculine interests, hobbies, and values dominated issues constantly. Aside from aforementioned adventure stories and comedic characters, there were cowboys, aliens, kings, the supernatural, fantasy creatures (and talking animals), and men whose lifestyle or jobs require physical strength (despite the story making their careers incidental). \"The Beano\" alternated between mocking or idolising these characters through story formats; wealthy characters causing mischief, caring about their families or being shown underprivileged lives made the working-class audience relate and sympathise with them. Female characters were usually supporting a male character, joint protagonist with a male character, or the antagonist. Prose stories starring girls and women were about the protagonist searching out the truth to a secret, usually over a friend's/family disappearance, or they were witches cursing or tormenting the male protagonists. Female comic characters were also in supporting roles with or join-protagonist with a male character, but the starring characters notably had binary stereotypical traits: drawn as tall and flowy, \"Swanky, Lanky Liz\" is obsessed with fashion and makeup and acts vain and snobbish, whereas Pansy Potter, Minnie the Minx and Toots from \"The Bash Street Kids\" share the round-faced and snub-nosed art style of the boys in their stories and are unruly tomboys (in Pansy Potter's case, showcases the strength she inherited from her father). Non-White characters starred in their stories either set in Africa, Asia, or South America, or were about the character adapting to a new life in the United Kingdom.\nStories used to vary in length and layout, but in 2012, \"The Beano\" debuted a chapter called Funsize Funnies where shorter comic strips shared some pages. In some instances, these extremely short strips were brand new (\"Stunt Gran\", \"BamBeanos\", \"BSK CCTV\", \"Gnash Gnews\", \"Winston\"), but others were tiny reboots of older comic strips that the new audience could not recall reading before. Quiet reboots included \"Simply Smiffy\" (cancelled 1987), \"Rasher\" (cancelled 1995), \"Little Plum\" (cancelled 2007), \"Les Pretend\" (cancelled 2007), \"Baby Face Finlayson\" (cancelled 2005), \"Biffo the Bear\" (cancelled 1999), \"Pansy Potter\" (cancelled 1993), and \"Lord Snooty\" (cancelled 1991).\nCrossovers.\n\"The Beano\" allows its characters from different strips to interact with each other. Reprinting old stories or redistributing characters into other magazines is common throughout DC Thomson's history, as if the stories are set in the same universe. The \"Lord Snooty\" series discontinued old characters and replaced them with \"Beano\" strip characters of the past; \"Dennis the Menace\" featured in DC Thomson's \"Champ\" magazine in the mid-1980s and \"The Weekly News\" tabloid-magazine for four years in the 1950s. \"Morgyn the Mighty\", \"Tricky Dicky\", \"Bananaman\" and \"Corporal Clott\" were stories previously from \"The Rover\", \"The Topper\", \"Nutty\" and \"The Dandy\", respectively, whereas one of Gnasher's puppies had her own strip in \"The Beezer and Topper\" and \"Jackie\" magazine.\nAnniversary issues.\nAlong with guest editors, anniversary issues are frequently contained with crossovers. The 2000th issue had the \"Hall of Fame\" strip which showed framed portraits of characters from the past, and issue 3443's \"Fred's Bed\" featured Fred crawling under his bed and time travelling through the magazine's comic strips. For the 80th anniversary, issue 3945 was guest edited by actor-turned children's author David Walliams and had a large crossover story about Bash Street School opening the Beanotown's 1938 time capsule and discovering a map, which leads to robots and a giant tentacle monster breaking out to attack the residents. There was also a flashback panel of the time capsule being sealed which featured a handful of comic strip characters from the first issue, later helping the present day characters discover how to defeat the tentacle monster, named Simon. Issue 4000's crossover was a time travel story where the Beanotown characters of the present helped their future selves save the world.\nCreators.\nChief Editor history.\nAs of 2020, there have been seven official chief editors:\nTemporary chief editors:\nNotable artists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Barrie Appleby\nMerchandise.\nFrom the first issue, readers have received free gifts from \"The Beano\": toy masks, sweets, posters, and toys. Originally, free gifts would be attached inside the cover or strategically on the front so that it could distract the buyer from other comics next to \"The Beano\" on the shelves, hopefully excited for the next issue after reading it and eating/playing with the toys. Gifts were intentionally sporadic, especially during the Christmas period when families' money would be saved for food and presents. Issue 90 would be the last issue with a gift (licorice \"black eye\") due to rationing, the next free gift being the Flying Snorter Balloon in issue 953. The most popular free gift was issue 2201's Gnasher Snapper, a prank toy that would make a bang sound when unfolded, and was re-gifted occasionally in later issues, as well as the 60th anniversary.\nDuring the 25th anniversary of \"Dennis the Menace\", The Dennis the Menace Fan Club was formed. The fan club was instantly popular, recalls Euan Kerr in 1984; \"The club enrolled over 2000 new members every week, well into the 90s[.]\" Membership was 30p, and new members received a membership card full of classified communication tactics and two badges: a red one with Dennis' face on the front and a furry one of a googly-eyed Gnasher face\u2014the latter was the most sought-after badge in the club's history. For two years, there was a tie-in agony aunt page called \"Dear Dennis\" (issue 1679\u20131767) where fan club members sent Dennis their problems that Dennis would reply to in the following issue; thousands of letters would arrive at DC Thomson per week and the authors of the messages would receive prizes. The club would be renamed The Beano Club, which ended in 2010, but had over 1.5 million members. A spin-off was introduced called Gnasher's Fang Club, and Gnasher would ask readers to send him stories about their pets' adventures which could be printed into the next issue. \"The mailbag of little drawings of pets was several thousand per week,\" remembers sub-editor Morris Heggie. \"And the popularity lasted and lasted.\"\nThe 21st century celebrated anniversaries with more memorabilia. For \"The Beano\"'s 70th birthday, DC Thomson published \"The Beano Special Collectors Edition: 70 Years of Fun\" (2008), and \"The History of The Beano\" (2008) was published by Waverly Books, both documenting the magazine's history; two exhibitions at the University of Dundee (\"Happy Birthday, Beano!\") and The Cartoon Museum (\"Beano and Dandy Birthday Bash!\") showed the public private DC Thomson artwork and the history of the magazine. For 2018, readers could buy a box for the 80th anniversary containing posters, reprints of selected older issues, and two books updating the previous documentation of the magazine's history, as well as \"Minnie the Minx\"'s origins. Both anniversaries had tie-in museum exhibitions that also told their audiences the magazine's history. Limited-edition figurines from Robert Harrop were available to buy from their official website in late 2008. The 21st century also began \"Beano\"'s branching into different mediums: their first website, Beanotown.com, formed in 2000, and Chessington World of Adventures opened Beanoland in the same year. Both would later discontinue but Beanotown.com would be revamped as beano.com, a website full of games, \"Beano\" secrets and other activities for children. Gulliver's Travels opened the Beano 6 Super Ride in May 2021. \"The Beano\" was also the face of the United Kingdom's 2018 Summer Reading Challenge, called Mischief Makers, which included a special Dennis the Menace novel tie-in called \"Dennis the Menace and the Chamber of Mischief\" by Beano artist Nigel Auchterlounie. The Dennis the Menace Fan Club was re-launched as a phone app, rebranded as The Dennis and Gnasher Fan Club, and allowed readers free membership, printable badges, and pranks. On television, the Sky Kids show \"SO Beano!\" aired; a TV show with special guests, children presenters, and fun and games, in a similar style to \"Friday Download\" and \"Scrambled!\"\nAnnuals.\nThe first Beano annual hardcover book was published as far back as 1939, a year after the first weekly comic was published. In 2018, it was estimated that an original first issue Beano annual in relatively good condition could fetch between \u00a31,200 to \u00a31,500.\nSpin-off comics.\nComic libraries.\nSince 1982 the comic, along with \"The Dandy\", has also run \"Comic Library\" titles. Released monthly, these titles are a feature-length (usually about 64-page) adventure, featuring a character from the comic itself. They are available in A5 size only. In 1998, these were replaced by the \"Fun Size Beano\". Fun Size Comics were discontinued in late 2010.\n\"Beano Specials\".\nThe comic also ran A4-sized \"Beano Specials\" in 1987 with full coloured pages, which later were replaced by \"Beano Superstars\" which ran for 121 issues from 1992 to 2002. These were similar to the Comic Library series. Some of the last issues were printed versions of episodes from the 1996\u20131998 \"Dennis and Gnasher\" animated TV series. A \"Beano Poster Comic\" series was also printed in the early 1990s.\nThe Beano Specials returned in 2003, and are now published seasonally. The issues were numbered, and the first one was a Dennis and Friends special, the last a Christmas reprint special. These were replaced by BeanoMAX in early 2007.\nBeanoMAX.\nOn 15 February 2007, the first issue of a monthly comic entitled \"BeanoMAX\" was published. The sister comic features many of the same characters; however, the stories in \"BeanoMAX\" are written in a longer format meant for 10- to 13-year-olds. The first issue was a Comic Relief special featuring assorted celebrity guests. The magazine has been rebranded several times since 2013, and is currently known as \"EPIC Magazine\".\n\"Plug\".\n\"Plug\" was a comic based on the eponymous character from \"The Bash Street Kids\" that began with issue dated 24 September 1977, and is notable for being the first comic to make use of rotogravure printing. The magazine similar in style to I.P.C's \"Krazy\" which had started the previous year. It contained uncharacteristically outlandish material for D C. Thomson, as well as later including celebrity appearances in the comic.\nThe comic revealed Plug's full name to be Percival Proudfoot Plugsley and also gave him a pet monkey by the name of Chumkee. Plug's strip was mostly drawn by Vic Neill but other artists, including Dave Gudgeon drew some later strips. Other strips included \"Antchester United\", \"Violent Elizabeth\", \"Eebagoom\", \"Hugh's Zoo\" and \"D'ye Ken John Squeal and his Hopeless Hounds\".\nThe venture was unsuccessful, in part because the comic cost 9p, with the \"Beano\" at the time only costing 4p and most of its rivals priced similarly. It merged with \"The Beezer\" on 24 February 1979.\n\"Dennis and Gnasher\".\nThe brand new \"Dennis and Gnasher\" was launched separately from \"The Beano\" in September 2009. It coincided with their new cartoon on CBBC of the same name.\n\"BeanOLD\".\n44-page special issue 4062, with cover date 21 November 2020, during a lockdown in the COVID-19 pandemic had an eight-page adult pullout named \"BeanOLD\", with cartoons poking fun at British politicians such as Boris Johnson and Dominic Cummings, and with appearances by Greta Thunberg, Captain Tom, and footballer Marcus Rashford. The slogan was \"2020 has been tough. So tough that even grown-ups need \"Beano\"\".\nBeano Studios.\nIn June 2016, DC Thomson launched Beano Studios, a spin-off media studio based in London and Dundee, to create media for children and expand The Beano franchise. The launch was marked in The Beano issue 3854, featuring a new cover design, updated logo, and the introduction of the website beano.com. \nMichael Stirling, former chief editor, returned as head of the Dundee studio, with Jodie Morris, James Neal, Nigel Pickard, and Emma Scott joining in key roles. The website beano.com offers games, news, videos, and content that appeals to children and nostalgic parents alike, drawing over two million annual visitors. This online presence contributed to a 10% rise in comic sales by 2018. \nBeano Studios quickly expanded its reach with the popular CBBC series Dennis &amp; Gnasher: Unleashed! in 2017, which aired in over 90 countries and earned an International Emmy nomination. Building on this success, Beano Studios pursued new projects including a live-action Minnie the Minx show, another Dennis the Menace adaptation, and a Bananaman cartoon in collaboration with Fox Entertainment.\nReception and legacy.\n\"The Beano\" was an instant success upon release, and became the longest-running, weekly-issued comic of all time in 2018. Although interest in comic magazines dwindled, it survived surrounding setbacks. In the 1950s, it (and \"The Dandy\") were unaffected by DC Thomson's magazine cancellations (selling over 100 million per year) that were caused by both paper rationing and public lack of interest. Alan Digby's attempt to boost sales with the 8-week \"Missing Gnasher\" plot in \"Dennis the Menace\" failed, but the story featured in newspapers and on radio broadcasts, causing people of all ages to contact \"Beano\" offices to voice their concerns. Roughly 31,000\u201341,000 copies are sold per week in the present day, but an estimated 2 billion \"Beano\" comic magazines have been sold in its lifetime. A 1997 television poll by the National Comics Awards selected it for the Best British Comic Ever award. Dennis the Menace would represent the comic when Royal Mail launched a special stamp collection in 2012, celebrating Britain's rich comic book history. \"The Dandy\", \"Eagle\", \"The Topper\", \"Roy of the Rovers\", \"Bunty\", \"Buster\", \"Valiant\", \"Twinkle\" and \"2000 AD\" were also featured.\nLike \"The Dandy\", \"The Beano\" is a definitive part of British pop culture. \"It's refreshing to see how the [zany] principles that made it such a hit all those years ago have remained to this day.\" writes \"Coventry Evening Telegraph\". \"Beano\" annuals are the most popular Christmas annual sold, and old issues sell for thousands at auctions. Lord Snooty is often used as a pejorative in British politics. DC Thomson considers the 1950s \"Beano\"'s golden age possibly because of many commemorations based on the strips that first appeared from that decade: Dennis became the literal and metaphorical mascot of the magazine, his increasing popularity making him the last consistent cover star and his strips spawning three BBC animated adaptations; Minnie and the Bash Street Kids have a statue and a street named after the strip, respectively. The \"anarchic\" humour is credited as the key to the magazine's longevity, as well as its refusal to be condescending to its readers: \"\"The Beano\" may have changed since the '30s but has always maintained its anti-authoritarian stance and steadfast refusal to treat children like idiots,\" theorised Morris Heggie.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy British-born grandparents made sure they passed down an important part of their culture by giving out \"Beano\" Annuals every year. I grew up on \"Beano\"s and \"Dandy\"s in 1970s Canada, and become one of my country's leading kids' cartoonists, writing and drawing for \"Chickadee\" magazines and annuals, and creating a weekly comic strip for the \"Toronto Star\". I'm forever in debt to the lowbrow lessons gleaned from Dennis and his ilk.\nJay Stephens, 2003\nThe magazine is cited as an inspiration to many readers. \"Beano\" artists Emily McGorman-Bruce, Zoom Rockman, Jess Bradley, and Barrie Appleby were avid readers of the magazine and/or its annuals before they became creators of its new strips. Meanwhile, \"The Beano\" inspired comic artists Jay Stephens, Carolyn Edwards (Titan Comics) and webcomic creator Sarah Millman (\"NPC Tea\", \"The Heart of Time\") to either work in the creative industry or create their own stories. Alan Moore theorised the magazine influenced numerous British comic artists into reimagining American comics in the 1980s by pioneering the Dark Age. Guest chief-editors Nick Park, David Walliams, Joe Sugg, and Harry Hill are also fans of \"The Beano\", with Park admitting \"My dream job was always to work on \"The Beano\" and it's such an honour for me to be Guest Editor[.]\"\nNotable famous members of the old Dennis the Menace/Beano Club include Auberon Waugh, Mike Read, and Mark Hamill, as well as honorary members Paul Gascoigne, and Princes William and Harry. Chris Tarrant cited Dennis as his role model when he was a child, and Paul Rudd revealed \"Roger the Dodger\" was his favourite strip. Stella McCartney created tribute fashion to both \"The Beano\" and \"The Dandy\", explaining they were \"a huge part of my childhood\" and wanted to celebrate \"the next generation of \"Beano\" fans with a sustainable and practical range for kids who still share that \u2018Beano\u2019 spirit of these iconic characters\". In music pop culture, the album \"Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton\" is nicknamed \"The Beano Album\" because Eric Clapton is holding issue 1242 on its cover.\nAudience participation.\nInteraction with the audience is a historic practice in \"The Beano\"'s history. Excluding fan clubs and merchandise, \"Comic Idol\" is a sporadic election in which readers vote for their favourite strips to keep in the magazine. Cancelled strips with the least votes include \"Little Plum\", \"Baby Face Finlayson\", \"Les Pretend\", \"Calamity James\", \"Crazy for Daisy\", and \"Lord Snooty\". \"Super School\" and \"Meebo and Zuky\" were nominees who won polls and became official strips in the following issues. Readers would find a voting slip covered with the candidates printed in an issue that they would fill out and mail to DC Thomson, but the creation of \"Beano\"'s websites would allow real-time opinions from readers. \"Pets' Picture Gallery\" invited readers to send drawings of their pets to feature in the following issue.\nReaders participated in the magazine's record-breaking stunts. In 1988, 100 children helped Euan Kerr and \"Beano\" scriptwriter Al Bernard recreate the front cover of issue 2396 on Scarborough Beach with Hann-Made Productions. It was awarded the Largest Comic Strip at 39950 square feet. \"Beano\"'s 2018 comic competition to celebrate the opening of V&amp;A Dundee was awarded the biggest competition to finish a comic strip with 650 participants.\nAlong with Nick Park's guest editor issue, the 70th anniversary coincided with Gnashional Menace Day, a CLIC Sargent-partnered event where readers could be sponsored \"behaving like Dennis\" for charity.\nControversy.\n\"The Beano\" has had a few controversies throughout its lifetime, but aspects have either been discontinued, phased out or changed to not cause offence. Its infamous changes are the removal of corporal punishment (e.g. Dennis the Menace often depicted receiving bottom spanks with a slipper by his furious father) and misbehaving characters abandoning slingshots\u2014the latter irritating former readers for being a \"politically correct\" notion, usually highlighted with claim \"Dennis has lost his menace\".\nRacist depictions and terminology have been removed through the years as well. \"Little Plum\"'s sub-title \"Your redskin chum\" was not included in its 2002 revival. The first masthead character was a caricatured design of a black boy named Peanut, mascot of the \"Little Peanut's Page of Fun\" joke page (appeared from issues 1 to 112), usually eating watermelon. His last masthead feature was in December 1947, but subsequent reprints of the first issues have removed him. \"Hard-Nut the Nigger\" and \"Musso the Wop\" have not had reprints since their last appearances, the latter being printed during World War II when Britain was at war with Fascist Italy.\nSome changes were to not convince readers bullying was acceptable. Dennis and Gnasher's constant targeting of passive, diligent Walter \"the Softy\" (who was also a knitting and flower-picking hobbyist) was accused of encouraging playground homophobia, so it was toned down. Walter was also rewritten to be a bit less soft, becoming more antagonistic and stood up to Dennis sometimes, eventually having his first girlfriend. Fatty from the Bash Street Kids was renamed Freddy (his real name) in 2021, causing backlash from former readers, including then government minister Jacob Rees-Mogg who accused the change of being \"publicity-seeking\". Former chief-editor Mike Stirling explained it was due to fan letters from young readers asking why he was nicknamed so: \"although it's always been used affectionately, and never pejoratively, we agreed it's time it changed.\" A \"News of the World\" report contained accusations of \"Uh Oh, Si Co!\" encouraging readers to mock children with anger issues or mental illness, which caused the strip to be cancelled.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4654", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4654", "title": "Bee", "text": "Clade of insects\nBees are winged insects that form a monophyletic clade Anthophila within the superfamily Apoidea of the order Hymenoptera, with over 20,000 known species in seven recognized families. Some species \u2013 including honey bees, bumblebees, and stingless bees \u2013 are social insects living in highly hierarchical colonies, while over 90% of bee species \u2013 including mason bees, carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, and sweat bees \u2013 are solitary. Members of the most well-known bee genus, \"Apis\" (i.e. honey bees), are known to construct hexagonally celled waxy nests called hives.\nUnlike the closely related wasps and ants, who are carnivorous/omnivorous, bees are herbivores that specifically feed on nectar (nectarivory) and pollen (palynivory), the former primarily as a carbohydrate source for metabolic energy, and the latter primarily for protein and other nutrients for their larvae. They are found on every continent except Antarctica, and in every habitat on the planet that contains insect-pollinated flowering plants. The most common bees in the Northern Hemisphere are the Halictidae, or sweat bees, but they are small and often mistaken for wasps or flies. Bees range in size from tiny stingless bee species, whose workers are less than long, to the leafcutter bee \"Megachile pluto\", the largest species of bee, whose females can attain a length of . Vertebrate predators of bees include primates and birds such as bee-eaters; insect predators include beewolves and dragonflies.\nBees are best known for their ecological roles as pollinators and, in the case of the best-known species, the western honey bee, for producing honey, a regurgitated and dehydrated viscous mixture of partially digested monosaccharides kept as food storage of the bee colony. Pollination management via bees is important both ecologically and agriculturally, and the decline in wild bee populations has increased the demand and value of domesticated pollination by commercially managed hives of honey bees. Human beekeeping or apiculture (meliponiculture for stingless bees) has been practiced as a discipline of animal husbandry for millennia, since at least the times of Ancient Egypt and Ancient Greece. Bees have appeared in mythology and folklore, through all phases of art and literature from ancient times to the present day, although primarily focused in the Northern Hemisphere where beekeeping is far more common. In Mesoamerica, the Maya have practiced large-scale intensive meliponiculture since pre-Columbian times.\nEvolution.\nThe immediate ancestors of bees were stinging wasps in the family Ammoplanidae, which were predators of other insects. The switch from insect prey to pollen may have resulted from the consumption of prey insects which were flower visitors and were partially covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae. This same evolutionary scenario may have occurred within the vespoid wasps, where the pollen wasps evolved from predatory ancestors.\nBased on phylogenetic analysis, bees are thought to have originated during the Early Cretaceous (about 124 million years ago) on the supercontinent of West Gondwana, just prior to its breakup into South America and Africa. The supercontinent is thought to have been a largely xeric environment at this time; modern bee diversity hotspots are also in xeric and seasonal temperate environments, suggesting strong niche conservatism among bees ever since their origins.\nGenomic analysis indicates that despite only appearing much later in the fossil record, all modern bee families had already diverged from one another by the end of the Cretaceous. The Melittidae, Apidae, and Megachilidae had already evolved on the supercontinent prior to its fragmentation. Further divergences were facilitated by West Gondwana's breakup around 100 million years ago, leading to a deep Africa-South America split within both the Apidae and Megachilidae, the isolation of the Melittidae in Africa, and the origins of the Colletidae, Andrenidae and Halictidae in South America. The rapid radiation of the South American bee families is thought to have followed the concurrent radiation of flowering plants within the same region. Later in the Cretaceous (80 million years ago), colletid bees colonized Australia from South America (with an offshoot lineage evolving into the Stenotritidae), and by the end of the Cretaceous, South American bees had also colonized North America. The North American fossil taxon \"Cretotrigona\" belongs to a group that is no longer found in North America, suggesting that many bee lineages went extinct during the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event (the \"K-Pg extinction\").\nFollowing the K-Pg extinction, surviving bee lineages continued to spread into the Northern Hemisphere, colonizing Europe from Africa by the Paleocene, and then spreading east to Asia. This was facilitated by the warming climate around the same time, allowing bees to move to higher latitudes following the spread of tropical and subtropical habitats. By the Eocene (~45 mya) there was already considerable diversity among eusocial bee lineages. A second extinction event among bees is thought to have occurred due to rapid climatic cooling around the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, leading to the extinction of some bee lineages such as the tribe Melikertini. During the Paleogene and Neogene periods, bee lineages expanded worldwide. This came about as continental drift and changing climates created new barriers and habitats, isolating populations and driving the evolution of many new tribes.\nFossils.\nThe oldest non-compression bee fossil is \"Cretotrigona prisca\", a corbiculate bee of Late Cretaceous age (~70 mya) found in New Jersey amber. A fossil from the early Cretaceous (~100 mya), \"Melittosphex burmensis\", was initially considered \"an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea sister to the modern bees\", but subsequent research has rejected the claim that \"Melittosphex\" is a bee, or even a member of the superfamily Apoidea to which bees belong, instead treating the lineage as \"incertae sedis\" within the Aculeata.\nThe Allodapini (within the Apidae) appeared around 53 Mya.\nThe Colletidae appear as fossils only from the late Oligocene (~25 Mya) to early Miocene.\nThe Melittidae are known from \"Palaeomacropis eocenicus\" in the Early Eocene.\nThe Megachilidae are known from trace fossils (characteristic leaf cuttings) from the Middle Eocene.\nThe Andrenidae are known from the Eocene-Oligocene boundary, around 34 Mya, of the Florissant shale.\nThe Halictidae first appear in the Early Eocene with species found in amber. The Stenotritidae are known from fossil brood cells of Pleistocene age.\nCoevolution.\nThe earliest animal-pollinated flowers were shallow, cup-shaped blooms pollinated by insects such as beetles, so the syndrome of insect pollination was well established before bees evolved. Bees represent a further step in this process, being specialized for pollination through behavioral and physical traits that specifically enhance the task and make them the most efficient pollinating insects. In a process of coevolution, flowers developed floral rewards such as nectar and longer tubes, and bees developed longer tongues to extract the nectar. Bees also developed structures known as scopal hairs and pollen baskets to collect and carry pollen. The location and type differ among and between groups of bees. Most species have scopal hairs on their hind legs or on the underside of their abdomens. Some species in the family Apidae have pollen baskets on their hind legs, while very few lack these and instead collect pollen in their crops. The appearance of these structures drove the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, bees themselves. Bees and certain mites have indeed coevolved, with some bee species evolving specialized structures called acarinaria that serve as lodgings for mites, demonstrating a mutualistic relationship. Mites residing in these acarinaria can benefit their bee hosts by eating fungi that attack pollen and brood, leading to reduced fungal contamination and improved bee survivorship.\nPhylogeny.\nExternal.\nMolecular phylogeny was used by Debevic \"et al\", 2012, to demonstrate that the bees (Anthophila) arose from deep within the Crabronidae \"sensu lato\", which was thus rendered paraphyletic. In their study, the placement of the monogeneric Heterogynaidae was uncertain. The small family Mellinidae was not included in this analysis.\nFurther studies by Sann \"et al.\", 2018, elevated the subfamilies (plus one tribe and one subtribe) of Crabronidae \"sensu lato\" to family status. They also recovered the placement of \"Heterogyna\" within Nyssonini and sunk Heterogynaidae. The newly erected family, Ammoplanidae, formerly a subtribe of Pemphredoninae, was recovered as the most sister family to bees.\nInternal.\nThis cladogram of the bee families is based on Hedtke et al., 2013, which places the former families Dasypodaidae and Meganomiidae as subfamilies inside the Melittidae. English names, where available, are given in parentheses.\nCharacteristics.\nBees differ from closely related groups such as wasps by having branched or plume-like setae (hairs), combs on the forelimbs for cleaning their antennae, small anatomical differences in limb structure, and the venation of the hind wings. In females, the seventh dorsal abdominal plate is also divided into two half-plates.\nBees have the following characteristics:\nThe largest species of bee is thought to be Wallace's giant bee \"Megachile pluto\", whose females can attain a length of . The smallest species may be dwarf stingless bees in the tribe Meliponini whose workers are less than in length.\nSociality.\nHaplodiploid breeding system.\nAccording to inclusive fitness theory, an organism can increase its evolutionary success not only by increasing its own offspring, but also by helping close relatives reproduce. In genetic terms, cooperation is favored when the cost to the helper is less than the product of relatedness and benefit. This condition is more easily met in haplodiploid species such as bees, where the genetic relationships create strong incentives for cooperative behavior.\nHaplodiploidy alone does not explain the evolution of eusociality. Some eusocial species such as termites are not haplodiploid. Conversely, many haplodiploid species, including most bees, are not eusocial, and even among eusocial bees, queens often mate with several males, producing half sisters that share only about a quarter of their genes. However, since single mating appears to be the ancestral condition in all eusocial lineages studied so far, haplodiploidy may still have played an important role in the early evolution of eusocial behaviour in bees.\nEusociality.\nBees may be solitary or may live in various types of community. Eusociality appears to have arisen independently at least three times in halictid bees. The most advanced of these form eusocial colonies; these are characterized by cooperative brood care and a division of labour into reproductive and non-reproductive adults, with overlapping generations. This division of labour creates specialized groups within eusocial societies, called castes. In some species, groups of cohabiting females are sisters. If these sisters share a division of labour, the group is described as semisocial. When the group instead includes a mother (the queen) and her daughters (the workers), it is considered eusocial. If the castes differ only in behavior and size, as in many paper wasps, the system is primitively eusocial. When the castes show clear morphological differences, the system is described as highly eusocial.\nTrue honey bees (genus \"Apis\", with eight species) are highly eusocial, and are among the best known insects. Their colonies are established by swarms, consisting of a queen and several thousand workers. There are 29 subspecies of one of these species, \"Apis mellifera\", native to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. Africanized bees are a hybrid strain of \"A. mellifera\" that escaped from experiments involving crossing European and African subspecies; they are extremely defensive.\nStingless bees are also highly eusocial. They practice mass provisioning, with complex nest architecture and perennial colonies also established via swarming.\nMany bumblebees are eusocial, similar to the eusocial Vespidae such as hornets in that the queen initiates a nest on her own rather than by swarming. Bumblebee colonies typically have from 50 to 200 bees at peak population, which occurs in mid to late summer. Nest architecture is simple, limited by the size of the pre-existing nest cavity, and colonies rarely last more than a year. In 2011, the International Union for Conservation of Nature set up the Bumblebee Specialist Group to review the threat status of all bumblebee species worldwide using the IUCN Red List criteria.\nThere are many more species of primitively eusocial than highly eusocial bees, but they have been studied less often. Most are in the family Halictidae, or \"sweat bees\". Colonies are typically small, with a dozen or fewer workers, on average. Queens and workers differ only in size, if at all. Most species have a single season colony cycle, even in the tropics, and only mated females hibernate. A few species have long active seasons and attain colony sizes in the hundreds, such as \"Halictus hesperus\". Some species are eusocial in parts of their range and solitary in others, or have a mix of eusocial and solitary nests in the same population. The orchid bees (Apidae) include some primitively eusocial species with similar biology. Some allodapine bees (Apidae) form primitively eusocial colonies, with progressive provisioning: a larva's food is supplied gradually as it develops, as is the case in honey bees and some bumblebees.\nSolitary and communal bees.\nMost other bees, including familiar insects such as carpenter bees, leafcutter bees and mason bees are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile, and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself. There is no division of labor, so these nests lack queens and \"worker\" bees. Solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax. Bees collect pollen to feed their young, and have the necessary adaptations to do this. However, certain wasp species such as pollen wasps have similar behaviours, and a few species of bee scavenge from carcasses to feed their offspring. Solitary bees are important pollinators; they gather pollen to provision their nests with food for their brood. Often it is mixed with nectar to form a paste-like consistency. Some solitary bees have advanced types of pollen-carrying structures on their bodies. Very few species of solitary bee are being cultured for commercial pollination. Most of these species belong to a distinct set of genera which are commonly known by their nesting behavior or preferences, namely the carpenter bees, sweat bees, mason bees, plasterer bees, squash bees, dwarf carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, alkali bees and digger bees.\nMost solitary bees are fossorial, digging nests in the ground in a variety of soil textures and conditions, while others create nests in hollow reeds or twigs, or holes in wood. The female typically creates a compartment (a \"cell\") with an egg and some provisions for the resulting larva, then seals it off. A nest may consist of numerous cells. When the nest is in wood, usually the last (those closer to the entrance) contain eggs that will become males. The adult does not provide care for the brood once the egg is laid, and usually dies after making one or more nests. The males typically emerge first and are ready for mating when the females emerge. Solitary bees are very unlikely to sting (only in self-defense, if ever), and some (esp. in the family Andrenidae) are stingless.\nWhile solitary, females each make individual nests. Some species, such as the European mason bee \"Hoplitis anthocopoides\", and the Dawson's Burrowing bee, \"Amegilla dawsoni,\" are gregarious, preferring to make nests near others of the same species, and giving the appearance of being social. Large groups of solitary bee nests are called \"aggregations\", to distinguish them from colonies. In some species, multiple females share a common nest, but each makes and provisions her own cells independently. This type of group is called \"communal\" and is not uncommon. The primary advantage appears to be that a nest entrance is easier to defend from predators and parasites when multiple females use that same entrance regularly.\nBiology.\nLife cycle.\nThe life cycle of both solitary and social bees involves the laying of an egg, the development through several moults of a legless larva, a pupa in which the insect undergoes complete metamorphosis, and the emergence of a winged adult. Most solitary bees and bumble bees in temperate climates overwinter as adults or pupae and emerge in spring when increasing numbers of flowering plants come into bloom. The males usually emerge first and search for females with which to mate. Like the other members of Hymenoptera, bees are haplodiploid; the sex of a bee is determined by whether or not the egg is fertilized. After mating, a female stores the sperm, and determines which sex is required at the time each individual egg is laid, fertilized eggs producing female offspring and unfertilized eggs, males. Tropical bees may have several generations in a year and no resting diapause stage\nThe egg is generally oblong, slightly curved and tapering at one end. Solitary bees, lay each egg in a separate cell with a supply of mixed pollen and nectar next to it. This may be rolled into a pellet or placed in a pile and is known as mass provisioning. Social bee species provision progressively, that is, they feed the larva regularly while it grows. The nest varies from a hole in the ground or in wood, in solitary bees, to a substantial structure with wax combs in bumblebees and honey bees.\nIn most species, bee larvae are whitish grubs, roughly oval and bluntly-pointed at both ends. They have 15 segments and spiracles in each segment for breathing. They have no legs but move within the cell, helped by tubercles on their sides. They have short horns on the head, jaws for chewing food and an appendage on either side of the mouth tipped with a bristle. There is a gland under the mouth that secretes a viscous liquid which solidifies into the silk they use to produce a cocoon. The cocoon is semi-transparent and the pupa can be seen through it. Over the course of a few days, the larva undergoes metamorphosis into a winged adult. When ready to emerge, the adult splits its skin dorsally and climbs out of the exuviae and breaks out of the cell.\nFlight.\nIn the 1930s, calculations based on the aerodynamics of fixed wings appeared to show that insect flight was impossible, with results taken from equations meant for aircraft to wings that beat rapidly through short arcs. The author of the study remarked that \"one should not be surprised that the results of the calculations do not square with reality,\" but this comment was later taken out of context and gave rise to the myth that \"the bumblebee should not be able to fly.\"\nIn fact, those early models were never suited to describe how insects fly. Studies later showed that bees and many other insects produce lift through swirling vortices that form along the leading edge of the wing. High-speed imaging and robotic wing experiments confirmed that lift in bees results from rapid wing reversals and high wing-beat frequency, which together sustain the airflow needed to stay in the air.\nNavigation, communication, and finding food.\nThe ethologist Karl von Frisch showed that honey bees communicate by the waggle dance, a pattern of movement that informs other workers about the direction and distance to food. He showed that honey bees use the sun as their main compass but can still locate its position on cloudy days by reading the polarization pattern of skylight. They use spatial memory with a \"rich, map-like organization\".\nDigestion.\nThe gut of bees is relatively simple, but multiple metabolic strategies exist in the gut microbiota. Pollinating bees consume nectar and pollen, which require different digestion strategies by somewhat specialized bacteria. While nectar is a liquid of mostly monosaccharide sugars and so easily absorbed, pollen contains complex polysaccharides: branching pectin and hemicellulose. Approximately five groups of bacteria are involved in digestion. Three groups specialize in simple sugars (\"Snodgrassella\" and two groups of \"Lactobacillus\"), and two other groups in complex sugars (\"Gilliamella\" and \"Bifidobacterium\"). Digestion of pectin and hemicellulose is dominated by bacterial clades \"Gilliamella\" and \"Bifidobacterium\" respectively. Bacteria that cannot digest polysaccharides obtain enzymes from their neighbors, and bacteria that lack certain amino acids do the same, creating multiple ecological niches.\nAlthough most bee species eat nectar and pollen, some do not. The vulture bees in the genus \"Trigona,\" consume carrion and the immature stages of wasps, turning meat into a honey-like substance. Bees drink guttation drops from leaves for energy and nutrients.\nEcology.\nFloral relationships.\nMost bees are generalists, collecting pollen from a range of flowering plants. Some are specialistss, gathering pollen only from one or a few species or genera of closely related plants. Some genera in Melittidae and Apidae are highly specialized for collecting plant oils as well as or instead of nectar; they mix the oils with pollen to feed their larvae. Male orchid bees in some species gather aromatic compounds from orchids, which is one of the few cases where male bees are effective pollinators. All bees are able to detect desirable flowers by recognizing ultraviolet patterning on flowers, and by floral odors. Bumblebees can in addition detect flowers' electromagnetic fields. Once landed, a bee uses nectar quality and pollen taste to determine whether to continue visiting similar flowers.\nIn rare cases, a plant species may only be effectively pollinated by a single bee species; some plants are endangered in part because their pollinator is threatened. Such specialist bees are however strongly associated with common, widespread plants visited by multiple pollinator species. For example, in the arid southwestern United States, the creosote bush (\"Larrea tridentata\") supports more than forty bee species that specialize in collecting its pollen.\nAs mimics and models.\nMany bees are aposematically colored, typically orange and black, warning of their ability to defend themselves with a powerful sting. As such they are models for Batesian mimicry by non-stinging insects such as bee-flies, robber flies and hoverflies, all of which gain a measure of protection by superficially looking and behaving like bees.\nBees are themselves M\u00fcllerian mimics of other aposematic insects with the same color scheme, including wasps, lycid and other beetles, and many butterflies and moths (Lepidoptera) which are themselves distasteful, often through acquiring bitter and poisonous chemicals from their plant food. All the M\u00fcllerian mimics, including bees, benefit from the reduced risk of predation that results from their easily recognized warning coloration.\nBees are mimicked by plants such as the bee orchid which imitates both the appearance and the scent of a female bee; male bees attempt to mate (pseudocopulation) with the furry lip of the flower, thus pollinating it.\nAs brood parasites.\nBrood parasites occur in several bee families including the apid subfamily Nomadinae. Females of these species lack pollen collecting structures (the scopa) and do not construct their own nests. They typically enter the nests of pollen collecting species, and lay their eggs in cells provisioned by the host bee. When the \"cuckoo\" bee larva hatches, it consumes the host larva's pollen ball, and often the host egg also. In particular, the Arctic species of Bumblebee, \"Bombus hyperboreus,\" is an aggressive brood parasite that invades and enslaves colonies of other bumblebees within the same subgenus, \"Alpinobombus\". Unlike most socially parasitic bumblebees, which have lost the ability to collect pollen, \"B. hyperboreus\" retains functional pollen baskets and has been observed gathering pollen and nectar in the field. This retention of foraging ability may be an adaptation to the severe Arctic climate, in which the short breeding season and limited availability of host colonies favor flexibility and a degree of metabolic self-reliance.\nIn Southern Africa, hives of African honeybees (\"A. mellifera scutellata\") are being destroyed by parasitic workers of the Cape honeybee, \"A. m. capensis\". These lay diploid eggs (\"thelytoky\"), escaping normal worker policing, leading to the colony's destruction; the parasites can then move to other hives.\nThe cuckoo bees in the \"Bombus\" subgenus \"Psithyrus\" are closely related to, and resemble, their hosts in looks and size. This common pattern gave rise to the ecological principle \"Emery's rule\". Others parasitize bees in different families, like \"Townsendiella\", a nomadine apid, two species of which are cleptoparasites of the dasypodaid genus \"Hesperapis\", while the other species in the same genus attacks halictid bees.\nNocturnal bees.\nFour bee families (Andrenidae, Colletidae, Halictidae, and Apidae) contain some species that are crepuscular. Most are tropical or subtropical, but some live in arid regions at higher latitudes. These bees have greatly enlarged ocelli, which are extremely sensitive to light and dark, though incapable of forming images. Some have refracting superposition compound eyes: these combine the output of many elements of their compound eyes to provide enough light for each retinal photoreceptor. Their ability to fly by night enables them to avoid many predators, and to exploit flowers that produce nectar only or also at night.\nPredators, parasites and pathogens.\nVertebrate predators of bees include bee-eaters, shrikes and flycatchers, which make short sallies to catch insects in flight. Swifts and swallows fly almost continually, catching insects as they go. The honey buzzard attacks bees' nests and eats the larvae. The greater honeyguide interacts with humans by guiding them to the nests of wild bees. The humans break open the nests and take the honey and the bird feeds on the larvae and the wax. Among mammals, predators such as the badger dig up bumblebee nests and eat both the larvae and any stored food.\nSpecialist ambush predators of visitors to flowers include crab spiders, which wait on flowering plants for pollinating insects; predatory bugs, and praying mantises, some of which (the flower mantises of the tropics) wait motionless, aggressive mimics camouflaged as flowers. Beewolves are large wasps that habitually attack bees; the ethologist Niko Tinbergen estimated that a single colony of the beewolf \"Philanthus triangulum\" might kill several thousand honeybees in a day: all the prey he observed were honeybees. Other predatory insects that sometimes catch bees include robber flies and dragonflies. Honey bees are affected by parasites including tracheal and \"Varroa\" mites. However, some bees are believed to have a mutualistic relationship with mites.\nSome mites of the genus \"Tarsonemus\" are associated with bees. They live in bee nests and ride on adult bees for dispersal. They are presumed to feed on fungi, nest materials or pollen. However, the impact they have on bees remains uncertain.\nExposure to chemical stressors.\nBees are exposed to a wide range of chemical stressors, both natural and synthetic, though their relative impacts differ sharply. Comparative toxicological studies indicate that synthetic insecticides, such as neonicotinoids, are 1,000 to 10,000 times more acutely toxic to honeybees than commonly encountered natural alkaloids such as nicotine and caffeine, which are among the most thoroughly studied plant secondary metabolites.\nInsecticides remain the most damaging chemical stressor for bees. Neonicotinoids such as Imidacloprid, Clothianidin, and Thiamethoxam interfere with navigation, thermoregulation, and immune responses even at sub-lethal concentrations. Long-term exposure reduces colony growth, foraging success, and queen survival in both laboratory and field conditions. Following EFSA's 2018 risk assessment, outdoor agricultural uses of these active ingredients were banned throughout the European Union. Other synthetic insecticides, including organophosphates and pyrethroids, as well as some fungicide mixtures, act synergistically with parasites and pathogens such as \"Varroa destructor\", a parasitic mite of honeybees, and \"Nosema ceranae\", compounding the physiological stress on colonies.\nIndustrial emissions and road traffic release traces of heavy metals such as cadmium, lead, and zinc, which can accumulate in hive products and bee tissues. These metals induce oxidative stress, developmental abnormalities and altered foraging behaviour. These substances are much less acutely toxic than insecticides, however their persistence and the fact that they are found everywhere results in chronic exposure that weakens immunity and increases disease susceptibility.\nA minority of flowering plants produce secondary metabolites that can become toxic to pollinators when concentrated. Alkaloids, saponins and glycosides in species such as \"Aesculus californica\" (California buckeye) and \"Rhododendron\" spp. (grayanotoxins) can deter feeding or cause mortality. However, because their occurrence is sporadic and seasonal, natural floral toxins rarely affect colonies at a population level.\nChemical stressors affecting pollinators are best characterized by their acute and sublethal toxicity as well as ecological impact. In this way, synthetic insecticides consistently present the greatest risk across meta-analyses, followed by fungicides and certain industrial pollutants. Natural floral toxins (plant secondary metabolites) are typically sublethal. As well, they rarely drive population declines and are minor in impact compared to anthropogenic chemicals.\nOverall, synthetic agrochemicals (particularly insecticides and some fungicides) and industrial pollutants remain the dominant chemical drivers of pollinator decline,whereas the majority of natural floral toxins have sublethal impacts that do not generally contribute to major population-level effects.\nRelationship with humans.\nIn mythology and folklore.\nHomer's \"Hymn to Hermes\" describes three bee-maidens with the power of divination and thus speaking truth, and identifies the food of the gods as honey. Sources associated the bee maidens with Apollo and, until the 1980s, scholars followed Gottfried Hermann (1806) in incorrectly identifying the bee-maidens with the Thriae. Honey, according to a Greek myth, was discovered by a nymph called Melissa (\"Bee\"); and honey was offered to the Greek gods from Mycenean times. Bees were also associated with the Delphic oracle and the prophetess was sometimes called a bee.\nThe image of a community of honey bees has been used from ancient to modern times, in Aristotle and Plato; in Virgil and Seneca; in Erasmus and Shakespeare; Tolstoy, and by political and social theorists such as Bernard Mandeville and Karl Marx as a model for human society. In English folklore, bees would be told of important events in the household, in a custom known as \"Telling the bees\". \nHoney bees, signifying immortality and resurrection, were royal heraldic emblems of the Merovingians, revived by Napoleon.\nIn art and literature.\nSome of the oldest examples of bees in art are rock paintings in Spain which have been dated to 15,000 BC.\nW. B. Yeats's poem \"The Lake Isle of Innisfree\" (1888) contains the couplet \"Nine bean rows will I have there, a hive for the honey bee, / And live alone in the bee loud glade.\" At the time he was living in Bedford Park in the West of London. Beatrix Potter's illustrated book \"The Tale of Mrs Tittlemouse\" (1910) features Babbity Bumble and her brood \"(pictured)\". Kit Williams' treasure hunt book \"The Bee on the Comb\" (1984) uses bees and beekeeping as part of its story and puzzle. Sue Monk Kidd's \"The Secret Life of Bees\" (2004), and the 2009 film starring Dakota Fanning, tells the story of a girl who escapes her abusive home and finds her way to live with a family of beekeepers, the Boatwrights.\nBees have appeared in films such as Jerry Seinfeld's animated \"Bee Movie\", or Eugene Schlusser's \"A Sting in the Tale\" (2014). The playwright Laline Paull's fantasy \"The Bees\" (2015) tells the tale of a hive bee named Flora 717 from hatching onwards.\nBeekeeping.\nHumans have kept honey bee colonies, commonly in hives, for millennia. Depictions of humans collecting honey from wild bees date to 15,000 years ago; efforts to domesticate them are shown in Egyptian art around 4,500 years ago. Simple hives and smoke were used.\nAmong Classical Era authors, beekeeping with the use of smoke is described in Aristotle's \"History of Animals\" Book 9. The account mentions that bees die after stinging; that workers remove corpses from the hive, and guard it; castes including workers and non-working drones, but \"kings\" rather than queens; predators including toads and bee-eaters; and the waggle dance, with the \"irresistible suggestion\" of (\", it waggles) and (\", they watch). Beekeeping is described in detail by Virgil in his \"Georgics\"; it is mentioned in his \"Aeneid\", and in Pliny's \"Natural History\".\nFrom the 18th century, European understanding of the colonies and biology of bees allowed the construction of the moveable comb hive so that honey could be harvested without destroying the colony.\nAs commercial pollinators.\nBees play an important role in pollinating flowering plants, and are the major type of pollinator in many ecosystems that contain flowering plants. It is estimated that one third of the human food supply depends on pollination by insects, birds and bats, most of which is accomplished by bees, whether wild or domesticated.\nSince the 1970s, there has been a general decline in the species richness of wild bees and other pollinators, probably attributable to stress from increased parasites and disease, the use of pesticides, and a decrease in the number of wild flowers. Climate change probably exacerbates the problem. This is a major cause of concern, as it can cause biodiversity loss and ecosystem degradation as well as increase climate change.\nContract pollination has overtaken the role of honey production for beekeepers in many countries. After the introduction of Varroa mites, feral honey bees declined dramatically in the US, though their numbers have since recovered. The number of colonies kept by beekeepers declined slightly, through urbanization, systematic pesticide use, tracheal and \"Varroa\" mites, and the closure of beekeeping businesses. In 2006 and 2007 the rate of attrition increased, and was described as colony collapse disorder. In 2010 invertebrate iridescent virus and the fungus \"Nosema ceranae\" were shown to be in every killed colony, and deadly in combination. Winter losses increased to about 1/3. \"Varroa\" mites were thought to be responsible for about half the losses.\nApart from colony collapse disorder, losses outside the US have been attributed to causes including pesticide seed dressings, using neonicotinoids such as clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. From 2013 the European Union restricted some pesticides to stop bee populations from declining further. In 2014 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report warned that bees faced increased risk of extinction because of global warming. In 2018 the European Union decided to ban field use of all three major neonicotinoids; they remain permitted in veterinary, greenhouse, and vehicle transport usage.\nFarmers have focused on alternative solutions to mitigate these problems. By raising native plants, they provide food for native bee pollinators like \"Lasioglossum vierecki\" and \"L. leucozonium\", leading to less reliance on honey bee populations.\nAs food producers.\nHoney is a natural product produced by bees and stored for their own use, but its sweetness has always appealed to humans. Before domestication of bees was even attempted, humans were raiding their nests for their honey. Smoke was often used to subdue the bees and such activities are depicted in rock paintings in Spain dated to 15,000 BC. \nHoney bees are used commercially to produce honey.\nAs food.\nBees are considered edible insects. People in some countries eat insects, including the larvae and pupae of bees, mostly stingless species. They also gather larvae, pupae and surrounding cells, known as bee brood, for consumption. In the Indonesian dish \"botok tawon\" from Central and East Java, bee larvae are eaten as a companion to rice, after being mixed with shredded coconut, wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed.\nBee brood (pupae and larvae) although low in calcium, has been found to be high in protein and carbohydrate, and a useful source of phosphorus, magnesium, potassium, and trace minerals iron, zinc, copper, and selenium. In addition, while bee brood was high in fat, it contained no fat soluble vitamins (such as A, D, and E) but it was a good source of most of the water-soluble B vitamins including choline as well as vitamin C. The fat was composed mostly of saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids with 2.0% being polyunsaturated fatty acids.\nAs alternative medicine.\nApitherapy is a branch of alternative medicine that uses honey bee products, including raw honey, royal jelly, pollen, propolis, beeswax and apitoxin (Bee venom). The claim that apitherapy treats cancer, which some proponents of apitherapy make, remains unsupported by evidence-based medicine.\nStings.\nThe painful stings of bees are mostly associated with the poison gland and the Dufour's gland which are abdominal exocrine glands containing various chemicals. In \"Lasioglossum leucozonium\", the Dufour's Gland mostly contains octadecanolide as well as some eicosanolide. There is also evidence of n-triscosane, n-heptacosane, and 22-docosanolide.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4655", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4655", "title": "Buendnis 90 - Die Gruenen", "text": ""}
{"id": "4656", "revid": "48014761", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4656", "title": "Shogunate", "text": ""}
{"id": "4657", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4657", "title": "Binding arbitration", "text": ""}
{"id": "4660", "revid": "50614249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4660", "title": "Basques", "text": "The Basques ( or ; ; ; ) are a Southwestern European ethnic group, characterised by the Basque language, a common culture, shared genetic ancestry to the ancient Vascones and Aquitanians, and are considered among the last remaining direct descendants of Neolithic Europeans populations in Europe. Basques are indigenous to, and primarily inhabit, an area traditionally known as the Basque Country ()\u2014a region that is located around the western end of the Pyrenees on the coast of the Bay of Biscay and straddles parts of north-central Spain and south-western France.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"Basque\" may be pronounced or and derives from the French \"Basque\" (), itself derived from Gascon \"Basco\" (pronounced ), cognate with Spanish \"Vasco \"(pronounced ). Those, in turn, come from Latin \"Vasc\u014d\" (pronounced ; plural \"Vasc\u014dn\u0113s\"\u2014see history section below). The Latin generally evolved into the bilabials and in Gascon and Spanish, probably under the influence of Basque and the related Aquitanian (the Latin /w/ instead evolved into in French, Italian and other Romance languages).\nSeveral coins from the 2nd and the 1st centuries BC found in the Basque Country bear the inscription \"barscunes\". The place in which they were minted is not certain but is thought to be somewhere near Pamplona, in the heartland of the area that historians believe was inhabited by the \"Vascones\". Some scholars have suggested a Celtic etymology based on \"bhar-s-\", meaning \"summit\", \"point\" or \"leaves\", according to which \"barscunes\" may have meant \"the mountain people\", \"the tall ones\" or \"the proud ones\", and others have posited a relationship to a Proto-Indo-European root \"*bar-\" meaning \"border\", \"frontier\", \"march\".\nIn Basque, people call themselves the \"euskaldunak\", singular \"euskaldun\", formed from \"euskal-\" (i.e. \"Basque (language)\") and \"-dun\" (i.e. \"one who has\"); \"euskaldun\" literally means a Basque-speaker. Not all Basques are Basque-speakers. Therefore, the neologism \"euskotar\", plural \"euskotarrak\", was coined in the 19th century to mean a Basque person, whether Basque-speaking or not. Alfonso Irigoyen posits that the word \"euskara\" is derived from an ancient Basque verb \"enautsi\" \"to say\" (compare modern Basque \"esan\") and the suffix \"-(k)ara\" (\"way (of doing something)\"). Thus, \"euskara\" would mean literally \"way of saying\" or \"way of speaking\". One item of evidence in favour of that hypothesis is found in the Spanish book \"Compendio Historial\", written in 1571 by the Basque writer Esteban de Garibay. He records the name of the Basque language as \"enusquera\". That may, however, be a writing mistake.\nIn the 19th century, the Basque nationalist activist Sabino Arana posited an original root \"euzko\", which he thought came from \"eguzkiko\" (\"of the sun\", related to the assumption of an original solar religion). On the basis of that putative root, Arana proposed the name Euzkadi for an independent Basque nation, composed of seven Basque historical territories. Arana's neologism \"Euzkadi\" (in the regularized spelling \"Euskadi\") is still widely used in both Basque and Spanish since it is now the official name of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country.\nGenetic origins.\nThe distinctiveness noted by studies of classical genetic markers (such as blood groups) and the pre-Indo-European of the Basque language has resulted in a popular and long-held view that Basques are \"living fossils\" of the earliest modern humans who colonised Europe. Partly for these reasons, anthropological and genetic studies from the beginning and the end of the 20th century theorized that the Basques are the descendants of the original Cro-Magnons. \nBut although they are genetically distinctive in some ways due to isolation, the Basques are still very typically European in their Y-DNA and mtDNA sequences, and in some other genetic loci. These same sequences are widespread throughout the Western half of Europe, especially along the Western fringe of the continent.\nHistory.\nBasque tribes were mentioned in Roman times by Strabo and Pliny, including the Vascones, Aquitani, and others. There is enough evidence to support the hypothesis that at that time and later they spoke old varieties of the Basque language (see: Aquitanian language).\nIn the Early Middle Ages, the territory between the Ebro and Garonne rivers was known as Vasconia, a vaguely defined ethnic area and political entity struggling to fend off pressure from the Iberian Visigothic kingdom and Arab rule to the south, as well as the Frankish push from the north. By the turn of the first millennium, the territory of Vasconia had fragmented into different feudal regions, such as Soule and Labourd, while south of the Pyrenees the Castile, Pamplona and the Pyrenean counties of Aragon, Sobrarbe, Ribagor\u00e7a (later Kingdom of Aragon), and Pallars emerged as the main regional entities with Basque population in the 9th and 10th centuries.\nThe Kingdom of Pamplona, a central Basque realm, later known as Navarre, underwent a process of feudalization and was subject to the influence of its much larger Aragonese, Castilian and French neighbours. Castile deprived Navarre of its coastline by conquering key western territories (1199\u20131201), leaving the kingdom landlocked. The Basques were ravaged by the War of the Bands, bitter partisan wars between local ruling families. Weakened by the Navarrese civil war, the bulk of the realm eventually fell before the onslaught of the Spanish armies (1512\u20131524). However, the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees remained beyond the reach of an increasingly powerful Spain. Lower Navarre became a province of France in 1620.\nNevertheless, the Basques enjoyed a great deal of self-government until the French Revolution (1790) and the Carlist Wars (1839, 1876), when the Basques supported heir apparent Carlos V and his descendants. On either side of the Pyrenees, the Basques lost their native institutions and laws held during the \"Ancien r\u00e9gime\". Since then, despite the current limited self-governing status of the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre as settled by the Spanish Constitution, many Basques have attempted higher degrees of self-empowerment (see Basque nationalism), sometimes by acts of violence. Labourd, Lower Navarre, and Soule were integrated into the French department system (starting 1790), with Basque efforts to establish a region-specific political-administrative entity failing to take off to date. However, in January 2017, a single agglomeration community was established for the Basque Country in France.\nGeography.\nPolitical and administrative divisions.\nThe Basque region is divided into at least three administrative units, namely the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre in Spain, and the arrondissement of Bayonne and the cantons of Maul\u00e9on-Licharre and Tardets-Sorholus in the \"d\u00e9partement\" of Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es Atlantiques, France.\nThe autonomous community (a concept established in the Spanish Constitution of 1978) known as \"Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa\" or EAE in Basque and as \"Comunidad Aut\u00f3noma Vasca\" or CAV in Spanish (in English: \"Basque Autonomous Community\" or BAC), is made up of the three Spanish provinces of \u00c1lava, Biscay and Gipuzkoa. The corresponding Basque names of these territories are \"Araba\", \"Bizkaia\" and \"Gipuzkoa\", and their Spanish names are \"\u00c1lava\", \"Vizcaya\" and \"Guip\u00fazcoa\".\nThe BAC only includes three of the seven provinces of the currently called historical territories. It is sometimes referred to simply as \"the Basque Country\" (or \"Euskadi\") by writers and public agencies only considering those three western provinces, but also on occasions merely as a convenient abbreviation when this does not lead to confusion in the context. Others reject this usage as inaccurate and are careful to specify the BAC (or an equivalent expression such as \"the three provinces\", up to 1978 referred to as \"Provincias Vascongadas\" in Spanish) when referring to this entity or region. Likewise, terms such as \"the Basque Government\" for \"the government of the BAC\" are commonly though not universally employed. In particular in common usage the French term \"Pays Basque\" (\"Basque Country\"), in the absence of further qualification, refers either to the whole Basque Country (\"Euskal Herria\" in Basque), or not infrequently to the northern (or \"French\") Basque Country specifically.\nUnder Spain's present constitution, Navarre (\"Nafarroa\" in present-day Basque, \"Navarra\" historically in Spanish) constitutes a separate entity, called in present-day Basque \"Nafarroako Foru Erkidegoa\", in Spanish \"Comunidad Foral de Navarra\" (the autonomous community of Navarre). The government of this autonomous community is the Government of Navarre. In historical contexts Navarre may refer to a wider area, and that the present-day northern Basque province of Lower Navarre may also be referred to as (part of) \"Nafarroa\", while the term \"High Navarre\" (\"Nafarroa Garaia\" in Basque, \"Alta Navarra\" in Spanish) is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community.\nThere are three other historic provinces parts of the Basque Country: Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule (\"Lapurdi, Nafarroa Beherea\" and \"Zuberoa\" in Basque; \"Labourd, Basse-Navarre\" and \"Soule\" in French), devoid of official status within France's present-day political and administrative territorial organization, and only minor political support to the Basque nationalists. A large number of regional and local nationalist and non-nationalist representatives have waged a campaign for years advocating for the creation of a separate Basque d\u00e9partement, while these demands have gone unheard by the French administration.\nPopulation, main cities, and languages.\nThere are 2,123,000 people living in the Basque Autonomous Community (279,000 in Alava, 1,160,000 in Biscay and 684,000 in Gipuzkoa). The most important cities in this region, which serve as the provinces' administrative centers, are Bilbao (in Biscay), San Sebasti\u00e1n (in Gipuzkoa), and Vitoria-Gasteiz (in \u00c1lava). The official languages are Basque and Spanish. Knowledge of Spanish is compulsory under the Spanish constitution (article no. 3), and knowledge and usage of Basque is a right under the Statute of Autonomy (article no. 6), so only knowledge of Spanish is virtually universal. Knowledge of Basque, after declining for many years during Franco's dictatorship owing to official persecution, is again on the rise due to favorable official language policies and popular support. Currently about 33 percent of the population in the Basque Autonomous Community speaks Basque.\nNavarre has a population of 601,000; its administrative capital and main city, also regarded by many nationalist Basques as the Basques' historical capital, is Pamplona (\"Iru\u00f1ea\" in modern Basque). Only Spanish is an official language of Navarre, and the Basque language is only co-official in the province's northern region, where most Basque-speaking Navarrese are concentrated.\nAbout a quarter of a million people live in the French Basque Country. Nowadays Basque-speakers refer to this region as \"Iparralde\" (Basque for North), and to the Spanish provinces as \"Hegoalde\" (South). Much of this population lives in or near the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) urban belt on the coast (in Basque these are \"Baiona\", \"Angelu\" and \"Miarritze\"). The Basque language, which was traditionally spoken by most of the region's population outside the BAB urban zone, is today rapidly losing ground to French. The French Basque Country's lack of self-government within the French state is coupled with the absence of official status for the Basque language in the region. Attempts to introduce bilingualism in local administration have so far met direct refusal from French officials.\nBasque diaspora.\nLarge numbers of Basques have left the Basque Country to settle in the rest of Spain, France or other parts of the world in different historical periods, often for economic or political reasons. Historically the Basques abroad were often employed in shepherding and ranching and by maritime fisheries and merchants. Millions of Basque descendants (see Basque American and Basque Canadian) live in North America (the United States; Canada, mainly in the provinces of Newfoundland and Quebec), all over Latin America, South Africa, and Australia.\nLatin America.\nSpanish author Miguel de Unamuno said: \"There are at least two things that clearly can be attributed to Basques: the Society of Jesus and the Republic of Chile.\" Chilean historian Luis Thayer Ojeda estimated that 48 percent of immigrants to Chile in the 17th and 18th centuries were Basque. Estimates for the number of Basque descendants living in Chile range between 2.5 and 5\u00a0million; the Basque have been a major, if not the strongest, influence in the country's cultural and economic development.\nIn Bolivia, the War of the Vicu\u00f1as and Basques (Spanish: Guerra de Vicu\u00f1as y Vascongados), was an armed conflict in Charcas Province that lasted between June 1622 and March 1625, fought between Basques and \"Vicu\u00f1as\" (an informal term for non-Basque Spaniards in Upper Peru, a name obtained through the habit of wearing hats made of vicu\u00f1a skins). Competition over the control of the silver mines in Potos\u00ed, L\u00edpez and Chichas surged in the early 17th century, pitting Basques and Vicu\u00f1as against each other.The Vicu\u00f1as had initially employed legal and political measures attempting to block the Basque attempts to monopolize control over the cabildo (municipal government) of Potos\u00ed and the silver mining sector. The war pitted different sectors of the viceregal administration against each other, as some supported the Basque claims for hegemony whilst others had a conciliatory approach to the Vicu\u00f1a rebels. Personalities involved in the conflict included the president and oidores of the Royal Audiencia of Charcas, treasury officials and the corregidor of Potos\u00ed and the visitador (sent to the area in order to audit fiscal accounts).\nBasque place names are to be found in the Americas, such as Nueva Vizcaya (now Chihuahua and Durango, Mexico), New Navarre (now Sonora and Sinaloa, Mexico), Biscayne Bay (United States), and Aguereberry Point (United States). Nueva Vizcaya was the first province in the north of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico) to be explored and settled by the Spanish. It consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of Chihuahua and Durango (the original Durango is a known city in Biscay).\nIn Mexico most descendants of Basque \u00e9migr\u00e9s are concentrated in the cities of Monterrey, Saltillo, Reynosa, Camargo, and the states of Jalisco, Durango, Nuevo Le\u00f3n, Tamaulipas, Coahuila, and Sonora. The Basques were important in the mining industry; many were ranchers and vaqueros (cowboys), and the rest opened small shops in major cities such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Puebla. In Guatemala, most Basques have been concentrated in Sacatepequez Department, Antigua Guatemala, Jalapa for six generations now, while some have migrated to Guatemala City.\nIn Colombia, a large number of Basques settled mainly in Antioquia and the Coffee Axis. In 1955, Joaqu\u00edn Ospina said: \"Is there something more similar to the Basque people than the \"\"antioque\u00f1os\". Also, writer Arturo Escobar Uribe said in his book \"Mitos de Antioquia\"\" (Myths of Antioquia) (1950): \"Antioquia, which in its clean ascendance predominates the peninsular farmer of the Basque provinces, inherited the virtues of its ancestors. ... Despite the predominance of the white race, its extension in the mountains ... has projected over Colombia's map the prototype of its race; in Medell\u00edn with the industrial paisa, entrepreneur, strong and steady ... in its towns, the adventurer, arrogant, world-explorer. ... Its myths, which are an evidence of their deep credulity and an indubitable proof of their Iberian ancestor, are the sequel of the conqueror's blood which runs through their veins\". Bambuco, a Colombian folk music, has Basque roots.\nUnited States.\nThe largest of several important Basque communities in the United States is in the area around Boise, Idaho, home to the Basque Museum and Cultural Center, host to an annual Basque festival, as well as a festival for the Basque diaspora every five years. Reno, Nevada, where the Center for Basque Studies and the Basque Studies Library are located at the University of Nevada, is another significant nucleus of Basque population. Elko, Nevada, sponsors an annual Basque festival that celebrates the dance, cuisine and cultures of the Basque peoples of Spanish, French and Mexican nationalities who have arrived in Nevada since the late 19th century.\nTexas has a large percentage of Hispanics descended from Basques who participated in the conquest of New Spain. Many of the original Tejanos had Basque blood, including those who fought in the Battle of the Alamo alongside many of the other Texans. Along the Mexican/Texan border, many Basque surnames can be found. The largest concentration of Basques who settled on Mexico's north-eastern \"frontera\", including the states of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo Le\u00f3n, and Tamaulipas, also settled along Texas' Rio Grande from South Texas to West Texas. Many of the historic \"hidalgos\", or noble families from this area, had gained their titles and land grants from Spain and Mexico; they still value their land. Some of North America's largest ranches, which were founded under these colonial land grants, can be found in this region.\nCalifornia has a major concentration of Basques, most notably in the San Joaquin Valley between Stockton, Fresno and Bakersfield. The city of Bakersfield has a large Basque community and the city has several Basque restaurants, including Noriega's which won the 2011 James Beard Foundation America's Classic Award. There is a history of Basque culture in Chino, California. In Chino, two annual Basque festivals celebrate the dance, cuisine, and culture of the peoples. The surrounding area of San Bernardino County has many Basque descendants as residents. They are mostly descendants of settlers from Spain and Mexico. These Basques in California are grouped in the group known as \"Californios\".\nBasques of European Spanish-French and Latin American nationalities also settled throughout the western U.S. in states like Louisiana, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Washington.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nThe identifying language of the Basques is called Basque or \"Euskara\", spoken today by 25%-30% of the region's population. An idea of the central place the language has in cultural terms is given by the fact that Basques identify themselves by the term \"euskaldun\" and their country as \"Euskal Herria\", literally \"Basque speaker\" and \"Country of the Basque Language\" respectively. The language has been made a political issue by official Spanish and French policies restricting its use either historically or currently; however, this has not stopped the teaching, speaking, writing, and cultivating of this increasingly vibrant minority language. This sense of Basque identity tied to the local language does not only exist in isolation. For many Basques, it is juxtaposed with a sense of either Spanish or French identity tied with the use of the Spanish and French languages among other Basques, especially in the French Basque Country. Regarding the Spanish Basque Country, Basques that don't have a sense of Spanish identity make up an important part of the population. As with many European states, a regional identity, be it linguistically derived or otherwise, is not mutually exclusive with the broader national one. For example, Basque rugby union player for France, Imanol Harinordoquy, has said about his national identity:\"I am French and Basque. There is no conflict, I am proud of both. ... I have friends who are involved in the political side of things but that is not for me. My only interest is the culture, the Euskera language, the people, our history and ways.\"\nAs a result of state language promotion, school policies, the effects of mass media and migration, today virtually all Basques (except for some children below school age) speak the official language of their state (Spanish or French). There are extremely few Basque monolingual speakers: essentially all Basque speakers are bilingual on both sides of the border. Spanish or French is typically the first language of citizens from other regions (who often feel no need to learn Basque), and Spanish or French is also the first language of many Basques, all of which maintains the dominance of the state tongues of both France and Spain. Recent Basque Government policies aim to change this pattern, as they are viewed as potential threats against mainstream usage of the minority tongue.\nThe Basque language is thought to be a genetic language isolate in contrast with other European languages, vast majority of which belong to the broad Indo-European language family. Another peculiarity of Basque is that it has probably been spoken continuously \"in situ\", in and around its present territorial location, for longer than most other modern European languages, which are typically thought to have been introduced in historic or prehistoric times through population migrations or other processes of cultural transmission.\nHowever, popular stereotypes characterizing Basque as \"the oldest language in Europe\" and \"unique among the world's languages\" may be misunderstood and lead to erroneous assumptions. Over the centuries, Basque has remained in continuous contact with neighboring western European languages with which it has come to share numerous lexical properties and typological features; it is therefore misleading to exaggerate the \"outlandish\" character of Basque. Basque is also a modern language, and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication, as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts, styles, and registers.\nLand and inheritance.\nBasques have a close attachment to their home (\"etxe(a)\" 'house, home'), especially when this consists of the traditional self-sufficient, family-run farm or \"baserri(a)\". Home in this context is synonymous with family roots. Some Basque surnames were adapted from old \"baserri\" or habitation names. They typically related to a geographical orientation or other locally meaningful identifying features. Such surnames provide even those Basques whose families may have left the land generations ago with an important link to their rural family origins: \"Bengoetxea\" \"the house of further down\", \"Goikoetxea\" \"the house above\", \"Landaburu\" \"top of the field\", \"Errekondo\" \"next to the stream\", \"Elizalde\" \"by the church\", \"Mendizabal\" \"wide hill\", \"Usetxe\" \"house of birds\" \"Ibarretxe\" \"house in the valley\", \"Etxeberria\" \"the new house\", and so on.\nIn contrast to surrounding regions, ancient Basque inheritance patterns, recognised in the \"fueros,\" favoured survival of the unity of inherited land holdings. In a kind of primogeniture, these usually were inherited by the eldest male or female child. As in other cultures, the fate of other family members depended on the assets of a family: wealthy Basque families tended to provide for all children in some way, while less-affluent families may have had only one asset to provide to one child. However, this heir often provided for the rest of the family (unlike in England, with strict primogeniture, where the eldest son inherited everything and often did not provide for others). Even though they were provided for in some way, younger siblings had to make much of their living by other means. Mostly after the advent of industrialisation, this system resulted in the emigration of many rural Basques to Spain, France or the Americas. Harsh by modern standards, this custom resulted in a great many enterprising figures of Basque origin who went into the world to earn their way, from Spanish conquistadors such as Lope de Aguirre and Francisco V\u00e1squez de Coronado, to explorers, missionaries and saints of the Catholic Church, such as Francis Xavier.\nA widespread belief that Basque society was originally matriarchal is at odds with the current, clearly patrilineal kinship system and inheritance structures. Some scholars and commentators have attempted to reconcile these points by assuming that patrilineal kinship represents an innovation. In any case, the social position of women in both traditional and modern Basque society is somewhat better than in neighbouring cultures, and women have a substantial influence in decisions about the domestic economy. In the past, some women participated in collective magical ceremonies. They were key participants in a rich folklore, today largely forgotten.\nCuisine.\nBasque cuisine is at the heart of Basque culture, influenced by the neighboring communities and produce from the sea and the land. A 20th-century feature of Basque culture is the phenomenon of gastronomical societies (called \"txoko\" in Basque), food clubs where men gather to cook and enjoy their own food. Until recently, women were allowed entry only one day in the year. Cider houses (Sagardotegiak) are popular restaurants in Gipuzkoa open for a few months while the cider is in season.\nCultural production.\nAt the end of the 20th century, despite ETA violence (ended in 2010) and the crisis of heavy industries, the Basque economic condition recovered remarkably. They emerged from the Franco regime with a revitalized language and culture. The Basque language expanded geographically led by large increases in the major urban centers of Pamplona, Bilbao, and Bayonne, where only a few decades ago the Basque language had all but disappeared. Nowadays, the number of Basque speakers is maintaining its level or increasing slightly.\nReligion.\nTraditionally Basques have been mostly Catholics. In the 19th century and well into the 20th, Basques as a group remained notably devout and churchgoing. In recent years church attendance has fallen off, as in most of Western Europe. The region has been a source of missionaries like Francis Xavier and Michel Garico\u00efts. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, was a Basque. California Franciscan Ferm\u00edn Lasu\u00e9n was born in Vitoria. Lasu\u00e9n was the successor to Franciscan Padre Jun\u00edpero Serra and founded 9 of the 21 extant California Missions along the coast.\nA sprout of Protestantism in the continental Basque Country produced the first translation of the new Testament into Basque by Joanes Leizarraga. Queen Jeanne III of Navarre, a devout Huguenot, commissioned the translation of the New Testament into Basque and B\u00e9arnese for the benefit of her subjects. By the time Henry III of Navarre converted to Catholicism in order to become king of France, Protestantism virtually disappeared from the Basque community.\nBayonne held a Jewish community composed mainly of Sephardi Jews fleeing from the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions. There were also important Jewish and Muslim communities in Navarre before the Castilian invasion of 1512\u201321.\nNowadays, according to one single opinion poll, only slightly more than 50% of Basques profess some kind of belief in God, while the rest are either agnostic or atheist. The number of religious skeptics increases noticeably for the younger generations, while the older ones are more religious. Catholicism is, by far, the largest religion in the Basque Country. In 2019, the proportion of Basques that identify themselves as Roman Catholic was 60%, while it is one of the most secularized communities of Spain: 24.6% were non-religious and 12.3% of Basques were atheist.\nPre-Christian religion and mythology.\nThe Christianisation of the Basque Country has been the topic of some discussion. There are, broadly speaking, two views. According to one, Christianity arrived in the Basque Country during the 4th and 5th centuries but according to the other, it did not take place until the 12th and 13th centuries. The \"Encyclopaedia Britannica\" says that the Basques were not Christianized until the tenth century, however, and that their earlier animism survives in their folklore. The main issue lies in the different interpretations of what is considered Christianisation. Early traces of Christianity can be found in the major urban areas from the 4th century onwards, a bishopric from 589 in Pamplona and three hermit cave concentrations (two in \u00c1lava, one in Navarre) that were in use from the 6th century onwards. In this sense, Christianity arrived \"early\".\nPre-Christian belief seems to have focused on a goddess called Mari. A number of place-names contain her name, which would suggest these places were related to worship of her such as \"Anbotoko Mari\" who appears to have been related to the weather. According to one tradition, she travelled every seven years between a cave on Mount Anboto and one on another mountain (the stories vary); the weather would be wet when she was in Anboto, dry when she was in Alo\u00f1a, or Supelegor, or Gorbea. One of her names, \"Mari Urraca\" possibly ties her to an historical Navarrese princess of the 11th and 12th century, with other legends giving her a brother or cousin who was a Roman Catholic priest. So far the discussions about whether the name Mari is original and just happened to coincide closely with the Christian name Mar\u00eda or if Mari is an early Basque attempt to give a Christian veneer to pagan worship have remained speculative. At any rate, Mari (Andramari) is one of the oldest worshipped Christian icons in Basque territories.\nMari's consort is Sugaar. This chthonic couple seems to bear the superior ethical power and the power of creation and destruction. It's said that when they gathered in the high caves of the sacred peaks, they engendered the storms. These meetings typically happened on Friday nights, the day of historical akelarre or coven. Mari was said to reside in Mount Anboto; periodically she crossed the skies as a bright light to reach her other home at Mount Txindoki.\nLegends also speak of many and abundant genies, like \"jentilak\" (equivalent to giants), \"lamiak\" (equivalent to nymphs), \"mairuak\" (builders of the cromlechs or stone circles, literally Moors), \"iratxoak\" (imps), \"sorginak\" (witches, priestess of Mari), and so on. Basajaun is a Basque version of the Woodwose. There is a trickster named \"San Martin Txiki\" (\"St Martin the Lesser\").\nIt is unclear whether Neolithic stone structures called dolmens have a religious significance or were built to house animals or resting shepherds. Some of the dolmens and cromlechs are burial sites serving also as border markers.\n The \"jentilak\" ('Giants'), on the other hand, are a legendary people which explains the disappearance of a people of Stone Age culture that used to live in the high lands and with no knowledge of iron. Many legends about them tell that they were bigger and taller, with a great force, but were displaced by the \"ferrons\", or workers of ironworks foundries, until their total fade-out. They were pagans, but one of them, Olentzero, accepted Christianity and became a sort of Basque Santa Claus. They gave name to several toponyms, as \"Jentilbaratza\".\nSociety.\nHistorically, Basque society can be described as being somewhat at odds with Roman and later European societal norms. Strabo's account of the north of Spain in his \"Geographica\" (written between approximately 20 BC and 20 AD) makes a mention of \"a sort of woman-rule\u2014not at all a mark of civilization\" (Hadington 1992), a first mention of the\u2014for the period\u2014unusual position of women: \"Women could inherit and control property as well as officiate in churches.\" The evidence for this assertion is rather sparse however.\nThis preference for female dominance existed well into the 20th century:\n... matrilineal inheritance laws, and agricultural work performed by women continued in Basque country until the early twentieth century. For more than a century, scholars have widely discussed the high status of Basque women in law codes, as well as their positions as judges, inheritors, and arbitrators through ante-Roman, medieval, and modern times. The system of laws governing succession in the French Basque region reflected total equality between the sexes. Up until the eve of the French Revolution, the Basque woman was truly 'the mistress of the house', hereditary guardian, and head of the lineage.\nWhile women continued to have a higher position in Basque than other western European societies, it is highly unlikely that any point the society was 'matriarchal', as is often falsely claimed about pre-Indo-European peoples in general. The 'Basque matriarchy' argument is typically tied to 20th century nationalism and is at odds with earlier accounts of the society.\nAlthough the Kingdom of Navarre did adopt feudalism, most Basques also possessed unusual social institutions different from those of the rest of feudal Europe. Some aspects of this include the elizate tradition where local house-owners met in front of the church to elect a representative to send to the \"juntas\" and \"Juntas Generales\" (such as the \"Juntas Generales de Vizcaya\" or \"Guip\u00fazcoa\") which administered much larger areas. Another example was that in the medieval period most land was owned by the farmers, not the Church or a king.\nSports in the Basque Country.\nPelota.\nThe great family of ball games has its unique offspring among Basque ball games, known generically as pilota (Spanish: \"pelota\"). Some variants have been exported to the United States and Macau under the name of Jai Alai.\nRural sports.\nThere are several sports derived by Basques from everyday chores. Heavy workers were challenged and bets placed upon them. Examples are:\nBull runs and bullock games.\nThe encierro (bull run) in Pamplona's fiestas \"Sanfermines\" started as a transport of bulls to the ring. These encierros, as well as other bull and bullock related activities are not exclusive to Pamplona but are traditional in many towns and villages of the Basque country.\nFootball.\nThere are several clubs within the Basque Country, such as Athletic Bilbao, Real Sociedad, Deportivo Alav\u00e9s, SD Eibar and, as Navarre club, the CA Osasuna (the only club in La Liga that has a Basque name\u2014\"osasuna\" means \"health\"). In the 2016\u201317 season these five clubs played together in La Liga, the first instance where five Basque clubs have reached that level at the same time. Athletic's recruitment policy has meant the club refuses to sign any non-Basque players, with \"Basque\" currently defined to include either ethnic Basques or players of any ethnicity trained by a Basque club. Real Sociedad also previously employed such a policy.\nBasketball.\nThe Basque Country also features several professional basketball teams, the most notable of which is Saski Baskonia from Vitoria-Gasteiz, one of the 11 clubs that own stakes in Euroleague Basketball, the company that operates the continent-wide EuroLeague and EuroCup. They are currently joined in the Spanish top flight, Liga ACB, by Bilbao Basket, with the two clubs involved in a longstanding rivalry. Another club from the Basque Country, Gipuzkoa Basket from Donostia, currently plays in the second-level LEB Oro.\nRugby union.\nRugby union is a popular sport among French Basques, with major clubs Biarritz Olympique and Aviron Bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of French Rugby (the Top 14). Biarritz regularly play Champions Cup matches, especially knockout matches, at Estadio Anoeta in San Sebastian. Games between the Basque clubs and Catalan club USA Perpignan are always hard fought.\nProfessional cycling.\nCycling is popular and the Euskaltel\u2013Euskadi professional cycling team, partly sponsored by the Basque Government participated in the UCI World Tour division until 2014. Known for their orange tops and hill-climbing ability, their fans were famous for lining the famous Pyrenean climbs in the Tour de France, in support of their compatriots.\nEach April the week-long Tour of the Basque Country showcases the beautiful rolling Basque countryside. Miguel Indurain, born in Villava is one of the most celebrated cyclists in the world having won 5 consecutive Tours de France.\nPolitics.\nWhile there is no independent Basque state, Spain's autonomous community of the Basque Country, made up of the provinces of \u00c1lava (Araba), Biscay (Bizkaia) and Gipuzkoa, is primarily a historical consequence and an answer to the wide autonomy claim of its population.\nNavarre has a separate statute of autonomy, a contentious arrangement designed during Spanish transition to democracy (the \"Amejoramiento\", an 'upgrade' of its previous status during dictatorship). It refers back to the kingdom status of Navarre (up to 1841) and their traditional institutional and legal framework (charters). Basque, the original and main language of Navarre up to the late 18th century, has kept family transmission especially in the northern part of Navarre and central areas to a lesser extent, designated as Basque speaking or mixed area in Navarrese law. Questions of political, linguistic and cultural allegiance and identity are highly complex in Navarre. Politically some Basque nationalists would like to integrate with the Basque Autonomous Community.\nThe French Basque Country today does not exist as a formal political entity and is officially simply part of the French department of Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es Atlantiques, centered in B\u00e9arn. In recent years the number of mayors of the region supporting the creation of a separate Basque department has grown to 63.87%. So far, their attempts have been unsuccessful.\nPolitical conflicts.\nLanguage.\nBoth the Spanish and French governments have, at times, suppressed Basque linguistic and cultural identity. The French Republics, the epitome of the nation-state, have a long history of attempting the complete cultural absorption of cultural minority groups. Spain has, at most points in its history, granted some degree of linguistic, cultural, and even political autonomy to its Basques, but under the regime of Francisco Franco, the Spanish government reversed the advances of Basque nationalism, as it had fought in the opposite side of the Spanish Civil War: cultural activity in Basque was limited to folkloric issues and the Catholic Church.\nToday, the Southern Basque Country within Spain enjoys an extensive cultural and political autonomy. The majority of schools under the jurisdiction of the Basque education system use Basque as the primary medium of teaching. However, the situation is more delicate in the Northern Basque Country within France, where Basque is not officially recognized, and where lack of autonomy and monolingual public schooling in French exert great pressure on the Basque language.\nIn Navarre, Basque was declared an endangered language, since the conservative government of the Navarrese People's Union restricted its use.\nBasque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of Spain and France, in Australia, in many parts of Latin America, and in the United States, especially in Nevada, Idaho, and California.\nPolitical status and violence.\nSince its articulation by Sabino Arana in the late 19th century, the more radical currents of Basque nationalism have demanded the right of self-determination and even independence. Within the Basque country, this element of Basque politics is often in balance with the conception of the Basque Country as just another part of the Spanish state, a view more commonly espoused on the right of the political spectrum. In contrast, the desire for greater autonomy or independence is particularly common among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 2002 and 2006. Since self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, a wide majority of Basques abstained (55%) and some even voted against it (23.5%) in the ratification referendum of 6 December that year. However, it was approved by clear majority overall in Spain (87%). The autonomous regime for the Basque Country was approved in a 1979 referendum but the autonomy of Navarre (\"Amejoramiento del Fuero\": \"improvement of the charter\") was never subject to a referendum but only approved by the Navarrese Cortes (parliament).\nClassification.\nAs with their language, the Basques are clearly a distinct cultural group in their region. They regard themselves as culturally and especially linguistically distinct from their surrounding neighbours. Some Basques identify themselves as Basques only whereas others identify themselves both as Basque and Spanish. Many Basques regard the designation as a \"cultural minority\" as incomplete, favouring instead the definition as a nation, the commonly accepted designation for the Basque people up to the rise of the nation-states and the definition imposed by the 1812 Spanish Constitution.\nIn modern times, as a European people living in a highly industrialized area, cultural differences from the rest of Europe are inevitably blurred, although a conscious cultural identity as a people or nation remains very strong, as does an identification with their homeland, even among many Basques who have emigrated to other parts of Spain or France, or to other parts of the world.\nThe strongest distinction between the Basques and their traditional neighbours is linguistic. Surrounded by Romance-language speakers, the Basques traditionally spoke (and many still speak) a language that was not only non-Romance but non-Indo-European. The prevailing belief amongst Basques, and forming part of their national identity, is that their language has continuity with the people who were in this region since not only pre-Roman and pre-Celtic times, but since the Stone Age.\nNotable Basques.\nAmong the most notable Basque people are Juan Sebasti\u00e1n Elcano (who led the first successful expedition to circumnavigate the globe after Ferdinand Magellan died mid-journey); Sancho III of Navarre; and Ignatius of Loyola and Francis Xavier, founders of the Society of Jesus.\nDon Diego Mar\u00eda de Gardoqui y Arriquibar (1735\u20131798) was also a Basque, who became Spain's first Ambassador to the United States, and Miguel de Unamuno was a noted novelist and philosopher of the late 19th and the 20th century, was also a Basque.\nAnother well-known Basque was Father Alberto Hurtado, S.J. (1901\u20131952), a Jesuit priest who founded the charitable housing system Hogar de Cristo, meaning hearth, or home, of Christ, in Chile. El Hogar provided a home-like milieu for the homeless. Hurtado also founded the Chilean Trade Union Association to promote a union movement based on the social teachings of the Catholic Church. He was a friend and savior to all the poor and homeless, and was beatified by Pope John Paul II on 16 October 1994. He was canonized by Pope Benedict XVI on 23 October 2005.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4661", "revid": "41998662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4661", "title": "Blot", "text": "Blot may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "4662", "revid": "50894201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4662", "title": "Bookkeeping", "text": "Recording financial transactions or events\nBookkeeping is the record of financial transactions that occur in business daily or any time so as to have a proper and accurate financial report.\nBookkeeping is the recording of financial transactions, and is part of the process of accounting in business and other organizations. It involves preparing source documents for all transactions, operations, and other events of a business. Transactions include purchases, sales, receipts and payments by an individual person, organization or corporation. There are several standard methods of bookkeeping, including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. While these may be viewed as \"real\" bookkeeping, any process for recording financial transactions is a bookkeeping process.\nThe person in an organisation who is employed to perform bookkeeping functions is usually called the bookkeeper (or book-keeper). They usually write the \"daybooks\" (which contain records of sales, purchases, receipts, and payments), and document each financial transaction, whether cash or credit, into the correct daybook\u2014that is, petty cash book, suppliers ledger, customer ledger, etc.\u2014and the general ledger. Thereafter, an accountant can create financial reports from the information recorded by the bookkeeper. The bookkeeper brings the books to the trial balance stage, from which an accountant may prepare financial reports for the organisation, such as the income statement and balance sheet.\nHistory.\nThe origin of book-keeping is lost in obscurity, but recent research indicates that methods of keeping accounts have existed from the remotest times of human life in cities. Babylonian records written with styli on small slabs of clay have been found dating to 2600 BC. Mesopotamian bookkeepers kept records on clay tablets that may date back as far as 7,000 years. Use of the modern double entry bookkeeping system was described by Luca Pacioli in 1494.\nThe term \"waste book\" was used in colonial America, referring to the documenting of daily transactions of receipts and expenditures. Records were made in chronological order, and for temporary use only. Daily records were then transferred to a daybook or account ledger to balance the accounts and to create a permanent journal; then the waste book could be discarded, hence the name.\nProcess.\nThe primary purpose of bookkeeping is to record the \"financial effects\" of transactions. An important difference between a manual and an electronic accounting system is the former's latency between the recording of a financial transaction and its posting in the relevant account. This delay, which is absent in electronic accounting systems due to nearly instantaneous posting to relevant accounts, is characteristic of manual systems, and gave rise to the primary books of accounts\u2014cash book, purchase book, sales book, etc.\u2014for immediately documenting a financial transaction.\nIn the normal course of business, a document is produced each time a transaction occurs. Sales and purchases usually have invoices or receipts. Historically, deposit slips were produced when lodgements (deposits) were made to a bank account; and checks (spelled \"cheques\" in the UK and several other countries) were written to pay money out of the account. Nowadays such transactions are mostly made electronically. Bookkeeping first involves recording the details of all of these \"source documents\" into multi-column \"journals\" (also known as \"books of first entry\" or \"daybooks\"). For example, all credit sales are recorded in the sales journal; all cash payments are recorded in the cash payments journal. Each column in a journal normally corresponds to an account. In the single entry system, each transaction is recorded only once. Most individuals who balance their check-book each month are using such a system, and most personal-finance software follows this approach.\nAfter a certain period, typically a month, each column in each journal is totalled to give a summary for that period. Using the rules of double-entry, these journal summaries are then transferred to their respective accounts in the ledger, or \"account book\". For example, the entries in the Sales Journal are taken and a debit entry is made in each customer's account (showing that the customer now owes the company money), and a credit entry might be made in the account for \"Sale of class 2 widgets\" (showing that this activity has generated revenue). This process of transferring summaries or individual transactions to the ledger is called \"posting\". Once the posting process is complete, accounts kept using the \"T\" format (debits on the left side of the \"T\" and credits on the right side) undergo \"balancing\", which is simply a process to arrive at the balance of the account.\nAs a partial check that the posting process was done correctly, a working document called an \"unadjusted trial balance\" is created. In its simplest form, this is a three-column list. Column One contains the names of those accounts in the ledger which have a non-zero balance. If an account has a \"debit\" balance, the balance amount is copied into Column Two (the \"debit column\"); if an account has a \"credit\" balance, the amount is copied into Column Three (the \"credit column\"). The debit column is then totalled, and then the credit column is totalled. The two totals must agree\u2014which is not by chance\u2014because under the double-entry rules, whenever there is a posting, the debits of the posting equal the credits of the posting. If the two totals do not agree, an error has been made, either in the journals or during the posting process. The error must be located and rectified, and the totals of the debit column and the credit column recalculated to check for agreement before any further processing can take place.\nOnce the accounts balance, the accountant makes a number of adjustments and changes the balance amounts of some of the accounts. These adjustments must still obey the double-entry rule: for example, the \"inventory\" account and asset account might be changed to bring them into line with the actual numbers counted during a stocktake. At the same time, the \"expense\" account associated with use of inventory is adjusted by an equal and opposite amount. Other adjustments such as posting depreciation and prepayments are also done at this time. This results in a listing called the \"adjusted trial balance\". It is the accounts in this list, and their corresponding debit or credit balances, that are used to prepare the financial statements.\nFinally financial statements are drawn from the trial balance, which may include:\nSingle-entry system.\nThe primary bookkeeping record in single-entry bookkeeping is the \"cash book\", which is similar to a checking account register (in UK: cheque account, current account), except all entries are allocated among several categories of income and expense accounts. Separate account records are maintained for petty cash, accounts payable and accounts receivable, and other relevant transactions such as inventory and travel expenses. To save time and avoid the errors of manual calculations, single-entry bookkeeping can be done today with do-it-yourself bookkeeping software.\nDouble-entry system.\nA \"double-entry bookkeeping system\" is a set of rules for recording financial information in a financial accounting system in which every transaction or event changes at least two different ledger accounts.\nMethod.\nCash Accounting.\nThe Cash-Based System of Accounting (or Cash Basis Accounting) is a simplified method of financial record-keeping that determines a company's profit based on the actual cash flow. The cash-based system of accounting records revenues when cash is received and expenses when cash is paid out, simplifying profit calculation for smaller entities (smaller businesses, freelancers, and sole proprietorships) by focusing purely on the actual movement of money. This method provides a clear view of current liquidity (cash on hand), but it does not necessarily reflect the true economic position (e.g., outstanding invoices or liabilities).\nAccrual Accounting.\nThe accrual basis method, which is the required standard under Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP), records income when it is earned and expenses when they are incurred, regardless of when the cash is actually exchanged, providing a more accurate picture of a company's financial performance. The accrual-basis system offers a more accurate view of a business's profitability and success by matching revenues and expenses in the correct period, which enhances forecasting accuracy, enables better strategic decisions on resource management and growth, and increases transparency and credibility for stakeholders.\nDaybooks.\nA \"daybook\" is a descriptive and chronological (diary-like) record of day-to-day financial transactions; it is also called a \"book of original entry\". The daybook's details must be transcribed formally into journals to enable posting to ledgers. Daybooks include:\nPetty cash book.\nA \"petty cash\" book is a record of small-value purchases before they are later transferred to the ledger and final accounts; it is maintained by a petty or junior cashier. This type of cash book usually uses the imprest system: a certain amount of money is provided to the petty cashier by the senior cashier. This money is to cater for minor expenditures (hospitality, minor stationery, casual postage, and so on) and is reimbursed periodically on satisfactory explanation of how it was spent.\nThe balance of petty cash book is Asset.\nJournals.\n\"Journals\" are recorded in the general journal daybook. A journal is a formal and chronological record of financial transactions before their values are accounted for in the general ledger as debits and credits. A company can maintain one journal for all transactions, or keep several journals based on similar activity (e.g., sales, cash receipts, revenue, etc.), making transactions easier to summarize and reference later. For every debit journal entry recorded, there must be an equivalent credit journal entry to maintain a balanced accounting equation.\nLedgers.\nA \"ledger\" is a record of accounts. The ledger is a permanent summary of all amounts entered in supporting Journals which list individual transactions by date. These accounts are recorded separately, showing their beginning/ending balance. A journal lists financial transactions in chronological order, without showing their balance but showing how much is going to be entered in each account. A ledger takes each financial transaction from the journal and records it into the corresponding accounts. The ledger also determines the balance of every account, which is transferred into the balance sheet or the income statement. There are three different kinds of ledgers that deal with book-keeping:\nChart of accounts.\nA chart of accounts is a list of the accounts codes that can be identified with numeric, alphabetical, or alphanumeric codes allowing the account to be located in the general ledger. The equity section of the chart of accounts is based on the fact that the legal structure of the entity is of a particular legal type. Possibilities include \"sole trader\", \"partnership\", \"trust\", and \"company\".\nComputerized bookkeeping.\nComputerized bookkeeping removes many of the paper \"books\" that are used to record the financial transactions of a business entity; instead, relational databases are used today, but typically, these still enforce the norms of bookkeeping including the single-entry and double-entry bookkeeping systems. Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) supervise the internal controls for computerized bookkeeping systems, which serve to minimize errors in documenting the numerous activities a business entity may initiate or complete over an accounting period.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4663", "revid": "5094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4663", "title": "Basil the Great", "text": ""}
{"id": "4664", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4664", "title": "B\u00e9zier curve", "text": "Curve used in computer graphics and related fields\nA B\u00e9zier curve ( , ) is a parametric curve used in computer graphics and related fields. A set of discrete \"control points\" defines a smooth, continuous curve by means of a formula. Usually the curve is intended to approximate a real-world shape that otherwise has no mathematical representation or whose representation is unknown or too complicated. The B\u00e9zier curve is named after French engineer Pierre B\u00e9zier (1910\u20131999), who used it in the 1960s for designing curves for the bodywork of Renault cars. Other uses include the design of computer fonts and animation. B\u00e9zier curves can be combined to form a B\u00e9zier spline, or generalized to higher dimensions to form B\u00e9zier surfaces. The B\u00e9zier triangle is a special case of the latter.\nIn vector graphics, B\u00e9zier curves are used to model smooth curves that can be scaled indefinitely. \"Paths\", as they are commonly referred to in image manipulation programs, are combinations of linked B\u00e9zier curves. Paths are not bound by the limits of rasterized images and are intuitive to modify.\nB\u00e9zier curves are also used in the time domain, particularly in animation, user interface design and smoothing cursor trajectory in eye gaze controlled interfaces. For example, a B\u00e9zier curve can be used to specify the velocity over time of an object such as an icon moving from A to B, rather than simply moving at a fixed number of pixels per step. When animators or interface designers talk about the \"physics\" or \"feel\" of an operation, they may be referring to the particular B\u00e9zier curve used to control the velocity over time of the move in question.\nThis also applies to robotics where the motion of a welding arm, for example, should be smooth to avoid unnecessary wear.\nInvention.\nThe mathematical basis for B\u00e9zier curves\u2014the Bernstein polynomials\u2014was established in 1912, but the polynomials were not applied to graphics until some 50 years later when mathematician Paul de Casteljau in 1959 developed de Casteljau's algorithm, a numerically stable method for evaluating the curves, and became the first to apply them to computer-aided design at French automaker Citro\u00ebn. De Casteljau's method was patented in France but not published until the 1980s while the B\u00e9zier polynomials were widely publicised in the 1960s by the French engineer Pierre B\u00e9zier, who discovered them independently and used them to design automobile bodies at Renault.\nSpecific cases.\nA B\u00e9zier curve is defined by a set of \"control points\" P0 through P\"n\", where \"n\" is called the order of the curve (\"n\" = 1 for linear, 2 for quadratic, 3 for cubic, etc.). The first and last control points are always the endpoints of the curve; however, the intermediate control points generally do not lie on the curve. The sums in the following sections are to be understood as affine combinations \u2013 that is, the coefficients sum to 1.\nLinear B\u00e9zier curves.\nGiven distinct points P0 and P1, a linear B\u00e9zier curve is simply a line between those two points. The curve is given by\nformula_1\nThis is the simplest and is equivalent to linear interpolation. The quantity formula_2 represents the displacement vector from the start point to the end point.\nQuadratic B\u00e9zier curves.\nA quadratic B\u00e9zier curve is the path traced by the function B(\"t\"), given points P0, P1, and P2,\n formula_3,\nwhich can be interpreted as the linear interpolant of corresponding points on the linear B\u00e9zier curves from P0 to P1 and from P1 to P2 respectively. Rearranging the preceding equation yields:\n formula_4\nThis can be written in a way that highlights the symmetry with respect to P1:\n formula_5\nWhich immediately gives the derivative of the B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\":\n formula_6\nfrom which it can be concluded that the tangents to the curve at P0 and P2 intersect at P1. As \"t\" increases from 0 to 1, the curve departs from P0 in the direction of P1, then bends to arrive at P2 from the direction of P1.\nThe second derivative of the B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\" is\n formula_7\nCubic B\u00e9zier curves.\nFour points P0, P1, P2 and P3 in the plane or in higher-dimensional space define a cubic B\u00e9zier curve.\nThe curve starts at P0 going toward P1 and arrives at P3 coming from the direction of P2. Usually, it will not pass through P1 or P2; these points are only there to provide directional information. The distance between P1 and P2 determines \"how far\" and \"how fast\" the curve moves towards P1 before turning towards P2.\nWriting BP\"i\",P\"j\",P\"k\"(\"t\") for the quadratic B\u00e9zier curve defined by points P\"i\", P\"j\", and P\"k\", the cubic B\u00e9zier curve can be defined as an affine combination of two quadratic B\u00e9zier curves:\nformula_8\nThe explicit form of the curve is:\nformula_9\nFor some choices of P1 and P2 the curve may intersect itself, or contain a cusp.\nAny series of 4 distinct points can be converted to a cubic B\u00e9zier curve that goes through all 4 points in order.\nGiven the starting and ending point of some cubic B\u00e9zier curve, and the points along the curve corresponding to \"t\"\u00a0= 1/3 and \"t\"\u00a0=\u00a02/3, the control points for the original B\u00e9zier curve can be recovered.\nThe derivative of the cubic B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\" is\n formula_10\nThe second derivative of the B\u00e9zier curve with respect to \"t\" is\n formula_11\nFor control points whose consecutive triples form two similar triangles with the same orientation, the resulting cubic B\u00e9zier curve is an arc of a (scaled and translated) Tschirnhausen cubic. These are Pythagorean hodograph curves, curves whose arc length and offset curves have a rational parameterization, and they are the only cubic curves with these properties.\nGeneral definition.\nB\u00e9zier curves can be defined for any degree \"n\".\nRecursive definition.\nA recursive definition for the B\u00e9zier curve of degree \"n\" expresses it as a point-to-point linear combination (linear interpolation) of a pair of corresponding points in two B\u00e9zier curves of degree \"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01.\nLet formula_12 denote the B\u00e9zier curve determined by any selection of points P0, P1,\u00a0...,\u00a0P\"k\". Then to start,\nformula_13\nformula_14\nThis recursion is elucidated in the animations below.\nExplicit definition.\nThe formula can be expressed explicitly as follows (where t0 and (1-t)0 are extended continuously to be 1 throughout [0,1]):\nformula_15\nwhere formula_16 are the binomial coefficients.\nFor example, when \"n\"\u00a0=\u00a05:\nformula_17\nTerminology.\nSome terminology is associated with these parametric curves. We have\nformula_18\nwhere the polynomials\nformula_19\nare known as Bernstein basis polynomials of degree \"n\".\n\"t\"0\u00a0=\u00a01, (1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"t\")0\u00a0=\u00a01, and the binomial coefficient, formula_16, is:\nformula_21\nThe points P\"i\" are called \"control points\" for the B\u00e9zier curve. The polygon formed by connecting the B\u00e9zier points with lines, starting with P0 and finishing with P\"n\", is called the \"B\u00e9zier polygon\" (or \"control polygon\"). The convex hull of the B\u00e9zier polygon contains the B\u00e9zier curve.\nPolynomial form.\nSometimes it is desirable to express the B\u00e9zier curve as a polynomial instead of a sum of less straightforward Bernstein polynomials. Application of the binomial theorem to the definition of the curve followed by some rearrangement will yield\nformula_22\nwhere\nformula_23\nThis could be practical if formula_24 can be computed prior to many evaluations of formula_25; however one should use caution as high order curves may lack numeric stability (de Casteljau's algorithm should be used if this occurs). Note that the empty product is 1.\nSecond-order curve is a parabolic segment.\nA quadratic B\u00e9zier curve is also a segment of a parabola. As a parabola is a conic section, some sources refer to quadratic B\u00e9ziers as \"conic arcs\". With reference to the figure on the right, the important features of the parabola can be derived as follows:\nDerivative.\nThe derivative for a curve of order \"n\" is\nformula_39\nConstructing B\u00e9zier curves.\nLinear curves.\nLet \"t\" denote the fraction of progress (from 0 to 1) the point B(\"t\") has made along its traversal from P0 to P1. For example, when \"t\"=0.25, B(\"t\") is one quarter of the way from point P0 to P1. As \"t\" varies from 0 to 1, B(\"t\") draws a line from P0 to P1.\nQuadratic curves.\nFor quadratic B\u00e9zier curves one can construct intermediate points Q0 and Q1 such that as \"t\" varies from 0 to 1:\nHigher-order curves.\nFor higher-order curves one needs correspondingly more intermediate points. For cubic curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, and Q2 that describe linear B\u00e9zier curves, and points R0 and R1 that describe quadratic B\u00e9zier curves:\nFor fourth-order curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, Q2 and Q3 that describe linear B\u00e9zier curves, points R0, R1 and R2 that describe quadratic B\u00e9zier curves, and points S0 and S1 that describe cubic B\u00e9zier curves:\nFor fifth-order curves, one can construct similar intermediate points.\nThese representations rest on the process used in De Casteljau's algorithm to calculate B\u00e9zier curves.\nOffsets (or stroking) of B\u00e9zier curves.\nThe curve at a fixed offset from a given B\u00e9zier curve, called an offset or parallel curve in mathematics (lying \"parallel\" to the original curve, like the offset between rails in a railroad track), cannot be exactly formed by a B\u00e9zier curve (except in some trivial cases). In general, the two-sided offset curve of a cubic B\u00e9zier is a 10th-order algebraic curve and more generally for a B\u00e9zier of degree \"n\" the two-sided offset curve is an algebraic curve of degree 4\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a02. However, there are heuristic methods that usually give an adequate approximation for practical purposes.\nIn the field of vector graphics, painting two symmetrically distanced offset curves is called \"stroking\" (the B\u00e9zier curve or in general a path of several B\u00e9zier segments). The conversion from offset curves to filled B\u00e9zier contours is of practical importance in converting fonts defined in Metafont, which require stroking of B\u00e9zier curves, to the more widely used PostScript type 1 fonts, which only require (for efficiency purposes) the mathematically simpler operation of filling a contour defined by (non-self-intersecting) B\u00e9zier curves.\nDegree elevation.\nA B\u00e9zier curve of degree \"n\" can be converted into a B\u00e9zier curve of degree \"n\"\u00a0+ 1 \"with the same shape\". This is useful if software supports B\u00e9zier curves only of specific degree. For example, systems that can only work with cubic B\u00e9zier curves can implicitly work with quadratic curves by using their equivalent cubic representation.\nTo do degree elevation, we use the equality formula_40 Each component formula_41 is multiplied by (1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"t\") and\u00a0\"t\", thus increasing a degree by one, without changing the value. Here is the example of increasing degree from 2 to\u00a03.\nformula_42\nIn other words, the original start and end points are unchanged. The new control points are formula_43 and formula_44.\nFor arbitrary \"n\" we use equalities\nformula_45\nTherefore:\nformula_46\nintroducing arbitrary formula_47 and formula_48.\nTherefore, new control points are\n formula_49\nRepeated degree elevation.\nThe concept of degree elevation can be repeated on a control polygon R to get a sequence of control polygons R, R1, R2, and so on. After \"r\" degree elevations, the polygon R\"r\" has the vertices P0,\"r\", P1,\"r\", P2,\"r\", ..., P\"n\"+\"r\",\"r\" given by \nformula_50\nIt can also be shown that for the underlying B\u00e9zier curve \"B\",\nformula_51\nDegree reduction.\nDegree reduction can only be done exactly when the curve in question is originally elevated from a lower degree. A number of approximation algorithms have been proposed and used in practice.\nRational B\u00e9zier curves.\nThe rational B\u00e9zier curve adds adjustable weights to provide closer approximations to arbitrary shapes. The numerator is a weighted Bernstein-form B\u00e9zier curve and the denominator is a weighted sum of Bernstein polynomials. Rational B\u00e9zier curves can, among other uses, be used to represent segments of conic sections exactly, including circular arcs.\nGiven \"n\"\u00a0+ 1 control points P0, ..., P\"n\", the rational B\u00e9zier curve can be described by\nformula_52\nor simply\nformula_53\nThe expression can be extended by using number systems besides reals for the weights. In the complex plane the points {1}, {-1}, and {1} with weights {formula_54}, {1}, and {formula_55} generate a full circle with radius one. For curves with points and weights on a circle, the weights can be scaled without changing the curve's shape. Scaling the central weight of the above curve by 1.35508 gives a more uniform parameterization.\nApplications.\nComputer graphics.\nB\u00e9zier curves are widely used in computer graphics to model smooth curves. As the curve is completely contained in the convex hull of its control points, the points can be graphically displayed and used to manipulate the curve intuitively. Affine transformations such as translation and rotation can be applied on the curve by applying the respective transform on the control points of the curve.\nQuadratic and cubic B\u00e9zier curves are most common. Higher degree curves are more computationally expensive to evaluate. When more complex shapes are needed, low order B\u00e9zier curves are patched together, producing a composite B\u00e9zier curve. A composite B\u00e9zier curve is commonly referred to as a \"path\" in vector graphics languages (like PostScript), vector graphics standards (like SVG) and vector graphics programs (like Artline, Timeworks Publisher, Adobe Illustrator, CorelDraw, Inkscape, and Allegro). In order to join B\u00e9zier curves into a composite B\u00e9zier curve without kinks, a property called \"G1 continuity\" suffices to force the control point at which two constituent B\u00e9zier curves meet to lie on the line defined by the two control points on either side.\nThe simplest method for scan converting (rasterizing) a B\u00e9zier curve is to evaluate it at many closely spaced points and scan convert the approximating sequence of line segments. However, this does not guarantee that the rasterized output looks sufficiently smooth, because the points may be spaced too far apart. Conversely it may generate too many points in areas where the curve is close to linear. A common adaptive method is recursive subdivision, in which a curve's control points are checked to see if the curve approximates a line to within a small tolerance. If not, the curve is subdivided parametrically into two segments, 0 \u2264 \"t\" \u2264 0.5 and 0.5 \u2264 \"t\" \u2264 1, and the same procedure is applied recursively to each half. There are also forward differencing methods, but great care must be taken to analyse error propagation.\nAnalytical methods where a B\u00e9zier is intersected with each scan line involve finding roots of cubic polynomials (for cubic B\u00e9ziers) and dealing with multiple roots, so they are not often used in practice.\nThe rasterisation algorithm used in Metafont is based on discretising the curve, so that it is approximated by a sequence of \"rook moves\" that are purely vertical or purely horizontal, along the pixel boundaries. To that end, the plane is first split into eight 45\u00b0 sectors (by the coordinate axes and the two lines formula_56), then the curve is decomposed into smaller segments such that the \"direction\" of a curve segment stays within one sector; since the curve velocity is a second degree polynomial, finding the formula_57 values where it is parallel to one of these lines can be done by solving quadratic equations. Within each segment, either horizontal or vertical movement dominates, and the total number of steps in either direction can be read off from the endpoint coordinates; in for example the 0\u201345\u00b0 sector horizontal movement to the right dominates, so it only remains to decide between which steps to the right the curve should make a step up.\nThere is also a modified curve form of Bresenham's line drawing algorithm by Zingl that performs this rasterization by subdividing the curve into rational pieces and calculating the error at each pixel location such that it either travels at a 45\u00b0 angle or straight depending on compounding error as it iterates through the curve. This reduces the next step calculation to a series of integer additions and subtractions.\nAnimation.\nIn animation applications, such as Adobe Flash and Synfig, B\u00e9zier curves are used to outline, for example, movement. Users outline the wanted path in B\u00e9zier curves, and the application creates the needed frames for the object to move along the path.\nIn 3D animation, B\u00e9zier curves are often used to define 3D paths as well as 2D curves for keyframe interpolation. B\u00e9zier curves are now very frequently used to control the animation easing in CSS, JavaScript, JavaFx and Flutter SDK.\nFonts.\nTrueType fonts use composite B\u00e9zier curves composed of quadratic B\u00e9zier curves. Other languages and imaging tools (such as PostScript, Asymptote, Metafont, and SVG) use composite B\u00e9ziers composed of cubic B\u00e9zier curves for drawing curved shapes. OpenType fonts can use either kind of curve, depending on which font technology underlies the OpenType wrapper.\nFont engines, like FreeType, draw the font's curves (and lines) on a pixellated surface using a process known as font rasterization. Typically font engines and vector graphics engines render B\u00e9zier curves by splitting them recursively up to the point where the curve is flat enough to be drawn as a series of linear or circular segments. The exact splitting algorithm is implementation dependent, only the flatness criteria must be respected to reach the necessary precision and to avoid non-monotonic local changes of curvature. The \"smooth curve\" feature of charts in Microsoft Excel also uses this algorithm.\nBecause arcs of circles and ellipses cannot be exactly represented by B\u00e9zier curves, they are first approximated by B\u00e9zier curves, which are in turn approximated by arcs of circles. This is inefficient as there exists also approximations of all B\u00e9zier curves using arcs of circles or ellipses, which can be rendered incrementally with arbitrary precision. Another approach, used by modern hardware graphics adapters with accelerated geometry, can convert exactly all B\u00e9zier and conic curves (or surfaces) into NURBS, that can be rendered incrementally without first splitting the curve recursively to reach the necessary flatness condition. This approach also preserves the curve definition under all linear or perspective 2D and 3D transforms and projections.\nRobotics.\nBecause the control polygon allows to tell whether or not the path collides with any obstacles, B\u00e9zier curves are used in producing trajectories of the end effectors. Furthermore, joint space trajectories can be accurately differentiated using B\u00e9zier curves. Consequently, the derivatives of joint space trajectories are used in the calculation of the dynamics and control effort (torque profiles) of the robotic manipulator.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4665", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4665", "title": "Banach algebra", "text": "Particular kind of algebraic structure\nIn mathematics, especially functional analysis, a Banach algebra, named after Stefan Banach, is an associative algebra formula_1 over the real or complex numbers (or over a non-Archimedean complete normed field) that at the same time is also a Banach space, that is, a normed space that is complete in the metric induced by the norm. The norm is required to satisfy\nformula_2\nThis ensures that the multiplication operation is continuous with respect to the metric topology.\nA Banach algebra is called \"unital\" if it has an identity element for the multiplication whose norm is formula_3 and \"commutative\" if its multiplication is commutative.\nAny Banach algebra formula_1 (whether it is unital or not) can be embedded isometrically into a unital Banach algebra formula_5 so as to form a closed ideal of formula_5. Often one assumes \"a priori\" that the algebra under consideration is unital because one can develop much of the theory by considering formula_5 and then applying the outcome in the original algebra. However, this is not the case all the time. For example, one cannot define all the trigonometric functions in a Banach algebra without identity.\nThe theory of real Banach algebras can be very different from the theory of complex Banach algebras. For example, the spectrum of an element of a nontrivial complex Banach algebra can never be empty, whereas in a real Banach algebra it could be empty for some elements.\nBanach algebras can also be defined over fields of formula_8-adic numbers. This is part of formula_8-adic analysis.\nExamples.\nThe prototypical example of a Banach algebra is formula_10, the space of (complex-valued) continuous functions, defined on a locally compact Hausdorff space formula_11, that vanish at infinity. formula_10 is unital if and only if formula_11 is compact. The complex conjugation being an involution, formula_10 is in fact a C*-algebra. More generally, every C*-algebra is a Banach algebra by definition.\nProperties.\nSeveral elementary functions that are defined via power series may be defined in any unital Banach algebra; examples include the exponential function and the trigonometric functions, and more generally any entire function. (In particular, the exponential map can be used to define abstract index groups.) The formula for the geometric series remains valid in general unital Banach algebras. The binomial theorem also holds for two commuting elements of a Banach algebra.\nThe set of invertible elements in any unital Banach algebra is an open set, and the inversion operation on this set is continuous (and hence is a homeomorphism), so that it forms a topological group under multiplication.\nIf a Banach algebra has unit formula_35 then formula_36 cannot be a commutator; that is, formula_37\u2009 for any formula_38 This is because formula_39 and formula_40 have the same spectrum except possibly formula_41\nThe various algebras of functions given in the examples above have very different properties from standard examples of algebras such as the reals. For example:\nSpectral theory.\nUnital Banach algebras over the complex field provide a general setting to develop spectral theory. The \"spectrum\" of an element formula_49 denoted by formula_50, consists of all those complex scalars formula_51 such that formula_52 is not invertible in formula_48 The spectrum of any element formula_54 is a closed subset of the closed disc in formula_55 with radius formula_56 and center formula_57 and thus is compact. Moreover, the spectrum formula_50 of an element formula_54 is non-empty and satisfies the spectral radius formula:\nformula_60\nGiven formula_49 the holomorphic functional calculus allows to define formula_62 for any function formula_63 holomorphic in a neighborhood of formula_64 Furthermore, the spectral mapping theorem holds:\nformula_65\nWhen the Banach algebra formula_1 is the algebra formula_67 of bounded linear operators on a complex Banach space formula_11 (for example, the algebra of square matrices), the notion of the spectrum in formula_1 coincides with the usual one in operator theory. For formula_70 (with a compact Hausdorff space formula_11), one sees that:\nformula_72\nThe norm of a normal element formula_54 of a C*-algebra coincides with its spectral radius. This generalizes an analogous fact for normal operators.\nLet formula_1 be a complex unital Banach algebra in which every non-zero element formula_54 is invertible (a division algebra). For every formula_76 there is formula_77 such that\nformula_78 is not invertible (because the spectrum of formula_79 is not empty) hence formula_80 this algebra formula_1 is naturally isomorphic to formula_55 (the complex case of the Gelfand\u2013Mazur theorem).\nIdeals and characters.\nLet formula_1 be a unital \"commutative\" Banach algebra over formula_84 Since formula_1 is then a commutative ring with unit, every non-invertible element of formula_1 belongs to some maximal ideal of formula_48 Since a maximal ideal formula_88 in formula_1 is closed, formula_90 is a Banach algebra that is a field, and it follows from the Gelfand\u2013Mazur theorem that there is a bijection between the set of all maximal ideals of formula_1 and the set formula_92 of all nonzero homomorphisms from formula_1 to formula_84 The set formula_92 is called the \"structure space\" or \"character space\" of formula_96 and its members \"characters\".\nA character formula_97 is a linear functional on formula_1 that is at the same time multiplicative, formula_99 and satisfies formula_100 Every character is automatically continuous from formula_1 to formula_102 since the kernel of a character is a maximal ideal, which is closed. Moreover, the norm (that is, operator norm) of a character is one. Equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence on formula_1 (that is, the topology induced by the weak-* topology of formula_104), the character space, formula_105 is a Hausdorff compact space.\nFor any formula_49\nformula_107\nwhere formula_108 is the Gelfand representation of formula_54 defined as follows: formula_108 is the continuous function from formula_92 to formula_55 given by formula_113 The spectrum of formula_114 in the formula above, is the spectrum as element of the algebra formula_115 of complex continuous functions on the compact space formula_116 Explicitly,\nformula_117\nAs an algebra, a unital commutative Banach algebra is semisimple (that is, its Jacobson radical is zero) if and only if its Gelfand representation has trivial kernel. An important example of such an algebra is a commutative C*-algebra. In fact, when formula_1 is a commutative unital C*-algebra, the Gelfand representation is then an isometric *-isomorphism between formula_1 and formula_120\nBanach *-algebras.\nA Banach *-algebra formula_1 is a Banach algebra over the field of complex numbers, together with a map formula_122 that has the following properties:\nIn other words, a Banach *-algebra is a Banach algebra over formula_55 that is also a *-algebra.\nIn most natural examples, one also has that the involution is isometric, that is, \nformula_135\nSome authors include this isometric property in the definition of a Banach *-algebra.\nA Banach *-algebra satisfying formula_136 is a C*-algebra.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4666", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4666", "title": "B*-algebra", "text": ""}
{"id": "4667", "revid": "36346239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4667", "title": "Boris Pasternak", "text": "Russian and Soviet writer (1890\u20131960)\nBoris Leonidovich Pasternak (10 February\u00a0[O.S. 29 January]\u00a01890\u00a0\u2013 30 May 1960) was a Russian and Soviet poet, novelist, and literary translator.\nComposed in 1917, Pasternak's first book of poems, \"My Sister, Life\", was published in Berlin in 1922 and soon became an important collection in the Russian language. Pasternak's translations of stage plays by Goethe, Schiller, Calder\u00f3n de la Barca and Shakespeare remain very popular with Russian audiences.\nPasternak was the author of \"Doctor Zhivago\" (1957), a novel that takes place between the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the Second World War. \"Doctor Zhivago\" was rejected for publication in the USSR, but the manuscript was smuggled to Italy and was first published there in 1957.\nPasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1958, an event that enraged the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, which forced him to decline the prize. In 1989, Pasternak's son Yevgeny finally accepted the award on his father's behalf. \"Doctor Zhivago\" has been part of the main Russian school curriculum since 2003.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life.\nPasternak was born in Moscow on 10 February\u00a0[O.S. 29 January]\u00a01890 into a wealthy, assimilated Jewish family. His father was the post-Impressionist painter Leonid Pasternak, who taught as a professor at the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture. His mother was Rosa Kaufman, a concert pianist and the daughter of Odessa industrialist Isadore Kaufman and his wife. Pasternak had a younger brother, Alex, and two sisters, Lydia and Josephine. The family claimed descent on the paternal line from Isaac Abarbanel, the famous 15th-century Sephardic Jewish philosopher, Bible commentator, and treasurer of Portugal.\nEarly education.\nFrom 1904 to 1907, Boris Pasternak was the cloister-mate of Peter Minchakievich (1890\u20131963) in Holy Dormition Pochayev Lavra (now in Ukraine). Minchakievich came from an Orthodox Ukrainian family and Pasternak came from a Jewish family. Some confusion has arisen as to Pasternak attending a military academy in his boyhood years. The uniforms of their monastery Cadet Corp were only similar to those of The Czar Alexander the Third Military Academy, as Pasternak and Minchakievich never attended any military academy. Most schools used a distinctive military-looking uniform particular to them as was the custom of the time in Eastern Europe and Russia. Boyhood friends, they parted in 1908, friendly but with different politics, never to see each other again. Pasternak went to the Moscow Conservatory to study music (and later to Germany to study philosophy), and Minchakievich went to Lvov University to study history and philosophy. The good dimension of the character Strelnikov in \"Dr. Zhivago\" is based upon Peter Minchakievich. Several of Pasternak's characters are composites. After World War One and the Revolution, fighting for the Provisional or Republican government under Kerensky, and then escaping a Communist jail and execution, Minchakievich trekked across Siberia in 1917 and became an American citizen. Pasternak stayed in Russia.\nIn a 1959 letter to Jacqueline de Proyart, Pasternak recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was baptized as a child by my nanny, but because of the restrictions imposed on Jews, particularly in the case of a family which was exempt from them and enjoyed a certain reputation in view of my father's standing as an artist, there was something a little complicated about this, and it was always felt to be half-secret and intimate, a source of rare and exceptional inspiration rather than being calmly taken for granted. I believe that this is at the root of my distinctiveness. Most intensely of all my mind was occupied by Christianity in the years 1910\u201312, when the main foundations of this distinctiveness\u2014my way of seeing things, the world, life\u2014were taking shape...\nShortly after his birth, Pasternak's parents had joined the Tolstoyan Movement. Novelist Leo Tolstoy was a close family friend, as Pasternak recalled, \"my father illustrated his books, went to see him, revered him, and [...] the whole house was imbued with his spirit.\"\nIn a 1956 essay, Pasternak recalled his father's feverish work creating illustrations for Tolstoy's novel \"Resurrection\". The novel was serialized in the journal \"Niva\" by the publisher Fyodor Marx, based in St Petersburg. The sketches were drawn from observations in such places as courtrooms, prisons and on trains, in a spirit of realism. To ensure that the sketches met the journal deadline, train conductors were enlisted to personally collect the illustrations. Pasternak wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My childish imagination was struck by the sight of a train conductor in his formal railway uniform, standing waiting at the door of the kitchen as if he were standing on a railway platform at the door of a compartment that was just about to leave the station. Joiner's glue was boiling on the stove. The illustrations were hurriedly wiped dry, fixed, glued on pieces of cardboard, rolled up, tied up. The parcels, once ready, were sealed with sealing wax and handed to the conductor.\nAccording to Max Hayward, \"In November 1910, when Tolstoy fled from his home and died in the stationmaster's house at Astapovo, Leonid Pasternak was informed by telegram and he went there immediately, taking his son Boris with him, and made a drawing of Tolstoy on his deathbed.\"\nRegular visitors to the Pasternaks' home also included Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alexander Scriabin, Lev Shestov, and Rainer Maria Rilke. Pasternak aspired first to be a musician. Inspired by Scriabin, Pasternak briefly was a student at the Moscow Conservatory. In 1910, he abruptly left for the University of Marburg in Germany, where he studied under neo-Kantian philosophers Hermann Cohen, Nicolai Hartmann, and Paul Natorp.\nLife and career.\nOlga Freidenberg.\nIn 1910 Pasternak was reunited with his cousin Olga Freidenberg (1890\u20131955). They had shared the same nursery but had been separated when the Freidenberg family moved to Saint Petersburg. They fell in love immediately but were never lovers. The romance, however, is made clear from their letters, Pasternak writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You do not know how my tormenting feeling grew and grew until it became obvious to me and to others. As you walked beside me with complete detachment, I could not express it to you. It was a rare sort of closeness, as if we two, you and I, were in love with something that was utterly indifferent to both of us, something that remained aloof from us by virtue of its extraordinary inability to adapt to the other side of life.\nThe cousins' initial passion developed into a lifelong close friendship. From 1910 Pasternak and Freidenberg exchanged frequent letters, and their correspondence lasted over 40 years until 1954. The cousins last met in 1936.\nIda Wissotzkaya.\nPasternak fell in love with Ida Wissotzkaya, a girl from a notable Moscow Jewish , whose company Wissotzky Tea was the largest tea company in the world. Pasternak had tutored her in the final class of high school. He helped her prepare for finals. They met in Marburg during the summer of 1912 when Boris' father, Leonid Pasternak, painted her portrait.\nAlthough Professor Cohen encouraged him to remain in Germany and to pursue a Philosophy doctorate, Pasternak decided against it. He returned to Moscow around the time of the outbreak of the First World War. In the aftermath of events, Pasternak proposed marriage to Ida. However, the Wissotzky family was disturbed by Pasternak's poor prospects and persuaded Ida to refuse him. She turned him down and he told of his love and rejection in the poem \"Marburg\" (1917):\n&lt;poem&gt;I quivered. I flared up, and then was extinguished.\nI shook. I had made a proposal\u2014but late,\nToo late. I was scared, and she had refused me.\nI pity her tears, am more blessed than a saint.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAround this time, when he was back in Russia, he joined the Russian Futurist group Centrifuge (Tsentrifuga) as a pianist; poetry was still only a hobby for him at that time. It was in their group journal, \"Lirika\", where some of his earliest poems were published. His involvement with the Futurist movement as a whole reached its peak when, in 1914, he published a satirical article in \"Rukonog\", which attacked the jealous leader of the \"Mezzanine of Poetry\", Vadim Shershenevich, who was criticizing \"Lirika\" and the Ego-Futurists because Shershenevich himself was barred from collaborating with Centrifuge, the reason being that he was such a talentless poet. The action eventually caused a verbal battle amongst several members of the groups, fighting for recognition as the first, truest Russian Futurists; these included the Cubo-Futurists, who were by that time already notorious for their scandalous behaviour. Pasternak's first and second books of poetry were published shortly after these events.\nAnother failed love affair in 1917 inspired the poems in his third and first major book, \"My Sister, Life\". His early verse cleverly dissimulates his preoccupation with Immanuel Kant's philosophy. Its fabric includes striking alliterations, wild rhythmic combinations, day-to-day vocabulary, and hidden allusions to his favourite poets such as Rilke, Lermontov, Pushkin and German-language Romantic poets.\nDuring World War I, Pasternak taught and worked at a chemical factory in Vsevolodo-Vilva near Perm, which undoubtedly provided him with material for \"Dr. Zhivago\" many years later. Unlike the rest of his family and many of his closest friends, Pasternak chose not to leave Russia after the October Revolution of 1917. According to Max Hayward,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pasternak remained in Moscow throughout the Civil War (1918\u20131920), making no attempt to escape abroad or to the White-occupied south, as a number of other Russian writers did at the time. No doubt, like Yuri Zhivago, he was momentarily impressed by the \"splendid surgery\" of the Bolshevik seizure of power in October 1917, but\u2014again to judge by the evidence of the novel, and despite a personal admiration for Vladimir Lenin, whom he saw at the 9th Congress of Soviets in 1921\u2014he soon began to harbor profound doubts about the claims and credentials of the regime, not to mention its style of rule. The terrible shortages of food and fuel, and the depredations of the Red Terror, made life very precarious in those years, particularly for the \"bourgeois\" intelligentsia. In a letter written to Pasternak from abroad in the twenties, Marina Tsvetayeva reminded him of how she had run into him in the street in 1919 as he was on the way to sell some valuable books from his library in order to buy bread. He continued to write original work and to translate, but after about the middle of 1918 it became almost impossible to publish. The only way to make one's work known was to declaim it in the several \"literary\" cafes which then sprang up, or\u2014anticipating samizdat\u2014to circulate it in manuscript. It was in this way that \"My Sister, Life\" first became available to a wider audience.\nWhen it finally was published in 1922, Pasternak's \"My Sister, Life\" revolutionised Russian poetry. It made Pasternak the model for younger poets, and decisively changed the poetry of Osip Mandelshtam, Marina Tsvetayeva and others.\nFollowing \"My Sister, Life\", Pasternak produced some hermetic pieces of uneven quality, including his masterpiece, the lyric cycle \"Rupture\" (1921). Both Pro-Soviet writers and their White \u00e9migr\u00e9 equivalents applauded Pasternak's poetry as pure, unbridled inspiration.\nIn the late 1920s, he also participated in the much celebrated tripartite correspondence with Rilke and Tsvetayeva. As the 1920s wore on, however, Pasternak increasingly felt that his colourful style was at odds with a less educated readership. He attempted to make his poetry more comprehensible by reworking his earlier pieces and starting two lengthy poems on the Russian Revolution of 1905. He also turned to prose and wrote several autobiographical stories, notably \"The Childhood of Luvers\" and \"Safe Conduct\". (The collection \"Zhenia's Childhood and Other Stories\" would be published in 1982.)\nIn 1922 Pasternak married Evgeniya Lurye (\u0415\u0432\u0433\u0435\u043d\u0438\u044f \u041b\u0443\u0440\u044c\u0435), a student at the Art Institute. The following year their son Yevgeny was born.\nEvidence of Pasternak's support of still-revolutionary members of the leadership of the Communist Party as late as 1926 is indicated by his poem \"In Memory of Reissner\" presumably written upon the premature death from typhus of Bolshevik leader Larissa Reissner aged 30 in February of that year.\nBy 1927, Pasternak's close friends Vladimir Mayakovsky and Nikolai Aseyev were advocating the complete subordination of the arts to the needs of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. In a letter to his sister Josephine, Pasternak wrote of his intentions to \"break off relations\" with both of them. Although he expressed that it would be deeply painful, Pasternak explained that it could not be prevented. He explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They don't in any way measure up to their exalted calling. In fact, they've fallen short of it but\u2014difficult as it is for me to understand\u2014a modern sophist might say that these last years have actually demanded a reduction in conscience and feeling in the name of greater intelligibility. Yet now the very spirit of the times demands great, courageous purity. And these men are ruled by trivial routine. Subjectively, they're sincere and conscientious. But I find it increasingly difficult to take into account the personal aspect of their convictions. I'm not out on my own\u2014people treat me well. But all that only holds good up to a point. It seems to me that I've reached that point.\nBy 1932, Pasternak had strikingly reshaped his style to make it more understandable to the general public and printed the new collection of poems, aptly titled \"The Second Birth\". Although its Caucasian pieces were as brilliant as the earlier efforts, the book alienated the core of Pasternak's refined audience abroad, which was largely composed of anti-communist \u00e9migr\u00e9s.\nIn 1932, Pasternak fell in love with Zinaida Neuhaus, the wife of the Russian pianist Heinrich Neuhaus. They both got divorces and married two years later.\nPasternak continued to change his poetry, simplifying his style and language through the years, as expressed in his next book, \"Early Trains\" (1943).\nStalin Epigram.\nIn April 1934 Osip Mandelstam recited his \"Stalin Epigram\" to Pasternak. After listening, Pasternak told Mandelstam: \"I didn't hear this, you didn't recite it to me, because, you know, very strange and terrible things are happening now: they've begun to pick people up. I'm afraid the walls have ears and perhaps even these benches on the boulevard here may be able to listen and tell tales. So let's make out that I heard nothing.\"\nOn the night of 14 May 1934, Mandelstam was arrested at his home based on a warrant signed by NKVD boss Genrikh Yagoda. Devastated, Pasternak went immediately to the offices of \"Izvestia\" and begged Nikolai Bukharin to intercede on Mandelstam's behalf.\nSoon after his meeting with Bukharin, the telephone rang in Pasternak's Moscow apartment. A voice from the Kremlin said, \"Comrade Stalin wishes to speak with you.\" According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak was struck dumb. \"He was totally unprepared for such a conversation. But then he heard \"his\" voice, the voice of Stalin, coming over the line. Stalin addressed him in a rather bluff uncouth fashion, using the familiar \"thou\" form: 'Tell me, what are they saying in your literary circles about the arrest of Mandelstam?'\" Flustered, Pasternak denied that there was any discussion or that there were any literary circles left in Soviet Russia. Stalin went on to ask him for his own opinion of Mandelstam. In an \"eager fumbling manner\" Pasternak explained that he and Mandelstam each had a completely different philosophy about poetry. Stalin finally said, in a mocking tone of voice: \"I see, you just aren't able to stick up for a comrade\", and put down the receiver.\nGreat Purge.\nAccording to Pasternak, during the 1937 trial of General Iona Yakir and Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Union of Soviet Writers requested all members to add their names to a statement supporting the death penalty for the defendants. Pasternak refused to sign, even after leadership of the Union visited him.\nSoon after, Pasternak appealed directly to Stalin, describing his family's strong Tolstoyan convictions and putting his own life at Stalin's disposal; he said that he could not stand as a self-appointed judge of life and death. Pasternak was certain that he would be arrested, but instead Stalin is said to have crossed Pasternak's name off an execution list, reportedly declaring, \"Do not touch this cloud dweller\" (or, in another version, \"Leave that holy fool alone!\").\nPasternak's close friend Titsian Tabidze did fall victim to the Great Purge. In an autobiographical essay published in the 1950s, Pasternak described the execution of Tabidze and the suicides of Marina Tsvetaeva and Paolo Iashvili.\nIvinskaya wrote, \"I believe that between Stalin and Pasternak there was an incredible, silent duel.\"\nWorld War II.\nWhen the Luftwaffe began bombing Moscow, Pasternak immediately began to serve as a fire warden on the roof of the writer's building on Lavrushinski Street. According to Ivinskaya, he repeatedly helped to dispose of German bombs which fell on it.\nIn 1943, Pasternak was finally granted permission to visit the soldiers at the front. He bore it well, considering the hardships of the journey (he had a weak leg from an old injury), and he wanted to go to the most dangerous places. He read his poetry and talked extensively with the active and injured troops.\nPasternak later said, \"If, in a bad dream, we had seen all the horrors in store for us after the war, we should not have been sorry to see Stalin fall, together with Hitler. Then, an end to the war in favour of our allies, civilized countries with democratic traditions, would have meant a hundred times less suffering for our people than that which Stalin again inflicted on it after his victory.\"\nOlga Ivinskaya.\nIn October 1946, the twice-married Pasternak met Olga Ivinskaya, a 34 year old single mother employed by \"Novy Mir\". Deeply moved by her resemblance to his first love Ida Vysotskaya, Pasternak gave Ivinskaya several volumes of his poetry and literary translations. Although Pasternak never left his wife Zinaida, he started an extramarital relationship with Ivinskaya that would last for the remainder of Pasternak's life. Ivinskaya later recalled, \"He phoned almost every day and, instinctively fearing to meet or talk with him, yet dying of happiness, I would stammer out that I was 'busy today.' But almost every afternoon, toward the end of working hours, he came in person to the office and often walked with me through the streets, boulevards, and squares all the way home to Potapov Street. 'Shall I make you a present of this square?' he would ask.\"\nShe gave him the phone number of her neighbour Olga Volkova who resided below. In the evenings, Pasternak would phone and Volkova would signal by Olga banging on the water pipe which connected their apartments.\nWhen they first met, Pasternak was translating the verse of the Hungarian national poet, S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi. Pasternak gave his lover a book of Pet\u0151fi with the inscription, \"Pet\u0151fi served as a code in May and June 1947, and my close translations of his lyrics are an expression, adapted to the requirements of the text, of my feelings and thoughts for you and about you. In memory of it all, B.P., 13 May 1948.\"\nPasternak later noted on a photograph of himself: \"Pet\u0151fi is magnificent with his descriptive lyrics and picture of nature, but you are better still. I worked on him a good deal in 1947 and 1948, when I first came to know you. Thank you for your help. I was translating both of you.\" Ivinskaya would later describe the Pet\u0151fi translations as \"a first declaration of love\".\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Zinaida Pasternak was infuriated by her husband's infidelity. Once, when his younger son Leonid fell seriously ill, Zinaida extracted a promise from her husband, as they stood by the boy's sickbed, that he would end his affair with Ivinskaya. Pasternak asked Luisa Popova, a mutual friend, to tell Ivinskaya about his promise. Popova told him that he must do it himself. Soon after, Ivinskaya happened to be ill at Popova's apartment, when suddenly Zinaida Pasternak arrived and confronted her.\nIvinskaya later recalled,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But I became so ill through loss of blood that she and Luisa had to get me to the hospital, and I no longer remember exactly what passed between me and this heavily built, strong-minded woman, who kept repeating how she didn't give a damn for our love and that, although she no longer loved [Boris Leonidovich] herself, she would not allow her family to be broken up. After my return from the hospital, Boris came to visit me, as though nothing had happened, and touchingly made his peace with my mother, telling her how much he loved me. By now she was pretty well used to these funny ways of his.\nIn 1948, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya to resign her job at \"Novy Mir\", which was becoming extremely difficult due to their relationship. In the aftermath, Pasternak began to instruct her in translating poetry. In time, they began to refer to her apartment on Potapov Street as, \"Our Shop\".\nOn the evening of 6 October 1949, Ivinskaya was arrested at her apartment by the KGB. Ivinskaya relates in her memoirs that, when the agents burst into her apartment, she was at her typewriter working on translations of the Korean poet Won Tu-Son. Her apartment was ransacked and all items connected with Pasternak were piled up in her presence. Ivinskaya was taken to the Lubyanka Prison and repeatedly interrogated, where she refused to say anything incriminating about Pasternak. At the time, she was pregnant with Pasternak's child and had a miscarriage early in her ten-year sentence in the GULAG.\nUpon learning of his mistress' arrest, Pasternak telephoned Luisa Popova and asked her to come at once to Gogol Boulevard. She found him sitting on a bench near the Palace of Soviets Metro Station. Weeping, Pasternak told her, \"Everything is finished now. They've taken her away from me and I'll never see her again. It's like death, even worse.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya, \"After this, in conversation with people he scarcely knew, he always referred to Stalin as a 'murderer.' Talking with people in the offices of literary periodicals, he often asked: 'When will there be an end to this freedom for lackeys who happily walk over corpses to further their own interests?' He spent a good deal of time with Akhmatova\u2014who in those years was given a very wide berth by most of the people who knew her. He worked intensively on the second part of \"Doctor Zhivago\".\"\nIn a 1958 letter to a friend in West Germany, Pasternak wrote, \"She was put in jail on my account, as the person considered by the secret police to be closest to me, and they hoped that by means of a gruelling interrogation and threats they could extract enough evidence from her to put me on trial. I owe my life, and the fact that they did not touch me in those years, to her heroism and endurance.\"\nTranslating Goethe.\nPasternak's translation of the of \"Faust\" led him to be attacked in the August 1950 edition of \"Novy Mir\". The critic accused Pasternak of distorting Goethe's \"progressive\" meanings to support \"the reactionary theory of 'pure art'\", as well as introducing aesthetic and individualist values. In a subsequent letter to the daughter of Marina Tsvetaeva, Pasternak explained that the attack was motivated by the fact that the supernatural elements of the play, which \"Novy Mir\" considered, \"irrational\", had been translated as Goethe had written them. Pasternak further declared that, despite the attacks on his translation, his contract for the had not been revoked.\nKhrushchev thaw.\nWhen Stalin died of a stroke on 5 March 1953, Ivinskaya was still imprisoned in the Gulag, and Pasternak was in Moscow. Across the nation, there were waves of panic, confusion, and public displays of grief. Pasternak wrote, \"Men who are not free... always idealize their bondage.\"\nAfter her release, Pasternak's relationship with Ivinskaya picked up where it had left off. Soon after he confided in her, \"For so long we were ruled over by a madman and a murderer, and now by a fool and a pig. The madman had his occasional flights of fancy, he had an intuitive feeling for certain things, despite his wild obscurantism. Now we are ruled over by mediocrities.\" During this period, Pasternak delighted in reading a clandestine copy of George Orwell's \"Animal Farm\" in English. In conversation with Ivinskaya, Pasternak explained that the pig dictator Napoleon, in the novel, \"vividly reminded\" him of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.\n\"Doctor Zhivago\".\nAlthough it contains passages written in the 1910s and 1920s, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was not completed until 1955. Pasternak submitted the novel to \"Novy Mir\" in 1956, which refused publication due to its rejection of socialist realism. The author, like his protagonist Yuri Zhivago, showed more concern for the welfare of individual characters than for the \"progress\" of society. Censors also regarded some passages as anti-Soviet, especially the novel's criticisms of Stalinism, Collectivisation, the Great Purge, and the Gulag.\nPasternak's fortunes were soon to change, however. In March 1956, the Italian Communist Party sent a journalist, Sergio D'Angelo, to work in the Soviet Union, and his status as a journalist as well as his membership in the Italian Communist Party allowed him to have access to various aspects of the cultural life in Moscow at the time. A Milan publisher, the communist Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, had also given him a commission to find new works of Soviet literature that would be appealing to Western audiences, and upon learning of \"Doctor Zhivago\"'s existence, D'Angelo travelled immediately to Peredelkino and offered to submit Pasternak's novel to Feltrinelli's company for publication. At first Pasternak was stunned. Then he brought the manuscript from his study and told D'Angelo with a laugh, \"You are hereby invited to watch me face the firing squad.\"\nAccording to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak was aware that he was taking a huge risk. No Soviet author had attempted to deal with Western publishers since the 1920s, when such behavior led the Soviet State to declare war on Boris Pilnyak and Evgeny Zamyatin. Pasternak, however, believed that Feltrinelli's Communist affiliation would not only guarantee publication, but might even force the Soviet State to publish the novel in Russia.\nIn a rare moment of agreement, both Olga Ivinskaya and Zinaida Pasternak were horrified by the submission of \"Doctor Zhivago\" to a Western publishing house. Pasternak, however, refused to change his mind and informed an emissary from Feltrinelli that he was prepared to undergo any sacrifice in order to see \"Doctor Zhivago\" published.\nIn 1957, Feltrinelli announced that the novel would be published by his company. Despite repeated demands from visiting Soviet emissaries, Feltrinelli refused to cancel or delay publication. According to Ivinskaya, \"He did not believe that we would ever publish the manuscript here and felt he had no right to withhold a masterpiece from the world \u2013 this would be an even greater crime.\" The Soviet government forced Pasternak to cable the publisher to withdraw the manuscript, but he sent separate, secret letters advising Feltrinelli to ignore the telegrams.\nHelped considerably by the Soviet campaign against the novel (as well as by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency's secret purchase of hundreds of copies of the book as it came off the presses around the world \u2013 see \"Nobel Prize\" section below), \"Doctor Zhivago\" became an instant sensation throughout the non-Communist world upon its release in November 1957. In the State of Israel, however, Pasternak's novel was sharply criticized for its assimilationist views towards the Jewish people. When informed of this, Pasternak responded, \"No matter. I am above race...\" According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak had written the disputed passages prior to Israeli independence. At the time, Pasternak had also been regularly attending Russian Orthodox Divine Liturgy. Therefore, he believed that Soviet Jews converting to Christianity was preferable to assimilating into atheism and Stalinism.\nThe first English translation of \"Doctor Zhivago\" was hastily produced by Max Hayward and Manya Harari in order to coincide with overwhelming public demand. It was released in August 1958, and remained the only edition available for more than fifty years. Between 1958 and 1959, the English language edition spent 26 weeks at the top of \"The New York Times\"' bestseller list.\nIvinskaya's daughter Irina circulated typed copies of the novel in Samizdat. Although no Soviet critics had read the banned novel, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was pilloried in the State-owned press. Similar attacks led to a humorous Russian saying, \"I haven't read Pasternak, but I condemn him\".\nDuring the aftermath of the Second World War, Pasternak had composed a series of poems on Gospel themes. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak had regarded Stalin as a \"giant of the pre-Christian era.\" Therefore, Pasternak's decision to write Christian poetry was \"a form of protest\".\nOn 9 September 1958, the \"Literary Gazette\" critic Viktor Pertsov retaliated by denouncing \"the decadent religious poetry of Pasternak, which reeks of mothballs from the Symbolist suitcase of 1908\u201310 manufacture.\" Furthermore, the author received much hate mail from Communists both at home and abroad. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to receive such letters for the remainder of his life.\nIn a letter written to his sister Josephine, however, Pasternak recalled the words of his friend Ekaterina Krashennikova upon reading \"Doctor Zhivago\". She had said, \"Don't forget yourself to the point of believing that it was you who wrote this work. It was the Russian people and their sufferings who created it. Thank God for having expressed it through your pen.\"\nNobel Prize.\nAccording to Yevgeni Borisovich Pasternak, \"Rumors that Pasternak was to receive the Nobel Prize started right after the end of World War II.\" According to the former Nobel Committee head Lars Gyllensten, his nomination was discussed every year from 1946 to 1950, then again in 1957 (it was finally awarded in 1958). Pasternak guessed at this from the growing waves of criticism in USSR. Sometimes he had to justify his European fame: 'According to the Union of Soviet Writers, some literature circles of the West see unusual importance in my work, not matching its modesty and low productivity...'\nMeanwhile, Pasternak wrote to Renate Schweitzer and his sister, Lydia Pasternak Slater. In both letters, the author expressed hope that he would be passed over by the Nobel Committee in favour of Alberto Moravia. Pasternak wrote that he was wracked with torments and anxieties at the thought of placing his loved ones in danger.\nOn 23 October 1958, Boris Pasternak was announced as the winner of the Nobel Prize. The citation credited Pasternak's contribution to Russian lyric poetry and for his role in \"continuing the great Russian epic tradition.\" On 25 October, Pasternak sent a telegram to the Swedish Academy: \"Infinitely grateful, touched, proud, surprised, overwhelmed.\" That same day, the Literary Institute in Moscow demanded that all its students sign a petition denouncing Pasternak and his novel. They were further ordered to join a \"spontaneous\" demonstration demanding Pasternak's exile from the Soviet Union. Also on that day, the \"Literary Gazette\" published a letter which was sent to B. Pasternak in September 1956 by the editors of the Soviet literary journal Novy Mir to justify their rejection of Doctor Zhivago. In publishing this letter the Soviet authorities wished to justify the measures they had taken against the author and his work. On 26 October, the \"Literary Gazette\" ran an article by David Zaslavski entitled, \"Reactionary Propaganda Uproar over a Literary Weed\".\nAccording to Solomon Volkov:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The anti-Pasternak campaign was organized in the worst Stalin tradition: denunciations in \"Pravda\" and other newspapers; publications of angry letters from, \"ordinary Soviet workers\", who had not read the book; hastily convened meetings of Pasternak's friends and colleagues, at which fine poets like Vladimir Soloukin, Leonid Martynov, and Boris Slutsky were forced to censure an author they respected. Slutsky, who in his brutal prose-like poems had created an image for himself as a courageous soldier and truth-lover, was so tormented by his anti-Pasternak speech that he later went insane. On October 29, 1958, at the plenum of the Central Committee of the Young Communist League, dedicated to the Komsomol's fortieth anniversary, its head, Vladimir Semichastny, attacked Pasternak before an audience of 14,000 people, including Khrushchev and other Party leaders. Semichastny first called Pasternak, \"a mangy sheep\", who pleased the enemies of the Soviet Union with, \"his slanderous so-called work.\" Then Semichastny (who became head of the KGB in 1961) added that, \"this man went and spat in the face of the people.\" And he concluded with, \"If you compare Pasternak to a pig, a pig would not do what he did,\" because a pig, \"never shits where it eats.\" Khrushchev applauded demonstratively. News of that speech drove Pasternak to the brink of suicide. It has recently come to light that the real author of Semichastny's insults was Khrushchev, who had called the Komsomol leader the night before and dictated his lines about the mangy sheep and the pig, which Semichastny described as a, \"typically Khrushchevian, deliberately crude, unceremoniously scolding.\"\nFurthermore, Pasternak was informed that, if he traveled to Stockholm to collect his Nobel Medal, he would be refused re-entry to the Soviet Union. As a result, on 29 October Pasternak sent a second telegram to the Nobel Committee: \"In view of the meaning given the award by the society in which I live, I must renounce this undeserved distinction which has been conferred on me. Please do not take my voluntary renunciation amiss.\" The Swedish Academy announced: \"This refusal, of course, in no way alters the validity of the award. There remains only for the Academy, however, to announce with regret that the presentation of the Prize cannot take place.\"\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, \"I couldn't recognize my father when I saw him that evening. Pale, lifeless face, tired painful eyes, and only speaking about the same thing: 'Now it all doesn't matter, I declined the Prize.'\"\nDeportation plans.\nDespite his decision to decline the award, the Union of Soviet Writers continued to demonise Pasternak in the State-owned press. Furthermore, he was threatened at the very least with formal exile to the West. In response, Pasternak wrote directly to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am addressing you personally, the C.C. of the C.P.S.S., and the Soviet Government. From Comrade Semichastny's speech I learn that the government, 'would not put any obstacles in the way of my departure from the U.S.S.R.' For me this is impossible. I am tied to Russia by birth, by my life and work. I cannot conceive of my destiny separate from Russia, or outside it. Whatever my mistakes or failings, I could not imagine that I should find myself at the center of such a political campaign as has been worked up round my name in the West. Once I was aware of this, I informed the Swedish Academy of my voluntary renunciation of the Nobel Prize. Departure beyond the borders of my country would for me be tantamount to death and I therefore request you not to take this extreme measure with me. With my hand on my heart, I can say that I have done something for Soviet literature, and may still be of use to it.\nIn \"The Oak and the Calf\", Alexander Solzhenitsyn sharply criticized Pasternak, both for declining the Nobel Prize and for sending such a letter to Khrushchev. In her own memoirs, Olga Ivinskaya blames herself for pressuring her lover into making both decisions.\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, \"She accused herself bitterly for persuading Pasternak to decline the Prize. After all that had happened, open shadowing, friends turning away, Pasternak's suicidal condition at the time, one can... understand her: the memory of Stalin's camps was too fresh, [and] she tried to protect him.\"\nOn 31 October 1958, the Union of Soviet Writers held a trial behind closed doors. According to the meeting minutes, Pasternak was denounced as an internal \u00e9migr\u00e9 and a Fascist fifth columnist. Afterwards, the attendees announced that Pasternak had been expelled from the Union. They further signed a petition to the Politburo, demanding that Pasternak be stripped of his Soviet citizenship and exiled to \"his Capitalist paradise.\" According to Yevgenii Pasternak, however, author Konstantin Paustovsky refused to attend the meeting. Yevgeny Yevtushenko did attend, but walked out in disgust.\nAccording to Yevgenii Pasternak, his father would have been exiled had it not been for Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who telephoned Khrushchev and threatened to organize a Committee for Pasternak's protection.\nIt is possible that the 1958 Nobel Prize prevented Pasternak's imprisonment due to the Soviet State's fear of international protests. Yevgenii Pasternak believes, however, that the resulting persecution fatally weakened his father's health.\nMeanwhile, Bill Mauldin produced that won the 1959 Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning. The cartoon depicts Pasternak as a GULAG inmate splitting trees in the snow, saying to another inmate: \"I won the Nobel Prize for Literature. What was your crime?\"\nLast years.\nPasternak's post-\"Zhivago\" poetry probes the universal questions of love, immortality, and reconciliation with God. Boris Pasternak wrote his last complete book, \"When the Weather Clears\", in 1959.\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to stick to his daily writing schedule even during the controversy over \"Doctor Zhivago\". He also continued translating the writings of Juliusz S\u0142owacki and Pedro Calder\u00f3n de la Barca. In his work on Calderon, Pasternak received the discreet support of Nikolai Mikhailovich Liubimov, a senior figure in the Party's literary apparatus. Ivinskaya describes Liubimov as, \"a shrewd and enlightened person who understood very well that all the mudslinging and commotion over the novel would be forgotten, but that there would always be a Pasternak.\" In a letter to his sisters in Oxford, England, Pasternak claimed to have finished translating one of Calderon's plays in less than a week.\nDuring the summer of 1959, Pasternak began writing \"The Blind Beauty\", a trilogy of stage plays set before and after Alexander II's abolition of serfdom in Russia. In an interview with Olga Carlisle from \"The Paris Review\", Pasternak enthusiastically described the play's plot and characters. He informed Olga Carlisle that, at the end of \"The Blind Beauty\", he wished to depict \"the birth of an enlightened and affluent middle class, open to occidental influences, progressive, intelligent, artistic\". However, Pasternak fell ill with terminal lung cancer before he could complete the first play of the trilogy.\nDeath.\nBoris Pasternak died of lung cancer in his dacha in Peredelkino on the evening of 30 May 1960. He first summoned his sons, and in their presence said, \"Who will suffer most because of my death? Who will suffer most? Only Oliusha will, and I haven't had time to do anything for her. The worst thing is that she will suffer.\" Pasternak's last words were, \"I can't hear very well. And there's a mist in front of my eyes. But it will go away, won't it? Don't forget to open the window tomorrow.\"\nFuneral demonstration.\nDespite only a small notice appearing in the \"Literary Gazette\", handwritten notices carrying the date and time of the funeral were posted throughout the Moscow subway system. As a result, thousands of admirers braved Militia and KGB surveillance to attend Pasternak's funeral in Peredelkino.\nBefore Pasternak's civil funeral, Ivinskaya had a conversation with Konstantin Paustovsky. According to her,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He began to say what an authentic event the funeral was\u2014an expression of what people really felt, and so characteristic of the Russia which stoned its prophets and did its poets to death as a matter of longstanding tradition. At such a moment, he continued indignantly, one was bound to recall the funeral of Pushkin and the Tsar's courtiers \u2013 their miserable hypocrisy and false pride. \"Just think how rich they are, how many Pasternaks they have\u2014as many as there were Pushkins in the Russia of Tsar Nicholas... Not much has changed. But what can one expect? They are afraid...\"\nThen, in the presence of a large number of foreign journalists, the body of Pasternak was removed to the cemetery. According to Ivinskaya,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The graveside service now began. It was hard for me in my state to make out what was going on. Later, I was told that Paustovski had wanted to give the funeral address, but it was in fact Professor Asmus who spoke. Wearing a light colored suit and a bright tie, he was dressed more for some gala occasion than for a funeral. \"A writer has died,\" he began, \"who, together with Pushkin, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy, forms part of the glory of Russian literature. Even if we cannot agree with him in everything; we all none the less owe him a debt of gratitude for setting an example of unswerving honesty, for his incorruptible conscience, and for his heroic view of his duty as a writer.\" Needless to say, he mentioned [Boris Leonidovich]'s, \"mistakes and failings,\" but hastened to add that, \"they do not, however, prevent us from recognizing the fact that he was a great poet.\" \"He was a very modest man,\" Asmus said in conclusion, \"and he did not like people to talk about him too much, so with this I shall bring my address to a close.\"\nTo the horror of the assembled Party officials, however, someone with \"a young and deeply anguished voice\" began reciting Pasternak's banned poem \"Hamlet\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nAccording to Ivinskaya,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At this point, the persons stage-managing the proceedings decided the ceremony must be brought to an end as quickly as possible, and somebody began to carry the lid toward the coffin. For the last time, I bent down to kiss Boris on the forehead, now completely cold... But now something unusual began to happen in the cemetery. Someone was about to put the lid on the coffin, and another person in gray trousers... said in an agitated voice: \"That's enough, we don't need any more speeches! Close the coffin!\" But people would not be silenced so easily. Someone in a colored, open-necked shirt who looked like a worker started to speak: \"Sleep peacefully, dear Boris Leonidovich! We do not know all your works, but we swear to you at this hour: the day will come when we shall know them all. We do not believe anything bad about your book. And what can we say about all you others, all you brother writers who have brought such disgrace upon yourselves that no words can describe it. Rest in peace, Boris Leonidovich!\" The man in gray trousers seized hold of other people who tried to come forward and pushed them back into the crowd: \"The meeting is over, there will be no more speeches!\" A foreigner expressed his indigation in broken Russian: \"You can only say the meeting is over when no more people wish to speak!\"\nThe final speaker at the graveside service said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God marks the path of the elect with thorns, and Pasternak was picked out and marked by God. He believed in eternity and he will belong to it... We excommunicated Tolstoy, we disowned Dostoevsky, and now we disown Pasternak. Everything that brings us glory we try to banish to the West... But we cannot allow this. We love Pasternak and we revere him as a poet... Glory to Pasternak!\nAs the spectators cheered, the bells of Peredelkino's Church of the Transfiguration began to toll. Written prayers for the dead were then placed upon Pasternak's forehead and the coffin was closed and buried. Pasternak's gravesite would go on to become a major shrine for members of the Soviet dissident movement.\nLegacy.\nAfter Pasternak's death, Ivinskaya was arrested for the second time, with her daughter, Irina Emelyanova. Both were accused of being Pasternak's link with Western publishers and of dealing in hard currency for \"Doctor Zhivago\". All of Pasternak's letters to Ivinskaya, as well as many other manuscripts and documents, were seized by the KGB. The KGB quietly released them, Irina after one year, in 1962, and Olga in 1964. By this time, Ivinskaya had served four years of an eight-year sentence, in retaliation for her role in \"Doctor Zhivago\"'s publication. In 1978, her memoirs were smuggled abroad and published in Paris. An English translation by Max Hayward was published the same year under the title \"A Captive of Time: My Years with Pasternak\".\nIvinskaya was rehabilitated only in 1988. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ivinskaya sued for the return of the letters and documents seized by the KGB in 1961. The Russian Supreme Court ultimately ruled against her, stating that \"there was no proof of ownership\" and that the \"papers should remain in the state archive\". Ivinskaya died of cancer on 8 September 1995. A reporter on NTV compared her role to that of other famous muses for Russian poets: \"As Pushkin would not be complete without Anna Kern, and Yesenin would be nothing without Isadora, so Pasternak would not be Pasternak without Olga Ivinskaya, who was his inspiration for \"Doctor Zhivago\".\".\nMeanwhile, Boris Pasternak continued to be pilloried by the Soviet State until Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed Perestroika during the 1980s.\nIn 1980, an asteroid was named 3508 Pasternak after Boris Pasternak.\nIn 1988, after decades of circulating in Samizdat, \"Doctor Zhivago\" was serialized in the literary journal \"Novy Mir\".\nIn December 1989, Yevgenii Borisovich Pasternak was permitted to travel to Stockholm in order to collect his father's Nobel Medal. At the ceremony, acclaimed cellist and Soviet dissident Mstislav Rostropovich performed a Bach serenade in honor of his deceased countryman.\nThe Pasternak family papers are stored at the Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford University. They contain correspondence, drafts of \"Doctor Zhivago\" and other writings, photographs, and other material, of Boris Pasternak and other family members.\nSince 2003, during the first presidency of Vladimir Putin, the novel \"Doctor Zhivago\" has entered the Russian school curriculum, where it is read in the 11th grade of secondary school.\nCommemoration.\nIn October 1984 by decision of a court, Pasternak's dacha in Peredelkino was taken from the writer's relatives and transferred to state ownership. Two years later, in 1986, the House-Museum of Boris Pasternak was founded (the first house-museum in the USSR).\nIn 1990, the year of the poet's 100th anniversary, the Pasternak Museum opened its doors in Chistopol, in the house where the poet evacuated to during the Great Patriotic War (1941\u20131943), and in Peredelkino, where he lived for many years until his death. The head of the poet's house-museum is Natalia Pasternak, his daughter-in-law (widow of the youngest son Leonid).\nIn 2008 a museum was opened in Vsevolodo-Vilva in the house where the budding poet lived from January to June 1916.\nIn 2009 on the City Day in Perm the first Russian monument to Pasternak was erected in the square near the Opera Theater (sculptor: Elena Munc).\nA memorial plaque was installed on the house where Pasternak was born.\nIn memory of the poet's three-time stay in Tula, on 27 May 2005 a marble memorial plaque to Pasternak was installed on the W\u00f6rmann hotel's wall, as Pasternak was a Nobel laureate and dedicated several of his works to Tula.\nOn 20 February 2008, in Kyiv, a memorial plaque was put up on the house No.9 on Lipinsky Street, but seven years later it was stolen by vandals.\nIn 2012 a monument to Boris Pasternak was erected in the district center of Muchkapsky by Z. Tsereteli.\nIn 1990, as part of the series \"Nobel Prize Winners\", the USSR and Sweden (\"Nobel Prize Winners \u2013 Literature\") issued stamps depicting Boris Pasternak.\nIn 2015, as part of the series \"125th Annive. of the Birth of Boris Pasternak, 1890\u20131960\", Mozambique issued a miniature sheet depicting Boris Pasternak. Although this issue was acknowledged by the postal administration of Mozambique, the issue was not placed on sale in Mozambique, and was only distributed to the new issue trade by Mozambique's philatelic agent.\nIn 2015, as part of the series \"125th Birth Anniversary of Boris Pasternak\", Maldives issued a miniature sheet depicting Boris Pasternak. The issue was acknowledged by the Maldive postal authorities, but only distributed by the Maldive philatelic agent for collecting purposes.\nOn the occasion of the 50th anniversary of B. Pasternak's Nobel Prize, the Principality of Monaco issued a postage stamp in his memory.\nOn 27 January 2015, in honor of the poet's 125th birthday, the Russian Post issued an envelope with the original stamp.\nOn 1 October 2015, a monument to Pasternak was erected in Chistopol.\nOn 10 February 2020, a celebration of the 130th birthday anniversary was held at Exhibition of Achievements of National Economy in Moscow.\nOn 10 February 2021, Google celebrated his 131st birthday with a Google Doodle. The Doodle was displayed in Russia, Sweden, some Middle Eastern countries and some Mediterranean countries.\nAdaptations.\nThe first screen adaptation of \"Doctor Zhivago\", adapted by Robert Bolt and directed by David Lean, appeared in 1965. The film, which toured in the roadshow tradition, starred Omar Sharif, Geraldine Chaplin, and Julie Christie. Concentrating on the love triangle aspects of the novel, the film became a worldwide blockbuster, but was unavailable in Russia until perestroika.\nIn 2002, the novel was adapted as a television miniseries. Directed by Giacomo Campiotti, the serial starred Hans Matheson, Alexandra Maria Lara, Keira Knightley, and Sam Neill.\nThe Russian TV version of 2006, directed by Aleksandr Proshkin and starring Oleg Menshikov as Zhivago, is more faithful to Pasternak's novel than David Lean's 1965 film.\nWork.\nPoetry.\nThoughts on poetry.\nAccording to Olga Ivinskaya:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Pasternak the \"all-powerful god of detail\" always, it seems, revolted against the idea of turning out verse for its own sake or to convey vague personal moods. If \"eternal\" themes were to be dealt with yet again, then only by a poet in the true sense of the word\u2014otherwise he should not have the strength of character to touch them at all. Poetry so tightly packed (till it crunched like ice) or distilled into a solution where \"grains of true prose germinated,\" a poetry in which realistic detail cast a genuine spell\u2014only such poetry was acceptable to Pasternak; but not poetry for which indulgence was required, or for which allowances had to be made\u2014that is, the kind of ephemeral poetry which is particularly common in an age of literary conformism. [Boris Leonidovich] could weep over the \"purple-gray circle\" which glowed above Blok's tormented muse and he never failed to be moved by the terseness of Pushkin's sprightly lines, but rhymed slogans about the production of tin cans in the so-called \"poetry\" of Surkov and his like, as well as the outpourings about love in the work of those young poets who only echo each other and the classics\u2014all this left him cold at best and for the most part made him indignant.\nFor this reason, Pasternak avoided literary cafes where young poets regularly invited them to read their verse. According to Ivinskaya, \"It was this sort of thing that moved him to say: 'Who started the idea that I love poetry? I can't stand poetry.'\"\nAlso according to Ivinskaya, \"'The way they could write!' he once exclaimed\u2014by 'they' he meant the Russian classics. And immediately afterward, reading or, rather, glancing through some verse in the \"Literary Gazette\": 'Just look how tremendously well they've learned to rhyme! But there's actually nothing there\u2014it would be better to say it in a news bulletin. What has poetry got to do with this?' By 'they' in this case, he meant the poets writing today.\"\nTranslation.\nReluctant to conform to socialist realism, Pasternak turned to translation in order to provide for his family. He soon produced acclaimed translations of S\u00e1ndor Pet\u0151fi, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Rainer Maria Rilke, Paul Verlaine, Taras Shevchenko, and Nikoloz Baratashvili. Osip Mandelstam, however, privately warned him, \"Your collected works will consist of twelve volumes of translations, and only one of your own work.\"\nIn a 1942 letter, Pasternak declared, \"I am completely opposed to contemporary ideas about translation. The work of Lozinski, Radlova, Marshak, and Chukovski is alien to me, and seems artificial, soulless, and lacking in depth. I share the nineteenth-century view of translation as a literary exercise demanding insight of a higher kind than that provided by a merely philological approach.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya, Pasternak believed in not being too literal in his translations, which he felt could confuse the meaning of the text. He instead advocated observing each poem from afar to plumb its true depths.\nPasternak's translations of William Shakespeare (\"Romeo and Juliet\", \"Antony and Cleopatra\", \"Othello\", \"King Henry IV\" (Part I) and (Part II), \"Hamlet\", \"Macbeth\", \"King Lear\") remain deeply popular with Russian audiences because of their colloquial, modernised dialogues. Pasternak's critics, however, accused him of \"pasternakizing\" Shakespeare. In a 1956 essay, Pasternak wrote: \"Translating Shakespeare is a task which takes time and effort. Once it is undertaken, it is best to divide it into sections long enough for the work to not get stale and to complete one section each day. In thus daily progressing through the text, the translator finds himself reliving the circumstances of the author. Day by day, he reproduces his actions and he is drawn into some of his secrets, not in theory, but practically, by experience.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whenever [Boris Leonidovich] was provided with literal versions of things which echoed his own thoughts or feelings, it made all the difference and he worked feverishly, turning them into masterpieces. I remember his translating Paul Verlaine in a burst of enthusiasm like this \u2013 \"\" was after all an expression of his own beliefs about poetry.\nWhile they were both collaborating on translating Rabindranath Tagore from Bengali into Russian, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya: \"1) Bring out the theme of the poem, its subject matter, as clearly as possible; 2) tighten up the fluid, non-European form by rhyming internally, not at the end of the lines; 3) use loose, irregular meters, mostly ternary ones. You may allow yourself to use assonances.\"\nLater, while she was collaborating with him on a translation of V\u00edt\u011bzslav Nezval, Pasternak told Ivinskaya:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Use the literal translation only for the \"meaning\", but do not borrow words as they stand from it: they are absurd and not always comprehensible. Don't translate everything, only what you can manage, and by this means try to make the translation more precise than the original \u2013 an absolute necessity in the case of such a confused, slipshod piece of work.\"\nAccording to Ivinskaya, however, translation was not a genuine vocation for Pasternak. She later recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One day someone brought him a copy of a British newspaper in which there was a double feature under the title, \"Pasternak Keeps a Courageous Silence.\" It said that if Shakespeare had written in Russian he would have written in the same way he was translated by Pasternak... What a pity, the article continued, that Pasternak published nothing but translations, writing his own work for himself and a small circle of intimate friends. \"What do they mean by saying that my silence is courageous?\" [Boris Leonidovich] commented sadly after reading all this. \"I am silent because I am not printed.\"\nMusic.\nBoris Pasternak was also a composer, and had a promising musical career as a musician ahead of him, had he chosen to pursue it. He came from a musical family: his mother was a concert pianist and a student of Anton Rubinstein and Theodor Leschetizky, and Pasternak's early impressions were of hearing piano trios in the home. The family had a dacha (country house) close to one occupied by Alexander Scriabin. Sergei Rachmaninoff, Rainer Maria Rilke and Leo Tolstoy were all visitors to the family home. His father Leonid was a painter who produced one of the most important portraits of Scriabin, and Pasternak wrote many years later of witnessing with great excitement the creation of Scriabin's Symphony No. 3 (\"The Divine Poem\"), in 1903.\nPasternak began to compose at the age of 13. The high achievements of his mother discouraged him from becoming a pianist, but \u2013 inspired by Scriabin \u2013 he entered the Moscow Conservatory, but left abruptly in 1910 at the age of twenty, to study philosophy in Marburg University. Four years later he returned to Moscow, having finally decided on a career in literature, publishing his first book of poems, influenced by Aleksandr Blok and the Russian Futurists, the same year.\nPasternak's early compositions show the clear influence of Scriabin. His single-movement Piano Sonata of 1909 shows a more mature and individual voice. Nominally in B minor, it moves freely from key to key with frequent changes of key-signature and a chromatic dissonant style that defies easy analysis. Although composed during his time at the Conservatory, the Sonata was composed at Rayki, some 40km north-east of Moscow, where Leonid Pasternak had his painting studio and taught his students.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4668", "revid": "2136253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4668", "title": "Binomial coefficient", "text": "Number of subsets of a given size\nIn mathematics, the binomial coefficients are the positive integers that occur as coefficients in the binomial theorem. Commonly, a binomial coefficient is indexed by a pair of integers \"n\" \u2265 \"k\" \u2265 0 and is written formula_1 It is the coefficient of the \"x\"\"k\" term in the polynomial expansion of the binomial power (1 + \"x\")\"n\"; this coefficient can be computed by the multiplicative formula\nformula_2\nwhich using factorial notation can be compactly expressed as\nformula_3\nFor example, the fourth power of 1 + \"x\" is\nformula_4\nand the binomial coefficient formula_5 is the coefficient of the \"x\"2 term.\nArranging the numbers formula_6 in successive rows for \"n\" = 0, 1, 2, ... gives a triangular array called Pascal's triangle, satisfying the recurrence relation\nformula_7\nThe binomial coefficients occur in many areas of mathematics, and especially in combinatorics. In combinatorics the symbol formula_8 is usually read as \"n choose k\" because there are formula_8 ways to choose an (unordered) subset of k elements from a fixed set of n elements. For example, there are formula_10 ways to choose 2 elements from {1, 2, 3, 4}, namely {1, 2}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, {2, 3}, {2, 4} and {3, 4}.\nThe first form of the binomial coefficients can be generalized to formula_11 for any complex number z and integer \"k\" \u2265 0, and many of their properties continue to hold in this more general form.\nHistory and notation.\nAndreas von Ettingshausen introduced the notation formula_12 in 1826, although the numbers were known centuries earlier (see Pascal's triangle). Around 1150, the Indian mathematician Bhaskaracharya gave an exposition of binomial coefficients in his book \"L\u012bl\u0101vat\u012b\".\nAlternative notations include \"C\"(\"n\", \"k\"), \"n\"\"C\"\"k\", \"n\"\"C\"\"k\", \"C\", \"C\", and \"C\"\"n\",\"k\", in all of which the C stands for \"combinations\" or \"choices\"; the C notation means the number of ways to choose \"k\" out of \"n\" objects. Many calculators use variants of the because they can represent it on a single-line display. In this form the binomial coefficients are easily compared to the numbers of k-permutations of n, written as \"P\"(\"n\", \"k\"), etc.\nDefinition and interpretations.\nFor natural numbers (taken to include 0) n and k, the binomial coefficient formula_12 can be defined as the coefficient of the monomial \"X\"\"k\" in the expansion of (1 + \"X\")\"n\". The same coefficient also occurs (if \"k\" \u2264 \"n\") in the binomial formula\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\n(valid for any elements x, y of a commutative ring),\nwhich explains the name \"binomial coefficient\".\nAnother occurrence of this number is in combinatorics, where it gives the number of ways, disregarding order, that k objects can be chosen from among n objects; more formally, the number of k-element subsets (or k-combinations) of an n-element set. This number can be seen as equal to that of the first definition, independently of any of the formulas below to compute it: if in each of the n factors of the power (1 + \"X\")\"n\" one temporarily labels the term X with an index i (running from 1 to n), then each subset of k indices gives after expansion a contribution \"X\"\"k\", and the coefficient of that monomial in the result will be the number of such subsets. This shows in particular that formula_12 is a natural number for any natural numbers n and k. There are many other combinatorial interpretations of binomial coefficients (counting problems for which the answer is given by a binomial coefficient expression), for instance the number of words formed of n bits (digits 0 or 1) whose sum is k is given by formula_12, while the number of ways to write formula_16 where every \"a\"\"i\" is a nonnegative integer is given by &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Most of these interpretations can be shown to be equivalent to counting k-combinations.\nComputing the value of binomial coefficients.\nSeveral methods exist to compute the value of formula_8 without actually expanding a binomial power or counting k-combinations.\nRecursive formula.\nOne method uses the recursive, purely additive formula\nformula_18 for all integers formula_19 such that formula_20\nwith boundary values\nformula_21\nfor all integers \"n\" \u2265 0.\nThe formula follows from considering the set {1, 2, 3, ..., \"n\"} and counting separately (a) the k-element groupings that include a particular set element, say \"i\", in every group (since \"i\" is already chosen to fill one spot in every group, we need only choose \"k\" \u2212 1 from the remaining \"n\" \u2212 1) and (b) all the \"k\"-groupings that don't include \"i\"; this enumerates all the possible k-combinations of n elements. It also follows from tracing the contributions to \"X\"\"k\" in (1 + \"X\")\"n\"\u22121(1 + \"X\"). As there is zero \"X\"\"n\"+1 or \"X\"\u22121 in (1 + \"X\")\"n\", one might extend the definition beyond the above boundaries to include formula_22 when either \"k\" &gt; \"n\" or \"k\" &lt; 0. This recursive formula then allows the construction of Pascal's triangle, surrounded by white spaces where the zeros, or the trivial coefficients, would be.\nMultiplicative formula.\nA more efficient method to compute individual binomial coefficients is given by the formula\nformula_23\nwhere the numerator of the first fraction, formula_24, is a falling factorial.\nThis formula is easiest to understand for the combinatorial interpretation of binomial coefficients.\nThe numerator gives the number of ways to select a sequence of k distinct objects, retaining the order of selection, from a set of n objects. The denominator counts the number of distinct sequences that define the same k-combination when order is disregarded. This formula can also be stated in a recursive form. Using the \"C\" notation from above, formula_25, where formula_26. It is readily derived by evaluating formula_27 and can intuitively be understood as starting at the leftmost coefficient of the formula_28-th row of Pascal's triangle, whose value is always formula_29, and recursively computing the next coefficient to its right until the formula_30-th one is reached.\nDue to the symmetry of the binomial coefficients with regard to k and \"n\" \u2212 \"k\", calculation of the above product, as well as the recursive relation, may be optimised by setting its upper limit to the smaller of k and \"n\" \u2212 \"k\".\nFactorial formula.\nFinally, though computationally unsuitable, there is the compact form, often used in proofs and derivations, which makes repeated use of the familiar factorial function:\nformula_31\nwhere \"n\"! denotes the factorial of n. This formula follows from the multiplicative formula above by multiplying numerator and denominator by (\"n\" \u2212 \"k\")!; as a consequence it involves many factors common to numerator and denominator. It is less practical for explicit computation (in the case that k is small and n is large) unless common factors are first cancelled (in particular since factorial values grow very rapidly). The formula does exhibit a symmetry that is less evident from the multiplicative formula (though it is from the definitions)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich leads to a more efficient multiplicative computational routine. Using the falling factorial notation,\nformula_32\nGeneralization and connection to the binomial series.\nThe multiplicative formula allows the definition of binomial coefficients to be extended by replacing \"n\" by an arbitrary number \"\u03b1\" (negative, real, complex) or even an element of any commutative ring in which all positive integers are invertible:\nformula_33\nWith this definition one has a generalization of the binomial formula (with one of the variables set to 1), which justifies still calling the formula_34 binomial coefficients:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis formula is valid for all complex numbers \"\u03b1\" and \"X\" with |\"X\"|\u00a0&lt;\u00a01. It can also be interpreted as an identity of formal power series in \"X\", where it actually can serve as definition of arbitrary powers of power series with constant coefficient equal to\u00a01; the point is that with this definition all identities hold that one expects for exponentiation, notably\nformula_35\nIf \"\u03b1\" is a nonnegative integer \"n\", then all terms with \"k\" &gt; \"n\" are zero, and the infinite series becomes a finite sum, thereby recovering the binomial formula. However, for other values of \"\u03b1\", including negative integers and rational numbers, the series is really infinite.\nPascal's triangle.\nPascal's rule is the important recurrence relation\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich can be used to prove by mathematical induction that formula_36 is a natural number for all integer \"n\" \u2265 0 and all integer \"k\", a fact that is not immediately obvious from formula (1). To the left and right of Pascal's triangle, the entries (shown as blanks) are all zero.\nPascal's rule also gives rise to Pascal's triangle:\nRow number n contains the numbers formula_8 for \"k\" = 0, \u2026, \"n\". It is constructed by first placing 1s in the outermost positions, and then filling each inner position with the sum of the two numbers directly above. This method allows the quick calculation of binomial coefficients without the need for fractions or multiplications. For instance, by looking at row number 5 of the triangle, one can quickly read off that\nformula_38\nCombinatorics and statistics.\nBinomial coefficients are of importance in combinatorics because they provide ready formulas for certain frequent counting problems:\nBinomial coefficients as polynomials.\nFor any nonnegative integer \"k\", the expression formula_45 can be written as a polynomial with denominator \"k\"!:\nformula_46\nthis presents a polynomial in \"t\" with rational coefficients.\nAs such, it can be evaluated at any real or complex number \"t\" to define binomial coefficients with such first arguments. These \"generalized binomial coefficients\" appear in Newton's generalized binomial theorem.\nFor each \"k\", the polynomial formula_47 can be characterized as the unique degree \"k\" polynomial \"p\"(\"t\") satisfying \"p\"(0) = \"p\"(1) = \u22ef = \"p\"(\"k\" \u2212 1) = 0 and \"p\"(\"k\") = 1.\nIts coefficients are expressible in terms of Stirling numbers of the first kind:\nformula_48\nThe derivative of formula_47 can be calculated by logarithmic differentiation:\nformula_50\nThis can cause a problem when evaluated at integers from formula_51 to formula_52, but using identities below we can compute the derivative as:\nformula_53\nBinomial coefficients as a basis for the space of polynomials.\nOver any field of characteristic 0 (that is, any field that contains the rational numbers), each polynomial \"p\"(\"t\") of degree at most \"d\" is uniquely expressible as a linear combination formula_54 of binomial coefficients, because the binomial coefficients consist of one polynomial of each degree. The coefficient \"a\"\"k\" is the \"k\"th difference of the sequence \"p\"(0), \"p\"(1), ..., \"p\"(\"k\"). Explicitly,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInteger-valued polynomials.\nEach polynomial formula_47 is integer-valued: it has an integer value at all integer inputs formula_56. (One way to prove this is by induction on \"k\" using Pascal's identity.) Therefore, any integer linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials is integer-valued too. Conversely, (4) shows that any integer-valued polynomial is an integer linear combination of these binomial coefficient polynomials. More generally, for any subring \"R\" of a characteristic 0 field \"K\", a polynomial in \"K\"[\"t\"] takes values in \"R\" at all integers if and only if it is an \"R\"-linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials.\nExample.\nThe integer-valued polynomial 3\"t\"(3\"t\" + 1) / 2 can be rewritten as\nformula_57\nIdentities involving binomial coefficients.\nThe factorial formula facilitates relating nearby binomial coefficients. For instance, if \"k\" is a positive integer and \"n\" is arbitrary, then\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nand, with a little more work,\nformula_58\nWe can also get\nformula_59\nMoreover, the following may be useful:\nformula_60\nFor constant \"n\", we have the following recurrence:\nformula_61\nTo sum up, we have\nformula_62\nformula_63\nSums of the binomial coefficients.\nThe formula\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nsays that the elements in the nth row of Pascal's triangle always add up to 2 raised to the nth power. This is obtained from the binomial theorem (\u2217) by setting \"x\" = 1 and \"y\" = 1. The formula also has a natural combinatorial interpretation: the left side sums the number of subsets of {1, ..., \"n\"} of sizes \"k\" = 0, 1, ..., \"n\", giving the total number of subsets. (That is, the left side counts the power set of {1, ..., \"n\"}.) However, these subsets can also be generated by successively choosing or excluding each element 1, ..., \"n\"; the \"n\" independent binary choices (bit-strings) allow a total of formula_64 choices. The left and right sides are two ways to count the same collection of subsets, so they are equal.\nThe formulas\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nand\nformula_65\nfollow from the binomial theorem after differentiating with respect to x (twice for the latter) and then substituting \"x\" = \"y\" = 1.\nThe Chu\u2013Vandermonde identity, which holds for any complex values \"m\" and \"n\" and any non-negative integer \"k\", is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nand can be found by examination of the coefficient of formula_66 in the expansion of (1 + \"x\")\"m\"(1 + \"x\")\"n\"\u2212\"m\" = (1 + \"x\")\"n\" using equation (2). When \"m\" = 1, equation (7) reduces to equation (3). In the special case \"n\" = 2\"m\", \"k\" = \"m\", using (1), the expansion (7) becomes (as seen in Pascal's triangle at right)\nformula_67 Pascal's triangle, rows 0 through 7. Equation 8 for \"m\" = 3 is illustrated in rows 3 and 6 as formula_68\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere the term on the right side is a central binomial coefficient.\nAnother form of the Chu\u2013Vandermonde identity, which applies for any integers \"j\", \"k\", and \"n\" satisfying 0 \u2264 \"j\" \u2264 \"k\" \u2264 \"n\", is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe proof is similar, but uses the binomial series expansion (2) with negative integer exponents.\nWhen \"j\" = \"k\", equation (9) gives the hockey-stick identity\nformula_69\nand its relative\nformula_70\nLet \"F\"(\"n\") denote the \"n\"-th Fibonacci number.\nThen\nformula_71\nThis can be proved by induction using (3) or by Zeckendorf's representation. A combinatorial proof is given below.\nMultisections of sums.\nFor integers \"s\" and \"t\" such that formula_72 series multisection gives the following identity for the sum of binomial coefficients:\nformula_73\nFor small s, these series have particularly nice forms; for example,\nformula_74\nformula_75\nformula_76\nformula_77\nformula_78\nformula_79\nformula_80\nPartial sums.\nAlthough there is no closed formula for partial sums\nformula_81\nof binomial coefficients, one can again use (3) and induction to show that for \"k\" = 0, \u2026, \"n\" \u2212 1,\nformula_82\nwith special case\nformula_83\nfor \"n\" &gt; 0. This latter result is also a special case of the result from the theory of finite differences that for any polynomial \"P\"(\"x\") of degree less than \"n\",\nformula_84\nDifferentiating (2) \"k\" times and setting \"x\" = \u22121 yields this for\nformula_85,\nwhen 0 \u2264 \"k\" &lt; \"n\",\nand the general case follows by taking linear combinations of these.\nWhen \"P\"(\"x\") is of degree less than or equal to \"n\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_86 is the coefficient of degree \"n\" in \"P\"(\"x\").\nMore generally for (10),\nformula_87\nwhere \"m\" and \"d\" are complex numbers. This follows immediately applying (10) to the polynomial &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; instead of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and observing that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; still has degree less than or equal to \"n\", and that its coefficient of degree \"n\" is \"dnan\".\nThe series formula_88 is convergent for \"k\" \u2265 2. This formula is used in the analysis of the German tank problem. It follows from formula_89 which is proved by induction on \"M\".\nIdentities with combinatorial proofs.\nMany identities involving binomial coefficients can be proved by combinatorial means. For example, for nonnegative integers formula_90, the identity\nformula_91\n(which reduces to (6) when \"q\" = 1) can be given a double counting proof, as follows. The left side counts the number of ways of selecting a subset of [\"n\"] = {1, 2, ..., \"n\"} with at least \"q\" elements, and marking \"q\" elements among those selected. The right side counts the same thing, because there are formula_92 ways of choosing a set of \"q\" elements to mark, and formula_93 to choose which of the remaining elements of [\"n\"] also belong to the subset.\nIn Pascal's identity\nformula_94\nboth sides count the number of \"k\"-element subsets of [\"n\"]: the two terms on the right side group them into those that contain element \"n\" and those that do not.\nThe identity (8) also has a combinatorial proof. The identity reads\nformula_95\nSuppose you have formula_96 empty squares arranged in a row and you want to mark (select) \"n\" of them. There are formula_97 ways to do this. On the other hand, you may select your \"n\" squares by selecting \"k\" squares from among the first \"n\" and formula_98 squares from the remaining \"n\" squares; any \"k\" from 0 to \"n\" will work. This gives\nformula_99\nNow apply (1) to get the result.\nIf one denotes by \"F\"(\"i\") the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, indexed so that \"F\"(0) = \"F\"(1) = 1, then the identity\nformula_100\nhas the following combinatorial proof. One may show by induction that \"F\"(\"n\") counts the number of ways that a \"n\" \u00d7 1 strip of squares may be covered by 2 \u00d7 1 and 1 \u00d7 1 tiles. On the other hand, if such a tiling uses exactly k of the 2 \u00d7 1 tiles, then it uses \"n\" \u2212 2\"k\" of the 1 \u00d7 1 tiles, and so uses \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" tiles total. There are formula_101 ways to order these tiles, and so summing this coefficient over all possible values of k gives the identity.\nSum of coefficients row.\nThe number of \"k\"-combinations for all \"k\", formula_102, is the sum of the \"n\"th row (counting from 0) of the binomial coefficients. These combinations are enumerated by the 1 digits of the set of base 2 numbers counting from 0 to formula_103, where each digit position is an item from the set of \"n\".\nDixon's identity.\nDixon's identity is\nformula_104\nor, more generally,\nformula_105\nwhere \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are non-negative integers.\nContinuous identities.\nCertain trigonometric integrals have values expressible in terms of binomial coefficients: For any formula_106\nformula_107\nformula_108\nformula_109\nThese can be proved by using Euler's formula to convert trigonometric functions to complex exponentials, expanding using the binomial theorem, and integrating term by term.\nCongruences.\nIf \"n\" is prime, then formula_110 for every \"k\" with formula_111\nMore generally, this remains true if \"n\" is any number and \"k\" is such that all the numbers between 1 and \"k\" are coprime to \"n\".\nIndeed, we have\nformula_112\nGenerating functions.\nOrdinary generating functions.\nFor a fixed n, the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_113 is\nformula_114\nFor a fixed k, the ordinary generating function of the sequence formula_115 is\nformula_116\nThe bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is\nformula_117\nA symmetric bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is\nformula_118\nwhich is the same as the previous generating function after the substitution formula_119.\nExponential generating function.\nA symmetric exponential bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is:\nformula_120\nDivisibility properties.\nIn 1852, Kummer proved that if \"m\" and \"n\" are nonnegative integers and \"p\" is a prime number, then the largest power of \"p\" dividing formula_121 equals \"p\"\"c\", where \"c\" is the number of carries when \"m\" and \"n\" are added in base \"p\".\nEquivalently, the exponent of a prime \"p\" in formula_39\nequals the number of nonnegative integers \"j\" such that the fractional part of \"k\"/\"p\"\"j\" is greater than the fractional part of \"n\"/\"p\"\"j\". (For example, formula_39 is not divisible by \"p\" if every digit in the base-\"p\" representation of \"k\" is less than or equal to the corresponding digit in the base-\"p\" representation of \"n\".) It can be deduced from this that formula_39 is divisible by \"n\"/gcd(\"n\",\"k\"). In particular therefore it follows that \"p\" divides formula_125 for all positive integers \"r\" and \"s\" such that \"s\" &lt; \"p\"\"r\". However this is not true of higher powers of \"p\": for example 9 does not divide formula_126.\nAny integer divides almost all binomial coefficients. More precisely, fix an integer \"d\" and let \"f\"(\"N\") denote the number of binomial coefficients formula_39 with formula_128 such that \"d\" divides formula_39. Then\nformula_130\nSince the number of binomial coefficients formula_39 with \"n\" &lt; \"N\" is \"N\"(\"N\" + 1) / 2, this implies that the density of binomial coefficients divisible by \"d\" goes to 1.\nBinomial coefficients have divisibility properties related to least common multiples of consecutive integers. For example:\n formula_132 divides formula_133.\n formula_132 is a multiple of formula_135.\nAnother fact:\nAn integer \"n\" \u2265 2 is prime if and only if\nall the intermediate binomial coefficients\nformula_136\nare divisible by \"n\".\nProof:\nWhen \"p\" is prime, \"p\" divides\nformula_137 for all 0 &lt; \"k\" &lt; \"p\"\nbecause formula_138 is a natural number and \"p\" divides the numerator but not the denominator.\nWhen \"n\" is composite, let \"p\" be the smallest prime factor of \"n\" and let \"k\" = \"n\"/\"p\". Then 0 &lt; \"p\" &lt; \"n\" and\nformula_139\notherwise the numerator \"k\"(\"n\" \u2212 1)(\"n\" \u2212 2)\u22ef(\"n\" \u2212 \"p\" + 1) has to be divisible by \"n\" = \"k\"\u00d7\"p\", this can only be the case when (\"n\" \u2212 1)(\"n\" \u2212 2)\u22ef(\"n\" \u2212 \"p\" + 1) is divisible by \"p\". But \"n\" is divisible by \"p\", so \"p\" does not divide \"n\" \u2212 1, \"n\" \u2212 2, \u2026, \"n\" \u2212 \"p\" + 1 and because \"p\" is prime, we know that \"p\" does not divide (\"n\" \u2212 1)(\"n\" \u2212 2)\u22ef(\"n\" \u2212 \"p\" + 1) and so the numerator cannot be divisible by \"n\".\nBounds and asymptotic formulas.\nThe following bounds for formula_39 hold for all values of \"n\" and \"k\" such that 1 \u2264 \"k\" \u2264 \"n\":\nformula_141\nThe first inequality follows from the fact that\nformula_142\nand each of these formula_143 terms in this product is formula_144. A similar argument can be made to show the second inequality. The final strict inequality is equivalent to formula_145, that is clear since the RHS is a term of the exponential series formula_146.\nFrom the divisibility properties we can infer that\nformula_147\nwhere both equalities can be achieved.\nThe following bounds are useful in information theory:\nformula_148\nwhere formula_149 is the binary entropy function. It can be further tightened to\nformula_150\nfor all formula_151.\nBoth \"n\" and \"k\" large.\nStirling's approximation yields the following approximation, valid when formula_152 both tend to infinity:\nformula_153\nBecause the inequality forms of Stirling's formula also bound the factorials, slight variants on the above asymptotic approximation give exact bounds.\nIn particular, when formula_28 is sufficiently large, one has\nformula_155 and formula_156. More generally, for \"m\" \u2265 2 and \"n\" \u2265 1 (again, by applying Stirling's formula to the factorials in the binomial coefficient),\nformula_157\nIf \"n\" is large and \"k\" is linear in \"n\", various precise asymptotic estimates exist for the binomial coefficient formula_158. For example, if formula_159 then\nformula_160\nwhere \"d\" = \"n\" \u2212 2\"k\".\nn much larger than k.\nIf n is large and k is \"o\"(\"n\") (that is, if \"k\"/\"n\" \u2192 0), then\nformula_161\nwhere again o is the little o notation.\nSums of binomial coefficients.\nA simple and rough upper bound for the sum of binomial coefficients can be obtained using the binomial theorem:\nformula_162\nMore precise bounds are given by\nformula_163\nvalid for all integers formula_164 with formula_165.\nGeneralized binomial coefficients.\nThe infinite product formula for the gamma function also gives an expression for binomial coefficients\nformula_166\nwhich yields the asymptotic formulas\nformula_167\nas formula_168.\nThis asymptotic behaviour is contained in the approximation\nformula_169\nas well. (Here formula_170 is the \"k\"-th harmonic number and formula_171 is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant.)\nFurther, the asymptotic formula\nformula_172\nhold true, whenever formula_173 and formula_174 for some complex number formula_175.\nGeneralizations.\nGeneralization to multinomials.\nBinomial coefficients can be generalized to multinomial coefficients defined to be the number:\nformula_176\nwhere\nformula_177\nWhile the binomial coefficients represent the coefficients of (\"x\" + \"y\")\"n\", the multinomial coefficients\nrepresent the coefficients of the polynomial\nformula_178\nThe case \"r\" = 2 gives binomial coefficients:\nformula_179\nThe combinatorial interpretation of multinomial coefficients is distribution of \"n\" distinguishable elements over \"r\" (distinguishable) containers, each containing exactly \"ki\" elements, where \"i\" is the index of the container.\nMultinomial coefficients have many properties similar to those of binomial coefficients, for example the recurrence relation:\nformula_180\nand symmetry:\nformula_181\nwhere formula_182 is a permutation of (1, 2, ..., \"r\").\nTaylor series.\nUsing Stirling numbers of the first kind the series expansion around any arbitrarily chosen point formula_183 is\nformula_184\nBinomial coefficient with \"n\" = 1/2.\nThe definition of the binomial coefficients can be extended to the case where formula_28 is real and formula_30 is integer.\nIn particular, the following identity holds for any non-negative integer formula_30:\nformula_188\nThis shows up when expanding formula_189 into a power series using the Newton binomial series :\nformula_190\nProducts of binomial coefficients.\nOne can express the product of two binomial coefficients as a linear combination of binomial coefficients:\nformula_191\nwhere the connection coefficients are multinomial coefficients. In terms of labelled combinatorial objects, the connection coefficients represent the number of ways to assign \"m\" + \"n\" \u2212 \"k\" labels to a pair of labelled combinatorial objects\u2014of weight \"m\" and \"n\" respectively\u2014that have had their first \"k\" labels identified, or glued together to get a new labelled combinatorial object of weight \"m\" + \"n\" \u2212 \"k\". (That is, to separate the labels into three portions to apply to the glued part, the unglued part of the first object, and the unglued part of the second object.) In this regard, binomial coefficients are to exponential generating series what falling factorials are to ordinary generating series.\nThe product of all binomial coefficients in the \"n\"th row of the Pascal triangle is given by the formula:\nformula_192\nPartial fraction decomposition.\nThe partial fraction decomposition of the reciprocal is given by\nformula_193\nNewton's binomial series.\nNewton's binomial series, named after Sir Isaac Newton, is a generalization of the binomial theorem to infinite series:\nformula_194\nThe identity can be obtained by showing that both sides satisfy the differential equation (1 + \"z\") \"f\"'(\"z\") = \"\u03b1\" \"f\"(\"z\").\nThe radius of convergence of this series is 1. An alternative expression is\nformula_195\nwhere the identity\nformula_196\nis applied.\nMultiset (rising) binomial coefficient.\nBinomial coefficients count subsets of prescribed size from a given set. A related combinatorial problem is to count multisets of prescribed size with elements drawn from a given set, that is, to count the number of ways to select a certain number of elements from a given set with the possibility of selecting the same element repeatedly. The resulting numbers are called \"multiset coefficients\"; the number of ways to \"multichoose\" (i.e., choose with replacement) \"k\" items from an \"n\" element set is denoted formula_197.\nTo avoid ambiguity and confusion with \"n\"'s main denotation in this article, let \"f\" = \"n\" = \"r\" + (\"k\" \u2212 1) and \"r\" = \"f\" \u2212 (\"k\" \u2212 1).\nMultiset coefficients may be expressed in terms of binomial coefficients by the rule\nformula_198\nOne possible alternative characterization of this identity is as follows:\nWe may define the falling factorial as\nformula_199\nand the corresponding rising factorial as\nformula_200\nso, for example,\nformula_201\nThen the binomial coefficients may be written as\nformula_202\nwhile the corresponding multiset coefficient is defined by replacing the falling with the rising factorial:\nformula_203\nGeneralization to negative integers \"n\".\nFor any \"n\",\nformula_204\nIn particular, binomial coefficients evaluated at negative integers \"n\" are given by signed multiset coefficients. In the special case formula_205, this reduces to formula_206\nFor example, if \"n\" = \u22124 and \"k\" = 7, then \"r\" = 4 and \"f\" = 10:\nformula_207\nTwo real or complex valued arguments.\nThe binomial coefficient is generalized to two real or complex valued arguments using the gamma function or beta function via\nformula_208\nThis definition inherits these following additional properties from formula_209:\nformula_210\nmoreover,\nformula_211\nThe resulting function has been little-studied, apparently first being graphed in . Notably, many binomial identities fail: formula_212 but formula_213 for \"n\" positive (so formula_214 negative). The behavior is quite complex, and markedly different in various octants (that is, with respect to the \"x\" and \"y\" axes and the line formula_215), with the behavior for negative \"x\" having singularities at negative integer values and a checkerboard of positive and negative regions:\nGeneralization to \"q\"-series.\nThe binomial coefficient has a \"q\"-analog generalization known as the Gaussian binomial coefficient. These coefficients are polynomials in an indeterminate (traditionally denoted \"q\") and have applications to many enumerative problems in combinatorics, such as counting the number of linear subspaces of a vector space over a finite field and counting the number of subsets of {1, 2, ..., \"n\"} with certain symmetries (an instance of the cyclic sieving phenomenon).\nGeneralization to infinite cardinals.\nThe definition of the binomial coefficient can be generalized to infinite cardinals by defining:\nformula_223\nwhere A is some set with cardinality formula_224. One can show that the generalized binomial coefficient is well-defined, in the sense that no matter what set we choose to represent the cardinal number formula_224, formula_226 will remain the same. For finite cardinals, this definition coincides with the standard definition of the binomial coefficient.\nAssuming the Axiom of Choice, one can show that formula_227 for any infinite cardinal formula_224.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\"This article incorporates material from the following PlanetMath articles, which are licensed under the : http://, http://, http://, http://.\""}
{"id": "4669", "revid": "42769864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4669", "title": "Bill Holbrook", "text": "American cartoonist (born 1958)\nBill Holbrook (born 1958) is an American cartoonist and webcomic writer and artist, best known for his syndicated comic strip \"On the Fastrack\".\nBorn in Los Angeles, Holbrook grew up in Huntsville, Alabama, and began drawing at an early age. While majoring in illustration and visual design at Auburn University, Holbrook served as art director of the student newspaper, doing editorial cartoons and a weekly comic strip. At the same time, his work was being published in the \"Huntsville Times\" and the \"Monroe Journal\". After graduation in 1980, he joined the \"Atlanta Constitution\" as an editorial staff artist.\nDuring a 1982 visit to relatives on the West Coast, Holbrook met \"Peanuts\" creator, Charles Schulz. Following his advice and encouragement, Holbrook created a strip in the fall of that year about a college graduate working in a rundown diner. It did not stir syndicate interest, but what he learned on the strip helped him when he created \"On the Fastrack\".\nEleven days before \"On the Fastrack\" made its syndicated debut (March 19, 1984), Holbrook met Teri Peitso on a blind date. They were married on Pearl Harbor Day, 1985. They have two daughters, Chandler and Haviland. Peitso-Holbrook's novels have been nominated for both Edgar Awards and Agatha Awards. She is currently an assistant professor in literacy education at Georgia State University. The family lives in the Atlanta area.\nOn October 3, 1988, Holbrook began his second strip, \"Safe Havens\", and his third strip, \"Kevin and Kell\", was launched in September 1995.\nComic strips.\nEvery week Holbrook writes the story line for the next three weeks for one of his strips and draws the next three weeks' worth of strips for another. In 2010, characters from \"On the Fastrack\" and \"Safe Havens\" began appearing in both strips.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4670", "revid": "1314556350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4670", "title": "Bruce Campbell", "text": "American actor (born 1958)\nBruce Lorne Campbell (born June 22, 1958) is an American actor and filmmaker. He is best known for his role as Ash Williams in Sam Raimi's \"Evil Dead\" horror series, beginning with the short movie \"Within the Woods\" (1978). He has also featured in many low-budget cult movies, such as \"Crimewave\" (1985), \"Maniac Cop\" (1988), \"\" (1989), and \"Bubba Ho-Tep\" (2002).\nCampbell had the main roles of the television series \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" (1993\u20131994) and \"Jack of All Trades\" (2000), and a recurring role as in ' (1995\u20131999) and ' (1995\u20131999). He played Sam Axe on the USA Network series \"Burn Notice\" (2007\u20132013) and reprised his role as Ash for the Starz series \"Ash vs. Evil Dead\" (2015\u20132018). He also appeared in \"The Escort\" (2015).\nCampbell directed, produced, and featured in the documentaries \"Fanalysis\" (2002) and \"A Community Speaks\" (2004); co-wrote, directed, produced, and featured in the movie \"Man with the Screaming Brain\" (2005); and directed, produced, and featured in a parody of his career \"My Name Is Bruce\" (2007).\nCampbell is known for frequent collaborations with the aforementioned Raimi, his brother Ted, Josh Becker, and Scott Spiegel.\nEarly life.\nBruce Lorne Campbell was born in Royal Oak, Michigan, on June 22, 1958, the son of advertising executive and college professor Charles Newton Campbell and homemaker Joanne Louise (n\u00e9e Pickens). He is of English and Scottish ancestry, and has an older brother named Don and an older half-brother named Michael. His father was also an actor and director for local theater. Campbell began acting and making short Super 8 movies with friends as a teenager. After meeting future moviemaker Sam Raimi while the two attended Wylie E. Groves High School, they became good friends and collaborators. Campbell attended Western Michigan University and continued to pursue an acting career.\nCareer.\nFilm.\nCampbell and Raimi collaborated with a 30-minute Super 8 version of the first \"Evil Dead\" movie, titled \"Within the Woods\" (1978), which was initially used to attract investors. He and Raimi got together with family and friends to begin working on \"The Evil Dead\" (1981). While featuring as the protagonist, Campbell also had participation with the production of the movie, receiving a co-executive producer credit. Raimi wrote, directed, and edited the movie, while Rob Tapert produced. After an endorsement by horror author Stephen King, the movie slowly began to receive attention and offers for distribution. Four years after its original release, it became the most popular movie in the UK. It was then distributed in the United States, resulting in the sequels \"Evil Dead II\" (1987) and \"Army of Darkness\" (1992).\nCampbell was also drawn in the Marvel Zombie comics as his character, Ash Williams. He is featured in five comics, all in the series \"Marvel Zombies vs. Army of Darkness\". In them, he fights alongside the Marvel heroes against the heroes and people who have become zombies (deadites) while in search of the Necronomicon (Book of the Names of the Dead). Campbell also played as Coach Boomer in the movie \u201cSky High\u201d.\nHe has appeared in several of Raimi's movies other than the \"Evil Dead\" series, notably having cameo appearances in the director's \"Spider-Man\" film series. Campbell also joined the cast of Raimi's movie \"Darkman\" and \"The Quick and the Dead\", though having no actual screen time in the latter movie's theatrical version. In March 2022, Campbell was announced to have a cameo in Raimi's Marvel Cinematic Universe film \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\".\nCampbell often performs quirky roles, such as Elvis Presley for the movie \"Bubba Ho-Tep\". Along with \"Bubba Ho-Tep\", he played a supporting role in \"Maniac Cop\" and \"Maniac Cop 2\", and spoofed his career in the self-directed \"My Name is Bruce.\"\nOther mainstream movies for Campbell include supporting or featured roles in the Coen Brothers movie \"The Hudsucker Proxy\", the Michael Crichton adaptation \"Congo\", the movie version of \"McHale's Navy\", \"Escape from L.A.\" (the sequel to John Carpenter's \"Escape from New York\"), the Jim Carrey drama \"The Majestic\" and the 2005 Disney movie \"Sky High\".\nCampbell had a major voice role for the 2009 animated adaptation of the children's book \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\", and a supporting voice role for Pixar's \"Cars 2\".\nCampbell produced the 2013 remake of \"The Evil Dead\", along with Raimi and Rob Tapert, appearing in the movie's post-credits scene in a cameo role with the expectation he would reprise that role in \"Army of Darkness 2\". The next year, the comedy metal band Psychostick released a song titled \"Bruce Campbell\" on their album \"\" that pays a comedic tribute to his past roles.\nCampbell worked as an executive producer for the 2023 movie \"Evil Dead Rise\".\nTelevision.\nOther than cinema, Campbell has appeared in a number of television series. He featured in \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\" a boisterous science fiction comedy western created by Jeffrey Boam and Carlton Cuse that played for one season. He played a lawyer turned bounty hunter who was trying to hunt down John Bly, the man who killed his father. He featured in the television series \"Jack of All Trades\", set on a fictional island occupied by the French in 1801. Campbell was also credited as co-executive producer, among others. The show was directed by Eric Gruendemann, and was produced by various people, including Sam Raimi. The show was broadcast for two seasons, from 2000 to 2001. He had a recurring role as \"Bill Church Jr.\" based upon the character of Morgan Edge from the Superman comics on \"\".\nFrom 1996 to 1997, Campbell was a recurring guest actor of the television series \"Ellen\" as Ed Billik, who becomes Ellen's boss when she sells her bookstore in season four.\nHe is also known for his supporting role as the recurring character Autolycus (\"King of Thieves\") on both ' and ', which reunited him with producer Rob Tapert. Campbell played \"Hercules\"/\"Xena\" series producer Tapert in two episodes of \"Hercules\" set in the present. He directed a number of episodes of \"Hercules\" and \"Xena\", including the \"Hercules\" series finale.\nCampbell also obtained the main role of race car driver Hank Cooper for the Disney made-for-television remake of \"The Love Bug\".\nCampbell had a critically acclaimed dramatic guest role as a grief-stricken detective seeking revenge for his father's murder in a two-part episode of the fourth season of \"\". Campbell later played the part of a bigamous demon in \"The X-Files\" episode \"Terms of Endearment\". He also featured as Agent Jackman in the episode \"Witch Way Now?\" of the WB series \"Charmed\", as well as playing a state police officer in an episode of the short-lived series \"American Gothic\" titled \"Meet The Beetles\".\nCampbell co-featured in the television series \"Burn Notice\", which was broadcast from 2007 to 2013 by USA Network. He portrayed Sam Axe, a beer-chugging, former Navy SEAL now working as an unlicensed private investigator and occasional mercenary with his old friend Michael Westen, the show's main character. When working undercover, his character frequently used the alias Chuck Finley, which Bruce later revealed was the name of one of his father's old co-workers. Campbell was the star of a 2011 \"Burn Notice\" made-for-television prequel focusing on Sam's Navy SEAL career, titled \"\".\nIn 2014, Campbell played Santa Claus for an episode of \"The Librarians\". Campbell played Ronald Reagan in season 2 of the FX original series \"Fargo\". More recently Campbell reprised his role as Ashley \"Ash\" Williams in \"Ash vs Evil Dead\", a series based upon the \"Evil Dead\" series that began his career. \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" began airing on Starz on October 31, 2015, and was renewed by the cable channel for second and third seasons, before being cancelled.\nIn January 2019, Travel Channel announced a new version of the \"Ripley's Believe It or Not!\" reality series, with Campbell serving as host and executive producer. The 10-episode season debuted on June 9, 2019.\nVoice acting.\nCampbell is featured as a voice actor for several video games. He provides the voice of Ash in the four games based on the \"Evil Dead\" movies series: ', ', ' and '. He has expressed his intent to return to the role in an upcoming \"Evil Dead\" animated series. He also provided the voice of Ash in \"Dead by Daylight\". Despite the inclusion of his character \"Ash Williams\" in Telltale Games' \"Poker Night 2\", Danny Webber voices the character in the game, instead of Bruce Campbell.\nCampbell also provided voice talent in other titles such as \"\", \"Spider-Man\", \"Spider-Man 2\", \"Spider-Man 3\", and \"The Amazing Spider-Man\".\nHe provided the voice of main character Jake Logan for the PC game, ', the voice of main character Jake Burton for the PlayStation game \"Broken Helix\" and the voice of Magnanimous for \"Megas XLR\". Campbell voiced the pulp adventurer Lobster Johnson in ' and has done voice-over work for the Codemaster's game \"Hei$t\", a game which was announced on January 28, 2010, to have been \"terminated\". He also provided the voice of The Mayor for the 2009 movie \"Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs\", the voice of Rod \"Torque\" Redline in \"Cars 2\", the voice of Himcules in the 2003 Nickelodeon TV series \"My Life as a Teenage Robot\", and the voice of Fugax in the 2006 movie \"The Ant Bully\".\nHe has a voice in the online MOBA game, \"Tome: Immortal Arena\" in 2014. Campbell also provided voice-over and motion capture for Sgt. Lennox in the Exo Zombies mode of \"\".\nWriting.\nIn addition to acting and occasionally directing, Campbell has become a writer, starting with an autobiography, \"If Chins Could Kill: Confessions of a B Movie Actor\", published in June 2001. The autobiography was a successful \"New York Times\" Best Seller. It describes Campbell's career to date as an actor in low-budget movies and television, providing his insight into \"Blue-Collar Hollywood\". The paperback version of the book adds details about the reactions of fans during book signings: \"Whenever I do mainstream stuff, I think they're pseudo-interested, but they're still interested in seeing weirdo, offbeat stuff, and that's what I'm attracted to\".\nCampbell's next book \"Make Love! The Bruce Campbell Way\" was published on May 26, 2005. The book's plot involves him (depicted in a comical way) as the main character struggling to make it into the world of A-list movies. He later recorded an audio play adaptation of \"Make Love\" with fellow Michigan actors, including longtime collaborator Ted Raimi. This radio drama was released by the independent label Rykodisc and spans six discs with a six-hour running time.\nIn addition to his books, Campbell also wrote a column for \"X-Ray Magazine\" in 2001, an issue of the popular comic series \"The Hire\", and comic book adaptations of his \"Man with the Screaming Brain\". Most recently he wrote the introduction to Josh Becker's \"The Complete Guide to Low-Budget Feature Filmmaking\".\nIn late 2016, Campbell announced that he would be releasing a third book, \"Hail to the Chin: Further Confessions of a B Movie Actor,\" which will detail his life from where \"If Chins Could Kill\" ended. \"Hail to the Chin\" was released in August 2017, and accompanied by a book tour across the United States and Europe.\nCampbell maintained a weblog on his official website, where he posted mainly about politics and the movie industry. However, the website has since been deleted.\nBruce Campbell Horror Film Festival.\nSince 2014, the Bruce Campbell Horror Film Festival, narrated and organized by Campbell, was held in the Muvico Theater in Rosemont, Illinois. The first festival was originally from August 21 to 25, 2014, presented by Wizard World, as part of the Chicago Comicon. The second festival was from August 20 to 23, 2015, with guests Tom Holland and Eli Roth. The third festival took place over four days in August 2016. Guests of the event were Sam Raimi, Robert Tapert and Doug Benson.\nPersonal life.\nCampbell married Christine Deveau in 1983; they had two children before divorcing in 1989. He met costume designer Ida Gearon while working on \"Mindwarp.\" They married in 1991. They reside in Jacksonville, Oregon.\nCampbell is also an ordained minister, and has performed marriage ceremonies.\nCampbell is a Kentucky Colonel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4671", "revid": "12971673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4671", "title": "Baron Aberdare", "text": "Title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom\nBaron Aberdare, of Duffryn in the County of Glamorgan, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 23 August 1873 for the Liberal politician Henry Bruce. He served as Home Secretary from 1868 to 1873.\nHis grandson, the third Baron, was a soldier, cricketer and tennis player and a member of the International Olympic Committee. His son, the fourth Baron, held office in the Conservative administration of Edward Heath and was later a Deputy Speaker of the House of Lords. Lord Aberdare was one of the ninety-two elected hereditary peers that were allowed to remain in the House of Lords after the passing of the House of Lords Act 1999.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the title is held by his son, the fifth Baron, who succeeded in 2005 and was elected to the House of Lords in 2009.\nLineage.\nHenry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare, was the son of John Bruce-Pryce (born John Bruce Knight in Barnstaple, Devon), the eldest son of John Knight (died 1799) and Margaret Bruce (died 1809), daughter and heir of William Bruce of Llanblethian, Glamorgan. He descends from the Welsh Bruces, a branch of Bruce of Kennet of Clackmannan that dates to the 14th century.\nIn 1805, Lord Aberdare's father changed his surname from Knight to Bruce when he reached the age of majority and inherited the Bruce estates in Llanblethian, as per his grandfather's will. His younger brothers were Rev. William Bruce Knight (1785\u20131845) and Sir James Knight-Bruce (1791\u20131866).\nIn 1837, he changed his name again to Bruce-Pryce when he inherited Duffryn and the Monknash estates from a distant cousin, Frances Anne Grey (\"n\u00e9e\" Pryce; the daughter and heiress of Thomas Pryce), who had married Hon. William Booth Grey (1773\u20131852; the second son of the 5th Earl of Stamford).\nLord Aberdare's great-grandmother, Jane Lewis, was the daughter of MP Gabriel Lewis, of Llanishen House. The Lewis family of Van Castle, Glamorgan, had been prominent in politics since the 16th century.\nCoat of arms.\nThe heraldic blazon for the coat of arms of the family is: \"Or, a saltire gules, on a chief of the last a martlet of the field\".\nBarons Aberdare (1873).\nThe heir apparent is the present holder's son, the Hon. Hector Morys Napier Bruce (born 1974).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4673", "revid": "47249204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4673", "title": "Boy band", "text": "Vocal group consisting of young males\nA boy band is a vocal group consisting of young male singers, usually in their teenage years or in their twenties at the time of formation. Generally, boy bands perform love songs marketed towards girls and young women. Many boy bands dance as well as sing, usually giving highly choreographed performances. South Korean boy bands usually also have designated rappers. Most boy band members do not play musical instruments, either in recording sessions or on stage. They are similar in concept to their counterparts known as girl groups.\nSome boy bands are formed on their own, but most are created by talent managers or record producers who hold auditions. The popularity of boy bands has peaked three times: first in the 1960s to '70s, with e.g. the Jackson 5, the Bay City Rollers, and the Osmonds; the second time during the late 1980s, the 1990s and the 2000s, when acts such as New Kids on the Block, Take That, Backstreet Boys, Boyzone, NSYNC, Five, Westlife and Blue dominated global pop charts; and the latest time in the 2010s up to the present, with the emergence of groups such as Big Time Rush, the Wanted, One Direction, and K-pop acts such as BTS and Seventeen.\nHistory.\nThe term boy band was not established until the late 1980s when Lou Pearlman decided to form a record company to promote a new singing and dancing group after becoming fascinated with the success of New Kids on the Block.\nAlthough generally described as a rock band, the highest-selling band in history \u2013 the Beatles \u2013 have been described by several journalists as \"the first\" or \"the original\" boy band, \"before anyone had thought of the term\", exclusively due to the enthusiastic response they received from their young female audience.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Liverpool quartet known as the Beatles were not only the quintessential rock band, but many considered John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Star [\"sic\"] to be the original boy band \u2013 especially in the early 1960s when young girls would scream at the top of their lungs and pass out upon first sight of the \"Fab Four\".\u2014\u200a\nOther critics, however, have pointed out that this assessment of the Beatles as a \"boy band\" could be applied to all other bands of the 1960s, saying, \"if they were a (boy band), so was everyone else\" and is countered by others, including Ringo Starr, who point out that, from the beginning, the Beatles wrote and exercised creative control over their own music, played their own instruments, were not manufactured by a record label, and did not feature the choreographed dance moves that later came to be associated with boy bands. The Beatles did, however, inspire the production of the 1966 television series \"The Monkees\", which featured a music group of the same name, created for the show, that consisted of the four starring actors. The Monkees had a career as a rock and pop band after their songs from the TV series were released as successful records.\nLate 1960s and 1970s: The Jackson 5 and the Osmonds.\nAlthough the term \"boy band\" was not commonly used then, the earliest predecessors of this format were groups such as the Jackson 5 and the Osmonds which helped form the template for boy bands. The Jackson 5 were a sibling group that established many musical conventions that boy bands follow. For instance, their music featured close harmonies from soul music and catchy pop hooks influenced as much as they were by Motown and acts like the Supremes. The group also incorporated choreographed dance moves to their performances. All members of the band sang, which is a common convention of a boy band, as opposed to having a front man and the rest on instruments; thus, no one person dominated the stage. Also a sibling group, The Osmonds first started singing barbershop music for local audiences, before being hired to perform at Disneyland early in their career. Their appearance in a televised Disney special earned them additional TV spots, such as \"The Andy Williams Show\" and \"The Jerry Lewis Show\".\nScottish rock boy band, the Bay City Rollers, achieved considerable success commercially worldwide during the 1970s, becoming \"the first of many acts heralded as the 'biggest group since the Beatles' and one of the most screamed-at teeny-bopper acts of the 1970s\". They have sold an estimated 120 million records worldwide, however some claim their record sales could be as high as 300 million. Their debut studio album, \"Rollin\"' (1974) achieved considerable commercial success internationally, debuting atop the albums charts in the United Kingdom, as well as the top ten in Australia. It also reached the top forty of the albums charts in Canada, Japan and New Zealand, and finished 1975 as the 16th best selling album of the year in the United Kingdom. In May 1975, they released their second album, \"Once Upon a Star\", which continued their commercial success, again topping the albums charts in the United Kingdom and reaching the top ten in Finland and Australia. It spawned the successful single \"Bye, Bye Baby\" which reached number one on the singles charts in the United Kingdom, Ireland and Australia, and became the best\u2013selling single of 1975 in the United Kingdom. Their first full length album to be released in the United States and Canada, \"Bay City Rollers\", was released in September 1975, topping the albums charts in Canada and peaking at number twenty on the US \"Billboard\" 200.\nLate 1970s and 1980s: Menudo, New Edition, and New Kids on the Block.\nThe Puerto Rican boy band Menudo, appealing to young Latina audiences, was founded in 1977. Menudo had a convention unique among boy bands: when a member turned 16, became too tall, or their voice changed, they were replaced. The members of Menudo were generally aged 12\u201316. Menudo had a large impact in Latin America and in Asia; Menudo fever there was compared to Beatlemania and it was nicknamed \"Menudomania\". \nBoston group New Edition was formed in 1978 and reached their height of popularity in the 1980s, meaning they are often credited for starting the boy-band trend, even though the term \"boy band\" did not exist until the 1990s. Maurice Starr was influenced by New Edition and popularized it with his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 New Kids on the Block (NKOTB), the first commercially successful modern boy band, which formed in 1984 and found international success in 1988. Starr's idea was to take the traditional template from the R&amp;B genre (in this case his teenage band New Edition) and apply it to a pop genre.\nBros (abbreviation of the word \"brothers\") were a British boy band active in the late 1980s and early 1990s, consisting of twin brothers Matt and Luke Goss along with Craig Logan. Formed in 1986, they scored multiple top 10 hits between 1987 and 1989 and in 1988 became the first modern era\u2013style boy band to have a multiple platinum-selling album in the UK, with \"Push\", still one of the most successful boy-band albums in the UK. Other big boy bands in Britain during the late 1980s were Big Fun and Brother Beyond.\n1990s: Boyz II Men, Take That, Backstreet Boys, NSYNC, Westlife, Seo Taiji and Boys and the birth of modern K-pop.\nThe ongoing international success of New Kids on the Block inspired music managers in Europe to create their own acts, beginning with Nigel Martin-Smith's Take That in the UK (formed in 1990) and followed by Tom Watkins, who had success with Bros in the late 1980s and formed East 17 in 1991. East 17 were marketed and pitted against Take That as \"rivals\" with a rougher or harsher attitude, style and sound. Take That reformed in 2006 after a decade-long hiatus and became one of the most successful groups in British music chart history, with renewed chart success internationally, especially in Europe. Irish music manager Louis Walsh, who had witnessed the impact of these British boy bands, put out an advert for an \"Irish Take That\", thereby creating Boyzone in 1993. MN8 (formed in 1992), Let Loose (formed in 1993), and Damage and 911 (formed in 1995) were also successful boy bands in Britain; however, by the late 1990s all these bands had split up.\nAll these artists were very successful on both the singles and albums charts domestically and internationally; however, with the emergence of Britpop and the commercial co-option of indie rock, many boy bands were ridiculed by the British music press as having no artistic credibility, although some, such as East 17 and Take That, did write most of their own material. The media attention was then placed on the \"Battle of Britpop\", and the bands Oasis and Blur replaced the importance and rivalry of Take That and East 17 as the two new biggest bands in Britain. However, boy bands continued to find success in the late 1990s, such as Five, Another Level, Point Break and Westlife. In 1995 successful German music manager Frank Farian, who had been manager of Boney M and Milli Vanilli, put together Latin American band No Mercy who scored a few worldwide hits during the mid-90s.\nAlthough being American and the sons of Tito Jackson, a member of the Jackson 5, 3T had several hits singles across Europe in the mid-1990s, despite limited success in the US, and finished the second biggest selling act of 1996 in Europe behind the Spice Girls. With the success of North American boy bands like New Kids on the Block in East Asia, Japanese entertainment company Johnny &amp; Associates formed SMAP in 1992. The group enjoyed tremendous success, selling over 35 million records.\nIn 1992, after the disbandment of the heavy metal band Sinawe, in which he had a brief stint, Seo Taiji formed the boy band Seo Taiji and Boys (Korean: \uc11c\ud0dc\uc9c0\uc640 \uc544\uc774\ub4e4) together with dancers Lee Juno and Yang Hyun-suk, which went on to become highly successful and created a craze at the time. Seo Taiji and Boys is credited with changing the South Korean music industry by pioneering the incorporation of rap and breakdance as well as the fusion of Korean music and various popular Western music genres in Korean popular music, and in turn creating the prototype for the modern hybrid K-pop genre or \"rap-dance\", as it was called at the time, and K-pop groups. They also left a lasting impact by explicitly putting social criticism at the forefront of their music, as well as paving the way for artistic freedom in South Korea by challenging censorship laws and the television networks hegemony over the music market. In 1995 the Korean Broadband is not 6\u00a0ft to a particular location casting Ethics Committee demanded that Seo Taiji and Boys change the lyrics for \"Regret of the Times\". As a result, Seo decided to release the song as a purely instrumental track. This incited protests and resulted in the abolishment of music pre-censorship in Korea. Seo Taiji also did not have to rely on television networks due to the fact that he owned his own studio. This autonomy allowed Seo to bring subcultures in Korea, such as heavy metal, to the forefront of popular culture and challenge pervasive social norms. The band's independent success diminished the power of the television networks to dictate which artists appeared on shows, and gave rise to the influence of record labels and talent agencies. In 1996, Seo Taiji and Boys disbanded. In April 1996, Billboard reported that the band's first three albums had each sold over 1.6 million copies, with the fourth nearing two million, making all four some of the best-selling albums of all time in South Korea to this day. Lee Juno became a record producer, and Yang Hyun-suk was successful in founding YG Entertainment, one of the three biggest record companies in the country. Seo Taiji returned to music two years later with a successful solo career as a rock artist; he rose to become one of the most prominent and influential cultural icons in South Korea and was dubbed \"the President of culture\". In 2017, Seo Taiji released a 25th Anniversary album with his greatest hits and remakes by prominent Korean artists, including the group BTS. He also held a joint celebratory concert with the latter, in which he acknowledged them as his spiritual successors in K-pop due to the socially conscious thematic similarities in their music as well their shared hip hop leanings, and metaphorically passed the torch, saying \"This is your generation now\".\nIn the early 1990s in North America, with New Kids on the Block's continued success and Color Me Badd also having success, boy bands became a continued staple of the Billboard charts. Continuing this success in the mid-1990s, most prominent boy bands were African American and had R&amp;B and gospel elements, such as the groups All-4-One (formed in 1993) and Boyz II Men (formed in 1988). Boyz II Men are also the most successful boy band act on the U.S. Hot 100 as well as the Australian Singles Chart. Although they had success on the Billboard charts, they were not marketed towards youth but more towards adults. It was not until 1997 and the change to pop-oriented groups such as Backstreet Boys, 98 Degrees, NSYNC, the Moffatts, and Hanson that boy bands exploded commercially and dominated the market in the United States. This period in the late 1990s marked the height of boy band popularity in North America, which has not been seen since.\nArguably the most successful boy band manager from the U.S. was Lou Pearlman, who founded commercially successful acts such as the Backstreet Boys in 1993, NSYNC and LFO in 1995, O-Town in 2000, and US5 in 2005. Backstreet Boys and NSYNC became the two biggest boy bands in the late 1990s and the early 2000s, and Backstreet Boys went on to become the best-selling boy band in history with over 100 million records sold.\nIn the late 1990s in the UK, producer Simon Cowell (noted in the U.S. for the \"American Idol/The X Factor\" franchise) is also known for having managed British boyband Five (formed in 1997) and Irish boyband Westlife (formed in 1998). Westlife was created by Irishman Louis Walsh as a replacement for Boyzone and was initially managed by a former member of the band Ronan Keating. Westlife would eventually overtake Take That in number one's tally in the UK although Take That's overall UK sales are still higher. In 2012, the Official Charts Company revealed the biggest selling singles artists in British music chart history with Take That placed 15th overall and the highest selling boyband act (9.3 million), followed by Boyzone at 29 (7.1 million) and Westlife at 34 (6.8 million). Even though Cowell is known to have managed several successful boy bands, he is also infamous for passing on signing two of the biggest boybands to emerge from the 1990s and 2000s, Take That and Busted.\n2000s: Backstreet Boys, NSYNC, Westlife and Jonas Brothers.\nWith the continued success of Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC, American and British groups like 98 Degrees, Westlife, O-Town, A1, Blue, and Busted gained quick popularity both domestically and internationally. International boy bands would also occasionally spring up, such as the Moldovan band O-Zone, and Overground. American Christian boy band Plus One also enjoyed brief remarkable success during this time.\nAt the height of boy band popularity in North America, MTV created their own parody boyband, 2gether. Like the Monkees in the 1960s, they were a manufactured act composed of actors. 2gether played off of the idea that every successful boy band must have five distinct personality types: the bad boy, the shy one, the young one, the older brother type, and a heart throb.\nSince 2001, the dominance of traditional boy bands on pop charts began to fade in the western hemisphere, although Gil Kaufman of MTV has described \"new boy bands\" that are \"more likely to resemble My Chemical Romance, Sum 41, and Simple Plan.\nIn 2001, Taiwanese boy band F4 (called JVKV since 2007) blew up big as a result of the success of their TV drama \"Meteor Garden\". According to \"Forbes\", F4 has sold 3.5 million copies of their first two albums all over Asia as of July 2003.\nWith their success, many other Taiwanese boy bands emerged around this time, such as 5566 and Fahrenheit. In South Korea, Shinhwa also spread hallyu wave throughout Asia such as Japan, Thailand, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong and China. Also in 2001, a new all-male pop band and dance group boyband hailing from Japan called Exile debuted under Avex Group's label Rhythm Zone with 14 members, putting them on par with Super Junior, a South Korean boy band, who at the time, had had 13 members at its peak.\nJapanese boy band Arashi has sold over 30 million copies of their records since their first release in 1999. They had the yearly best-selling single in Japan in 2008 and 2009. In 2003 SMAP released the single \"Sekai ni Hitotsu Dake no Hana\" that has become the third best-selling single ever in Japan, with over three million copies sold.\nIn North America, the Jonas Brothers rose to fame from promotion on the Disney Channel in 2008. Other boy bands like JLS and Mindless Behavior also emerged and experienced remarkable success around this time. However, apart from them, boy bands have not seen the commercial boom experienced in the genre from the mid to late nineties in North America.\nThe mid 2000s, especially the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe, saw the continued longevity of nineties boy bands such as Backstreet Boys and Westlife (before they disbanded in 2012), and the successful comeback of Take That in 2005, Boyzone in 2007, and New Kids on the Block in 2008. Some sections of the press have referred to these acts, particularly those who have reformed after a previous split, such as Take That, Boyzone, and 98 Degrees, as 'man bands'.\n2010s and 2020s: Big Time Rush, One Direction and rise of K-pop.\nIn the early 2010s, there was somewhat of a resurgence of boy band popularity in countries where the trend had not maintained, with the emergence of new boy bands like Big Time Rush, the Wanted, and One Direction and the formation of supergroup NKOTBSB which comprised members of New Kids on the Block and Backstreet Boys. NKOTBSB's success inspired boy bands who were fairly popular during the 1990s and 2000s to make a comeback, such as A1, Blue, 98 Degrees, Five, 911, and O-Town. Like 2gether and the Monkees, Big Time Rush was a manufactured act created for a television show. One Direction were often credited as sparking a resurgence in the popularity and interest boy bands alongside being credited with forming part of a new \"British Invasion\" in the United States. Their Where We Are Tour was the highest-grossing tour by a vocal group in history and after the release of their fourth album, \"Four\", they became the only group in the 58-year history of the \"Billboard\" 200 to have their first four albums debut at number one.\nIn Southeast Asia, local boy bands also emerged as a result of the continued success of Korean and Japanese boy bands. After the debut of the Philippines supergroup SB19 in 2018, the group appeared at number six on Billboard Year-End Social 50 chart, making them the first Southeast Asian act to reach the top 10 of the magazine's annual chart.\nIn South Korea, boy bands have been commercially successful. On the Circle Chart year-end albums chart of 2022, 7 of the top 10 and 13 of the top 20 albums are by boy bands or by subunits/members of boy bands. Seventeen's \"FML\" is the best-selling album of all time in South Korea, with more than 6.2 million copies sold, and BTS's \"\" became the first album released since 2001 to sell more than 1 million copies.\nIn 2013, Billboard started covering music releases in K-pop, though K-pop had been entering the charts as early as 2009. By 2017, BTS crossed into the international music market, furthering the Korean Wave in the United States and becoming the first Korean group to receive a certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) with their single \"Mic Drop\". The band is the first Korean act to top the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200 with their studio album ' (2018) and have since hit the top of the U.S. charts with their albums ' (2018), ' (2019), ' (2020), \"Be\" (2020) and \"Proof\". \"Love Yourself: Answer\" also broke South Korea's Gaon Album Chart's all-time monthly record previously set by \"Love Yourself: Tear\" and became the first Korean album certified Gold in the United States. SuperM later became the first K-pop group to debut at No. 1 in the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200. In 2020, BTS \"Dynamite\" debuted atop the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, making them the first all-South Korean act in Hot 100 history to debut at number one. It garnered the band their first Grammy nomination, for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, making them the first K-pop act to be nominated for one.\nOn 12 December 2024, South Korean boy group Stray Kids become the first act ever to debut at No. 1 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart with their first six charting albums Oddinary (2022), Maxident (2022), 5-Star (2023), Rock-Star (2023), Ate (2024) and Hop (2024).\nIn Japan, Arashi was the best-selling music artist in Japan from 2013 through 2017 by value of sales and also having the yearly best-selling album in the country in 2010, 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2016. Other successful Japanese boy bands in this decade include Sandaime J Soul Brothers, the second best-selling music artist of 2016 in the country and Kanjani Eight, the fifth best-selling music artist of that year in Japan.\nIn Norway, the boy band Ballinciaga gained commercial success in 2022 with dance and party songs like \"Dans P\u00e5 Bordet\" and \"Beklager (Guttaklubben)\". The group is also known for keeping their identities anonymous by wearing pink-colored masks in the public. Other Norwegian boy bands that gained commercial success in the country in 2020s are Undergrunn and in 2022 and 2024 respectively.\nFictional boy bands such as 4*TOWN from Turning Red and Saja Boys from KPop Demon Hunters have gained popularity, charting on the Billboard Hot 100.\nWith the success of K-pop groups, many western labels have shifted to creating groups modeled after the \"K-pop aesthetic\". HYBE, a South Korean entertainment company, most notably responsible for BTS' success, teamed up with American label, Geffen. This partnership lead to the creation of Katseye, a global girl group in 2024. This then lead HYBE to create Santos Bravos, a Latin boy band based out of Mexico City. Previously, in early 2024, Q_ARE, a Chilean boy band debuted with elements of K-pop and Latin pop sounds. Currently, Q_ARE have become a national and international phenomenon and considered the first Latin K-pop boy band.\nKey factors of the concept.\nSeen as important to a \"boy band\" group's commercial success is the group's image, carefully controlled by managing all aspects of the group's attire, promotional materials (which are frequently supplied to teen magazines), and music videos. The key factor of a boy band is being trendy. This means that the band conforms to the most recent fashion and musical trends in the popular music scene. Typically, each member of the group will have some distinguishing feature and be portrayed as having a particular personality stereotype, such as \"the baby\", \"the bad boy\", or \"the shy one\". While managing the portrayal of popular musicians is as old as popular music, the particular pigeonholing of band members is a defining characteristic of boy and girl bands. In K-pop, officially designated positions within the group are common, such as \"leader\", \"maknae\" (Korean: \ub9c9\ub0b4, English: \"the youngest\"), \"visual\", \"center\" \"vocalist\", \"rapper\" and \"dancer\". The latter three are based on the members' specialized skills and are further divided into \"main-\", \"lead-\" and \"sub-\" (vocalist/rapper/dancer) positions, with the members occupying the \"main\" positions often being considered the most skilled and having the most parts in songs or being highlighted during solo dance parts. The \"leader\" is the spokesperson who represents the group in public, and is in charge of mediating between group members, as well as between the group and the label.\nIn most cases, their music is written, arranged and produced by a producer who works with the band at all times and controls the group's sound \u2013 if necessary, to the point of hiring session singers to record guide vocals for each member of the group to sing individually if the members cannot harmonize well together. However, for clarity of each voice, recording each voice individually is most commonly the norm with most modern vocal groups. In recent years, auto-tune has become a popular tool in vocal producing, some boy bands have come under fire for that reason. Some have also come under fire for lip syncing in their performances as well, for example New Kids on the Block.\nA typical boy band performance features elaborately choreographed dancing, with the members taking turns singing and/or rapping. Boy bands generally do not compose or produce their own material, unless the members lobby hard enough for creative control. However, some bands were created around the talent of a songwriter within the group like Gary Barlow of Take That or Tony Mortimer of East 17. It is not uncommon to find extra songs on an album written by one or more of the band members; however, their producers rarely use these as singles.\nSince the 21st century, however, boy bands have been expected to write or at least contribute in some part lyrically to songs. Apart from the groups mentioned above who all had at least one primary songwriter from their beginning, other groups soon caught up. At the close of the nineties, groups like Backstreet Boys and *NSYNC who had previously used writers like Max Martin during their early albums began writing their own songs. Newer groups from late 2000s such as JLS have all made a point from early interviews that they write their own songs and hold their own image as this is an important part of marketing. Some bands like The Wanted have even spent time learning the craft of songwriting. There has also been a rising trend of so-called \"songwriter-\" or \"producer idols\" (Korean: \"Hangul\" \uc791\uace1\ub3cc, \"rev. Rom.\" jakgok-dol) in K-pop since the early 2000s. Nowadays, it is not uncommon for groups to have at least one member who is heavily involved in the songwriting and producing of the groups' music. In many cases, these members are the rappers in the group, who have often gained songwriting and producing experience while being active as amateur or underground rappers before joining the group. There is also a higher expectation for rappers to write their own lyrics due to self-expression being a core value of the hip-hop genre. There are cases of \"producer idols\" writing or producing for other artists outside of their solo or respective group work as well, such as BTS' RM and Suga.\nIndividuals can also go on to achieve greater success as a solo artist coming out of a boy band having used the groups popularity to build on. Usually this signals the end of the group until potential future reunions. Examples of this include Justin Timberlake from NSYNC, and Robbie Williams from Take That. Some boy band members have gone on to successful careers elsewhere in the media. In K-pop, it is expected and common practice for members to embark on solo endeavors as musical artists or in other entertainment sectors, such as acting, or as variety personalities, alongside their group career after a few years. At the latest, this happens around the time the eldest member reaches the age of 28 (in exceptional cases 30) and is drafted for mandatory military service, forcing the group into a temporary hiatus of at least 18 months. The other members then often go on to pursue solo endeavors and reconvene as a group while no member is serving, or after all members have completed their service.\nMusic genres.\nAlthough most boy bands consist of R&amp;B or pop influences, other music genres, most notably country music and folk music, are also represented. South 65 and Marshall Dyllon, for example, were both country music boy bands. Il Divo, created by Simon Cowell in 2004, are a vocal group that performs operatic pop in several (mainly Italian) languages. Since then operatic/classical boy bands have become quite popular and common, especially in the UK. Since 2001, there has been some crossover with power pop and pop punk from bands that play live instruments. Just recently some boy bands decided to go back to their original doo-wop roots, most notably, The Overtones.\nControversy.\nSince the 2000s, groups such as Backstreet Boys and LFO have disliked the term \"boy band\" and have preferred to be known as a \"male vocal group\". Being categorized among boy bands was also the main reason the Moffatts split up. Boy bands have been accused by the music press of emphasizing the appearance and marketing of the group above the quality of music, deliberately trying to appeal to a preteen audience and for conforming to trends instead of being original. Such criticisms can become extremely scathing. Boy bands are often seen as being short-lived, although some acts such as the Jackson 5, Backstreet Boys, Human Nature, New Edition, SMAP, Shinhwa, Take That and Westlife have sustained lasting careers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4674", "revid": "50724392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4674", "title": "B-tree", "text": "Tree-based computer data structure\nIn computer science, a B-tree is a self-balancing tree data structure that maintains sorted data and allows searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in logarithmic time. The B-tree generalizes the binary search tree, allowing nodes to have more than two children.\nBy allowing more children under one node than a regular self-balancing binary search tree, the B-tree reduces the height of the tree and puts the data in fewer separate blocks. This is especially important for trees stored in secondary storage (e.g., disk drives), as these systems have relatively high latency and work with relatively large blocks of data, hence the B-tree's use in databases and file systems. This remains a major advantage when the tree is stored in memory, as modern computer systems rely heavily on CPU caches. Compared to reading from the cache, reading from memory after a cache miss costs significant time.\nHistory.\nWhile working at Boeing Research Labs, Rudolf Bayer and Edward M. McCreight invented B-trees to efficiently manage index pages for large random-access files. Their basic assumption was that indices would be so voluminous that only small chunks of the tree could fit in the main memory. Bayer and McCreight's paper \"Organization and maintenance of large ordered indices\" was first circulated in July 1970 and later published in \"Acta Informatica\".\nBayer and McCreight never explained what, if anything, the \"B\" stands for; \"Boeing\", \"balanced\", \"between\", \"broad\", \"bushy\", and \"Bayer\" have been suggested. When asked, \"I want to know what B in B-Tree stands for,\" McCreight answered:\"Everybody does!\"\n\"So you just have no idea what a lunchtime conversation can turn into. So there we were, Rudy and I, at lunch. We had to give the thing a name... We were working for Boeing at the time, but we couldn't use the name without talking to the lawyers. So there's a B.\" \n\"It has to do with Balance. There's another B.\" \n\"Rudy was the senior author. Rudy (Bayer) was several years older than I am, and had... many more publications than I did. So there's another B.\"\n\"And so at the lunch table, we never did resolve whether there was one of those that made more sense than the rest.\" \n\"What Rudy likes to say is, the more you think about what the B in B-Tree means, the better you understand B-Trees!\"\nDefinition.\nAccording to Knuth's definition, a B-tree of order \"m\" is a tree that satisfies the following properties:\nThe keys of each internal node act as separation values that divide its subtrees. For example, if an internal node has 3 child nodes (or subtrees), then it must have 2 keys: \"a\"1 and \"a\"2. All values in the leftmost subtree will be less than \"a\"1, all values in the middle subtree will be between \"a\"1 and \"a\"2, and all values in the rightmost subtree will be greater than \"a\"2.\n Internal nodes (also known as inner nodes) are all nodes except for leaf nodes and the root node. They are usually represented as an ordered set of elements and child pointers. Every internal node contains a maximum of \"U\" children and a minimum of \"L\" children. Thus, the number of elements is always 1 less than the number of child pointers (the number of elements is between \"L\"\u22121 and \"U\"\u22121). \"U\" must be either 2\"L\" or 2\"L\"\u22121; therefore, each internal node is at least half full. The relationship between \"U\" and \"L\" implies that two half-full nodes can be joined to make a legal node, and one full node can be split into two legal nodes (if there's room to push one element up into the parent). These properties make it possible to delete and insert new values into a B-tree while also adjusting the tree to preserve its properties.\n The root node's number of children has the same upper limit as internal nodes but has no lower limit. For example, when there are fewer than \"L\"\u22121 elements in the entire tree, the root will be the only node in the tree with no children at all.\n In Knuth's terminology, the \"leaf\" nodes are the actual data objects/chunks. The internal nodes that are one level above these leaves are what would be called the \"leaves\" by other authors: these nodes only store keys (at most \"m\"-1, and at least \"m\"/2-1 if they are not the root) and pointers (one for each key) to nodes carrying the data objects/chunks.\nA B-tree of depth \"n\"+1 can hold about \"U\" times as many items as a B-tree of depth \"n\", but the cost of search, insert, and delete operations grows with the depth of the tree. As with any balanced tree, the cost grows much more slowly than the number of elements.\nSome balanced trees store values only at leaf nodes and use different kinds of nodes for leaf nodes and internal nodes. B-trees keep values in every node in the tree except leaf nodes.\nDifferences in terminology.\nThe literature on B-trees is not uniform in its terminology.\nBayer and McCreight (1972), Comer (1979), and others define the order of a B-tree as the minimum number of keys in a non-root node. Folk and Zoellick point out that terminology is ambiguous because the maximum number of keys is unclear. An order 3 B-tree might hold a maximum of 6 keys or a maximum of 7 keys. Knuth (1998) avoids the problem by defining the order to be the maximum number of children (which is one more than the maximum number of keys).\nThe term leaf is also inconsistent. Bayer and McCreight (1972) considered the leaf level to be the lowest level of keys, but Knuth considered the leaf level to be one level below the lowest keys. There are many possible implementation choices. In some designs, the leaves may hold the entire data record; in other designs, the leaves may only hold pointers to the data record. Those choices are not fundamental to the idea of a B-tree.\nFor simplicity, most authors assume there is a fixed number of keys that fit in a node. The basic assumption is that the key size and node size are both fixed. In practice, variable-length keys may be employed.\nInformal description.\nNode structure.\nAs with other trees, B-trees can be represented as a collection of three types of nodes: \"root\", \"internal\" (a.k.a. interior), and \"leaf\". \nNote the following variable definitions:\nIn B-trees, the following properties are maintained for these nodes:\nEach internal node in a B-tree has the following format:\nEach leaf node in a B-tree has the following format:\nThe node bounds are summarized in the table below:\nInsertion and deletion.\nTo maintain the predefined range of child nodes, internal nodes may be joined or split.\nUsually, the number of keys is chosen to vary between d and formula_2, where d is the minimum number of keys, and* formula_3 is the minimum degree or branching factor of the tree. The factor of 2 will guarantee that nodes can be split or combined.\nIf an internal node has* formula_2 keys, then adding a key to that node can be accomplished by splitting the hypothetical* formula_5 key node into two d key nodes and moving the key that would have been in the middle to the parent node. Each split node has the required minimum number of keys. Similarly, if an internal node and its neighbor each have d keys, then a key may be deleted from the internal node by combining it with its neighbor. Deleting the key would make the internal node have* formula_6 keys; joining the neighbor would add d keys plus one more key brought down from the neighbor's parent. The result is an entirely full node of formula_2 keys.\nA B-tree is kept balanced after insertion by splitting a would-be overfilled node, of* formula_5 keys, into two d-key siblings and inserting the mid-value key into the parent. Depth only increases when the root is split, maintaining balance. Similarly, a B-tree is kept balanced after deletion by merging or redistributing keys among siblings to maintain the d-key minimum for non-root nodes. A merger reduces the number of keys in the parent, potentially forcing it to merge or redistribute keys with its siblings, and so on. The only change in depth occurs when the root has two children, of d and (transitionally) formula_6 keys, in which case the two siblings and parent are merged, reducing the depth by one.\nThis depth will increase slowly as elements are added to the tree, but an increase in the overall depth is infrequent, and results in all leaf nodes being one more node farther away from the root.\nComparison to other trees.\nBecause a range of child nodes is permitted, B-trees do not need re-balancing as frequently as other self-balancing search trees, but may waste some space since nodes are not entirely full.\nB-trees have substantial advantages over alternative implementations when the time to access the data of a node greatly exceeds the time spent processing that data, because the cost of accessing the node may then be amortized over multiple operations within the node. This usually occurs when the node data are stored in secondary storage, such as disk drives. By maximizing the number of keys within each internal node, the height of the tree decreases, and the number of expensive node accesses is reduced. In addition, rebalancing of the tree occurs less frequently. The maximum number of child nodes depends on the information that must be stored for each child node and the size of a full disk block or an analogous size in secondary storage. While 2\u20133 B-trees are easier to explain, practical B-trees using secondary storage need a large number of child nodes to improve performance.\nVariants.\nThe term B-tree may refer to a specific design or a general class of designs. In the narrow sense, a B-tree stores keys in its internal nodes but need not store those keys in the records at the leaves. The general class includes variations such as the B+ tree, the B* tree and the B*+ tree.\nB-tree usage in databases.\nSorted file search time.\nSorting and searching algorithms can be characterized by the number of comparison operations that must be performed using order notation. A binary search of a sorted table with N records, for example, can be done in roughly \u2308 log2 \"N\" \u2309 comparisons. If the table had 1,000,000 records, then a specific record could be located with at most 20 comparisons: \u2308 log2 (1,000,000) \u2309 = 20.\nLarge databases have historically been kept on disk drives. The time required to read a record on a disk drive far exceeds the time needed to compare keys once the record is available due to seek time and rotational delay. The seek time may be 0 to 20 or more milliseconds, and the rotational delay averages about half the rotation period. For a 7200 RPM drive, the rotation period is 8.33 milliseconds. For a drive such as the Seagate ST3500320NS, the track-to-track seek time is 0.8 milliseconds and the average reading seek time is 8.5 milliseconds. For simplicity, assume reading from disk takes about 10 milliseconds.\nThe time required to locate one record out of a million in the example above would be 20 disk reads, each taking 10 milliseconds, which equals 0.2 seconds.\nThe search time is reduced because individual records are grouped together in a disk block. A disk block might be 16 kilobytes in size. If each record is 160 bytes, then 100 records could be stored in each block. The disk read time above was actually for an entire block. Once the disk head is in position, one or more disk blocks can be read with little delay. With 100 records per block, the last 6 or so comparisons don't need to do any disk reads\u2014the comparisons are all within the last disk block read.\nTo speed up the search further, the time to do the first 13 to 14 comparisons (which each required disk access) must be reduced.\nIndex performance.\nA B-tree index can be used to improve performance. A B-tree index creates a multi-level tree structure that breaks a database down into fixed-size blocks or pages. Each level of this tree can be used to link those pages via an address location, allowing one page (known as a node, or internal page) to refer to another with leaf pages at the lowest level. One page is typically the starting point of the tree, or the \"root\". This is where the search for a particular key would begin, traversing a path that terminates in a leaf. Most pages in this structure will be leaf pages which refer to specific table rows. \nBecause each node (or internal page) can have more than two children, a B-tree index will usually have a shorter height (the distance from the root to the farthest leaf) than a Binary Search Tree. In the example above, initial disk reads narrowed the search range by a factor of two. That can be improved by creating an auxiliary index that contains the first record in each disk block (sometimes called a sparse index). This auxiliary index would be 1% of the size of the original database, but it can be searched quickly. Finding an entry in the auxiliary index would tell us which block to search in the main database; after searching the auxiliary index, we would have to search only that one block of the main database\u2014at a cost of one more disk read. \nIn the above example, the index would hold 10,000 entries and would take at most 14 comparisons to return a result. Like the main database, the last six or so comparisons in the auxiliary index would be on the same disk block. The index could be searched in about eight disk reads, and the desired record could be accessed in 9 disk reads.\nCreating an auxiliary index can be repeated to make an auxiliary index to the auxiliary index. That would create an aux-aux index that would need only 100 entries and would fit in one disk block.\nInstead of reading 14 disk blocks to find the desired record, we only need to read 3 blocks. This blocking is the core idea behind the creation of the B-tree, where disk blocks form a hierarchy of levels to make up the index. Reading and searching the first (and only) block of the aux-aux index, which is the root of the tree, identifies the relevant block in aux-index in the level below. Reading and searching that aux-index block identifies the relevant block to read until the final level, known as the leaf level, identifies a record in the main database. Instead of 150 milliseconds, we need only 30 milliseconds to get the record.\nThe auxiliary indices have turned the search problem from a binary search requiring roughly log2 \"N\" disk reads to one requiring only log\"b\" \"N\" disk reads where b is the blocking factor (the number of entries per block: \"b\" = 100 entries per block in our example; log100 1,000,000 = 3 reads).\nIn practice, if the main database is being frequently searched, the aux-aux index and much of the aux index may reside in a disk cache, so they would not incur a disk read. The B-tree remains the standard index implementation in almost all relational databases, and many nonrelational databases use it as well.\nInsertions and deletions.\nIf the database does not change, then compiling the index is simple to do, and the index need never be changed. If there are changes, managing the database and its index requires additional computation.\nDeleting records from a database is relatively easy. The index can stay the same, and the record can just be marked as deleted. The database remains in sorted order. If there are a large number of lazy deletions, then searching and storage become less efficient.\nInsertions can be very slow in a sorted sequential file because room for the inserted record must be made. Inserting a record before the first record requires shifting all of the records down one. Such an operation is just too expensive to be practical. One solution is to leave some spaces. Instead of densely packing all the records in a block, the block can have some free space to allow for subsequent insertions. Those spaces would be marked as if they were \"deleted\" records.\nBoth insertions and deletions are fast as long as space is available on a block. If an insertion won't fit on the block, then some free space on some nearby block must be found and the auxiliary indices adjusted. The best case is that enough space is available nearby so that the amount of block reorganization can be minimized. Alternatively, some out-of-sequence disk blocks may be used.\nUsage in databases.\nThe B-tree uses all of the ideas described above. In particular, a B-tree:\nIn addition, a B-tree minimizes waste by making sure the interior nodes are at least half full. A B-tree can handle an arbitrary number of insertions and deletions.\nBest case and worst case heights.\nLet \"h\" \u2265 \u20131 be the height of the classic B-tree (see for the tree height definition). Let \"n\" \u2265 0 be the number of entries in the tree. Let \"m\" be the maximum number of children a node can have. Each node can have at most \"m\"\u22121 keys.\nIt can be shown (by induction for example) that a B-tree of height \"h\" with all its nodes completely filled has \"n\" = \"m\"\"h\"+1\u20131 entries. Hence, the best case height (i.e. the minimum height) of a B-tree is:\n formula_10\nLet formula_11 be the minimum number of children an internal (non-root) node must have. For an ordinary B-tree, formula_12\nComer (1979) and Cormen et al. (2001) give the worst case height (the maximum height) of a B-tree as:\n formula_13\nAlgorithms.\nSearch.\nSearching is similar to searching a binary search tree. Starting at the root, the tree is recursively traversed from top to bottom. At each level, the search reduces its field of view to the child pointer (subtree) whose range includes the search value. A subtree's range is defined by the values, or keys, contained in its parent node. These limiting values are also known as separation values.\nBinary search is typically (but not necessarily) used within nodes to find the separation values and child tree of interest.\nInsertion.\nAll insertions start at a leaf node. To insert a new element, search the tree to find the leaf node where the new element should be added. Insert the new element into that node with the following steps:\nIf the splitting goes all the way up to the root, it creates a new root with a single separator value and two children, which is why the lower bound on the size of internal nodes does not apply to the root. The maximum number of elements per node is \"U\"\u22121. When a node is split, one element moves to the parent, but one element is added. So, it must be possible to divide the maximum number \"U\"\u22121 of elements into two legal nodes. If this number is odd, then \"U\"=2\"L\" and one of the new nodes contains (\"U\"\u22122)/2 = \"L\"\u22121 elements, and hence is a legal node, and the other contains one more element, and hence it is legal too. If \"U\"\u22121 is even, then \"U\"=2\"L\"\u22121, so there are 2\"L\"\u22122 elements in the node. Half of this number is \"L\"\u22121, which is the minimum number of elements allowed per node.\nAn alternative algorithm supports a single pass down the tree from the root to the node where the insertion will take place, splitting any full nodes encountered on the way pre-emptively. This prevents the need to recall the parent nodes into memory, which may be expensive if the nodes are on secondary storage. However, to use this algorithm, we must be able to send one element to the parent and split the remaining \"U\"\u22122 elements into two legal nodes, without adding a new element. This requires \"U\" = 2\"L\" rather than \"U\" = 2\"L\"\u22121, which accounts for why some textbooks impose this requirement in defining B-trees.\nDeletion.\nThere are two popular strategies for deletion from a B-tree.\nThe algorithm below uses the former strategy.\nThere are two special cases to consider when deleting an element:\nThe procedures for these cases are in order below.\nDeletion from an internal node.\nEach element in an internal node acts as a separation value for two subtrees, therefore we need to find a replacement for separation. Note that the largest element in the left subtree is still less than the separator. Likewise, the smallest element in the right subtree is still greater than the separator. Both of those elements are in leaf nodes, and either one can be the new separator for the two subtrees. Algorithmically described below:\nRebalancing after deletion.\nRebalancing starts from a leaf and proceeds toward the root until the tree is balanced. If deleting an element from a node has brought it under the minimum size, then some elements must be redistributed to bring all nodes up to the minimum. Usually, the redistribution involves moving an element from a sibling node that has more than the minimum number of nodes. That redistribution operation is called a rotation. If no sibling can spare an element, then the deficient node must be merged with a sibling. The merge causes the parent to lose a separator element, so the parent may become deficient and need rebalancing. The merging and rebalancing may continue all the way to the root. Since the minimum element count doesn't apply to the root, making the root be the only deficient node is not a problem. The algorithm to rebalance the tree is as follows:\nSequential access.\nWhile freshly loaded databases tend to have good sequential behaviour, this behaviour becomes increasingly difficult to maintain as a database grows, resulting in more random I/O and performance challenges.\nInitial construction.\nA common special case is adding a large amount of \"pre-sorted\" data into an initially empty B-tree. While it is quite possible to simply perform a series of successive inserts, inserting sorted data results in a tree composed almost entirely of half-full nodes. Instead, a special \"bulk loading\" algorithm can be used to produce a more efficient tree with a higher branching factor.\nWhen the input is sorted, all insertions are at the rightmost edge of the tree, and in particular any time a node is split, we are guaranteed that no more insertions will take place in the left half. When bulk loading, we take advantage of this, and instead of splitting overfull nodes evenly, split them as \"unevenly\" as possible: leave the left node completely full and create a right node with zero keys and one child (in violation of the usual B-tree rules).\nAt the end of bulk loading, the tree is composed almost entirely of completely full nodes; only the rightmost node on each level may be less than full. Because those nodes may also be less than \"half\" full, to re-establish the normal B-tree rules, combine such nodes with their (guaranteed full) left siblings and divide the keys to produce two nodes at least half full. The only node which lacks a full left sibling is the root, which is permitted to be less than half full.\nIn filesystems.\nIn addition to its use in databases, the B-tree (or ) is also used in filesystems to allow quick random access to an arbitrary block in a particular file. The basic problem is turning the file block formula_14 address into a disk block address.\nSome early operating systems, and some highly specialized ones, required the application to allocate the maximum size of a file when the file was created. The file can then be allocated as contiguous disk blocks. In that case, to convert the file block address formula_14 into a disk block address, the operating system simply adds the file block address formula_14 to the address of the first disk block constituting the file. The scheme is simple, but the file cannot exceed its created size.\nAll modern, mainstream operating systems allow a file to grow. The resulting disk blocks may not be contiguous, so mapping logical blocks to physical blocks is more involved.\nMS-DOS, for example, used a simple File Allocation Table (FAT). The FAT has an entry for each disk block, and that entry identifies whether its block is used by a file and if so, which block (if any) is the next disk block of the same file. So, the allocation of each file is represented as a linked list in the table. In order to find the disk address of file block formula_14, the operating system (or disk utility) must sequentially follow the file's linked list in the FAT. Worse, to find a free disk block, it must sequentially scan the FAT. For MS-DOS, that was not a huge penalty because the disks and files were small and the FAT had few entries and relatively short file chains. In the FAT12 filesystem (used on floppy disks and early hard disks), there were no more than 4,080 entries, and the FAT would usually be resident in memory. As disks got bigger, the FAT architecture began to confront penalties. On a large disk using FAT, it may be necessary to perform disk reads to learn the disk location of a file block to be read or written.\nTOPS-20 (and possibly TENEX) used a 0 to 2 level tree that has similarities to a B-tree. A disk block was 512 36-bit words. If the file fit in a 512 (29) word block, then the file directory would point to that physical disk block. If the file fit in 218 words, then the directory would point to an aux index; the 512 words of that index would either be NULL (the block isn't allocated) or point to the physical address of the block. If the file fit in 227 words, then the directory would point to a block holding an aux-aux index; each entry would either be NULL or point to an aux index. Consequently, the physical disk block for a 227 word file could be located in two disk reads and read on the third.\nApple's filesystem HFS+ and APFS, Microsoft's NTFS, AIX (jfs2) and some Linux filesystems, such as Bcachefs, Btrfs and ext4, use B-trees.\nB*-trees are used in the HFS and Reiser4 file systems.\nDragonFly BSD's HAMMER file system uses a modified B+-tree.\nPerformance.\nA B-tree grows slower with growing data amount, than the linearity of a linked list. Compared to a skip list, both structures have the same performance, but the B-tree scales better for growing \"n\". A T-tree, for main memory database systems, is similar but more compact.\nVariations.\nAccess concurrency.\nLehman and Yao showed that all the read locks could be avoided (and thus concurrent access greatly improved) by linking the tree blocks at each level together with a \"next\" pointer. This results in a tree structure where both insertion and search operations descend from the root to the leaf. Write locks are only required as a tree block is modified. This maximizes access concurrency by multiple users, an important consideration for databases and/or other B-tree-based ISAM storage methods. The cost associated with this improvement is that empty pages cannot be removed from the btree during normal operations. (There are strategies to implement node merging.)\nUnited States Patent 5283894, granted in 1994, appears to show a way to use a 'Meta Access Method' to allow concurrent B+ tree access and modification without locks. The technique accesses the tree 'upwards' for both searches and updates by means of additional in-memory indexes that point at the blocks in each level in the block cache. No reorganization for deletes is needed and there are no 'next' pointers in each block as in Lehman and Yao.\nParallel algorithms.\nSince B-trees are similar in structure to red-black trees, parallel algorithms for red-black trees can be applied to B-trees as well.\nMaple tree.\nA Maple tree is a B-tree developed for use in the Linux kernel to reduce lock contention in virtual memory management.\n(a,b)-tree.\n(a,b)-trees are generalizations of B-trees. B-trees require that each internal node have a minimum of formula_18 children and a maximum of formula_19 children, for some preset value of formula_19. In contrast, an (a,b)-tree allows the minimum number of children for an internal node to be set arbitrarily low. In an (a,b)-tree, each internal node has between a and b children, for some preset values of a and b.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nBulk loading"}
{"id": "4675", "revid": "27012908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4675", "title": "British Museum", "text": "National museum in London, England\n}} Tottenham Court Road\n}} Goodge Street; Holborn; Russell Square\nThe British Museum is a public museum dedicated to human history, art and culture located in the Bloomsbury area of London. Its permanent collection of eight million works is the largest in the world. It documents the story of human culture from its beginnings to the present. Established in 1753, the British Museum was the first public national museum. In 2023, the museum received 5,820,860 visitors. At least one group rated it the most popular attraction in the United Kingdom.\nAt its beginning, the museum was largely based on the collections of the Anglo-Irish physician and scientist Sir Hans Sloane. It opened to the public in 1759, in Montagu House, on the site of the current building. The museum's expansion over the following 250 years was largely a result of British colonisation and resulted in the creation of several branch institutions, or independent spin-offs, the first being the Natural History Museum in 1881. Some of its best-known acquisitions, such as the Greek Elgin Marbles and the Egyptian Rosetta Stone, are subject to long-term disputes and repatriation claims.\nIn 1973, the British Library Act 1972 detached the library department from the British Museum, but it continued to host the now separated British Library in the same Reading Room and building as the museum until 1997. The museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport. Like all UK national museums, it charges no admission fee except for loan exhibitions.\nHistory.\nSir Hans Sloane.\nAlthough today principally a museum of cultural art objects and antiquities, the British Museum was founded as a \"universal museum\". Its foundations lie in the will of the Anglo-Irish physician and naturalist Sir Hans Sloane (1660\u20131753), a London-based doctor and scientist from Ulster. During the course of his lifetime, and particularly after he married the widow of a wealthy Jamaican planter, Sloane gathered a large collection of curiosities, not wishing to see his collection broken up after death, he bequeathed it to King George II, for the nation, for a sum of \u00a320,000 () to be paid to his heirs by Parliament\u2014intentionally far less than the estimated value of the artefacts, contemporarily estimated at \u00a350,000 () or more according to some sources, and up to \u00a380,000 () or more by others.\nAt that time, Sloane's collection consisted of around 71,000 objects of all kinds including some 40,000 printed books, 7,000 manuscripts, extensive natural history specimens including 337 volumes of dried plants, prints and drawings including those by Albrecht D\u00fcrer and antiquities from Sudan, Egypt, Greece, Rome, the Ancient Near and Far East and the Americas.\nFoundation (1753).\nOn 7 June 1753, King George II gave his royal assent to the Act of Parliament which established the British Museum. The British Museum Act 1753 also added two other libraries to the Sloane collection, namely the Cottonian Library, assembled by Sir Robert Cotton, dating back to Elizabethan times, and the Harleian Library, the collection of Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Mortimer. They were joined in 1757 by the \"Old Royal Library\", now the Royal manuscripts, assembled by various British monarchs. Together these four \"foundation collections\" included many of the most treasured books now in the British Library including the Lindisfarne Gospels and the sole surviving manuscript of \"Beowulf\".\nThe British Museum was the first of a new kind of museum \u2013 national, belonging to neither church nor king, freely open to the public and aiming to collect everything. Sloane's collection, while including a vast miscellany of objects, tended to reflect his scientific interests. The addition of the Cotton and Harley manuscripts introduced a literary and antiquarian element, and meant that the British Museum now became both National Museum and library.\nCabinet of curiosities (1753\u20131778).\nThe body of trustees decided on a converted 17th-century mansion, Montagu House, as a location for the museum, which it bought from the Montagu family for \u00a320,000. The trustees rejected Buckingham House, which was later converted into the present day Buckingham Palace, on the grounds of cost and the unsuitability of its location.\nWith the acquisition of Montagu House, the first exhibition galleries and reading room for scholars opened on 15 January 1759. At this time, the largest parts of collection were the library, which took up the majority of the rooms on the ground floor and the natural history objects, which took up an entire wing on the first floor. In 1763, the trustees of the British Museum, under the influence of Peter Collinson and William Watson, employed the former student of Carl Linnaeus, Daniel Solander, to reclassify the natural history collection according to the Linnaean system, thereby making the museum a public centre of learning accessible to the full range of European natural historians. In 1823, George IV gave the King's Library assembled by George III, and Parliament gave the right to a copy of every book published in the country, thereby ensuring that the museum's library would expand indefinitely. During the few years after its foundation the British Museum received several further gifts, including the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts and David Garrick's library of 1,000 printed plays. The predominance of natural history, books and manuscripts began to lessen when in 1772 the museum acquired for \u00a38,410 its first significant antiquities in Sir William Hamilton's \"first\" collection of Greek vases.\nIndolence and energy (1778\u20131800).\nFrom 1778, a display of objects from the South Seas brought back from the round-the-world voyages of Captain James Cook and the travels of other explorers fascinated visitors with a glimpse of previously unknown lands. The bequest of a collection of books, engraved gems, coins, prints and drawings by Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode in 1800 did much to raise the museum's reputation; but Montagu House became increasingly crowded and decrepit and it was apparent that it would be unable to cope with further expansion.\nThe museum's first notable addition towards its collection of antiquities, since its foundation, was by Sir William Hamilton (1730\u20131803), British Ambassador to Naples, who sold his collection of Greek and Roman artefacts to the museum in 1784 together with a number of other antiquities and natural history specimens. A list of donations to the museum, dated 31 January 1784, refers to the Hamilton bequest of a \"Colossal Foot of an Apollo in Marble\". It was one of two antiquities of Hamilton's collection drawn for him by Francesco Progenie, a pupil of Pietro Fabris, who also contributed a number of drawings of Mount Vesuvius sent by Hamilton to the Royal Society in London.\nGrowth and change (1800\u20131825).\nIn the early 19th century the foundations for the extensive collection of sculpture began to be laid and Greek, Roman and Egyptian artefacts dominated the antiquities displays. After the defeat of the French campaign in the Battle of the Nile, in 1801, the British Museum acquired more Egyptian sculptures and in 1802 King George III presented the Rosetta Stone \u2013 key to the deciphering of hieroglyphs. Gifts and purchases from Henry Salt, British consul general in Egypt, beginning with the Colossal bust of Ramesses II in 1818, laid the foundations of the collection of Egyptian Monumental Sculpture. Many Greek sculptures followed, notably the first purpose-built exhibition space, the Charles Towneley collection, much of it Roman sculpture, in 1805. In 1806, Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin, ambassador to the Ottoman Empire from 1799 to 1803 removed the large collection of marble sculptures from the Parthenon, on the Acropolis of Athens and transferred them to the UK. In 1816 these masterpieces of western art were acquired by the British Museum by Act of Parliament and deposited in the museum thereafter. The collections were supplemented by the Bassae frieze from Phigaleia, Greece in 1815. The Ancient Near Eastern collection also had its beginnings in 1825 with the purchase of Assyrian and Babylonian antiquities from Mary Mackintosh Rich, the widow of Assyriologist Claudius James Rich.\nIn 1802 a buildings committee was set up to plan for expansion of the museum, and further highlighted by the donation in 1822 of the King's Library, personal library of King George III, comprising 65,000 volumes, 19,000 pamphlets, maps, charts and topographical drawings. The neoclassical architect, Sir Robert Smirke, was asked to draw up plans for an eastern extension to the museum \"...\u00a0for the reception of the Royal Library, and a Picture Gallery over it ...\" and put forward plans for today's quadrangular building, much of which can be seen today. The dilapidated Old Montagu House was demolished and work on the King's Library Gallery began in 1823. The extension, the East Wing, was completed by 1831. However, following the founding of the National Gallery, London in 1824, the proposed Picture Gallery was no longer needed, and the space on the upper floor was given over to the Natural history collections.\nThe first Synopsis of the British Museum was published in 1808. This described the contents of the museum, and the display of objects room by room, and updated editions were published every few years.\nLargest building site in Europe (1825\u20131850).\nAs Sir Robert Smirke's grand neo-classical building gradually arose, the museum became a construction site. The King's Library, on the ground floor of the East Wing, was handed over in 1827, and was described as one of the finest rooms in London. Although it was not fully open to the general public until 1857, special openings were arranged during The Great Exhibition of 1851.\nIn 1840, the museum became involved in its first overseas excavations, Charles Fellows's expedition to Xanthos, in Asia Minor, whence came remains of the tombs of the rulers of ancient Lycia, among them the Nereid and Payava monuments. In 1857, Charles Newton was to discover the 4th-century BC Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. In the 1840s and 1850s the museum supported excavations in Assyria by A.H. Layard and others at sites such as Nimrud and Nineveh. Of particular interest to curators was the eventual discovery of Ashurbanipal's great library of cuneiform tablets, which helped to make the museum a focus for Assyrian studies.\nSir Thomas Grenville (1755\u20131846), a trustee of the British Museum from 1830, assembled a library of 20,240 volumes, which he left to the museum in his will. The books arrived in January 1847 in twenty-one horse-drawn vans. The only vacant space for this large library was a room originally intended for manuscripts, between the Front Entrance Hall and the Manuscript Saloon. The books remained here until the British Library moved to St Pancras in 1998.\nCollecting from the wider world (1850\u20131875).\nThe opening of the forecourt in 1852 marked the completion of Robert Smirke's 1823 plan, but already adjustments were having to be made to cope with the unforeseen growth of the collections. Infill galleries were constructed for Assyrian sculptures and Sydney Smirke's Round Reading Room, with space for a million books, opened in 1857. Because of continued pressure on space the decision was taken to move natural history to a new building in South Kensington, which would later become the British Museum of Natural History.\nRoughly contemporary with the construction of the new building was the career of a man sometimes called the \"second founder\" of the British Museum, the Italian librarian Anthony Panizzi. Under his supervision, the British Museum Library (now part of the British Library) quintupled in size and became a well-organised institution worthy of being called a national library, the largest library in the world after the National Library of Paris. The quadrangle at the centre of Smirke's design proved to be a waste of valuable space and was filled at Panizzi's request by a circular Reading Room of cast iron, designed by Smirke's brother, Sydney Smirke.\nUntil the mid-19th century, the museum's collections were relatively circumscribed but, in 1851, with the appointment to the staff of Augustus Wollaston Franks to curate the collections, the museum began for the first time to collect British and European medieval antiquities, prehistory, branching out into Asia and diversifying its holdings of ethnography. A real coup for the museum was the purchase in 1867, over French objections, of the Duke of Blacas's wide-ranging and valuable collection of antiquities. Overseas excavations continued and John Turtle Wood discovered the remains of the 4th\u00a0century\u00a0BC Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, another Wonder of the Ancient World.\nScholarship and legacies (1875\u20131900).\nThe natural history collections were an integral part of the British Museum until their removal to the new British Museum of Natural History in 1887, nowadays the Natural History Museum in South Kensington. With the departure and the completion of the new White Wing (fronting Montague Street) in 1884, more space was available for antiquities and ethnography and the library could further expand. This was a time of innovation as electric lighting was introduced in the Reading Room and exhibition galleries.\nThe William Burges collection of armoury was bequeathed to the museum in 1881. In 1882, the museum was involved in the establishment of the independent Egypt Exploration Fund (now Society) the first British body to carry out research in Egypt. A bequest from Miss Emma Turner in 1892 financed excavations in Cyprus. In 1897 the death of the great collector and curator, A. W. Franks, was followed by an immense bequest of 3,300 finger rings, 153 drinking vessels, 512 pieces of continental porcelain, 1,500 netsuke, 850 inro, over 30,000 bookplates and miscellaneous items of jewellery and plate, among them the Oxus Treasure.\nIn 1898 Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild bequeathed the Waddesdon Bequest, the glittering contents from his New Smoking Room at Waddesdon Manor. This consisted of almost 300 pieces of \"objets d'art et de vertu\" which included exquisite examples of jewellery, plate, enamel, carvings, glass and maiolica, among them the Holy Thorn Reliquary, probably created in the 1390s in Paris for John, Duke of Berry. The collection was in the tradition of a \"Schatzkammer\" such as those formed by the Renaissance princes of Europe. Baron Ferdinand's will was most specific, and failure to observe the terms would make it void, the collection should be\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; These terms are still observed, and the collection occupies room 2a.\nNew century, new building (1900\u20131925).\nBy the last years of the 19th century, The British Museum's collections had increased to the extent that its building was no longer large enough. In 1895 the trustees purchased the 69 houses surrounding the museum with the intention of demolishing them and building around the west, north and east sides of the museum. The first stage was the construction of the northern wing beginning 1906.\nAll the while, the collections kept growing. Emil Torday collected in Central Africa, Aurel Stein in Central Asia, D. G. Hogarth, Leonard Woolley and T. E. Lawrence excavated at Carchemish. Around this time, the American collector and philanthropist J. Pierpont Morgan donated a substantial number of objects to the museum, including William Greenwell's collection of prehistoric artefacts from across Europe which he had purchased for \u00a310,000 in 1908. Morgan had also acquired a major part of Sir John Evans's coin collection, which was later sold to the museum by his son J. P. Morgan Jr. in 1915. In 1918, because of the threat of wartime bombing, some objects were evacuated via the London Post Office Railway to Holborn, the National Library of Wales (Aberystwyth) and a country house near Malvern. On the return of antiquities from wartime storage in 1919 some objects were found to have deteriorated. A conservation laboratory was set up in May 1920 and became a permanent department in 1931. It is today the oldest in continuous existence. In 1923, the British Museum welcomed over one million visitors.\nDisruption and reconstruction (1925\u20131950).\nNew mezzanine floors were constructed and book stacks rebuilt in an attempt to cope with the flood of books. In 1931, the art dealer Sir Joseph Duveen offered funds to build a gallery for the Parthenon sculptures. Designed by the American architect John Russell Pope, it was completed in 1938. The appearance of the exhibition galleries began to change as dark Victorian reds gave way to modern pastel shades.\nFollowing the retirement of George Francis Hill as Director and Principal Librarian in 1936, he was succeeded by John Forsdyke.\nAs tensions with Nazi Germany developed and it appeared that war may be imminent Forsdyke came to the view that with the likelihood of far worse air-raids than that experienced in World War I that the museum had to make preparations to remove its most valuable items to secure locations. Following the Munich crisis Forsdyke ordered 3,300 No-Nail Boxes and stored them in the basement of the Duveen Gallery. At the same time he began identifying and securing suitable locations. As a result, the museum was able to quickly commence relocating selected items on 24 August 1939, (a mere day after the Home Secretary advised them to do so), to secure basements, country houses, Aldwych tube station and the National Library of Wales. Many items were relocated in early 1942 from their initial dispersal locations to a newly developed facility at Westwood Quarry in Wiltshire.\nThe evacuation was timely, for in 1940 the Duveen Gallery was severely damaged by bombing. Meanwhile, prior to the war, the Nazis had sent a researcher to the British Museum for several years with the aim of \"compiling an anti-Semitic history of Anglo-Jewry\".\nAfter the war, the museum continued to collect from all countries and all centuries: among the most spectacular additions were the 2600 BC Mesopotamian treasure from Ur, discovered during Leonard Woolley's 1922\u201334 excavations. Gold, silver and garnet grave goods from the Anglo-Saxon ship burial at Sutton Hoo (1939) and late Roman silver tableware from Mildenhall, Suffolk (1946). The immediate post-war years were taken up with the return of the collections from protection and the restoration of the museum after the Blitz. Work also began on restoring the damaged Duveen Gallery.\nNew public face (1950\u20131975).\nIn 1953, the museum celebrated its bicentenary. Many changes followed: the first full-time in-house designer and publications officer were appointed in 1964, the Friends organisation was set up in 1968, an Education Service established in 1970 and publishing house in 1973. In 1963, a new Act of Parliament introduced administrative reforms. It became easier to lend objects, the constitution of the board of trustees changed and the Natural History Museum became fully independent. By 1959 the Coins and Medals office suite, completely destroyed during the war, was rebuilt and re-opened, attention turned towards the gallery work with new tastes in design leading to the remodelling of Robert Smirke's Classical and Near Eastern galleries. In 1962 the Duveen Gallery was finally restored and the Parthenon Sculptures were moved back into it, once again at the heart of the museum.\nBy the 1970s, the museum was again expanding. More services for the public were introduced; visitor numbers soared, with the temporary exhibition \"Treasures of Tutankhamun\" in 1972, attracting 1,694,117 visitors, the most successful in British history. In the same year the Act of Parliament establishing the British Library was passed, separating the collection of manuscripts and printed books from the British Museum. This left the museum with antiquities; coins, medals and paper money; prints and drawings; and ethnography. A pressing problem was finding space for additions to the library which now required an extra of shelving each year. The Government suggested a site at St Pancras for the new British Library but the books did not leave the museum until 1997.\nGreat Court emerges (1975\u20132000).\nThe departure of the British Library to a new site at St Pancras, finally achieved in 1998, provided the space needed for the books. It also created the opportunity to redevelop the vacant space in Robert Smirke's 19th-century central quadrangle into the Queen Elizabeth II Great Court \u2013 the largest covered square in Europe \u2013 which opened in 2000. The ethnography collections, which had been housed in the short-lived Museum of Mankind at 6 Burlington Gardens from 1970, were returned to new purpose-built galleries in the museum in 2000.\nThe museum again readjusted its collecting policies as interest in \"modern\" objects: prints, drawings, medals and the decorative arts reawakened. Ethnographical fieldwork was carried out in places as diverse as New Guinea, Madagascar, Romania, Guatemala and Indonesia and there were excavations in the Near East, Egypt, Sudan and the UK. The Weston Gallery of Roman Britain, opened in 1997, displayed a number of recently discovered hoards which demonstrated the richness of what had been considered an unimportant part of the Roman Empire. The museum turned increasingly towards private funds for buildings, acquisitions and other purposes. In 2000, the British Museum was awarded National Heritage Museum of the Year.\nBritish Museum today.\nToday the museum no longer houses collections of natural history, and the books and manuscripts it once held now form part of the independent British Library. The museum nevertheless preserves its universality in its collections of artefacts representing the cultures of the world, ancient and modern. The original 1753 collection has grown to over 13\u00a0million objects at the British Museum, 70\u00a0million at the Natural History Museum and 150\u00a0million at the British Library.\nThe Round Reading Room, which was designed by the architect Sydney Smirke, opened in 1857. For almost 150 years researchers came here to consult the museum's vast library. The Reading Room closed in 1997 when the national library (the British Library) moved to a new building at St Pancras. Today it has been transformed into the Walter and Leonore Annenberg Centre.\nWith the bookstacks in the central courtyard of the museum empty, the demolition for Lord Foster's glass-roofed Great Court could begin. The Great Court, opened in 2000, while undoubtedly improving circulation around the museum, was criticised for having a lack of exhibition space at a time when the museum was in serious financial difficulties and many galleries were closed to the public. At the same time the African collections that had been temporarily housed in 6 Burlington Gardens were given a new gallery in the North Wing funded by the Sainsbury family \u2013 with the donation valued at \u00a325\u00a0million.\nThe museum's online database had nearly 4,500,000 individual object entries in 2,000,000 records at the start of 2023. In 2022\u201323 there were 27 million visits to the website. This compares with 19.5\u00a0millions website visits in 2013.\nThere were 5,820,860 visits to the museum in 2023, a 42% increase on 2022. The museum was the most visited tourist attraction in Britain in 2023. The number of visits, however, has not recovered to the level reached before the Covid pandemic.\nA number of films have been shot at the British Museum.\nGovernance.\nDirector.\nThe British Museum is a non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport through a three-year funding agreement. Its head is the Director of the British Museum. The British Museum was run from its inception by a 'principal librarian' (when the book collections were still part of the museum), a role that was renamed 'director and principal librarian' in 1898, and 'director' in 1973 (on the separation of the British Library).\nTrustees.\nA board of 25 trustees (with the director as their accounting officer for the purposes of reporting to Government) is responsible for the general management and control of the museum, in accordance with the British Museum Act 1963 and the Museums and Galleries Act 1992. Prior to the 1963 Act, it was chaired by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor and the Speaker of the House of Commons. Of the 25 trustees, 15 are appointed by the Prime Minister, one by the Crown, four by relevant industry bodies, with the remaining five appointed by other trustees. The board was formed on the museum's inception to hold its collections in trust for the nation without actually owning them themselves, and now fulfil a mainly advisory role. Trustee appointments are governed by the regulatory framework set out in the code of practice on public appointments issued by the Office of the Commissioner for Public Appointments.\nBuilding.\nThe Greek Revival fa\u00e7ade facing Great Russell Street is a characteristic building of Sir Robert Smirke, with 43 columns in the Ionic order high, closely based on those of the temple of Athena Polias at Priene in Asia Minor. The pediment over the main entrance is decorated by sculptures by Sir Richard Westmacott depicting \"The Progress of Civilisation\", consisting of fifteen allegorical figures, installed in 1852.\nThe construction commenced around the courtyard with the East Wing (King's Library) in 1823\u20131828, followed by the North Wing in 1833\u20131838, which originally housed among other galleries a reading room, now the Wellcome Gallery. Work was also progressing on the northern half of the West Wing (The Egyptian Sculpture Gallery) 1826\u20131831, with Montagu House demolished in 1842 to make room for the final part of the West Wing, completed in 1846, and the South Wing with its great colonnade, initiated in 1843 and completed in 1847, when the Front Hall and Great Staircase were opened to the public. The museum is faced with Portland stone, but the perimeter walls and other parts of the building were built using Haytor granite from Dartmoor in South Devon, transported via the unique Haytor Granite Tramway.\nIn 1846 Robert Smirke was replaced as the museum's architect by his brother Sydney Smirke, whose major addition was the Round Reading Room 1854\u20131857; at in diameter it was then the second widest dome in the world, the Pantheon in Rome being slightly wider.\nThe next major addition was the White Wing 1882\u20131884 added behind the eastern end of the South Front, the architect being Sir John Taylor.\nIn 1895, Parliament gave the museum trustees a loan of \u00a3200,000 to purchase from the Duke of Bedford all 69 houses which backed onto the museum building in the five surrounding streets \u2013 Great Russell Street, Montague Street, Montague Place, Bedford Square and Bloomsbury Street. The trustees planned to demolish these houses and to build around the west, north and east sides of the museum new galleries that would completely fill the block on which the museum stands. The architect Sir John James Burnet was petitioned to put forward ambitious long-term plans to extend the building on all three sides. Most of the houses in Montague Place were knocked down a few years after the sale. Of this grand plan only the Edward VII galleries in the centre of the North Front were ever constructed, these were built 1906\u201314 to the design by J.J. Burnet, and opened by King George V and Queen Mary in 1914. They now house the museum's collections of Prints and Drawings and Oriental Antiquities. There was not enough money to put up more new buildings, and so the houses in the other streets are nearly all still standing.\nThe Duveen Gallery, sited to the west of the Egyptian, Greek &amp; Assyrian sculpture galleries, was designed to house the Elgin Marbles by the American Beaux-Arts architect John Russell Pope. Although completed in 1938, it was hit by a bomb in 1940 and remained semi-derelict for 22 years, before reopening in 1962. Other areas damaged during World War II bombing included: in September 1940 two unexploded bombs hit the Edward VII galleries, the King's Library received a direct hit from a high explosive bomb, incendiaries fell on the dome of the Round Reading Room but did little damage; on the night of 10 to 11 May 1941 several incendiaries fell on the south-west corner of the museum, destroying the book stack and 150,000 books in the courtyard and the galleries around the top of the Great Staircase \u2013 this damage was not fully repaired until the early 1960s.\nThe Queen Elizabeth II Great Court is a covered square at the centre of the British Museum designed by the engineers Buro Happold and the architects Foster and Partners. The Great Court opened in December 2000 and is the largest covered square in Europe. The roof is a glass and steel construction, built by an Austrian steelwork company, with 1,656 uniquely shaped panes of glass. At the centre of the Great Court is the Reading Room vacated by the British Library, its functions now moved to St Pancras.\nToday, the British Museum has grown to become one of the largest museums in the world, covering an area of over 92,000\u00a0m2 (990,000 sq. ft). In addition to 21,600\u00a0m2 (232,000 sq. ft) of on-site storage space, and 9,400\u00a0m2 (101,000 sq. ft) of external storage space. Altogether, the British Museum showcases on public display less than 1% of its entire collection, approximately 50,000 items.\nThere are nearly one hundred galleries open to the public, representing of exhibition space, although the less popular ones have restricted opening times. However, the lack of a large temporary exhibition space led to the \u00a3135\u00a0million World Conservation and Exhibitions Centre to provide one and to concentrate all the museum's conservation facilities into one centre. This project was announced in July 2007, with the architects Rogers Stirk Harbour and Partners. It was granted planning permission in December 2009 and was completed in time for the Viking exhibition in March 2014. In 2017, the World Conservation and Exhibitions Centre was shortlisted for the Stirling Prize for excellence in architecture.\nBlythe House in West Kensington was used by the museum for off-site storage of small and medium-sized artefacts until the British Museum Archeological Collection, a purpose-built storage facility near Reading, was opened in 2024. Another site Franks House in East London is used for storage and work on the \"Early Prehistory\" \u2013 Palaeolithic and Mesolithic \u2013 and some other collections.\nDepartments.\nDepartment of Egypt and Sudan.\nThe British Museum houses a collection of over 100,000 Egyptian antiquities from all periods and many sites of importance in Egypt and the Sudan. Together, they illustrate every aspect of the cultures of the Nile Valley (including Nubia), from the Predynastic Neolithic period (c.\u200910,000 BC) through Coptic (Christian) times (12th century AD), and up to the present day, a time-span over 11,000 years.\nEgyptian antiquities have formed part of the British Museum collection ever since its foundation in 1753 after receiving 160 Egyptian objects from Sir Hans Sloane. After the defeat of the French forces under Napoleon at the Battle of the Nile in 1801, the Egyptian antiquities collected were confiscated by the British army and presented to the British Museum in 1803. These works, which included the famed Rosetta Stone, were the first important group of large sculptures to be acquired by the museum. Thereafter, the UK appointed Henry Salt as consul in Egypt who amassed a huge collection of antiquities, some of which were assembled and transported with great ingenuity by the famous Italian explorer Giovanni Belzoni. Most of the antiquities Salt collected were purchased by the British Museum and the Mus\u00e9e du Louvre.\nBy 1866, the collection consisted of some 10,000 objects. Antiquities from excavations started to come to the museum in the latter part of the 19th century as a result of the work of the Egypt Exploration Fund under the efforts of E. A. Wallis Budge. Over the years more than 11,000 objects came from this source, including pieces from Amarna, Bubastis and Deir el-Bahari. Other organisations and individuals also excavated and donated objects to the British Museum, including Flinders Petrie's Egypt Research Account and the British School of Archaeology in Egypt, as well as the University of Oxford Expedition to Kawa and Faras in Sudan.\nActive support by the museum for excavations in Egypt continued to result in important acquisitions throughout the 20th century until changes in antiquities laws in Egypt led to the suspension of policies allowing finds to be exported, although divisions still continue in Sudan. The British Museum conducted its own excavations in Egypt where it received divisions of finds, including Asyut (1907), Mostagedda and Matmar (1920s), Ashmunein (1980s) and sites in Sudan such as Soba, Kawa and the Northern Dongola Reach (1990s). The size of the Egyptian collections now stand at over 110,000 objects.\nIn autumn 2001, the eight million objects forming the museum's permanent collection were further expanded by the addition of six million objects from the Wendorf Collection of Egyptian and Sudanese Prehistory. These were donated by Professor Fred Wendorf of Southern Methodist University in Texas, and comprise the entire collection of artefacts and environmental remains from his excavations at Prehistoric sites in the Sahara Desert between 1963 and 1997. Other fieldwork collections have recently come from Dietrich and Rosemarie Klemm (University of Munich) and William Adams (University of Kentucky).\nThe seven permanent Egyptian galleries at the British Museum, which include its largest exhibition space (Room 4, for monumental sculpture), can display only 4% of its Egyptian holdings. The second-floor galleries have a selection of the museum's collection of 140 mummies and coffins, the largest outside Cairo. A high proportion of the collection comes from tombs or contexts associated with the cult of the dead, and it is these pieces, in particular the mummies, that remain among the most eagerly sought-after exhibits by visitors to the museum.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nPredynastic and Early Dynastic period (c.\u20096000 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20092690 BC)\nOld Kingdom (2690\u20132181 BC)\nMiddle Kingdom (2134\u20131690 BC)\nSecond Intermediate Period (1650\u20131550 BC)\nNew Kingdom (1549\u20131069 BC)\nThird Intermediate Period (1069\u2013664 BC)\nLate Period (664\u2013332 BC)\nPtolemaic dynasty (305\u201330 BC)\nRoman Period (30 BC \u2013 641 AD)\nDepartment of Greece and Rome.\nThe British Museum has one of the world's largest and most comprehensive collections of antiquities from the Classical world, with over 100,000 objects. These mostly range in date from the beginning of the Greek Bronze Age (about 3200 BC) to the establishment of Christianity as the official religion of the Roman Empire, with the Edict of Milan under the reign of the Roman emperor Constantine I in 313 AD. Archaeology was in its infancy during the nineteenth century and many pioneering individuals began excavating sites across the Classical world, chief among them for the museum were Charles Newton, John Turtle Wood, Robert Murdoch Smith and Charles Fellows.\nThe Greek objects originate from across the Ancient Greek world, from the mainland of Greece and the Aegean Islands, to neighbouring lands in Asia Minor and Egypt in the eastern Mediterranean and as far as the western lands of Magna Graecia that include Sicily and southern Italy. The Cycladic, Minoan and Mycenaean cultures are represented, and the Greek collection includes important sculpture from the Parthenon in Athens, as well as elements of two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus and the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus.\nBeginning from the early Bronze Age, the department also houses one of the widest-ranging collections of Italic and Etruscan antiquities outside Italy, as well as extensive groups of material from Cyprus and non-Greek colonies in Lycia and Caria on Asia Minor. There is some material from the Roman Republic, but the collection's strength is in its comprehensive array of objects from across the Roman Empire, with the exception of Britain (which is the mainstay of the Department of Prehistory and Europe).\nThe collections of ancient jewellery and bronzes, Greek vases (many from graves in southern Italy that were once part of Sir William Hamilton's and Chevalier Durand's collections), Roman glass including the famous Cameo glass Portland Vase, Roman gold glass (the second largest collection after the Vatican Museums), Roman mosaics from Carthage and Utica in North Africa that were excavated by Nathan Davis, and silver hoards from Roman Gaul (some of which were bequeathed by the philanthropist and museum trustee Richard Payne Knight), are particularly important. Cypriot antiquities are strong too and have benefited from the purchase of Sir Robert Hamilton Lang's collection as well as the bequest of Emma Turner in 1892, which funded many excavations on the island. Roman sculptures (many of which are copies of Greek originals) are particularly well represented by the Townley collection as well as residual sculptures from the famous Farnese collection.\nObjects from the Department of Greece and Rome are located throughout the museum, although many of the architectural monuments are to be found on the ground floor, with connecting galleries from Gallery 5 to Gallery 23. On the upper floor, there are galleries devoted to smaller material from ancient Italy, Greece, Cyprus and the Roman Empire.\nThe current collection includes:\nWider collection\nPrehistoric Greece and Italy (3300 BC \u2013 8th century BC)\nEtruscan (8th century BC \u2013 1st century BC)\nAncient Greece (8th century BC \u2013 4th century AD)\nAncient Rome (1st century BC \u2013 4th century AD)\nThe collection encompasses architectural, sculptural and epigraphic items from many other sites across the classical world including Amathus, Atripalda, Aphrodisias, Delos, Iasos, Idalion, Lindus, Kalymnos, Kerch, Rhamnous, Salamis, Sestos, Sounion, Tomis and Thessaloniki.\nDepartment of the Middle East.\nWith a collection numbering some 330,000 works, the British Museum possesses the world's largest and most important collection of Mesopotamian antiquities outside Iraq. A collection of immense importance, the holdings of Assyrian sculpture, Babylonian and Sumerian antiquities are among the most comprehensive in the world with entire suites of rooms panelled in alabaster Assyrian palace reliefs from Nimrud, Nineveh and Khorsabad.\nThe collections represent the civilisations of the ancient Near East and its adjacent areas. These cover Mesopotamia, Persia, the Arabian Peninsula, Anatolia, the Caucasus, parts of Central Asia, Syria, the Holy Land and Phoenician settlements in the western Mediterranean from the prehistoric period and include objects from the 7th century.\nThe first significant addition of Mesopotamian objects was from the collection of Claudius James Rich in 1825. The collection was later dramatically enlarged by the excavations of A. H. Layard at the Assyrian sites of Nimrud and Nineveh between 1845 and 1851. At Nimrud, Layard discovered the North-West Palace of Ashurnasirpal II, as well as three other palaces and various temples. He later uncovered the Palace of Sennacherib at Nineveh with 'no less than seventy-one halls'. As a result, a large numbers of Lamassus, palace reliefs, stelae, including the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III, were brought to the British Museum.\nLayard's work was continued by his assistant, Hormuzd Rassam and in 1852\u20131854 he went on to discover the North Palace of Ashurbanipal at Nineveh with many magnificent reliefs, including the famous Lion Hunt of Ashurbanipal and Lachish reliefs. He also discovered the Royal Library of Ashurbanipal, a large collection of cuneiform tablets of enormous importance that today number around 130,000 pieces. W. K. Loftus excavated in Nimrud between 1850 and 1855 and found a remarkable hoard of ivories in the Burnt Palace. Between 1878 and 1882 Rassam greatly improved the museum's holdings with exquisite objects including the Cyrus Cylinder from Babylon, the bronze gates from Balawat, important objects from Sippar, and a fine collection of Urartian bronzes from Toprakkale including a copper figurine of a winged, human-headed bull.\nIn the early 20th century excavations were carried out at Carchemish, Turkey by D. G. Hogarth and Leonard Woolley, the latter assisted by T. E. Lawrence. The Mesopotamian collections were greatly augmented by excavations in southern Iraq after World War I. From Tell al-Ubaid came the bronze furnishings of a Sumerian temple, including life-sized lions and a panel featuring the lion-headed eagle Indugud found by H. R. Hall in 1919\u201324. Woolley went on to excavate Ur between 1922 and 1934, discovering the Royal Cemeteries of the 3rd millennium BC. Some of the masterpieces include the Standard of Ur, the Ram in a Thicket, the Royal Game of Ur, and two bull-headed lyres. The department also has three diorite statues of the ruler Gudea from the ancient state of Lagash and a series of limestone kudurru or boundary stones from different locations across ancient Mesopotamia.\nAlthough the collections centre on Mesopotamia, most of the surrounding areas are well represented. The Achaemenid collection was enhanced with the addition of the Oxus Treasure in 1897 and objects excavated by the German scholar Ernst Herzfeld and the Hungarian-British explorer Sir Aurel Stein. Reliefs and sculptures from the site of Persepolis were donated by Sir Gore Ouseley in 1825 and the 5th Earl of Aberdeen in 1861 and the museum received part of a pot-hoard of jewellery from Pasargadae as the division of finds in 1963 and part of the Ziwiye hoard in 1971. A large column base from the One Hundred Column Hall at Persepolis was acquired in exchange from the Oriental Institute, Chicago. Moreover, the museum has been able to acquire one of the greatest assemblages of Achaemenid silverware in the world. The later Sasanian Empire is also well represented by ornate silver plates and cups, many representing ruling monarchs hunting lions and deer. Phoenician antiquities come from across the region, but the Tharros collection from Sardinia, the hoard of about 150 metal bowls and hundreds of ivories from Nimrud, Ph\u0153nician inscriptions from Carthage including the Son of Baalshillek marble base, the Carthage Tariff and the Carthage tower model and the many punic stelae from Carthage and Maghrawa in Tunisia (such as the Ghorafa stelae) are outstanding. The number of Phoenician inscriptions from sites across Cyprus is also considerable, and include artefacts found at the Kition necropolis (with the two Kition Tariffs having the longest Phoenician inscription discovered on the island), the Idalion temple site and two bilingual pedestals found at Tamassos. Another often overlooked highlight is Yemeni antiquities, the finest collection outside that country. Furthermore, the museum has a representative collection of Dilmun and Parthian material excavated from various burial mounds at the ancient sites of A'ali and Shakhura (that included a Roman ribbed glass bowl) in Bahrain.\nFrom the modern state of Syria come almost forty funerary busts from Palmyra and a group of stone reliefs from the excavations of Max von Oppenheim at Tell Halaf that was purchased in 1920. More material followed from the excavations of Max Mallowan at Chagar Bazar and Tell Brak in 1935\u20131938 and from Woolley at Alalakh in the years just before and after World War II. Mallowan returned with his wife Agatha Christie to carry out further digs at Nimrud in the postwar period which secured many important artefacts, such as the Nimrud Ivories, for the museum. The collection of Palestinian material was strengthened by the work of Kathleen Kenyon at Tell es-Sultan (Jericho) in the 1950s and the acquisition in 1980 of around 17,000 objects found at Lachish by the Wellcome-Marston expedition of 1932\u20131938. Archaeological digs are still taking place where permitted in the Middle East, and, depending on the country, the museum continues to receive a share of the finds from sites such as Tell es Sa'idiyeh in Jordan.\nThe museum's collection of Islamic art, including archaeological material, numbers about 40,000 objects, one of the largest of its kind in the world. As such, it contains a broad range of pottery, paintings, tiles, metalwork, glass, seals, and inscriptions from across the Islamic world, from Spain in the west to India in the east. It is particularly famous for its collection of Iznik ceramics (the largest in the world), its large number of mosque lamps including one from the Dome of the Rock, mediaeval metalwork such as the Vaso Vescovali with its depictions of the Zodiac, a fine selection of astrolabes, and Mughal paintings and precious artwork including a large jade terrapin made for the emperor Jahangir. Thousands of objects were excavated after the war by professional archaeologists at Iranian sites such as Siraf by David Whitehouse and Alamut Castle by Peter Willey. The collection was augmented in 1983 by the Godman bequest of Iznik, Hispano-Moresque and early Iranian pottery. Artefacts from the Islamic world are on display in Gallery 34 of the museum.\nA representative selection from the Department of Middle East, including the most important pieces, are on display in 13 galleries throughout the museum and total some 4,500 objects. A whole suite of rooms on the ground floor display the sculptured reliefs from the Assyrian palaces at Nineveh, Nimrud and Khorsabad, while 8 galleries on the upper floor hold smaller material from ancient sites across the Middle East. The remainder form the study collection which ranges in size from beads to large sculptures. They include approximately 130,000 cuneiform tablets from Mesopotamia.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nNimrud.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNineveh.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther Mesopotamian sites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDepartment of Prints and Drawings.\nThe Department of Prints and Drawings holds the national collection of Western prints and drawings. It ranks as one of the largest and best print room collections in existence alongside the Albertina in Vienna, the Paris collections and the Hermitage. The holdings are easily accessible to the general public in the Study Room, unlike many such collections. The department also has its own exhibition gallery in Room 90, where the displays and exhibitions change several times a year.\nSince its foundation in 1808, the prints and drawings collection has grown to international renown as one of the richest and most representative collections in the world. There are approximately 50,000 drawings and over two million prints. The collection of drawings covers the period from the 14th century to the present, and includes many works of the highest quality by the leading artists of the European schools. The collection of prints covers the tradition of fine printmaking from its beginnings in the 15th century up to the present, with near complete holdings of most of the great names before the 19th century. Key benefactors to the department have been Clayton Mordaunt Cracherode, Richard Payne Knight, John Malcolm, Campbell Dodgson, C\u00e9sar Mange de Hauke and Tom\u00e1s Harris. Writer and author Louis Alexander Fagan, who worked in the department 1869\u20131894 made significant contributions to the department in form of his \"Handbook to the Department\", as well as various other books about the museum in general.\nThere are groups of drawings by Leonardo da Vinci, Raphael, Michelangelo, (including his only surviving full-scale cartoon), Albrecht D\u00fcrer (a collection of 138 drawings is one of the finest in existence), Peter Paul Rubens, Rembrandt, Claude Lorrain and Antoine Watteau, and largely complete collections of the works of all the great printmakers including D\u00fcrer (99 engravings, 6 etchings and most of his 346 woodcuts), Rembrandt and Francisco Goya. More than 30,000 British drawings and watercolours include important examples of work by William Hogarth, Paul Sandby, J. M. W. Turner, Thomas Girtin, John Constable, John Sell Cotman, David Cox, James Gillray, Thomas Rowlandson, Francis Towne and George Cruikshank, as well as all the great Victorians. The collection contains the unique set of watercolours by the pioneering colonist John White, the first British artist in America and first European to paint Native Americans. There are about a million British prints including more than 20,000 satires and outstanding collections of works by William Blake and Thomas Bewick.. The great eleven volume Catalogue of Political and Personal Satires Preserved in the Department of Prints and Drawings in the British Museum compiled between 1870 and 1954 is the definitive reference work for the study of British Satirical prints. Over 500,000 objects from the department are now on the online collection database, many with high-quality images. A 2011 donation of \u00a31\u00a0million enabled the museum to acquire a complete set of Pablo Picasso's \"Vollard Suite\".\nDepartment of Britain, Europe and Prehistory.\nThe Department of Britain, Europe and Prehistory is responsible for collections that cover a vast expanse of time and geography. It includes some of the earliest objects made by humans in east Africa over 2\u00a0million years ago, as well as Prehistoric and neolithic objects from other parts of the world; and the art and archaeology of Europe from the earliest times to the present day. Archeological excavation of prehistoric material took off and expanded considerably in the twentieth century and the department now has literally millions of objects from the Paleolithic and Mesolithic periods throughout the world, as well as from the Neolithic, Bronze Age and Iron Age in Europe. Stone Age material from Africa has been donated by famous archaeologists such as Louis and Mary Leakey, and Gertrude Caton\u2013Thompson. Paleolithic objects from the Sturge, Christy and Lartet collections include some of the earliest works of art from Europe. Many Bronze Age objects from across Europe were added during the nineteenth century, often from large collections built up by excavators and scholars such as Greenwell in Britain, Tobin and Cooke in Ireland, Lukis and de la Granci\u00e8re in Brittany, Worsaae in Denmark, Siret at El Argar in Spain, and Klemm and Edelmann in Germany. A representative selection of Iron Age artefacts from Hallstatt were acquired as a result of the Evans/Lubbock excavations and from Giubiasco in Ticino through the Swiss National Museum.\nIn addition, the British Museum's collections covering the period AD 300 to 1100 are among the largest and most comprehensive in the world, extending from Spain to the Black Sea and from North Africa to Scandinavia; a representative selection of these has recently been redisplayed in a newly refurbished gallery. Important collections include Latvian, Norwegian, Gotlandic and Merovingian material from Johann Karl B\u00e4hr, Alfred Heneage Cocks, Sir James Curle and Philippe Delamain respectively. However, the undoubted highlight from the early mediaeval period is the magnificent items from the Sutton Hoo royal grave, generously donated to the nation by the landowner Edith Pretty. The late mediaeval collection includes a large number of seal-dies from across Europe, the most famous of which include those from the Town of Boppard in Germany, Isabella of Hainault from her tomb in Notre Dame Cathedral, Paris, Inchaffray Abbey in Scotland and Robert Fitzwalter, one of the Barons who led the revolt against King John in England. There is also a large collection of medieval signet rings, prominent among them is the gold signet ring belonging to Jean III de Grailly who fought in the Hundred Years' War, as well as those of Mary, Queen of Scots and Richard I of England. Other groups of artefacts represented in the department include the national collection of (c.100) icon paintings, most of which originate from the Byzantine Empire and Russia, and over 40 mediaeval astrolabes from across Europe and the Middle East. The department also includes the national collection of horology with one of the most wide-ranging assemblage of clocks, watches and other timepieces in Europe, with masterpieces from every period in the development of time-keeping. Choice horological pieces came from the Morgan and Ilbert collections. The department is also responsible for the curation of Romano-British objects \u2013 the museum has by far the most extensive such collection in Britain and one of the most representative regional collections in Europe outside Italy. It is particularly famous for the large number of late Roman silver treasures, many of which were found in East Anglia, the most important of which is the Mildenhall Treasure. The museum purchased many Roman-British objects from the antiquarian Charles Roach Smith in 1856. These quickly formed the nucleus of the collection. The department also includes ethnographic material from across Europe including a collection of Bulgarian costumes and shadow puppets from Greece and Turkey. A particular highlight are the three S\u00e1mi drums from northern Sweden of which only about 70 are extant.\nObjects from the Department of Britain, Europe and Prehistory are mostly found on the upper floor of the museum, with a suite of galleries numbered from 38 to 51. Most of the collection is stored in its archive facilities, where it is available for research and study.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nStone Age (c. 3.4\u00a0million years BC \u2013 c. 2000 BC)\nBronze Age (c.\u20093300 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009600 BC)\nIron Age (c.\u2009600 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091st century AD)\nRomano-British (43 AD \u2013 410 AD)\nEarly Mediaeval (c.\u20094th century AD\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091000 AD)\nMediaeval (c.\u20091000 AD\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091500 AD)\nRenaissance to Modern (c.\u20091500 AD \u2013 present)\nThe many hoards of treasure include those of Esquiline, Carthage, First Cyprus, Hockwold, Hoxne, Lampsacus, Mildenhall, Vale of York and Water Newton, (4th\u201310th centuries AD)\nDepartment of Asia.\nThe scope of the Department of Asia is extremely broad; its collections of over 75,000 objects cover the material culture of the whole Asian continent and from the Neolithic up to the present day. Until recently, this department concentrated on collecting Oriental antiquities from urban or semi-urban societies across the Asian continent. Many of those objects were collected by colonial officers and explorers in former parts of the British Empire, especially the Indian subcontinent. Examples include the collections made by individuals such as James Wilkinson Breeks, Sir Alexander Cunningham, Sir Harold Deane, Sir Walter Elliot, James Prinsep, Charles Masson, Sir John Marshall and Charles Stuart.\nA large number of Chinese antiquities were purchased from the Anglo-Greek banker George Eumorfopoulos in the 1930s. The large collection of some 1,800 Japanese prints and paintings owned by Arthur Morrison was acquired in the early twentieth century. In the second half of the twentieth century, the museum greatly benefited from the bequest of the philanthropist PT Brooke Sewell, which allowed the department to purchase many objects and fill in gaps in the collection.\nIn 2004, the ethnographic collections from Asia were transferred to the department. These reflect the diverse environment of the largest continent in the world and range from India to China, the Middle East to Japan. Much of the ethnographic material comes from objects originally owned by tribal cultures and hunter-gatherers, many of whose way of life has disappeared in the last century. \nParticularly valuable collections are from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (much assembled by the British naval officer Maurice Portman), Sri Lanka (especially through the colonial administrator Hugh Nevill), Northern Thailand, south-west China, the Ainu of Hokkaido in Japan (chief among them the collection of the Scottish zoologist John Anderson), Siberia (with artefacts collected by the explorer Kate Marsden and Bassett Digby and is notable for its Sakha pieces, especially the ivory model of a summer festival at Yakutsk) and the islands of South-East Asia, especially Borneo. The latter benefited from the purchase in 1905 of the Sarawak collection put together by Dr Charles Hose, as well as from other colonial officers such as Edward A Jeffreys. A unique and valuable group of objects from Java, including shadow puppets and a gamelan musical set, was assembled by Sir Stamford Raffles.\nThe principal gallery devoted to Asian art in the museum is Gallery 33 with its comprehensive display of Chinese, Indian subcontinent and South-east Asian objects. An adjacent gallery showcases the Amaravati sculptures and monuments. Other galleries on the upper floors are devoted to its Japanese, Korean, painting and calligraphy, and Chinese ceramics collections.\nHighlights of the collections include:\nEast Asia\nSouth Asia\nSoutheast Asia\nDepartment of Africa, Oceania and the Americas.\nThe British Museum houses one of the world's most comprehensive collections of ethnographic material from Africa, Oceania and the Americas, representing the cultures of indigenous peoples throughout the world. Over 350,000 objects spanning thousands of years tells the history of mankind from three major continents and many rich and diverse cultures; the collecting of modern artefacts is ongoing. Many individuals have added to the department's collection over the years but those assembled by Henry Christy, Harry Beasley and William Oldman are outstanding.\nObjects from this department are mostly on display in several galleries on the ground and lower floors. Gallery 24 displays ethnographic from every continent while adjacent galleries focus on North America and Mexico. A long suite of rooms (Gallery 25) on the lower floor display African art. There are plans in place to develop permanent galleries for displaying art from Oceania and South America.\nAfrica.\nThe Sainsbury African Galleries display 600 objects from the greatest permanent collection of African arts and culture in the world. The three permanent galleries provide a substantial exhibition space for the museum's African collection comprising over 200,000 objects. A curatorial scope that encompasses both archaeological and contemporary material, including both unique masterpieces of artistry and objects of everyday life. A great addition was material amassed by Sir Henry Wellcome, which was donated by the Wellcome Historical Medical Museum in 1954.\nHighlights of the African collection include objects found at megalithic circles in The Gambia, a dozen exquisite Afro-Portuguese ivories, a series of soapstone figures from the Kissi people in Sierra Leone and Liberia, hoard of bronze Kru currency rings from the Sinoe River in Liberia, Asante goldwork and regalia from Ghana including the Bowdich collection, the rare Akan Drum from the same region in west Africa, pair of door panels and lintel from the palace at Ikere-Ekiti in Yorubaland, the Benin and Igbo-Ukwu bronze sculptures, the beautiful Bronze Head of Queen Idia, a magnificent brass head of a Yoruba ruler and quartz throne from Ife, a similar terracotta head from Iwinrin Grove near Ife, the Apapa Hoard from Lagos and other mediaeval bronze hoards from Allabia and the For\u00e7ados River in southern Nigeria.\nIncluded is an Ikom monolith from Cross River State, several ancestral screens from the Kalabari tribe in the Niger Delta, the Torday collection of central African sculpture, textiles and weaponry from the Kuba Kingdom including three royal figures, the unique Luzira Head from Uganda, processional crosses and other ecclesiastical and royal material from Gondar and Magdala, Ethiopia following the British Expedition to Abyssinia, excavated objects from Great Zimbabwe (that includes a unique soapstone, anthropomorphic figure) and satellite towns such as Mutare including a large hoard of Iron Age soapstone figures, a rare divining bowl from the Venda peoples and cave paintings and petroglyphs from South Africa.\nOceania.\nThe British Museum's Oceanic collections originate from the vast area of the Pacific Ocean, stretching from Papua New Guinea to Easter Island, from New Zealand to Hawaii. The three main anthropological groups represented in the collection are Polynesia, Melanesia and Micronesia \u2013 Aboriginal art from Australia is considered separately in its own right. Metal working was not indigenous to Oceania before Europeans arrived, so many of the artefacts from the collection are made from stone, shell, bone and bamboo. Prehistoric objects from the region include a bird-shaped pestle and a group of stone mortars from Papua New Guinea.\nThe British Museum is fortunate in having some of the earliest Oceanic and Pacific collections, many of which were put together by members of Cook's and Vancouver's expeditions or by colonial administrators and explorers such as Sir George Grey, Sir Frederick Broome, Joseph Bradshaw, Robert Christison, Gregory Mathews, Frederick Meinertzhagen, Thomas Mitchell and Arthur Gordon, before Western culture significantly impacted on indigenous cultures. The department has also benefited greatly from the legacy of pioneering anthropologists such as AC Haddon, Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski and Katherine Routledge. An important artefact is a wooden Aboriginal shield, probably dating from the late eighteenth century and one of the earliest precontact objects from Australia.\nThe Wilson cabinet of curiosities from Palau is an example of pre-contact ware. Another outstanding exemplar is the mourner's dress from Tahiti given to Cook on his second voyage, one of only ten in existence. In the collection is a large war canoe from the island of Vella Lavella in the Solomon Islands, one of the last ever to be built in the archipelago.\nThe M\u0101ori collection is the finest outside New Zealand with many intricately carved wooden and jade objects and the Aboriginal art collection is distinguished by its wide range of bark paintings, including two very early bark etchings collected by John Hunter Kerr. A particularly important group of objects was purchased from the London Missionary Society in 1911, that includes the unique statue of A'a from Rurutu Island, the rare idol from the isle of Mangareva and the Cook Islands deity figure. Other highlights include the huge Hawaiian statue of K\u016b-ka-ili-moku or god of war (one of three extant in the world) and the famous Easter Island statues Hoa Hakananai'a and Moai Hava.\nAmericas.\nThe Americas collection mainly consists of 19th and 20th century items although the Paracas, Moche, Inca, Maya, Aztec, Taino and other early cultures are well represented. The Kayung totem pole, which was made in the late nineteenth century on Haida Gwaii, dominates the Great Court and provides a fitting introduction to this very wide-ranging collection that stretches from the very north of the North American continent where the Inuit population has lived for centuries, to the tip of South America where indigenous tribes have long thrived in Patagonia.\nHighlights of the collection include Aboriginal Canadian and Native American objects from North America collected by the 5th Earl of Lonsdale, the Marquis of Lorne, the explorer David Haig-Thomas and Bryan Mullanphy, Mayor of St. Louis, the Squier and Davis collection of prehistoric mound relics from North America, two carved stone bowls in the form of a seated human figure made by ancient North West Coast peoples from British Columbia, the headdress of Chief Yellow Calf from the Arapaho tribe in Wyoming, a lidded rivercane basket from South Carolina and the earliest historic example of Cherokee basketry, a selection of pottery vessels found in prehistoric dwellings at Mesa Verde and Casas Grandes, one of the enigmatic crystal skulls of unknown origin, a collection of nine turquoise Aztec mosaics from Mexico (the largest in Europe), important artefacts from Teotihuacan and Isla de Sacrificios.\nThere are several rare pre-Columbian manuscripts including the Codex Zouche-Nuttall and Codex Waecker-Gotter and post-colonial ones such as the Codex Aubin and Codex Kingsborough, a spectacular series of Mayan lintels from Yaxchilan excavated by the British Mayanist Alfred Maudslay, a very high quality Mayan collection that includes sculptures from Copan, Tikal, Tulum, Pusilha, Naranjo and Nebaj (including the celebrated Fenton Vase), an ornate calcite vase with jaguar handles from the Ulua Valley in Honduras, the Lord Moyne collection from the Bay Islands, Honduras and Boyle collection from Nicaragua, over 20 stone metates with zoomorphic and anthropomorphic ornamentation from Costa Rica, a group of Zemi Figures from Vere, Jamaica, and wooden duhos from the Dominican Republic and The Bahamas.\nThere are a collection of Pre-Columbian human mummies from sites across South America including Ancon, Acari, Arica and Leyva, a number of prestigious pre-Columbian gold and votive objects from Colombia, three axe-shaped gold diadems found near Caman\u00e1 from the Siguas culture in Peru, unique collection of Moche wooden figures and staffs from the Macabi islands off Peru, ethnographic objects from across the Amazon region including the Schomburgk and Maybury Lewis collections and part of the von Martius and von Spix collection, two rare Tiwanaku pottery vessels from Lake Titicaca and important items from Tierra del Fuego donated by Commander Phillip Parker King.\nDepartment of Money and Medals.\nThe British Museum is home to one of the world's finest numismatic collections, comprising about a million objects, including coins, medals, tokens and paper money. The collection spans the entire history of coinage from its origins in the 7th century BC to the present day and is representative of both the East and West. The Department of Coins and Medals was created in 1861 and celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2011.\nDepartment of Conservation and Scientific Research.\nThis department was founded in 1920. Conservation has six specialist areas: ceramics &amp; glass; metals; organic material (including textiles); stone, wall paintings and mosaics; Eastern pictorial art and Western pictorial art. The science department has and continues to develop techniques to date artefacts, analyse and identify the materials used in their manufacture, to identify the place an artefact originated and the techniques used in their creation. The department also publishes its findings and discoveries.\nLibraries and archives.\nThis department covers all levels of education, from casual visitors, schools, degree level and beyond. The museum's various libraries hold in excess of 350,000 books, journals and pamphlets covering all areas of the museum's collection. Also the general museum archives which date from its foundation in 1753 are overseen by this department; the individual departments have their own separate archives and libraries covering their various areas of responsibility, which can be consulted by the public on application. The Anthropology Library is especially large, with 120,000 volumes. However, the Paul Hamlyn Library, which had become the central reference library of the British Museum and the only library there freely open to the general public, closed permanently in August 2011. The website and online database of the collection also provide increasing amounts of information.\nBritish Museum Press.\nThe British Museum Press (BMP) is the publishing business and a division of the British Museum Company Ltd., a company and a charity (established in 1973) wholly owned by the trustees of the British Museum.\nThe BMP publishes both popular and scholarly illustrated books to accompany the exhibition programme and explore aspects of the general collection. Profits from their sales goes to support the British Museum.\nScholarly titles are published in the Research Publications series, all of which are peer-reviewed. This series was started in 1978 and was originally called Occasional Papers. The series is designed to disseminate research on items in the collection. To date, over 200 books have been published in this series. Between six and eight titles are published each year in this series. They can be found on the https://.\nControversies and criticism.\nContested artefacts.\nIt is a point of controversy whether museums should possess artefacts illegally taken from other countries, and the British Museum is a notable target for criticism. The Elgin Marbles, the Benin Bronzes, Ethiopian Tabots and the Rosetta Stone are among the most disputed objects in its collections, and organisations have been formed demanding the return of these artefacts to their native countries.\nThe Elgin Marbles or Parthenon Marbles claimed by Greece have been cited by UNESCO, among others, for restitution. From 1801 to 1812, Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin's agents removed about half of the surviving sculptures from the Parthenon, as well as sculptures from the Propylaea and Erechtheion. The former director of the museum has stated, \"We are indebted to Elgin for having rescued the Parthenon sculptures and others from the Acropolis from the destruction they were suffering, as well as from the damage that the Acropolis monuments, including the sculptures that he did not remove, have suffered since.\" The British Museum itself damaged some of the artefacts during restoration in the 1930s. In late 2022, the British Museum had entered into preliminary negotiations with the Greek government about the future of the sculptures.\nThere is also controversy over artefacts taken during the destruction of the Old Summer Palace in Beijing by an Anglo-French expeditionary force during the Second Opium War in 1860, an event which drew protest from Victor Hugo. The British Museum and the Victoria and Albert Museum, among others, have been asked since 2009 to open their archives for investigation by a team of Chinese investigators as a part of an international mission to document Chinese national treasures in foreign collections. In 2010 Neil MacGregor, the former Director of the British Museum, said he hoped that both British and Chinese investigators would work together on the controversial collection. In 2020 the museum appointed a curator to research the history of its collections, including disputed items.\nThe British Museum has stated that the \"restitutionist premise, that whatever was made in a country must return to an original geographical site, would empty both the British Museum and the other great museums of the world\". The museum has also argued that the British Museum Act of 1963 prevents any object from leaving its collection once it has entered it. \"The Museum owns its collections, but its Trustees are not empowered to dispose of them\". Nevertheless, it has returned items such as Tasmanian Aboriginal burial remains when this was consistent with legislation regarding the disposal of items in the collections.\nNazi-looted art.\nIn 2002 the heirs of Arthur Feldmann, an art collector murdered in the Holocaust, requested that four old master drawings stolen by the Gestapo in 1939 be returned to the family. A High Court of Justice judge ruled in 2005 that it would be illegal for the British Museum to return artworks looted by the Nazis to a Jewish family, despite its willingness and moral obligation to do so. The law was changed in 2009, and again in 2022 giving museums additional powers to return looted art or provide compensation. Feldmann's heirs accepted a compensation payment for a looted drawing and stated that they were happy the drawing would remain in the British Museum collection.\nAccording to the British Museum Spoliation report published by the Collections Trust in 2017, \"Around 30% of some 21,350 continental and British drawings acquired since 1933 have an uncertain or incomplete provenance for the 1933\u20131945 period\". The museum lists these works on its website and investigates claims for restitution.\nBP sponsorship.\nSince 2016, there have been a number of protests by activist groups, trade unions and the public against the British Museum's relationship with the oil company BP which the protesters believe implicates the museum in global warming. In July 2019, Ahdaf Soueif resigned from the British Museum's board of trustees in protest against the sponsorship. In February 2020, 1,500 demonstrators, including British Museum staff, took part in a day of protest over the issue. In December 2023, it was announced that the British Museum had agreed to a new \u00a350 million sponsorship deal with BP.\nChairman's Advisory Group.\nThe Chairman's Advisory Group is an informal group of business leaders who provide advice to the chairman on various issues including the museum's relationship with the British government and policy on the museum's collections. Its existence was made public after a freedom of information request by a group campaigning against the museum's links with the fossil fuel industry. The museum has declined to name the members of the advisory group as they are acting in their personal capacity.\nThefts.\nThefts from the museum include: several historic coins and medals in the 1970s; a 17th-century Japanese Kakiemon figure in 1990; two Meiji figurines and a fragment of a gold ring in 1991; fifteen Roman coins and jewellery worth \u00a3250,000 in 1993; and a Japanese chest and two Persian books in 1996.\nIn July 2002 a marble head, valued at \u00a350,000, was stolen from the Archaic Greek gallery. In 2004, 15 Chinese artefacts including jewels, ornate hairpins and fingernail guards were stolen. In 2017, it was revealed that a Cartier diamond had been missing since 2011.\nIn August 2023, a staff member was fired after it emerged that items including gold, jewellery and gems had been stolen over a \"significant\" period of time. The incident led to an investigation by the Metropolitan Police and an independent review by the museum. Some of the missing artefacts were later found to have been sold on eBay for considerably less than their estimated value. The museum had been warned of the thefts as early as 2021. The museum's director, Hartwig Fischer, resigned because of the museum's inadequate response to the warnings of theft. The number of artefacts stolen was estimated to be about 2,000. As a consequence of the thefts, the museum announced a five-year plan to digitise the complete collection and make it available to view online. By May 2024, 626 of the missing items had been recovered.\nCopyright settlement.\nIn August 2023, the British Museum reached a settlement with the translator Yilin Wang over her translations of poetry by Qiu Jin. The museum had used her work without credit or permission in their exhibition \"China's Hidden Century\" which ran between May 2023 and October 2023.\nTibet naming conventions.\nIn January 2025, the British Museum was criticized by Tibetan human rights groups for referring to Tibet as \"Xizang,\" the current preferred term of the government of the People's Republic of China.\nGalleries.\n\"Department of Ancient Egypt and Sudan\"\n\"Department of the Middle East\"\n\"Department of Greece and Rome\"\nDigital and online.\nThe museum has a collaboration with the Google Cultural Institute to bring the collection online.\nExhibitions.\n\"Forgotten Empire Exhibition\" (October 2005 \u2013 January 2006)\nFrom January to April 2012 the museum presented \"\", the first major exhibition on the topic of the Hajj, the pilgrimage that is one of the five pillars of Islam.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4677", "revid": "40552684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4677", "title": "Binomial theorem", "text": "Algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial \nformula_1 The binomial coefficient formula_2 appears as the kth entry in the nth row of Pascal's triangle (where the top is the 0th row formula_3). Each entry is the sum of the two above it.\nIn elementary algebra, the binomial theorem (or binomial expansion) describes the algebraic expansion of powers of a binomial. According to the theorem, the power &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; expands into a polynomial with terms of the form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where the exponents &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are nonnegative integers satisfying &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the coefficient &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of each term is a specific positive integer depending on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For example, for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;,\nformula_4\nThe coefficient &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in each term &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is known as the binomial coefficient &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; or &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; (the two have the same value). These coefficients for varying &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be arranged to form Pascal's triangle. These numbers also occur in combinatorics, where &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; gives the number of different combinations (i.e. subsets) of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; elements that can be chosen from an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-element set. Therefore &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is usually pronounced as \"&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; choose &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\".\nStatement.\nAccording to the theorem, the expansion of any nonnegative integer power n of the binomial \"x\" + \"y\" is a sum of the form\nformula_5\nwhere each formula_6 is a positive integer known as a binomial coefficient, defined as\nformula_7\nThis formula is also referred to as the binomial formula or the binomial identity. Using summation notation, it can be written more concisely as\nformula_8\nThe final expression follows from the previous one by the symmetry of x and y in the first expression, and by comparison it follows that the sequence of binomial coefficients in the formula is symmetric, formula_9\nA simple variant of the binomial formula is obtained by substituting 1 for y, so that it involves only a single variable. In this form, the formula reads\nformula_10\nExamples.\nThe first few cases of the binomial theorem are:\nformula_11\nIn general, for the expansion of (\"x\" + \"y\")\"n\" on the right side in the nth row (numbered so that the top row is the 0th row):\nAn example illustrating the last two points: formula_12 with formula_13.\nA simple example with a specific positive value of \"y\":\nformula_14\nA simple example with a specific negative value of \"y\":\nformula_15\nGeometric explanation.\nFor positive values of a and b, the binomial theorem with \"n\" = 2 is the geometrically evident fact that a square of side \"a\" + \"b\" can be cut into a square of side a, a square of side b, and two rectangles with sides a and b. With \"n\" = 3, the theorem states that a cube of side \"a\" + \"b\" can be cut into a cube of side a, a cube of side b, three \"a\" \u00d7 \"a\" \u00d7 \"b\" rectangular boxes, and three \"a\" \u00d7 \"b\" \u00d7 \"b\" rectangular boxes.\nIn calculus, this picture also gives a geometric proof of the derivative formula_16 if one sets formula_17 and formula_18 interpreting b as an infinitesimal change in a, then this picture shows the infinitesimal change in the volume of an n-dimensional hypercube, formula_19 where the coefficient of the linear term (in formula_20) is formula_21 the area of the n faces, each of dimension \"n\" \u2212 1:\nformula_22\nSubstituting this into the definition of the derivative via a difference quotient and taking limits means that the higher order terms, formula_23 and higher, become negligible, and yields the formula formula_24 interpreted as \"the infinitesimal rate of change in volume of an n-cube as side length varies is the area of n of its (\"n\" \u2212 1)-dimensional faces\". If one integrates this picture, which corresponds to applying the fundamental theorem of calculus, one obtains Cavalieri's quadrature formula, the integral formula_25 \u2013 see proof of Cavalieri's quadrature formula for details.\nBinomial coefficients.\nThe coefficients that appear in the binomial expansion are called binomial coefficients. These are usually written formula_26 and pronounced \"n choose k\".\nFormulas.\nThe coefficient of \"x\"\"n\"\u2212\"k\"\"y\"\"k\" is given by the formula\nformula_27\nwhich is defined in terms of the factorial function \"n\"!. Equivalently, this formula can be written\nformula_28\nwith k factors in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction. Although this formula involves a fraction, the binomial coefficient formula_2 is actually an integer.\nCombinatorial interpretation.\nThe binomial coefficient formula_6 can be interpreted as the number of ways to choose k elements from an n-element set (a combination). This is related to binomials for the following reason: if we write (\"x\" + \"y\")\"n\" as a product\nformula_31\nthen, according to the distributive law, there will be one term in the expansion for each choice of either x or y from each of the binomials of the product. For example, there will only be one term \"x\"\"n\", corresponding to choosing x from each binomial. However, there will be several terms of the form \"x\"\"n\"\u22122\"y\"2, one for each way of choosing exactly two binomials to contribute a y. Therefore, after combining like terms, the coefficient of \"x\"\"n\"\u22122\"y\"2 will be equal to the number of ways to choose exactly 2 elements from an n-element set.\nProofs.\nCombinatorial proof.\nExpanding (\"x\" + \"y\")\"n\" yields the sum of the 2\"n\" products of the form \"e\"1\"e\"2 ... \"e\"\"n\" where each \"e\"\"i\" is \"x\" or\u00a0y. Rearranging factors shows that each product equals \"x\"\"n\"\u2212\"k\"\"y\"\"k\" for some k between 0 and\u00a0n. For a given k, the following are proved equal in succession:\nThis proves the binomial theorem.\nExample.\nThe coefficient of \"xy\"2 in\nformula_35\nequals formula_36 because there are three \"x\",\"y\" strings of length 3 with exactly two y's, namely,\nformula_37\ncorresponding to the three 2-element subsets of {1, 2, 3}, namely,\nformula_38\nwhere each subset specifies the positions of the y in a corresponding string.\nInductive proof.\nInduction yields another proof of the binomial theorem. When \"n\" = 0, both sides equal 1, since \"x\"0 = 1 and formula_39 Now suppose that the equality holds for a given n; we will prove it for \"n\" + 1. For \"j\", \"k\" \u2265 0, let [\"f\"(\"x\", \"y\")]\"j\",\"k\" denote the coefficient of \"x\"\"j\"\"y\"\"k\" in the polynomial \"f\"(\"x\", \"y\"). By the inductive hypothesis, (\"x\" + \"y\")\"n\" is a polynomial in x and y such that [(\"x\" + \"y\")\"n\"]\"j\",\"k\" is formula_2 if \"j\" + \"k\" = \"n\", and 0 otherwise. The identity\nformula_41\nshows that (\"x\" + \"y\")\"n\"+1 is also a polynomial in x and y, and\nformula_42\nsince if \"j\" + \"k\" = \"n\" + 1, then (\"j\" \u2212 1) + \"k\" = \"n\" and \"j\" + (\"k\" \u2212 1) = \"n\". Now, the right hand side is\nformula_43\nby Pascal's identity. On the other hand, if \"j\" + \"k\" \u2260 \"n\" + 1, then (\"j\" \u2013 1) + \"k\" \u2260 \"n\" and \"j\" + (\"k\" \u2013 1) \u2260 \"n\", so we get 0 + 0 = 0. Thus\nformula_44\nwhich is the inductive hypothesis with \"n\" + 1 substituted for n and so completes the inductive step.\nGeneralizations.\nGeneralized binomial theorem.\nThe standard binomial theorem, as discussed above, is concerned with formula_45 where the exponent \"n\" is a nonnegative integer. The generalized binomial theorem allows for non-integer, negative, or even complex exponents, at the expense of replacing the finite sum by an infinite series.\nIn order to do this, one needs to give meaning to binomial coefficients with an arbitrary upper index, which cannot be done using the usual formula with factorials. However, for an arbitrary number r, one can define\nformula_46\nwhere the last equation introduces modern notation for the falling factorial. This agrees with the usual definitions when r is a nonnegative integer. Then, if x and y are real numbers with , and r is any complex number, one has\nformula_47\nWhen r is a nonnegative integer, the binomial coefficients for \"k\" &gt; \"r\" are zero, so this equation reduces to the usual binomial theorem, and there are at most \"r\" + 1 nonzero terms. For other values of r, the series has infinitely many nonzero terms.\nFor example, \"r\" = 1/2 gives the following series for the square root:\nformula_48\nWith \"r\" = \u22121, the generalized binomial series becomes:\nformula_49 which is the geometric series sum formula for the convergent case , whose common ratio is \u2212\"x\".\nMore generally, with \"r\" = \u2212\"s\", we have for :\nformula_50\nSo, for instance, when \"s\" = 1/2,\nformula_51\nReplacing x with -x yields:\nformula_52\nSo, for instance, when \"s\" = 1/2, we have for :\nformula_53\nFurther generalizations.\nThe generalized binomial theorem can be extended to the case where x and y are complex numbers. For this version, one should again assume and define the powers of \"x\" + \"y\" and x using a holomorphic branch of log defined on an open disk of radius centered at x. The generalized binomial theorem is valid also for elements x and y of a Banach algebra as long as \"xy\" = \"yx\", and x is invertible, and .\nA version of the binomial theorem is valid for the following Pochhammer symbol-like family of polynomials: for a given real constant c, define formula_54 and\nformula_55\nfor formula_56 Then\nformula_57\nThe case \"c\" = 0 recovers the usual binomial theorem.\nMore generally, a sequence formula_58 of polynomials is said to be of binomial type if\nAn operator formula_66 on the space of polynomials is said to be the \"basis operator\" of the sequence formula_58 if formula_68 and formula_69 for all formula_70. A sequence formula_58 is binomial if and only if its basis operator is a Delta operator. Writing formula_72 for the shift by formula_73 operator, the Delta operators corresponding to the above \"Pochhammer\" families of polynomials are the backward difference formula_74 for formula_75, the ordinary derivative for formula_76, and the forward difference formula_77 for formula_78.\nMultinomial theorem.\nThe binomial theorem can be generalized to include powers of sums with more than two terms. The general version is\nformula_79\nwhere the summation is taken over all sequences of nonnegative integer indices \"k\"1 through \"k\"\"m\" such that the sum of all \"k\"\"i\" is\u00a0n. (For each term in the expansion, the exponents must add up to\u00a0n). The coefficients formula_80 are known as multinomial coefficients, and can be computed by the formula\nformula_81\nCombinatorially, the multinomial coefficient formula_82 counts the number of different ways to partition an n-element set into disjoint subsets of sizes \"k\"1, ..., \"k\"\"m\".\nMulti-binomial theorem.\nWhen working in more dimensions, it is often useful to deal with products of binomial expressions. By the binomial theorem this is equal to\nformula_83\nThis may be written more concisely, by multi-index notation, as\nformula_84\nGeneral Leibniz rule.\nThe general Leibniz rule gives the nth derivative of a product of two functions in a form similar to that of the binomial theorem: \nformula_85\nHere, the superscript (\"n\") indicates the nth derivative of a function, formula_86. If one sets \"f\"(\"x\") = \"e\"\"ax\" and \"g\"(\"x\") = \"e\"\"bx\", cancelling the common factor of \"e\"(\"a\" + \"b\")\"x\" from each term gives the ordinary binomial theorem.\nHistory.\nSpecial cases of the binomial theorem were known since at least the 4th century BC when Greek mathematician Euclid mentioned the special case of the binomial theorem for exponent formula_87. Greek mathematician Diophantus cubed various binomials, including formula_88. Indian mathematician Aryabhata's method for finding cube roots, from around 510 AD, suggests that he knew the binomial formula for exponent formula_89.\nBinomial coefficients, as combinatorial quantities expressing the number of ways of selecting k objects out of n without replacement (combinations), were of interest to ancient Indian mathematicians. The Jain \"Bhagavati Sutra\" (c. 300 BC) describes the number of combinations of philosophical categories, senses, or other things, with correct results up through &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (probably obtained by listing all possibilities and counting them) and a suggestion that higher combinations could likewise be found. The \"Chanda\u1e25\u015b\u0101stra\" by the Indian lyricist Pi\u1e45gala (3rd or 2nd century BC) somewhat cryptically describes a method of arranging two types of syllables to form metres of various lengths and counting them; as interpreted and elaborated by Pi\u1e45gala's 10th-century commentator Hal\u0101yudha his \"method of pyramidal expansion\" (\"meru-prast\u0101ra\") for counting metres is equivalent to Pascal's triangle. Var\u0101hamihira (6th century AD) describes another method for computing combination counts by adding numbers in columns. By the 9th century at latest Indian mathematicians learned to express this as a product of fractions &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, and clear statements of this rule can be found in \u015ar\u012bdhara's \"P\u0101\u1e6d\u012bga\u1e47ita\" (8th\u20139th century), Mah\u0101v\u012bra's \"Ga\u1e47ita-s\u0101ra-sa\u1e45graha\" (c. 850), and Bh\u0101skara II's \"L\u012bl\u0101vat\u012b\" (12th century).\nThe Persian mathematician al-Karaj\u012b (953\u20131029) wrote a now-lost book containing the binomial theorem and a table of binomial coefficients, often credited as their first appearance.\nAn explicit statement of the binomial theorem appears in al-Samaw\u02beal's \"al-B\u0101hir\" (12th century), there credited to al-Karaj\u012b. Al-Samaw\u02beal algebraically expanded the square, cube, and fourth power of a binomial, each in terms of the previous power, and noted that similar proofs could be provided for higher powers, an early form of mathematical induction. He then provided al-Karaj\u012b's table of binomial coefficients (Pascal's triangle turned on its side) up to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and a rule for generating them equivalent to the recurrence relation &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The Persian poet and mathematician Omar Khayyam was probably familiar with the formula to higher orders, although many of his mathematical works are lost. The binomial expansions of small degrees were known in the 13th century mathematical works of Yang Hui and also Chu Shih-Chieh. Yang Hui attributes the method to a much earlier 11th century text of Jia Xian, although those writings are now also lost.\nIn Europe, descriptions of the construction of Pascal's triangle can be found as early as Jordanus de Nemore's \"De arithmetica\" (13th century). In 1544, Michael Stifel introduced the term \"binomial coefficient\" and showed how to use them to express formula_90 in terms of formula_91, via \"Pascal's triangle\". Other 16th century mathematicians including Niccol\u00f2 Fontana Tartaglia and Simon Stevin also knew of it. 17th-century mathematician Blaise Pascal studied the eponymous triangle comprehensively in his \"Trait\u00e9 du triangle arithm\u00e9tique\".\nThe development of the binomial theorem for positive integer exponents is attributed to Al-Kashi by the year 1427. The first proper proof of the binomial theorem for positive integral index was given by Pascal. By the early 17th century, some specific cases of the generalized binomial theorem, such as for formula_92, can be found in the work of Henry Briggs' \"Arithmetica Logarithmica\" (1624). Isaac Newton discovered the generalized binomial theorem, valid for any real exponent, in 1664-5, inspired by the work of John Wallis's \"Arithmetic Infinitorum\" and his method of interpolation. A logarithmic version of the theorem for fractional exponents was discovered independently by James Gregory who wrote down his formula in 1670.\nApplications.\nMultiple-angle identities.\nFor the complex numbers the binomial theorem can be combined with de Moivre's formula to yield multiple-angle formulas for the sine and cosine. According to De Moivre's formula,\nformula_93\nUsing the binomial theorem, the expression on the right can be expanded, and then the real and imaginary parts can be taken to yield formulas for cos(\"nx\") and sin(\"nx\"). For example, since\nformula_94\nBut De Moivre's formula identifies the left side with formula_95, so\nformula_96\nwhich are the usual double-angle identities. Similarly, since\nformula_97\nDe Moivre's formula yields\nformula_98\nIn general,\nformula_99\nand\nformula_100There are also similar formulas using Chebyshev polynomials.\nSeries for \"e\".\nThe number e is often defined by the formula\nformula_101\nApplying the binomial theorem to this expression yields the usual infinite series for e. In particular:\nformula_102\nThe kth term of this sum is\nformula_103\nAs \"n\" \u2192 \u221e, the rational expression on the right approaches 1, and therefore\nformula_104\nThis indicates that e can be written as a series:\nformula_105\nIndeed, since each term of the binomial expansion is an increasing function of n, it follows from the monotone convergence theorem for series that the sum of this infinite series is equal to\u00a0e.\nProbability.\nThe binomial theorem is closely related to the probability mass function of the negative binomial distribution. The probability of a (countable) collection of independent Bernoulli trials formula_106 with probability of success formula_107 all not happening is\nformula_108\nAn upper bound for this quantity is formula_109\nIn abstract algebra.\nThe binomial theorem is valid more generally for two elements \"x\" and \"y\" in a ring, or even a semiring, provided that \"xy\" = \"yx\". For example, it holds for two \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrices, provided that those matrices commute; this is useful in computing powers of a matrix.\nThe binomial theorem can be stated by saying that the polynomial sequence {1, \"x\", \"x\"2, \"x\"3, ...} is of binomial type.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4678", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4678", "title": "Bitmap font", "text": ""}
{"id": "4680", "revid": "29750937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4680", "title": "Balboa", "text": "Balboa may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "4681", "revid": "3174456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4681", "title": "Boxing Day", "text": "Commonwealth nations holiday on 26 December\nBoxing Day, also known as Offering Day, is a holiday celebrated after Christmas Day, occurring on the second day of Christmastide (26 December). Boxing Day was once a day to donate gifts to those in need, but it has evolved to become a part of Christmas festivities. It originated in the United Kingdom and is celebrated in several Commonwealth nations. The attached bank holiday or public holiday may take place on 27 or 28 December if necessary to ensure it falls on a weekday. Boxing Day is also concurrent with the Christian festival Saint Stephen's Day.\nIn parts of Europe, such as east Spain, (Catalonia, Valencia and the Balearic Islands), the Czech Republic, Germany, Austria, Hungary, the Netherlands, Italy, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, Denmark, Finland, Romania, Sweden, Belgium, Norway, Latvia and Ireland, 26 December is Saint Stephen's Day, which is considered the second day of Christmas.\nEtymology.\nThere are competing theories for the origins of the term, none of which is definitive.\nThe European tradition of giving money and other gifts to those in need, or in service positions, has been dated to the Middle Ages, but the exact origin is unknown; it may refer to the alms box placed in the narthex of Christian churches to collect donations for the poor. The tradition may come from a custom in the late Roman and early Christian era, wherein alms boxes placed in churches were used to collect special offerings tied to the Feast of Saint Stephen, which, in the Western Christian Churches, falls on the same day as Boxing Day, the second day of Christmastide. On this day, it is customary in some localities for the alms boxes to be opened and distributed to the poor.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" gives the earliest attestation from Britain in 1743, defining it as \"the day after Christmas day\", and saying \"traditionally on this day tradespeople, employees, etc., would receive presents or gratuities (a 'Christmas box') from their customers or employers.\"\nThe term \"Christmas box\" dates back to the 17th century, and among other things meant:\nA present or gratuity given at Christmas: In Great Britain, usually confined to gratuities given to those who are supposed to have a vague claim upon the donor for services rendered to him as one of the general public by whom they are employed and paid, or as a customer of their legal employer; the undefined theory being that as they have done offices for this person, for which he has not directly paid them, some direct acknowledgement is becoming at Christmas.\nIn Britain, it was a custom for tradesmen to collect \"Christmas boxes\" of money or presents on the first weekday after Christmas as thanks for good service throughout the year. This is mentioned in Samuel Pepys' diary entry for 19 December 1663. This custom is linked to an older British tradition in which the servants of the wealthy were allowed the next day to visit their families since they would have had to serve their masters on Christmas Day. The employers would give each servant a box to take home containing gifts, bonuses, and sometimes leftover food. Until the late 20th century, there continued to be a tradition among many in the UK to give a Christmas gift, usually cash, to vendors, although not on Boxing Day, as many would not work on that day.\nDate.\nSaint Stephen's Day, a religious holiday, also falls on 26 December.\nIn the United Kingdom, Boxing Day could not fall on Sunday 26 December. Instead, Boxing Day would be celebrated on Monday 27 December, with the preceding Sunday called Christmas Sunday. This rule was independent of the rule of bank holidays being taken in lieu. Over time Sunday 26 December increasingly became referred to as Boxing Day.\nUnlike the contemporary understanding of Boxing Day itself, the associated bank holiday or public holiday always falls on a weekday. When 25 December falls on a Saturday and 26 December falls on a Sunday, the Christmas Day substitute holiday is observed on Monday 27 December, with the Boxing Day substitute holiday observed on Tuesday 28 December. When Christmas Day is a Sunday, the Boxing Day holiday is still observed on Monday 26 December, with the substitute holiday for Christmas Day observed on Tuesday 27 December.\nThe Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971, which regulates UK bank holidays, does not officially name the 26 December bank holiday as Boxing Day, but states that it falls on \"26th December, if it be not a Sunday.\"\nShopping.\nIn the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Trinidad and Tobago, Boxing Day is a popular shopping holiday. Boxing Day sales are common, and shops often allow dramatic price reductions. For many merchants, Boxing Day has become the day of the year with the greatest revenue. In the UK, it was estimated in 2009 that up to 12 million shoppers appeared at the sales (a rise of almost 20% compared to 2008, although this was also affected by the fact that the VAT was about to revert to 17.5% from 1 January, following the temporary reduction to 15%).\nMany retailers open very early (typically 5\u00a0am or even earlier) and offer doorbuster deals and loss leaders to draw people to their stores. It is not uncommon for long queues to form early in the morning of 26 December, hours before the opening of shops holding the big sales, especially at big-box consumer electronics retailers. Many stores have a limited quantity of big draw or deeply discounted items. Because of the shoulder-to-shoulder crowds, many choose to stay at home and avoid the hectic shopping experience. Local media often covers the event, mentioning how early the shoppers began queuing up and showing videos of shoppers queuing and later leaving with their purchased items. Many retailers have implemented practices aimed at managing large numbers of shoppers. They may limit entrances, restrict the number of patrons in a store at a time, provide tickets to people at the head of the queue to guarantee them a hot ticket item, or canvass queued-up shoppers to inform them of inventory limitations.\nIn some areas of Canada, particularly in Atlantic Canada and parts of Northern Ontario, most retailers are prohibited from opening on Boxing Day, either by provincial law or by municipal bylaw, or by informal agreement among major retailers, to provide a day of relaxation following Christmas Day. In these areas, sales otherwise scheduled for 26 December are moved to the 27th. The city council of Greater Sudbury, Ontario, which was the largest city in Canada to maintain this restriction as of the early 2010s, formally repealed its store hours bylaw on 9 December 2014.\nWhile Boxing Day is 26 December, many retailers run the sales for several days before or after 26 December, often up to New Year's Eve, branding it as \"Boxing Week\". Notably, in the recession of late 2008, a record number of retailers held early promotions because of the weak economy. In 2009, many retailers with both online and High Street stores launched their online sales on Christmas Eve and their High Street sales on Boxing Day.\nComparisons to Black Friday.\nIn terms of seasonal or holiday shopping traditions, Boxing Day sales have been compared to the US phenomenon of Black Friday sales\u00a0\u2013\u00a0Black Friday being the Friday following the American Thanksgiving holiday in late November. In the late 2000s, when the Canadian and United States dollars were near parity, many Canadian retailers began to hold Black Friday promotions in an effort to discourage shoppers from crossing the border to visit United States stores. This may have been a contributory factor, since 2013, in a relative decline of traditional Canadian Boxing Day sales, when compared to sales on Black Friday.\nThe traditional Boxing Day sales in the United Kingdom were never as large an event as the Black Friday sales are in the United States. However, many British retailers began to see an opportunity to import the Black Friday tradition into the UK, not to replace Boxing Day sales, but as an addition to their overall seasonal promotions. However, Black Friday and Boxing Day are close enough together that spending on one sale was likely to affect spending on the other. Ultimately, the result was a marked decline in traditional Boxing Day sales in the UK. The change was initially facilitated, although not necessarily by design, by U.S.-owned retailers such as Amazon, and Asda (then a subsidiary of US-based Walmart). This phenomenon was furthered by a general decline in traditional high-street shopping and a growing online marketplace, which is more international by nature. This led, in 2015, to greater November retail sales in the UK than in December for the first time. In 2019, a retail analysis firm estimated that there was a 9.8% drop in British store traffic on Boxing Day in comparison to 2018 (the largest year-over-year drop since 2010), citing several factors, such as the weather, the increased prominence of online shopping, uncertainties in the wake of the general election, and the growing prominence of Black Friday sales.\nBoxing Day sales are not a prominent tradition in the United States, although many retailers often begin after-Christmas sales that day. It is typically the earliest starting day after Christmas for people to return unwanted gifts for exchanges or refunds and to redeem gift cards.\nSport.\nIn the United Kingdom, it is traditional for the Home Nations' major football leagues (including, most prominently, the Premier League, Scottish Premiership, and NIFL Premiership) to hold a full programme of fixtures on Boxing Day. Originally, matches on Boxing Day were played against local rivals so that teams and their fans would not have to travel long distances to away games on the day after Christmas. The 2022 Premier League Boxing Day fixtures saw the return of domestic top flight football for the 2022\u201323 Premier League season, following the six-week break for the 2022 FIFA World Cup.\nIn Italy, Boxing Day football was played for the first time in the 2018\u201319 Serie A season. The experiment was successful, with Italian stadiums 69% full on average \u2013 more than any other match day in December 2018.\nIn rugby league, festive fixtures were a staple of the traditional winter season. Since the transition to a summer season in the 1990s, no formal fixtures are now arranged on Boxing Day but some clubs, such as Wakefield Trinity, arrange a traditional local derby friendly fixture instead.\nSince 1980, the Australian cricket team has traditionally opened one of the test matches of its summer season on Boxing Day at the Melbourne Cricket Ground. While several test matches had occasionally been held at the MCG around Boxing Day, it was not until 1980 that the concept was formalized by the Australian Cricket Board. The Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race is also traditionally held on Boxing Day.\nIn horse racing, there is the King George VI Chase at Kempton Park Racecourse in Surrey, England. It is the second most prestigious chase in Britain, after the Cheltenham Gold Cup. In addition to the prestigious race at Kempton, in Britain, it is usually the day with the most racing meetings of the year, with eight in 2016, in addition to three more in Ireland. In Barbados, the final day of horse racing is held on Boxing Day at The Historic Garrison Savannah, a UNESCO world heritage site. This tradition has been going on for decades in this former British colony.\nBoxing Day is one of the main days in the hunting calendar for hunts in the UK and US, with most hunts (both mounted foxhound or harrier packs and foot packs of beagles or bassets) holding meets, often in town or village centres.\nSeveral ice hockey contests are associated with the day. The IIHF World Junior Championship typically begins on 26 December, while the Spengler Cup also begins on 23 December in Davos, Switzerland; the Spengler Cup competition includes HC Davos, Team Canada, and other top European hockey teams. The National Hockey League traditionally had close to a full slate of games (10 were played in 2011), following the league-wide days off given for Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. However, the 2013 collective bargaining agreement (which followed a lock-out) extended the league mandate of Christmas Eve and Christmas Day off to include Boxing Day, except when it falls on a Saturday, in which case the league can choose to make 23 December a league-wide off day instead for that year. In Sweden, the related sport of bandy is also associated with the day, with Saint Stephen's Day bandy games having become an established tradition.\nIn some African Commonwealth nations, particularly Ghana, Uganda, Malawi, Zambia, and Tanzania, professional boxing contests are held on Boxing Day. This practice has also been followed for decades in Guyana and Italy.\nFood.\nIn the UK it is common to eat leftovers from the previous day's Christmas dinner, with turkey often being used in a Boxing Day sandwich or curry.\nBoxing Day Tsunami.\nThe 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami occurred on 26 December and thus has been referred to as \"the Boxing Day Tsunami\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4687", "revid": "49696380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4687", "title": "Balochistan, Pakistan", "text": "Province of Pakistan\nBalochistan (; , ; , ) is a province of Pakistan. Located in the southwestern region of the country, Balochistan is the largest province of Pakistan by land area but is the least populated one. It is bordered by the Pakistani provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa to the north-east, Punjab to the east, and Sindh to the southeast; shares international borders with Iran to the west and Afghanistan to the north; and is bound by the Arabian Sea to the south. Balochistan is an extensive plateau of rough terrain divided into basins by ranges of sufficient height and ruggedness. It has a large deep-sea port, the Port of Gwadar, lying in the Arabian Sea.\nAlthough it constitutes approximately 44% of Pakistan's land area, only 5% of it is arable, and it is noted for an extremely dry desert climate. Despite this, agriculture and livestock make up about 47% of Balochistan's economy.\nThe name \"Balochistan\" means \"the land of the Baloch people\". Largely underdeveloped, its economy is also dominated by natural resources, especially its natural gas fields. Aside from Quetta, the second-largest city of the province is Turbat in the south, while another area of major economic importance is the port city of Gwadar on the Arabian Sea, an emerging future business hub.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nBalochistan occupies the very southeasternmost portion of the Iranian plateau, the setting for the earliest known farming settlements in the pre-Indus Valley civilisation era, the earliest of which was Mehrgarh, dated around 7000 BCE, within the province. Balochistan marked the westernmost extent of civilisation. Centuries before the arrival of Islam in the seventh century, parts of Balochistan were ruled by the Paratarajas, an Indo-Scythian dynasty. At certain times, the Kushan Empire also held political sway in parts of Balochistan.\nThe Hindu Sewa Dynasty ruled parts of Balochistan, chiefly Kalat. The Sibi Division, which was carved out of Quetta Division and Kalat Division in 1974, derives its name from Rani Sewi, the queen of the Sewa dynasty.\nThe region came under rule during the reign of King Kay Khosrow of the Kayanian dynasty of Iran. The Baloch, under the command of Ashkash, conquered this land, which Makran was a part of Balochistan.\nThe remnants of the earliest people in Balochistan were the Brahui people, a Dravidian-speaking people. The Brahuis retained the Dravidian language throughout many millennia.\nAlthough during the Stone and Bronze Age and Alexander the Great's empire an indigenous population existed, the Baloch people themselves did not enter the region until the 14th century CE. A theory of the origin of the Baloch people, the largest ethnic group in the region, is that they are of Median descent.\nArrival of Islam.\nIn 654, Abdulrehman ibn Samrah, governor of Sistan and the newly emerged Rashidun caliphate at the expense of Sassanid Persia and the Byzantine Empire, sent an Islamic army to crush a revolt in Zaranj, which is now in southern Afghanistan. After conquering Zaranj, a column of the army pushed north, conquering Kabul and Ghazni, in the Hindu Kush mountain range, while another column moved through Quetta District in north-western Balochistan and conquered the area up to the ancient cities of \"Dawar\" and \"Qandabil\" (Bolan). It is documented that the major settlements, falling within today's province, became in 654 controlled by the Rashidun caliphate, except for the well-defended mountain town of \"QaiQan,\" which is now Kalat.\nDuring the caliphate of Ali, a revolt broke out in southern Balochistan's Makran region. In 663, during the reign of Umayyad Caliph Muawiyah I, his Muslim rule lost control of north-eastern Balochistan and Kalat when Haris ibn Marah and a large part of his army died in battle against a revolt in Kalat.\nPre-modern era.\nIn the 15th century, Mir Chakar Rind became the first Sirdar of Afghan, Iranian, and Pakistani Balochistan. He was a close aide of the Timurid ruler Humayun and was succeeded by the Khanate of Kalat, which owed allegiance to the Mughal Empire. Later, Nader Shah won the allegiance of the rulers of eastern Balochistan. He ceded Kalhora, one of the Sindh territories of Sibi-Kachi, to the Khanate of Kalat. Ahmad Shah Durrani, founder of the Afghan Empire, also won the allegiance of that area's rulers, and many Baloch fought under him during the Third Battle of Panipat. Most of the area would eventually revert to local Baloch control after Afghan rule.\nColonial era.\nIn 1876, northern Baluchistan became one of the presidencies and provinces of British India in colonial India. During this time, from the fall of the Durrani Empire in 1823, four princely states were recognised and reinforced in Balochistan: Makran, Kharan, Las Bela, and Kalat. In 1876, Robert Sandeman negotiated the Treaty of Kalat, which brought the Khan's territories, including Kharan, Makran, and Las Bela, under British protection, even though they remained independent princely states. After the Second Afghan War was ended by the Treaty of Gandamak in May 1879, the Afghan Emir ceded the districts of Quetta, Pishin, Harnai, Sibi, and Thal Chotiali to British control. On 1 April 1883, the British took control of the Bolan Pass, south-east of Quetta, from the Khan of Kalat. In 1887, small additional areas of Balochistan were declared British territory. In 1893, Sir Mortimer Durand negotiated an agreement with the Amir of Afghanistan, Abdur Rahman Khan, to renew the Durand Line running from Chitral to Balochistan as the boundary between the Emirate of Afghanistan and British-controlled areas. Two devastating earthquakes occurred in Balochistan during British colonial rule: the 1935 Quetta earthquake, which devastated Quetta, and the 1945 Balochistan earthquake with its epicentre in the Makran region. During the time of the Indian independence movement, \"three pro-Congress parties were still active in Balochistan's politics apart from Balochistan's Muslim League\", such as the Anjuman-i-Watan Baluchistan, which favoured a united India and opposed its partition.\nAfter independence.\nIn British-ruled Colonial India, Baluchistan contained a Chief Commissioner's province and princely states (including Kalat, Makran, Las Bela, and Kharan) that became a part of Pakistan. The province's Shahi Jirga (the grand council of tribal elders) and the non-official members of the Quetta Municipality, according to the Pakistani narrative, agreed to join Pakistan unanimously on 29 June 1947; however, the Shahi Jirga was stripped of its members from the Kalat State before the vote. The then-president of the Balochistan Muslim League, Qazi Muhammad Isa, informed Muhammad Ali Jinnah that \"Shahi Jirga in no way represents the popular wishes of the masses\" and that members of the Kalat State were \"excluded from voting; only representatives from the British part of the province voted and the British part included the leased areas of Quetta, Nasirabad Tehsil, Nushki and Bolan Agency.\" Following the referendum, on 22 June 1947 the Khan of Kalat received a letter from members of the Shahi Jirga, as well as sardars from the leased areas of Baluchistan, stating that they, \"as a part of the Baloch nation, were a part of the Kalat state too\" and that if the question of Baluchistan's accession to Pakistan arise, \"they should be deemed part of the Kalat state rather than (British) Balochistan\". This has brought into question whether an actual vote took place. Political scientist Salman Rafi Sheikh, in locating the origins of the insurgency in Balochistan, says \"that Balochistan's accession to Pakistan was, as against the officially projected narrative, not based upon consensus, nor was support for Pakistan overwhelming. What this manipulation indicates is that even before formally becoming a part of Pakistan, Balochistan had fallen prey to political victimization.\"\nInitially aspiring for independence, the Khan of Kalat finally acceded to Pakistan on 27 March 1948 following a period of negotiations with Pakistan. The signing of the Instrument of Accession by Ahmad Yar Khan led his brother, Prince Abdul Karim, to revolt against his brother's decision due to their family rift in July 1948. Princes Agha Abdul Karim Baloch and Muhammad Rahim refused to lay down arms, leading the Dosht-e Jhalawan in unconventional attacks on the army until 1950. The Prince indulged in terrorist activities without any assistance from others. Jinnah and his successors allowed Yar Khan to retain his title until the province's dissolution in 1955.\nInsurgencies by Baloch nationalists took place in 1948\u20131950, 1958\u20131960, 1962\u20131969, and 1973\u20131977, with a new ongoing insurgency by autonomy-seeking Baloch groups since 2003. While many Balochis support the demand for autonomy, the majority are not interested in seceding from Pakistan.\nAt a press conference on 8 June 2015 in Quetta, Balochistan's Home Minister Sarfraz Bugti accused India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi of openly supporting terrorism. Bugti implicated India's Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) of being responsible for recent attacks at military bases in Smangli and Khalid, and for subverting the China\u2013Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) agreement.\nGwadar, a region of Balochistan, was a colony of Oman for more than a century, from 1783 until 1958, when it was purchased by Pakistan. Many people in this region are therefore Omani.\nGeography.\nBalochistan is situated in the southwest of Pakistan and covers an area of . It is Pakistan's largest province by area, constituting 44% of Pakistan's total landmass. The province is bordered by Afghanistan to the north and northwest, Iran to the south-west, Punjab and Sindh, and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas to the northeast. To the south lies the Arabian Sea. Balochistan is located in the southeastern part of the Iranian plateau. It borders the geopolitical regions of the Middle East and Southwest Asia, Central Asia, and South Asia. Balochistan lies at the mouth of the Strait of Hormuz and provides the shortest route from seaports to Central Asia. Its geographical location has placed the otherwise desolate region in the scope of competing for global interests for all of recorded history.\nThe capital city, Quetta, is located in a densely populated portion of the Sulaiman Mountains in the northeast of the province. It is situated in a river valley near the Bolan Pass, which has been used as the route of choice from the coast to Central Asia, entering through Afghanistan's Kandahar region. The British and other historic empires have crossed the region to invade Afghanistan by this route.\nBalochistan is rich in non-renewable and renewable resources; it is the second-largest supplier of natural gas in Pakistan. The province's renewable and human resource potential has not been systematically measured or exploited. Local inhabitants have chosen to live in towns and have relied on sustainable water sources for thousands of years.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the upper highlands is characterised by very cold winters and hot summers. In the lower highlands, winters vary from extremely cold in northern districts of Ziarat, Quetta, Kalat, Muslim Bagh, and Khanozai, where temperatures can drop to , to milder conditions closer to the Makran coast. Winters are mild on the plains, with temperatures never falling below freezing point. Summers are hot and dry, especially in the arid zones of Chagai and Kharan districts. The plains are also very hot in summer, with temperatures reaching . The record high temperature, , was recorded in Sibi on 26 May 2010, exceeding the previous record, . Other hot areas include Turbat and Dalbandin. The desert climate is characterised by hot and very arid conditions. Occasionally, strong windstorms make these areas very inhospitable.\nGovernment and politics.\nIn common with the other provinces of Pakistan, Balochistan has a parliamentary form of government. The ceremonial head of the province is the Governor, who is appointed on the advice of the Chief Minister of Balochistan by the President of Pakistan. The Chief Minister, the province's chief executive, is normally the leader of the largest political party or alliance of parties in the provincial assembly.\nThe unicameral Provincial Assembly of Balochistan comprises 65 seats, of which 11 are reserved for women, and 3 are reserved for non-Muslims. The judicial branch of government is carried out by the Balochistan High Court, which is based in Quetta and headed by a Chief Justice.\nBesides the dominant Pakistan-wide political parties (such as the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, Pakistan Muslim League (N), and the Pakistan Peoples Party), Balochistan nationalist parties (such as the National Party and the Balochistan National Party (Mengal)) have been prominent in the province.\nAdministrative divisions.\nFor administrative purposes, the province is divided into seven divisions: Kalat, Makran, Nasirabad, Quetta, Sibi, Zhob, and Rakhshan. This divisional level was abolished in 2000, but restored after the 2008 election. Each division is under an appointed commissioner. The seven divisions are further subdivided into 36 districts:\nAs of June 2021, there are eight divisions. The eighth division, Loralai Division, was created by bifurcating Zhob Division.\nDemographics.\nBalochistan's population density is low due to the mountainous terrain and scarcity of water. In March 2012, preliminary census figures showed that the population of Balochistan, not including the districts of Khuzdar, Kech and Panjgur, had reached 13,162,222, an increase of 139.3% from 5,501,164 in 1998. The population constituted 6.85% of Pakistan's total population. This was the largest increase in population in any province of Pakistan during that time period, almost thrice the national increase of 46.9%. Official estimates of Balochistan's population grew from approximately 7.45 million in 2003 to 7.8 million in 2005. The 2023 Census enumerated a population of 14,894,402.\nLanguages and ethnicities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the preliminary results of the 2023 census, the languages with the most native speakers in the province are Balochi, spoken by 39.91% of the population (an increase of 4% compared to the 2017 census), and Pashto whose share is at 34.34%.\nThe Pashtuns mainly inhabit the north of Balochistan and form the majority in Quetta. Baloch on the other hand are found throughout Balochistan, but most highly concentrated in the west and south of the province.\nBrahui is spoken by 17.22% mainly in the central part of Balochistan. Other languages include Sindhi (3.81%), Saraiki (2.19%), Punjabi (0.59%), Urdu (0.53%) and others at (1.5%).\nBalochi forms the majority in 21 districts and Pashto forms majority in 9 districts of Balochistan. Brahui has majority in 4 districts. In the Lasbela, Hub districts and in Kachhi plain region a large minority of the population speaks Lasi and Siraiki, which are dialects of Sindhi.\nAccording to the Ethnologue, households speaking Balochi, whose primary dialect is Makrani constitutes 13%, Rukhshani 10%, Sulemani 7%, and Khetrani 3% of the population. Other languages spoken are Lasi, Urdu, Punjabi, Hazargi, Sindhi, Saraiki, Dehvari, Dari, Tajik, Hindko, Uzbek, and Hindki.\nThe 2005 census concerning Afghans in Pakistan showed that a total of 769,268 Afghan refugees were temporarily staying in Balochistan. However, there are probably fewer Afghans living in Balochistan today as many refugees repatriated in 2013. As of 2015, there are only 327,778 registered Afghan refugees according to the UNHCR.\nReligion.\nAccording to the 2017 Census, nearly all of the population of Balochistan were Muslims. There were also Hindu and Christian minorities in the province. The Hindu population in the province was approximately 49,133 (including the Scheduled Castes). The Shri Hinglaj Mata mandir which is the largest Hindu pilgrimage centre in Pakistan is situated in Balochistan. There was also a Christian minority of 26,462 individuals in the province.\nEducation.\nThe literacy rate of the province in 2017 was 43.6%, an increase from 24.8% in 1998.\nEconomy.\nThe economy of Balochistan is largely based upon agriculture, livestock, fisheries, production of natural gas, coal, and other minerals.\nThough agriculture and livestock play a dominant role in the provincial economy by contributing 47% of its GDP. It faced extensive damage due to the 2022 Pakistan floods. The floods killed around 500,000 of Balochistan's livestock and damaged cultivation and agricultural output in 32 out of 35 districts of the province. The Lasbela district was the worst hit as the floods washed away four-fifths of the homes, crops, and livestock. Due to the floods and severe drought conditions, the province faces food insecurity and is 85% dependent on the Sindh and Punjab provinces for the supply of wheat.\nFurthermore, with the exception of Quetta, Balochistan has been called a \"neglected province where a majority of the population lacks amenities.\" Although the province is rich in natural resources capable of uplifting its economy, most of them have not been fully utilised for the welfare of the population and are yet to be explored or developed.\nSince the mid-1970s, the province's contribution to Pakistan's GDP has dropped from 4.9 to 3.7%, and as of 2007, it had the highest poverty rate and infant and maternal mortality rate, and the lowest literacy rate in comparison to other provinces, factors some allege have contributed to the insurgency. However, in the seventh NFC awards, Punjab province and the Federal contributed to increase Baluchistan share more than its entitled population-based share. In Balochistan, poverty is increasing. In 2001\u20132002, poverty incidences were at 48% and by 2005\u20132006, these were at 50.9%. According to a report on Dawn, the rate of multidimensional poverty in Balochistan had risen to 71% by 2016.\nSeveral major development projects, including the construction of a new deep-sea port at the strategically important town of Gwadar, are in progress in Balochistan. The port is projected to be the hub of an energy and trade corridor to and from China, the Middle East, and the Central Asian republics. The Mirani Dam on the Dasht River, west of Turbat in the Makran Division, is being built to provide water to expand agricultural land use by where it would otherwise be unsustainable. In the district of Lasbela, there is an oil refinery owned by Byco International Incorporated (BII), which is capable of processing 120,000 barrels of oil per day. A power station is located adjacent to the refinery. Several cement plants and a marble factory are also located there. One of the world's largest ship-breaking yards is located on the coast.\nNatural resource extraction.\nBalochistan's share of Pakistan's national income has historically ranged between 3.7% to 4.9%. Since 1972, Balochistan's gross income has grown in size by 2.7 times. Outside Quetta, the resource extraction infrastructure of the province is gradually developing but still lags far behind other parts of Pakistan.\nThe agreements for royalty rights and ownership of mineral rights were reached during a period of unprecedented natural disasters, economic, social, political, and cultural unrest in Pakistan. The negotiations were widely considered to be insufficiently transparent.\nTourism.\nFollowing is a list of a few tourist attractions and places of interest in Balochistan:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences and notes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4688", "revid": "36595729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4688", "title": "William M. Tweed", "text": "American politician (1823\u20131878)\nWilliam Magear \"Boss\" Tweed (April 3, 1823\u00a0\u2013 April 12, 1878) was an American politician most notable for being the political boss of Tammany Hall, the Democratic Party's political machine that played a major role in the politics of 19th-century New York City and State.\nAt the height of his influence, Tweed was the third-largest landowner in New York City, a director of the Erie Railroad, a director of the Tenth National Bank, a director of the New-York Printing Company, the proprietor of the Metropolitan Hotel, a significant stockholder in iron mines and gas companies, a board member of the Harlem Gas Light Company, a board member of the Third Avenue Railway Company, a board member of the Brooklyn Bridge Company, and the president of the Guardian Savings Bank.\nTweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852 and the New York County Board of Supervisors in 1858, the year that he became the head of the Tammany Hall political machine. He was also elected to the New York State Senate in 1867. However, Tweed's greatest influence came from being an appointed member of a number of boards and commissions, his control over political patronage in New York City through Tammany, and his ability to ensure the loyalty of voters through jobs he could create and dispense on city-related projects.\nBoss Tweed was convicted for stealing an amount estimated by an aldermen's committee in 1877 at between $25\u00a0million and $45\u00a0million from New York City taxpayers by political corruption, but later estimates ranged as high as $200\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024). Unable to make bail, he escaped from jail once but was returned to custody. He died in the Ludlow Street Jail.\nEarly life and education.\nTweed was born April 3, 1823, at 1 Cherry Street, on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. The son of a third-generation Scottish chair-maker, Tweed grew up on Cherry Street. His grandfather arrived in the United States from a town near the River Tweed close to Edinburgh. Tweed's religious affiliation was not widely known in his lifetime, but at the time of his funeral \"The New York Times\", quoting a family friend, reported that his parents had been Quakers and \"members of the old Rose Street Meeting house\". At the age of 11, he left school to learn his father's trade, and then became an apprentice to a saddler. He also studied to be a bookkeeper and worked as a brushmaker for a company he had invested in, before eventually joining in the family business in 1852. On September 29, 1844, he married Mary Jane C. Skaden and lived with her family on Madison Street for two years.\nEarly career.\nTweed became a member of the Odd Fellows and the Masons, and joined a volunteer fire company, Engine No. 12. In 1848, at the invitation of state assemblyman John J. Reilly, he and some friends organized the Americus Fire Company No. 6, also known as the \"Big Six\", as a volunteer fire company, which took as its symbol a snarling red Bengal tiger from a French lithograph, a symbol which remained associated with Tweed and Tammany Hall for many years. At the time, volunteer fire companies competed vigorously with each other; some were connected with street gangs and had strong ethnic ties to various immigrant communities. The competition could become so fierce, that burning buildings would sometimes be ignored as the fire companies fought each other. Tweed became known for his ax-wielding violence, and was soon elected the Big Six foreman. Pressure from Alfred Carlson, the chief engineer, got him thrown out of the crew. However, fire companies were also recruiting grounds for political parties at the time, thus Tweed's exploits came to the attention of the Democratic politicians who ran the Seventh Ward. The Seventh Ward put him up for Alderman in 1850, when Tweed was 26. He lost that election to the Whig candidate Morgan Morgans, but ran again the next year and won, garnering his first political position. Tweed then became associated with the \"Forty Thieves\", the group of aldermen and assistant aldermen who, up to that point, were known as some of the most corrupt politicians in the city's history.\nTweed was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1852, but his two-year term was undistinguished. In an attempt by Republican reformers in Albany, the state capital, to control the Democratic-dominated New York City government, the power of the New York County Board of Supervisors was beefed up. The board had 12 members, six appointed by the mayor and six elected, and in 1858 Tweed was appointed to the board, which became his first vehicle for large-scale graft; Tweed and other supervisors forced vendors to pay a 15% overcharge to their \"ring\" in order to do business with the city. By 1853, Tweed was running the seventh ward for Tammany. The board also had six Democrats and six Republicans, but Tweed often just bought off one Republican to sway the board. One such Republican board member was Peter P. Voorhis, a coal dealer by profession who absented himself from a board meeting in exchange for $2,500 so that the board could appoint city inspectors. Henry Smith was another Republican that was a part of the Tweed ring.\nAlthough he was not trained as a lawyer, Tweed's friend, Judge George G. Barnard, certified him as an attorney, and Tweed opened a law office on Duane Street. He ran for sheriff in 1861 and was defeated, but became the chairman of the Democratic General Committee shortly after the election, and was then chosen to be the head of Tammany's general committee in January 1863. Several months later, in April, he became \"Grand Sachem\", and began to be referred to as \"Boss\", especially after he tightened his hold on power by creating a small executive committee to run the club. Tweed then took steps to increase his income: he used his law firm to extort money, which was then disguised as legal services; he had himself appointed deputy street commissioner\u00a0\u2013 a position with considerable access to city contractors and funding; he bought the New-York Printing Company, which became the city's official printer, and the city's stationery supplier, the Manufacturing Stationers' Company, and had both companies begin to overcharge the city government for their goods and services. Among other legal services he provided, he accepted almost $100,000 from the Erie Railroad in return for favors. He also became one of the largest owners of real estate in the city. He also started to form what became known as the \"Tweed Ring\", by having his friends elected to office: George G. Barnard was elected Recorder of New York City; Peter B. Sweeny was elected New York County District Attorney; and Richard B. Connolly was elected City Comptroller. Other judicial members of the Tweed ring included Albert Cardozo, John McCunn, and John K. Hackett.\nWhen Grand Sachem Isaac Fowler, who had produced the $2,500 to buy off the Republican Voorhis on the Board of Supervisors, was found to have stolen $150,000 in post office receipts, the responsibility for Fowler's arrest was given to Isaiah Rynders, another Tammany operative who was serving as a United States marshal at the time. Rynders made enough ruckus upon entering the hotel where Fowler was staying that Fowler was able to escape to Mexico.\nWith his new position and wealth came a change in style: Tweed began to favor wearing a large diamond in his shirtfront\u00a0\u2013 a habit that Thomas Nast used to great effect in his attacks on Tweed in \"Harper's Weekly\" beginning in 1869\u00a0\u2013 and he bought a brownstone to live in at 41 West 36th Street, then a very fashionable area. He invested his now considerable illegal income in real estate, so that by the late 1860s he ranked among the biggest landowners in New York City.\nTweed became involved in the operation of the New York Mutuals, an early professional baseball club, in the 1860s. He brought in thousands of dollars per home game by dramatically increasing the cost of admission and gambling on the team. He has been credited with originating the practice of spring training in 1869 by sending the club south to New Orleans to prepare for the season.\nTweed was a member of the New York State Senate (4th D.) from 1868 to 1873, sitting in the 91st, 92nd, 93rd, and 94th New York State Legislatures, but not taking his seat in the 95th and 96th New York State Legislatures. While serving in the State Senate, he split his time between Albany, New York and New York City. While in Albany, he stayed in a suite of seven rooms in Delevan House. Accompanying him in his rooms were his favorite canaries. Guests are presumed to have included members of the Black Horse Cavalry, thirty state legislators whose votes were up for sale. In the Senate he helped financiers Jay Gould and Big Jim Fisk to take control of the Erie Railroad from Cornelius Vanderbilt by arranging for legislation that legitimized fake Erie stock certificates that Gould and Fisk had issued. In return, Tweed received a large block of stock and was made a director of the company. Tweed was also subsequently elected to the board of the Gould-controlled Cleveland and Pittsburgh Railroad (future Pennsylvania Railroad) in January 1870.\nCorruption.\nAfter the election of 1869, Tweed took control of the New York City government. His prot\u00e9g\u00e9, John T. Hoffman, the former mayor of the city, won election as governor, and Tweed garnered the support of good-government reformers like Peter Cooper and the Union League Club, by proposing a new city charter which returned power to City Hall at the expense of the Republican-inspired state commissions. The new charter passed, thanks in part to $600,000 in bribes Tweed paid to Republicans, and was signed into law by Hoffman in 1870. Mandated new elections allowed Tammany to take over the city's Common Council when they won all fifteen aldermanic contests.\nThe new charter put control of the city's finances in the hands of a Board of Audit, which consisted of Tweed, who was Commissioner of Public Works, Mayor A. Oakey Hall and Comptroller Richard \"Slippery Dick\" Connolly, both Tammany men. Hall also appointed other Tweed associates to high offices\u00a0\u2013 such as Peter B. Sweeny, who took over the Department of Public Parks\u00a0\u2013 providing what became known as the Tweed Ring with even firmer control of the New York City government and enabling them to defraud the taxpayers of many more millions of dollars. In the words of Albert Bigelow Paine, \"their methods were curiously simple and primitive. There were no skilful manipulations of figures, making detection difficult ... Connolly, as Controller, had charge of the books, and declined to show them. With his fellows, he also 'controlled' the courts and most of the bar.\" Crucially, the new city charter allowed the Board of Audit to issue bonds for debt in order to finance opportunistic capital expenditures the city otherwise could not afford. This ability to float debt was enabled by Tweed's guidance and passage of the Adjusted Claims Act in 1868. Contractors working for the city\u00a0\u2013 \"Ring favorites, most of them\u00a0\u2013 were told to multiply the amount of each bill by five, or ten, or a hundred, after which, with Mayor Hall's 'O. K.' and Connolly's endorsement, it was paid ... through a go-between, who cashed the check, settled the original bill and divided the remainder ... between Tweed, Sweeny, Connolly and Hall\".\nFor example, the construction cost of the New York County Courthouse, begun in 1861, grew to nearly $13\u00a0million\u2014about $ in 2024 dollars, and nearly twice the cost of the Alaska Purchase in 1867.\n\"A carpenter was paid $360,751 (roughly $ in 2024) for one month's labor in a building with very little woodwork ... a plasterer got $133,187 ($) for two days' work\". Tweed bought a marble quarry in Sheffield, Massachusetts, to provide much of the marble for the courthouse at great profit to himself. After the Tweed Charter to reorganize the city's government was passed in 1870, four commissioners for the construction of the New York County Courthouse were appointed. The commission never held a meeting, though each commissioner received a 20% kickback from the bills for the supplies.\nTweed and his friends also garnered huge profits from the development of the Upper East Side, especially Yorkville and Harlem. They would buy up undeveloped property, then use the resources of the city to improve the area\u00a0\u2013 for instance by installing pipes to bring in water from the Croton Aqueduct\u00a0\u2013 thus increasing the value of the land, after which they sold and took their profits. The focus on the east side also slowed down the development of the west side, the topography of which made it more expensive to improve. The ring also took their usual percentage of padded contracts, as well as raking off money from property taxes. Despite the corruption of Tweed and Tammany Hall, they did accomplish the development of upper Manhattan, though at the cost of tripling the city's bond debt to almost $90\u00a0million.\nDuring the Tweed era, the proposal to build a suspension bridge between New York and Brooklyn, then an independent city, was floated by Brooklyn-boosters, who saw the ferry connections as a bottleneck to Brooklyn's further development. In order to ensure that the Brooklyn Bridge project would go forward, State Senator Henry Cruse Murphy approached Tweed to find out whether New York's aldermen would approve the proposal. Tweed's response was that $60,000 for the aldermen would close the deal, and contractor William C. Kingsley put up the cash, which was delivered in a carpet bag. Tweed and two others from Tammany also received over half the private stock of the Bridge Company, the charter of which specified that only private stockholders had voting rights, so that even though the cities of Brooklyn and Manhattan put up most of the money, they essentially had no control over the project.\nTweed bought a mansion at Fifth Avenue and 43rd Street, and stabled his horses, carriages and sleighs on 40th Street. By 1871, he was a member of the board of directors of not only the Erie Railroad and the Brooklyn Bridge Company, but also the Third Avenue Railway Company and the Harlem Gas Light Company. He was president of the Guardian Savings Banks and he and his confederates set up the Tenth National Bank to better control their fortunes.\nScandal.\nTweed's downfall began in 1871. James Watson, who was a county auditor in Comptroller Dick Connolly's office and who also held and recorded the ring's books, died a week after his head was smashed by a horse in a sleigh accident on January 24, 1871. Although Tweed guarded Watson's estate in the week prior to Watson's death, and although another ring member attempted to destroy Watson's records, a replacement auditor, Matthew O'Rourke, associated with former sheriff James O'Brien, provided city accounts to O'Brien. The Orange riot of 1871 in the summer of that year did not help the ring's popularity. The riot was prompted after Tammany Hall banned a parade of Irish Protestants celebrating a historical victory against Catholicism, namely the Battle of the Boyne. The parade was banned because of a riot the previous year in which eight people died when a crowd of Irish Catholic laborers attacked the paraders. Under strong pressure from the newspapers and the Protestant elite of the city, Tammany reversed course, and the march was allowed to proceed, with protection from city policemen and state militia. The result was an even larger riot in which over 60 people were killed and more than 150 injured.\nAlthough Tammany's electoral power base was largely centered in the Irish immigrant population, it also needed both the city's general population and elite to acquiesce in its rule, and this was conditional on the machine's ability to control the actions of its people. The July riot showed that this capability was not nearly as strong as had been supposed.\nTweed had for months been under attack from \"The New York Times\" and Thomas Nast, the cartoonist from \"Harper's Weekly\"\u00a0\u2013 regarding Nast's cartoons, Tweed reportedly said, \"Stop them damned pictures. I don't care so much what the papers say about me. My constituents don't know how to read, but they can't help seeing them damned pictures!\" \u2013 but their campaign had only limited success in gaining traction. They were able to force an examination of the city's books, but the blue-ribbon commission of six businessmen appointed by Mayor A. Oakey Hall, a Tammany man, which included John Jacob Astor III, banker Moses Taylor and others who benefited from Tammany's actions, found that the books had been \"faithfully kept\", letting the air out of the effort to dethrone Tweed.\nThe response to the Orange riot changed everything, and only days afterwards the \"Times\"/Nast campaign began to garner popular support. More important, the \"Times\" started to receive inside information from County Sheriff James O'Brien, whose support for Tweed had fluctuated during Tammany's reign. O'Brien had tried to blackmail Tammany by threatening to expose the ring's embezzlement to the press, and when this failed he provided the evidence he had collected to the \"Times\". Shortly afterward, county auditor Matthew J. O'Rourke supplied additional details to the \"Times\", which was reportedly offered $5\u00a0million to not publish the evidence. The \"Times\" also obtained the accounts of the recently deceased James Watson, who was the Tweed Ring's bookkeeper, and these were published daily, culminating in a special four-page supplement on July 29 headlined \"Gigantic Frauds of the Ring Exposed\". In August, Tweed began to transfer ownership in his real-estate empire and other investments to his family members.\nThe expos\u00e9 provoked an international crisis of confidence in New York City's finances, and, in particular, in its ability to repay its debts. European investors were heavily positioned in the city's bonds and were already nervous about its management\u00a0\u2013 only the reputations of the underwriters were preventing a run on the city's securities. New York's financial and business community knew that if the city's credit were to collapse, it could potentially bring down every bank in the city with it.\nThus, the city's elite met at Cooper Union in September to discuss political reform: but for the first time, the conversation included not only the usual reformers, but also Democratic bigwigs such as Samuel J. Tilden, who had been thrust aside by Tammany. The consensus was that the \"wisest and best citizens\" should take over the governance of the city and attempt to restore investor confidence. The result was the formation of the executive committee of Citizens and Taxpayers for Financial Reform of the city (also known as \"the Committee of Seventy\"), which attacked Tammany by cutting off the city's funding. Property owners refused to pay their municipal taxes, and a judge\u2014Tweed's old friend George Barnard\u2014enjoined the city Comptroller from issuing bonds or spending money. Unpaid workers turned against Tweed, marching to City Hall demanding to be paid. Tweed doled out some funds from his own purse\u2014$50,000\u2014but it was not sufficient to end the crisis, and Tammany began to lose its essential base.\nShortly thereafter, the Comptroller resigned, appointing Andrew Haswell Green, an associate of Tilden, as his replacement. Green loosened the purse strings again, allowing city departments not under Tammany control to borrow money to operate. Green and Tilden had the city's records closely examined, and discovered money that went directly from city contractors into Tweed's pocket. The following day, they had Tweed arrested.\nImprisonment, escape, and death.\nTweed was released on $1\u00a0million bail, and Tammany set to work to recover its position through the ballot box. Tweed was re-elected to the state senate in November 1871, due to his personal popularity and largesse in his district, but in general Tammany did not do well, and the members of the Tweed Ring began to flee the jurisdiction, many going overseas. Tweed was re-arrested, forced to resign his city positions, and was replaced as Tammany's leader. Once again, he was released on bail\u2014$8 million this time\u2014but Tweed's supporters, such as Jay Gould, felt the repercussions of his fall from power.\nTweed's first trial before Judge Noah Davis, in January 1873, ended when the jury was unable to deliver a verdict. Tweed's defense counsel included David Dudley Field II and Elihu Root. His retrial, again before Judge Noah Davis in November resulted in convictions on 204 of 220 counts, a fine of $12,750 (the equivalent of $ today) and a prison sentence of 12 years; a higher court, however, reduced Tweed's sentence to one year. After his release from The Tombs prison, New York State filed a civil suit against Tweed, attempting to recover $6\u00a0million in embezzled funds. Unable to put up the $3\u00a0million bail, Tweed was locked up in the Ludlow Street Jail, although he was allowed home visits. During one of these on December 4, 1875, Tweed escaped and fled via Cuba to Spain, where he worked as a common seaman on a Spanish ship. The U.S. government discovered his whereabouts and arranged for his arrest once he reached the Spanish border, where he was recognized from Nast's political cartoons. He was turned over to an American warship, the , which delivered him to authorities in New York City on November 23, 1876, and he was returned to prison.\nDesperate and broken, Tweed now agreed to testify about the inner workings of the Tweed Ring to a special committee set up by the Board of Aldermen in return for his release. However, after he did so, Tilden, now governor of New York, refused to abide by the agreement, and Tweed remained incarcerated.\nDeath and burial.\nHe died in the Ludlow Street Jail on April 12, 1878, from severe pneumonia, and was buried in Brooklyn's Green-Wood Cemetery. Mayor Smith Ely Jr. would not allow the flag at City Hall to be flown at half staff.\nEvaluations.\nAccording to Tweed biographer Kenneth D. Ackerman:It's hard not to admire the skill behind Tweed's system\u00a0... The Tweed ring at its height was an engineering marvel, strong and solid, strategically deployed to control key power points: the courts, the legislature, the treasury and the ballot box. Its frauds had a grandeur of scale and an elegance of structure: money-laundering, profit sharing and organization.\nA minority view that Tweed was mostly innocent is presented in a scholarly biography by history professor Leo Hershkowitz. He states:Except for Tweed's own very questionable \"confession,\" there really was no evidence of a \"Tweed Ring,\" no direct evidence of Tweed's thievery, no evidence, excepting the testimony of the informer contractors, of \"wholesale\" plunder by Tweed...[Instead there was] a conspiracy of self-justification of the corruption of the law by the upholders of that law, of a venal irresponsible press and a citizenry delighting in the exorcism of witchery.\nIn depictions of Tweed and the Tammany Hall organization, most historians have emphasized the thievery and conspiratorial nature of Boss Tweed, along with lining his own pockets and those of his friends and allies. The theme is that the sins of corruption so violated American standards of political rectitude that they far overshadow Tweed's positive contributions to New York City.\nAlthough he held numerous important public offices and was one of a handful of senior leaders of Tammany Hall, as well as the state legislature and the state Democratic Party, Tweed was never the sole \"boss\" of New York City. He shared control of the city with numerous less famous people, such as the villains depicted in Nast's famous circle of guilt cartoon shown above. Seymour J. Mandelbaum has argued that, apart from the corruption he engaged in, Tweed was a modernizer who prefigured certain elements of the Progressive Era in terms of more efficient city management. Much of the money he siphoned off from the city treasury went to needy constituents who appreciated the free food at Christmas time and remembered it at the next election, and to precinct workers who provided the muscle of his machine. As a legislator he worked to expand and strengthen welfare programs, especially those by private charities, schools, and hospitals. With a base in the Irish Catholic community, he opposed efforts of Protestants to require the reading of the King James Bible in public schools, which was done deliberately to keep out Catholics. He facilitated the founding of the New York Public Library, even though one of its founders, Samuel Tilden, was Tweed's sworn enemy in the Democratic Party.\nTweed recognized that the support of his constituency was necessary for him to remain in power, and as a consequence he used the machinery of the city's government to provide numerous social services, including building more orphanages, almshouses and public baths. Tweed also fought for the New York State Legislature to donate to private charities of all religious denominations, and subsidize Catholic schools and hospitals. From 1869 to 1871, under Tweed's influence, the state of New York spent more on charities than for the entire time period from 1852 to 1868 combined.\nDuring Tweed's regime, the main business thoroughfare Broadway was widened between 34th Street and 59th Street, land was secured for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and the Upper East Side and Upper West Side were developed and provided the necessary infrastructure \u2013 all to the benefit of the purses of the Tweed Ring.\nHershkowitz blames the implications of Thomas Nast in \"Harper's Weekly\" and the editors of \"The New York Times\", which both had ties to the Republican party. In part, the campaign against Tweed diverted public attention from Republican scandals such as the Whiskey Ring.\nTweed himself wanted no particular recognition of his achievements, such as they were. When it was proposed, in March 1871, when he was at the height of his power, that a statue be erected in his honor, he declared: \"Statues are not erected to living men ... I claim to be a live man, and hope (Divine Providence permitting) to survive in all my vigor, politically and physically, some years to come.\" One of Tweed's unwanted legacies is that he has become \"the archetype of the bloated, rapacious, corrupt city boss\".\nMiddle name.\nTweed never signed his middle name with anything other than a plain \"M.\", and his middle name is often mistakenly listed as \"Marcy\". His actual middle name was Magear, his mother's maiden name.\nConfusion derived from a Nast cartoon with a picture of Tweed supplemented with a quote from William L. Marcy, the former governor of New York.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "4689", "revid": "34532625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4689", "title": "Balsall Heath", "text": "Inner-city area of Birmingham, England\nBalsall Heath is an inner-city area of Birmingham, West Midlands, England. It has a diverse cultural mix of people and is the location of the Balti Triangle.\nHistory.\nThe name is first found as Bordeshale in 1275, which is derived from the Old English words \"Bord's healh\" meaning 'Bord's heath' or 'Bord's nook' implying a corner or small area of land, perhaps a sheltered hollow in the landscape, protected by trees, possibly within a river-bend. The name stems from the Anglian personal name of one \"Bord\", who held property in the area, and in this way shares its origin with that of neighbouring Bordesley, first record as Bordesleie or Bordeslea meaning 'Bord's clearing'.\nBalsall Heath was largely agricultural and park land between Moseley village and the city of Birmingham until the 1850s when expansion along Moseley Road joined the two. Balsall Heath was formerly a chapelry in the parish of King's Norton, in Worcestershire, it was added to the county borough of Birmingham in Warwickshire on 1 October 1891. On 31 December 1894 Balsall Heath became a separate civil parish being formed from the part of King's Norton in the County Borough of Birmingham, on 1 April 1912 the parish was abolished and merged with Birmingham. In 1911 the parish had a population of 39,884.\nDuring negotiations in the previous year it had been promised a public baths and a free library. In 1895, the library was opened on Moseley Road and, in 1907, Balsall Heath Baths were opened in an adjoining building.\nIn 1900, the city's College of Art was also opened on Moseley Road. By this time the small lake (\"Lady Pool\" on old maps) at the end of Ladypool Road had been filled in to create a park.\nBalsall Heath initially had a reasonably affluent population, which can still be seen in the dilapidated grandeur of some of the larger houses. Brighton Road railway station led to further expansion, and the end of the 19th century saw a proliferation of high-density small terraced houses.\nA Muslim community was started in June 1940 when two Yemenis purchased an artisan cottage on Mary Street. With the mosque being located in the area, more Muslim immigrants began to move into private lodgings in Balsall Heath. Today, Balsall Heath has one of the largest Muslim communities in Birmingham. It is also home to diverse communities from across the Commonwealth.\nBy the 1980s, many of Balsall Heath's houses were in a dilapidated condition; some still lacked bathrooms or indoor toilets. The local council considered demolishing these properties but chose to refurbish them as part of an urban renewal scheme. Most of these Victorian terraces still exist and, along with more modern social housing, characterise the area today. The area's traditional 'brick' pavements were replaced at this time by the more modern and conventional paving slabs.\nBalsall Heath's low rents also attracted a bohemian student population. Its proximity to the University of Birmingham, the city centre and the \"trendy\" area of Moseley were all contributing factors. There was little conflict between the students and locals despite their vastly differing lifestyles. However, a knife-incident in 1991 led to an article in \"Redbrick\" warning students not to live in the area.\nIn July 2005, Balsall Heath was hit by a tornado, which devastated many buildings around Church Road and Ladypool Road. Birmingham City Council offered loans to those who would otherwise be unable to repair their properties, and the area has now made a full recovery.\nRed light era.\nStreet prostitution first appeared in Balsall Heath during the 1950s. Property values fell, attracting Birmingham's poorer migrants. By the 1970s, the area was notorious for street robberies and drug dealing. Cheddar Road was the centre of a red-light district worked by 450 women. About half of the 50 houses on this road had prostitutes advertising themselves in the windows, similar to Amsterdam. It was labelled Britain's busiest cul-de-sac. This period of the area's history is depicted in the 1980 film \"Prostitute\".\nIn 1986, an organisation called ANAWIM was formed by the Sisters of Charity to provide outreach support to the prostitutes.\nIn September 1992, a report was published encouraging the formation of a zone of tolerance towards prostitution in Balsall Heath. This was opposed by residents and a local police inspector. In the following year Samo Paull, a woman working as a prostitute, was abducted from Balsall Heath and murdered.\nIn 1994, residents began to organise street patrols forcing the prostitutes and street criminals out of the area. These patrols had the qualified support of the police but were regarded as vigilantes by some. There was an immediate two-thirds reduction in street and window prostitution. By November 1995, they had been almost eliminated.\nThe area has enjoyed a slow revival. House prices are now similar to those in other inner-city areas, while the crime rate is among the lowest.\nPolitics and governance.\nBalsall Heath is divided by two wards for elections to Birmingham City Council; Balsall Heath West and Sparkbrook and Balsall Heath East.\nBalsall Heath West is part of the Birmingham Ladywood constituency for general elections to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom, whereas Sparkbrook and Balsall Heath East is Part of the Birmingham Hall Green Constituency.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4690", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4690", "title": "Bunge &amp; Born", "text": "Former multinational corporation in Argentina\nBunge &amp; Born was a multinational corporation based in Buenos Aires, Argentina, whose diverse interests included food processing and international trade in grains and oilseeds. It is now known as Bunge Limited.\nHistory.\nBunge &amp; Born was founded in 1883 by Ernesto Bunge, a German Argentine whose uncle, Karl Bunge, had been Consul General in Argentina for both the Netherlands and Prussia, and his brother-in-law, Jorge Born, who had recently arrived from Antwerp. The company superseded the Bunge Company founded in Amsterdam by Johan Bunge, in 1817. Following the purchase of of prime pampas wheat fields, Bunge &amp; Born established \"Centenera\", their first food processing plant, in 1898. They had one of the largest wheat mills in the country built on a Puerto Madero lot in 1901, and with it, established \"Molinos R\u00edo de la Plata\" (later a leader in the local retail foods market).\nThe company started Argentina's first burlap bag manufacturer, following which they successfully lobbied government policy makers for protective tariffs on the then-critical commercial staple. They established a mortgage bank, the \"Banco Hipotecario Franco Argentino\", and a subsidiary in Brazil in 1904, and by 1911, they reportedly controlled 79% of Argentine cereal exports (Argentina was, by then, the world's third-largest grain exporter). They later established paint manufacturer \"Alba\" (1925), chemical and fertilizer maker \"Compa\u00f1\u00eda Qu\u00edmica\", and textile maker \"Grafa\" (1932), among others; by the late 1920s, the company's annual export receipts alone reached US$300 million. The company inaugurated its neo-Gothic Buenos Aires headquarters on Leandro Alem Avenue, designed by local architect Pablo Naeff, in 1926.\nBunge &amp; Born's near-monopoly on cereal and flour exports ended with populist President Juan Per\u00f3n's 1946 establishment of the IAPI, a state agricultural purchasing and export agent. The company responded by extending its reach into the country fast-growing retail processed foods market, and though its prominence as the nation's chief exporter was partly restored by Per\u00f3n's 1955 ousting and the IAPI's liquidation, its focus remained domestic over the next three decades. A privately held company, Bunge &amp; Born did not release periodical financial statements, though it did report US$2bn in gross receipts in 1962; by then it had become an agribusiness leader, operating 110 offices worldwide.\nThe Bunge, Born, Hirsch, Engels and De La Tour families remained the company's chief stockholders, and by extension, leaders in the domestic textile, paint, chemical, fertilizer, and food processing industries. On September 19, 1974, however, the consortium was shaken by the kidnapping of siblings Jorge and Juan Born by the far-left terrorist group, Montoneros. Freed for a US$60 million ransom (the largest on record at that time), the ordeal triggered the company headquarters' relocation to S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil, and contributed to the March 1976 coup.\nRetaining their Argentine interests (44 companies, by the 1980s), the families continued to suffer from ongoing disputes, and in 1988, CEO Mario Hirsch died from tripping. The election of Carlos Menem to the Argentine Presidency in May 1988, however, resulted in an agreement between the President-elect and Jorge Born that gave the company partial control over national economic policy. Bunge &amp; Born provided the Menem government with its first two economy ministers, and the combination of large rate increases on public services (around 500%), a simplified exchange rate and a massive, mandatory wage hike led to a sharp economic turnaround between July and November 1989. This foray into government policy making, however, ended in a new currency crisis that December and the failure (compounded by the company's lackluster business performance) resulted in Born's 1991 ouster from the board; he was replaced by Chief Operations Officer Octavio Caraballo.\nBeset by the rift between Jorge Born and his brother, Juan, the prior unity between the shareholders disintegrated as Caraballo struggled to modernize the company. Family frictions intensified when Jorge Born formed a business partnership with one of his former kidnappers, erstwhile Montonero strategist Rodolfo Galimberti.\nBunge International.\nThe company was converted into the Bermuda-registered Bunge International in 1994, retaining the Bunge y Born name only in Argentina. Bunge remained a privately held company of 180 shareholders (including the longtime controlling family interests) and divested itself in 1998, of almost all its retail foods interests in favor of a greater role in international agribusiness and commodity markets; by then the company's gross annual turnover had reached US$13 billion. Bunge ultimately went public on the NYSE in 2001, becoming \"Bunge Limited\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4691", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4691", "title": "Big Apple", "text": "Nickname for New York City\n\"The Big Apple\" is a nickname for New York City. It was first popularized in the 1920s by John J. Fitz Gerald, a sportswriter for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\". Its popularity since the 1970s is due in part to a promotional campaign by the New York tourist authorities.\nOrigin.\nAlthough the history of \"Big Apple\" was once thought a mystery, a clearer picture of the term's history has emerged due to the work of historian Barry Popik as well as Gerald Cohen of the Missouri University of Science and Technology. A number of false theories had previously existed, including a claim that the term derived from a woman named Eve who ran a brothel in the city. This was subsequently exposed as a hoax.\nThe earliest known usage of \"big apple\" appears in the book \"The Wayfarer in New York\" (1909), in which Edward Sandford Martin writes: Kansas is apt to see in New York a greedy city ... It inclines to think that the big apple gets a disproportionate share of the national sap. William Safire considered this the coinage, but because the phrase is not quoted in the text, it is likely that it was used as a metaphor, and not as a nickname for the city.\nHorse racing origin.\n\"The Big Apple\" was popularized as a name for New York City by John J. Fitz Gerald in a number of horse-racing articles for the \"New York Morning Telegraph\" in the 1920s. The earliest of these was a casual reference on 3 May 1921:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;J. P. Smith, with Tippity Witchet and others of the L. T. Bauer string, is scheduled to start for \"the big apple\" to-morrow after a most prosperous Spring campaign at Bowie and Havre de Grace.\nFitz Gerald referred to the \"big apple\" frequently thereafter. He explained his use in a column dated February 18, 1924, under the headline \"Around the Big Apple\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Big Apple. The dream of every lad that ever threw a leg over a thoroughbred and the goal of all horsemen. There's only one Big Apple. That's New York.\nFitz Gerald reportedly first heard \"The Big Apple\" used to describe New York's racetracks by two African American stable hands at the New Orleans Fair Grounds. Using racing records, Popik traced that conversation to January 1920.\nIn recognition of Fitz Gerald's role in promulgating \"The Big Apple\" as a nickname for New York City, in 1997 Mayor Rudy Giuliani signed legislation designating as \"Big Apple Corner\" the southwest corner of West 54th Street and Broadway, the corner on which John J. Fitz Gerald lived from 1934 to 1963. The Hotel Ameritania also once had a plaque which was installed in 1996, according to Popik, but it was removed during renovations to the building and was lost.\nEvidence can also be found in the \"Chicago Defender\", an African-American newspaper that had a national circulation. Writing for the \"Defender\" on September 16, 1922, \"Ragtime\" Billy Tucker used the name \"big apple\" to refer to New York in a non-horse-racing context:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I trust your trip to 'the big apple' (New York) was a huge success and only wish that I had been able to make it with you.\nTucker had also earlier used \"big apple\" as a reference to Los Angeles. It is possible that he simply used \"big apple\" as a nickname for any large city:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dear Pal, Tony: No, Ragtime Billy Tucker hasn't dropped completely out of existence, but is still in the 'Big Apple', Los Angeles.\nPopularity.\nBy the late 1920s, New York writers other than Fitz Gerald were starting to use \"Big Apple\", and were using it in contexts other than horse racing. \"The Big Apple\" was a popular song and dance in the 1930s. Jazz musicians in the 1930s also contributed to the use of the phrase to refer to New York City, specifically to the city and Harlem as the jazz capital of the world. Beside the song and the dance, two nightclubs in the city used \"Big Apple\" in their names.\nWalter Winchell and other writers continued to use the term in the 1940s and early 1950s, but by the late 1950s, if it was known at all, it had come to be considered an outdated nickname for New York.\nIn the early 1970s, however, during the city's fiscal crisis, \"People were looking around desperately and some of them seized that old phrase the Big Apple to remind people of when New York had been a strong and powerful city and might become that again,\" according to the official Manhattan Borough Historian, Dr. Robert Snyder. It was then that the New York Convention and Visitors Bureau \u2013 now \"NYC Tourism + Conventions\", New York City's official marketing and tourism organization \u2013 with the help of the Ogilvy &amp; Mather advertising firm, began to promote the city's \"Big Apple\" nickname to tourists, under the leadership of its president, Charles Gillett. The campaign was a success, and the nickname has remained popular since then.\nToday, the name is used exclusively to refer to New York City, and is used with regularity by journalists and news headline writers across the English-speaking world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4692", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4692", "title": "Boston Corbett", "text": "English-born American soldier and milliner who killed John Wilkes Booth (1832\u20131888)\nThomas H. \"Boston\" Corbett (January 29, 1832 \u2013 disappeared c.\u2009May 26, 1888) was an English-born American soldier and milliner who, on April 26, 1865, killed John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of President Abraham Lincoln. He shot and mortally wounded Booth when his regiment surrounded the barn that Booth was hiding in on the Garrett Farm in Port Royal, Virginia. The American media and public largely considered Corbett a hero for his actions.\nKnown for his devout religious beliefs and eccentric behavior, Corbett was reportedly a good soldier and had been a prisoner of war at Andersonville Prison. \nAfter the Civil War, Corbett drifted around the United States before he was committed to Topeka Asylum for the Insane after being declared insane in 1887. In 1888, he escaped and subsequently disappeared.\nEarly life and education.\nCorbett was born in London, England, on January 29, 1832, and immigrated with his family to the US in 1840 when he was seven or eight. The Corbetts moved frequently before settling in Troy, New York.\nAs a teenager, he began apprenticing as a milliner, a profession Corbett practiced intermittently throughout his life. As a result, he was regularly exposed to the mercury(II) nitrate fumes, used at the time to treat fur in order to produce felt used on hats. Excessive exposure to the compound can lead to hallucinations, psychosis and erethism. Historians have theorized that the mental issues Corbett exhibited before and after the Civil War were caused by his exposure to mercury(II) nitrate.\nFamily and religion.\nAfter working as a milliner in Troy, Corbett returned to New York City. In the early 1850s, Corbett met and married Susan Rebecca, thirteen years his senior. He became an American citizen on June 9, 1855, taking the oath in a Troy courthouse, and the couple then moved to Richmond, Virginia.\nCorbett had a hard time finding and keeping work in the Antebellum South in large part because of his vociferous opposition to slavery. The couple decided to return to New York City by ship, but Susan became ill and died at sea on August 18, 1856. In New York her death was recorded and she was laid to rest. Following Susan's death, Corbett moved to Boston. Grief stricken, he became despondent and, according to friends, began drinking heavily. \nHe could not hold a job and eventually became homeless. After a night of heavy drinking, a street preacher confronted Corbett and persuaded him to join the Methodist Episcopal Church. Reportedly, some evangelical temperance Christians encountered and detained Corbett until he sobered up, undergoing a religious epiphany in the process.\nIn 1857, Corbett began working at a hat manufacturer's shop on Washington Street in downtown Boston. He was reported to be a proficient milliner but was known to proselytize frequently and stop work to pray and sing for co-workers who used profanity in his presence. He also began working as a street preacher and would sermonize and distribute religious literature in North Square. Corbett soon earned a reputation around Boston for being a \"local eccentric\" and religious fanatic. By the summer of 1858, Corbett fell in with members of the Methodist Episcopal Church, becoming a proselytizer and street preacher. On July\u00a016, 1858, Corbett, while trying to remain chaste, struggled against sexual urges and began reading the Gospel of Matthew, specifically and .\nYears later, a friend recounted Corbett saying \"that the Lord directed him, in a vision or in some way, to castrate himself,\" which he did with a pair of scissors. He then ate a meal and attended a prayer meeting before someone was sent for medical treatment. Corbett was released on August 15. A friend recorded that \"he was very much gratified with the result as his passion was not trouble any more...his object was that he might preach the gospel without being tormented by his passions.\"\nAfter being baptized on August 29, Corbett changed his first name from Thomas to Boston, the city of his conversion. He regularly attended meetings at the Fulton and Bromfield Street churches, where his enthusiastic behavior earned him the nickname \"The Glory to God man\". In an attempt to imitate Jesus, Corbett began to wear his hair very long, but the Union Army forced him to cut it upon enlisting.\nCorbett was described as friendly and open, helpful to those he saw in need but also quick to condemn those he thought were out of step with God. He routinely gathered up drunken sinners from the streets of New York and took them to his room, where he would sober them up, feed them and restore their health. He also tried to help them find work. Corbett routinely spent all his own money and frequently borrowed from friends. When his milliner boss asked him about his lack of decent clothes, Corbett always said he was \"doing the Lord's work.\" His boss later described him as \"a good man, for all of his faults were of the head, and not of the heart.\"\nMilitary career.\nEnlistment in the Union Army.\nOn April 19, 1861, early in the American Civil War, Corbett, who was anti-slavery, enlisted as a private in Company I of the Union Army's 12th New York State Militia. His eccentric behavior quickly got him into trouble. He always carried a Bible and regularly read passages aloud, held unauthorized prayer meetings, and argued with his superior officers. Corbett also castigated them for what he perceived as violations of God's word. He once reprimanded Col. Daniel Butterfield for cursing and taking the Lord's name in vain. Butterfield sent Corbett to the guardhouse for several days for insubordination, yet he refused to apologize.\nDue to his continued disruptive behavior and refusal to take orders, the Army court-martialed Corbett and sentenced him to be shot. His sentence was eventually reduced and he was discharged in August 1863. He re-enlisted later that month in Company L, 16th New York Cavalry Regiment. On February 26, 1864, he was demoted to private as punishment for an unknown incident.\nAndersonville.\nDespite his religious-oriented eccentricities, Corbett reportedly was a good soldier. On June\u00a024, 1864, after Confederate States Army troops led by John S. Mosby in Culpeper, Virginia had captured a good number of Corbett's comrades, Corbett continued to fire at the enemy from behind a persimmon tree and in a ditch with a seven-shooter repeating rifle. The Confederate Army only succeeded in capturing him on their third attempt after Corbett ran out of ammunition.\nOnce he was in custody, a junior officer was so enraged at Corbett's persistence that he leaped from his saddle, knocked the Spencer rifle from Corbett's hand and aimed a pistol at his head. Captain Chapman objected: \"Don\u2019t shoot that man! He has a right to defend himself to the last!\" Corbett later related to friends that the man who saved his life was Mosby, though this is dubious.\nCorbett was a prisoner of war at Andersonville Prison. A fellow prisoner named William Collins later relayed the following incident that happened while en route to the now infamous prison:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"At Macon there were about a thousand prisoners who had arrived ahead of us. The train we were on unloaded our thousand making two thousand in all. We were taken to an old pasture or common near the railroad tracks where a furrow was ploughed around it for a deadline. There was a small stream of water close to the guard line and the prisoners made a rush for it, most of them had no water for many hours, but the guards kept them back. One of the more venturesome than the rest got through the line and attempted to fill his canteen. He was immediately shot in the arm with buckshot by one of the guards. He was pushed back among our men and laid under a tree. The wounded man was suffering greatly and called for water to ease his pain, but none had any in his canteen. Boston Corbett stepped out of the ranks, having been unable to stand silent any longer. He crossed the deadline, filled his canteen in the stream and gave the wounded man a drink. The guards continually threatened him with death, but Corbett ignored them and went about his business. Despite their threats, he returned unharmed and rejoined the ranks of prisoners. The cheers of the soldiers at this brave deed could have been heard one mile away, but Corbett seemed to think it was not out of the ordinary. It was the bravest deed that I had seen during the war. We arrived at Andersonville prison the next day.\"\nFellow POW Richard Thatcher described Corbett as having \"qualities that challenged my admiration, even more than the heroism he was capable of displaying in the battlefield. He read passages from the Scriptures to me, and spoke words of sound and wholesome advice, from which I began to learn that he was one who had the courage of his convictions.\" Corbett, among others, led prayer meetings and patriotic rallies to boost morale, according to John McElroy's eyewitness account in his 1879 memoir \"Andersonville\".\nFive months later, in November 1864, the prison released Corbett in a prisoner exchange and he was admitted to a military hospital in Annapolis, Maryland, where doctors treated him for scurvy, malnutrition and exposure. Upon Corbett's return to his company, he was promoted to the rank of sergeant. He later testified for the prosecution in the trial of the commandant of Andersonville Prison, Captain Henry Wirz.\nPursuit and death of John Wilkes Booth.\nOn April 14, 1865, President Abraham Lincoln was shot by John Wilkes Booth. The President died the next day.\nOn the night Booth shot Lincoln, Good Friday, Corbett's regiment was based around the Potomac in Vienna, Virginia. On Saturday morning they searched for signs of the assassins and learned that Booth was the gunman who had shot the President. Lincoln's funeral included a two-hour procession on Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House to the Capitol Building. Corbett and the rest of the Cavalry joined other regiments leading the hearse, a large wagon drawn by six white horses and draped in black cloth.\nCorbett's regiment had barely left the Capitol after the funeral parade when orders caught up with Canadian-born Lt. Edward P. Doherty to pursue a lead about Booth. Corbett requested permission to attend night meetings at McKendree Chapel, and was allowed to lead a prayer over the President's death.\nCorbett was among the first to volunteer when, on Monday, April 24, his regiment was sent to capture Booth. On Wednesday, on April 26, the regiment surrounded Booth and one of his accomplices, David Herold, in a tobacco barn on the Virginia farm of Richard Garrett. Doherty asked Corbett \"to deploy the men right and left\" to surround the farm. Corbett and other soldiers arrayed themselves around the barn to prevent the men from escaping. Herold surrendered, but Booth refused, crying out, \"I will not be taken alive!\".\nThe regiment set the barn on fire in an attempt to force Booth out into the open, but he remained inside. Corbett was positioned near a large crack in the barn wall. He requested permission from Doherty to enter the barn alone and try to subdue Booth by himself, reasoning that that if Booth shot him, the other soldiers could overwhelm the assassin before he could reload. Corbett was unaware that Booth had a Spencer carbine and several revolvers. Doherty denied the request and Corbett moved back to his position.\nLt. Colonel Everton Conger ignited clumps of hay and slipped them in the cracks in the wall near Corbett, hoping to burn out Booth. Booth walked to the flames to assess whether he could extinguish them. Corbett and others claimed that they saw Booth aim his carbine, seemingly intending to fight his way out, prompting Corbett to shoot Booth through the crack with his Colt revolver, mortally wounding him. Booth screamed in pain and fell to the ground.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Finding the fire gaining upon him (Booth), he turned to the other side of the barn, and got toward where the door was, and as he got there I saw him make a movement toward the door. I supposed he was going to fight his way out. One of the men, who was watching him, told me that he aimed the carbine at me. He was taking aim with the carbine, but at whom I could not say. My mind was upon him attentively to see that he did no harm, and when I became impressed that it was time I shot him. I took steady aim on my arm, and shot him through a large crack in the barn.\"\nDoherty, Conger, and several soldiers rushed into the burning barn and carried Booth out. Assessing his condition, Corbett and others felt a cosmic justice had been served; Booth's entry wound was in the same spot where he'd shot Lincoln. The bullet struck Booth in the back of the head behind his left ear and passed through his neck. Three of Booth's vertebrae were pierced and his spinal cord was partially severed, leaving him completely paralyzed. As Mary Clemmer Ames would later put it, \"The balls entered the skull of each at nearly the same spot, but the trifling difference made an immeasurable difference ... Mr. Lincoln was unconscious ... Booth suffered as exquisite agony as if he had been broken on a wheel.\"\nConger initially thought Booth had shot himself, though Colonel Lafayette C. Baker was certain he had not. Corbett stepped forward and admitted he shot Booth before handing his gun over to Doherty. During questioning by Doherty, Baker and Conger, Corbett said he had intended to merely wound Booth in the shoulder, but either his aim slipped or Booth moved when Corbett fired. Initial statements by Doherty and others made no mention of Corbett having violated any orders, nor did they suggest that he would face disciplinary action for shooting Booth. \nAccording to later sources, when asked why he had violated orders, Corbett replied, \"Providence directed me.\" Author Scott Martelle disputes this, noting \"his initial statement, and those by Baker, Conger, and Doherty don't mention Providence ... those details came long after the shooting itself, amid the swirl of rumor and conjecture and considerable lobbying over the reward money.\" Corbett received $1,653.85. His 16th NY Cavalry comrades each received $1,000, Conger $15,000, Doherty $5,250, and Baker $3,750, though the initial amounts for the three officers was far greater.\nThe soldiers dragged Booth onto the porch of the Garrett farmhouse where he asked for water. Conger and Baker poured some into his mouth, which he immediately spat out, unable to swallow. Booth asked to be rolled over and turned facedown; Conger rejected the idea. \"Then at least turn me on my side,\" Booth pleaded; the move did not relieve Booth's suffering. Baker said, \"He seemed to suffer extreme pain whenever he was moved...and would several times repeat, 'Kill me!'\" \nAt sunrise, Booth remained in agony, and his breathing became more labored and irregular. Unable to move his limbs, he asked a soldier to lift his hands to his face and uttered his last words as he gazed at them: \"Useless ... useless.\" Booth then began gasping for air as his throat continued to swell, and he made a gurgling sound before he died from asphyxia, approximately two to three hours after Corbett shot him.\nDoherty told Corbett to ride to neighboring farms to find breakfast for the men. Corbett did so, but first \"rode off to a spot when I could be alone and pray, and when I had gone through my usual morning prayer, I asked the Lord in regard to the shooting. At once, I was filled with praise, for I felt a clear consciousness that it was an act of duty in the sight of God.\" Corbett found supplies for half the men, and they finished their meal before Booth died. Conger and Corbett rode off to Washington.\nFame.\nAccording to Johnson, Corbett was accompanied by Lt. Doherty to the War Department in Washington, D.C. to meet Secretary Edwin Stanton about Booth's shooting. Edward Steers writes that it was \"not against orders. Conger (said)...\"They had no orders either to fire or not to fire.\" \nCorbett maintained that he believed Booth had intended to shoot his way out of the barn and that he acted in self-defense. He told Stanton, \"...Booth would have killed me if I had not shot first. I think I did right.\" Corbett maintained that he did not intend to kill Booth but merely wanted to inflict a disabling wound, but either his aim slipped or Booth moved at the moment Corbett pulled the trigger. Stanton paused and then stated, \"The rebel is dead. The patriot lives; he has spared the country expense, continued excitement and trouble. Discharge the patriot.\" \nMartelle says that \"no other source mentions such a meeting...Johnson's memoir, which came out a half-century later, is just another part of the lore.\" Corbett was greeted by a cheering crowd. As he made his way to Mathew Brady's studio to have his official portrait taken, the crowd followed him, asking for autographs and requesting that he tell them about shooting Booth. Corbett told the crowd:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCorbett testified in the trial of the Lincoln assassination conspirators, testifying on May 17, 1865.\nCorbett was largely considered a hero by the public and press. Initial newspaper reporters described him as a simple and humble man devoted, possibly excessively, to his faith; he had eccentricities but also did his duty well. One newspaper editor declared that Corbett would \"live as one of the World's great avengers.\" For his part in Booth's capture, Corbett received a portion of the $100,000 reward money, amounting to $1,653.84, . His annual salary as a U.S. sergeant was $204, . Corbett received offers to purchase the gun he used to shoot Booth. He refused, stating, \"That is not mine\u2014it belongs to the Government, and I would not sell it for any price.\" Corbett also declined an offer for one of Booth's pistols as he did not want a reminder of shooting Booth.\nNegative responses.\nLater, newspaper accounts began to offer some criticism of Corbett's actions, that he had acted wilfully and against orders when he shot Booth (no orders were issued on whether Booth should be taken alive). Richard Garrett, the owner of the farm on which Booth died, and his 12-year-old son Robert said years later that Booth had never reached for his gun. Steers disputes this, noting that this contradicts original accounts.\nPost-war life.\nSouthern sympathizers sent letters threatening to kill Corbett, so he kept a gun nearby at all times to defend himself. After his discharge from the army in August 1865, Corbett returned to work as a milliner in Boston and frequently attended the Bromfield Street Church. When the hatting business in Boston slowed, Corbett moved to Danbury, Connecticut, to continue his work and also \"preached in the country round about.\" By 1870, he had relocated to Camden, New Jersey, where he was known as a \"Methodist lay preacher\" while also continuing to be a milliner. \nCorbett's inability to hold a job was attributed to his fanatical behavior. He was routinely fired after continuing his habit of stopping work to pray for his co-workers. To earn money, Corbett capitalized on his role as \"Lincoln's Avenger\". He gave lectures about the shooting of Booth accompanied by illustrated lantern slides at Sunday schools, women's groups and tent meetings. Corbett was never asked back due to his increasingly erratic behavior and incoherent speeches.\nR. B. Hoover, a man who later befriended Corbett, recalled that Corbett believed \"men who were high in authority at Washington at the time of the assassination\" were hounding him. Corbett said the men were angry because he had deprived them of prosecuting and executing John Wilkes Booth themselves. He believed the same men had gotten him fired from various jobs. \nCorbett's paranoia was furthered by hate mail he received for killing Booth. He became fearful that \"Booth's Avengers\" or organizations like the \"Secret Order\" were planning to seek revenge upon him and took to carrying a pistol with him at all times. As his paranoia increased, Corbett began brandishing his pistol at friends or strangers he deemed suspicious.\nIn 1875, while attending the Soldiers' Reunion of the Blue and Gray in Caldwell, Ohio, Corbett got into an argument with several men over the death of John Wilkes Booth. The men questioned if Booth had been killed at all, which enraged Corbett. He then drew his pistol on the men but was removed from the reunion before he could fire it. In 1878, Corbett moved to Concordia, Kansas, where he acquired a plot of land through homesteading and constructed a dugout home. He continued working as a preacher and attended revival meetings frequently. Throughout the rest of his life, he was paranoid that Booth's family or friends would come and kill him, causing him to go insane.\nDisappearance.\nIn January 1887, due to his fame as \"Lincoln's Avenger\", Corbett was appointed assistant doorkeeper of the Kansas House of Representatives in Topeka. On February 15, he became convinced that officers of the House were discriminating against him. He jumped to his feet, brandished a revolver, and began chasing the officers out of the building. No one was hurt, and Corbett was arrested. The following day, a judge declared Corbett insane and sent him to the Topeka Asylum for the Insane. On May 26, 1888, he escaped from the asylum on horseback. He then rode to Neodesha, Kansas, where he briefly stayed with Richard Thatcher, \"an old comrade\". When Corbett left, he told Thatcher he was going to Mexico.\nConjecture arose that rather than going to Mexico, Corbett may have settled in a cabin he built in the forests near Hinckley, in Pine County in eastern Minnesota and that he died in the Great Hinckley Fire on September\u00a01, 1894. This conjecture was based on speculation about the name \"Thomas Corbett\" appearing on the list of dead and a secondhand account by someone who said the fire victim had claimed to be Boston Corbett. Scott Martelle cited it as \"too tenuous a connection to credit\".\nIn September 2024, a presentation given to the 36th International Congress of Genealogical and Heraldic Sciences showed that the man who died in the Hinckley fire was Thomas Gilbert Corbitt, originally from Steuben County, New York, and not Boston Corbett. Proofs included the Civil War \"invalid\" filing by Thomas G. Corbitt, dated September 19, 1890, in Minnesota and on the same document, the widow's filing on August 9, 1895. Another proof included a newspaper article from the September 24, 1894, edition of the Steuben Farmers Advocate, announcing that Thomas Corbitt, formerly of Thurston, Steuben County, New York, had perished in the Hinckley fire.\nImpostors.\nSeveral men claimed to be Corbett in the years following his disappearance. A few years after Corbett was last seen in Neodesha, Kansas, a patent medicine salesman in Enid, Oklahoma, filed an application using Corbett's name to receive pension benefits. After an investigation proved that the man was not Boston Corbett, he was imprisoned. In September 1905, a man arrested in Dallas also claimed to be Corbett. He, too, was proven to be an impostor and was sent to prison for perjury and then to the Government Hospital for the Insane.\nLegacy.\nScott Martelle, who wrote the 2015 biography \"The Madman and the Assassin: The Strange Life of Boston Corbett, the Man Who Killed John Wilkes Booth\", called Corbett \"the closest to an average, everyday person...a regular, run-of-the-mill American\u2014albeit a strange one\u2014who did his job as a hatter, and then as a soldier\".\nMemorials.\nIn 1958, Boy Scout Troop 31 of Concordia, Kansas, built a roadside monument to Corbett on Key Road. A small sign was also placed to mark the dugout where Corbett had lived.\nPortrayals.\nA fictional version of Corbett appears in the novel \"Andersonville\" (1955). Dabbs Greer played a fictitious version of Corbett in the \"Lawman\" episode \"The Unmasked\" (1962), in which Corbett is living under the name \"Joe Brockway\" as a Wyoming hotel owner, being searched for by two vengeful former Confederate soldiers (although he gives his name as \"Bill Corbett\"). Corbett is portrayed by William Mark McCullough in the series \"Manhunt\" (2024).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
