{"id": "10133", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10133", "title": "Elias Boudinot", "text": "American politician, Founding Father of the United States (1740-1821)\nElias Boudinot ( ; May 2, 1740 \u2013 October 24, 1821) was an American Founding Father, lawyer, statesman, and early abolitionist and women's rights advocate. During the Revolutionary War, Boudinot was an intelligence officer and prisoner-of-war commissary under general George Washington, working to improve conditions for prisoners on both the American and British sides. In 1779, he was elected to the Continental Congress and then to its successor, the Congress of the Confederation, serving as President of Congress in 1782\u20131783, the final years of the war.\nAfter being elected to the first, second, and third U.S. Congresses, where he served from 1789 to 1795, Boudinot was appointed director of the United States Mint by president Washington and held the position through 1805 under the presidencies of John Adams and Thomas Jefferson. An advocate for women's rights, he led a Federalist campaign in New Jersey during the early 1790s to encourage women to become active in politics. Boudinot, a devout Presbyterian, spoke out frequently against slavery, both as a member of Congress and as a private citizen. In 1816, he helped found the American Bible Society and served as its first president for five years. Boudinot was also a member of the board of trustees of Princeton College from 1772 to 1821, the year of his death.\nEarly life and education.\nElias Boudinot was born in Philadelphia in the Province of Pennsylvania on May 2, 1740. His father, Elias Boudinot III, was a merchant and silversmith; he was a neighbor and friend of Benjamin Franklin. His mother, Mary Catherine Williams, was born in the British West Indies; her father was from Wales. Elias's paternal grandfather, Elie (sometimes called Elias) Boudinot, was the son of Jean Boudinot and Marie Suire of Marans, Aunis, France. They were a Huguenot (French Protestant) family who fled to New York about 1687 to avoid the religious persecutions of King Louis XIV.\nMary Catherine Williams and Elias Boudinot Sr. were married on August 8, 1729. Over the next twenty years, they had nine children. The first, John, was born in the British West Indies-Antigua. Of the others, only the younger Elias and his siblings Annis, Mary, and Elisha reached adulthood. Annis became one of the first published women poets in the Thirteen Colonies, and her work appeared in leading newspapers and magazines. Elisha Boudinot became Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of New Jersey.\nAfter studying and being tutored at home, Elias Boudinot went to Princeton, New Jersey to read the law as a legal apprentice to Richard Stockton, an attorney who married Elias' older sister Annis Boudinot. Stockton would also become a Founding Father as a signatory to the Declaration of Independence in 1776.\nCareer.\nIn 1760, Boudinot was admitted to the bar and began his practice in Elizabeth, New Jersey. He owned land adjacent to the road from Elizabethtown to Woodbridge Township, New Jersey.\nMarriage and family.\nAfter getting established, on April 21, 1762, Boudinot married Hannah Stockton (1736\u20131808), Richard's younger sister. They had two children, Maria Boudinot, who died at age two, and Susan Vergereau Boudinot.\nSusan married William Bradford, who became Chief Justice of Pennsylvania and Attorney General under George Washington. After her husband's death in 1795, Susan Boudinot Bradford returned to her parents' home to live. The young widow edited her father's papers. Now held by Princeton University, these provide significant insight into the events of the Revolutionary era.\nIn 1805, Elias, Hannah and Susan moved to a new home in Burlington, New Jersey. Hannah died a few years after their move, and Elias lived there for the remainder of his years.\nLater career.\nIn his later years, Boudinot invested and speculated in land. He owned large tracts in Ohio including most of Green Township in what is now the western suburbs of Cincinnati, where there is a street bearing his surname. At his death, he willed to the city of Philadelphia for parks and city needs. He was buried in the churchyard of St. Mary's Church, Burlington, New Jersey.\nPolitical career.\nBoudinot became a prominent lawyer and his practice prospered. As the revolution drew near, he aligned with the Whigs, and was elected to the New Jersey provincial assembly in 1775. In the early stages of the Revolutionary War, he was active in promoting enlistment; several times he loaned money to field commanders to purchase supplies. Boudinot helped support the activities of rebel spies.\nAfter the British occupation of New York City, spies were sent to Staten Island and Long Island to observe and report on movements of specific British garrisons and regiments.\nOn May 5, 1777, General George Washington asked Boudinot to be appointed as commissary general for prisoners. Congress through the board of war concurred. Boudinot was commissioned as a colonel in the Continental Army for this work. He served until July 1778, when competing responsibilities forced him to resign. The commissary managed enemy prisoners, and also was responsible for supplying American prisoners who were held by the British.\nIn November 1777, the New Jersey legislature named Boudinot as one of their delegates to the Second Continental Congress. His duties as Commissary prevented his attendance, so in May 1778 he resigned. By early July he had been replaced and attended his first meeting of the Congress on July 7, 1778. As a delegate, he still continued his concerns for the welfare of prisoners of war. His first term ended that year.\nIn 1781, Boudinot returned to the Congress, for a term lasting through 1783. In November 1782, he was elected as President of the Continental Congress for a one-year term. The President of Congress was a mostly ceremonial position with no real authority, but the office did require him to handle a good deal of correspondence and sign official documents. On April 15, 1783, he signed the Preliminary Articles of Peace. He also served as Secretary of Foreign affairs from June 1783 to December 1784. When the United States government was formed in 1789, Boudinot was elected from New Jersey to the US House of Representatives; he was also an unsuccessful candidate for the U.S. Senate that year. He was elected to the second and third congresses as well, where he generally supported the administration. He refused to join the expansion of affiliated groups that formed formal political parties. He was one of nine representatives to vote against the Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution.\nIn 1794, he declined to serve another term, and left Congress in early 1795. In October 1795, President George Washington appointed him as Director of the United States Mint, a position he held through succeeding administrations until he retired in 1805.\nLater public service.\nIn addition to serving in political office, Elias supported many civic, religious, and educational causes during his life. Boudinot served as one of the trustees of the College of New Jersey (later Princeton University) for nearly half a century, from 1772 until 1821. When the Continental Congress was forced to leave Philadelphia in 1783 while he was president, he moved the meetings to Princeton, where they met in the college's Nassau Hall.\nOn September 24, 1789, the House of Representatives voted to recommend the First Amendment of the newly drafted Constitution to the states for ratification. The next day, Congressman Boudinot proposed that the House and Senate jointly request of President Washington to proclaim a day of thanksgiving for \"the many signal favors of Almighty God.\" Boudinot said that he\ncould not think of letting the session pass over without offering an opportunity to all the citizens of the United States of joining, with one voice, in returning to Almighty God their sincere thanks for the many blessings he had poured down upon them.\nBoudinot was elected a member of the American Antiquarian Society in 1814.\nA devout Presbyterian, Boudinot supported missions and missionary work. He wrote \"The Age of Revelation\" in response to Thomas Paine's \"The Age of Reason.\" He was one of the founders of the American Bible Society, and after 1816 served as its president.\nHe argued for the rights of black and American Indian citizens, and sponsored students to the Board School for Indians in Connecticut. One of these, a young Cherokee named \"Gallegina Uwatie\", also known as \"Buck Watie\", stayed with him in Burlington on his way to the school. The two so impressed each other that \"Gallegina\" asked for and was given permission to adopt the statesman's name. Later known as Elias Boudinot, he was an editor of the \"Cherokee Phoenix\", the nation's first newspaper, which was published in Cherokee and English.\nArchival collections.\nThe Presbyterian Historical Society in Philadelphia has a http:// related to Boudinot from 1777 to 1821 in its holdings. The correspondence dating from 1777 to 1778 almost exclusively deals with the trading and releasing of prisoners.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10134", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10134", "title": "Electromagnetic spectrum", "text": "Range of frequencies or wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation\nThe electromagnetic spectrum is the full range of electromagnetic radiation, organized by frequency or wavelength. The spectrum is divided into separate bands, with different names for the electromagnetic waves within each band. From low to high frequency these are: radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays. The electromagnetic waves in each of these bands have different characteristics, such as how they are produced, how they interact with matter, and their practical applications.\nRadio waves, at the low-frequency end of the spectrum, have the lowest photon energy and the longest wavelengths\u2014thousands of kilometers, or more. They can be emitted and received by antennas, and pass through the atmosphere, foliage, and most building materials.\nGamma rays, at the high-frequency end of the spectrum, have the highest photon energies and the shortest wavelengths\u2014much smaller than an atomic nucleus. Gamma rays, X-rays, and extreme ultraviolet rays are called ionizing radiation because their high photon energy is able to ionize atoms, causing chemical reactions. Longer-wavelength radiation such as visible light is nonionizing; the photons do not have sufficient energy to ionize atoms.\nThroughout most of the electromagnetic spectrum, spectroscopy can be used to separate waves of different frequencies, so that the intensity of the radiation can be measured as a function of frequency or wavelength. Spectroscopy is used to study the interactions of electromagnetic waves with matter.\nHistory and discovery.\nHumans have always been aware of visible light and radiant heat but for most of history it was not known that these phenomena were connected or were representatives of a more extensive principle. The ancient Greeks recognized that light traveled in straight lines and studied some of its properties, including reflection and refraction. Light was intensively studied from the beginning of the 17th century leading to the invention of important instruments like the telescope and microscope. Isaac Newton was the first to use the term \"spectrum\" for the range of colours that white light could be split into with a prism. Starting in 1666, Newton showed that these colours were intrinsic to light and could be recombined into white light. A debate arose over whether light had a wave nature or a particle nature with Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Robert Hooke and Christiaan Huygens favouring a wave description and Newton favouring a particle description. Huygens in particular had a well developed theory from which he was able to derive the laws of reflection and refraction. Around 1801, Thomas Young measured the wavelength of a light beam with his two-slit experiment thus conclusively demonstrating that light was a wave.\nIn 1800, William Herschel discovered infrared radiation. He was studying the temperature of different colours by moving a thermometer through light split by a prism. He noticed that the highest temperature was beyond red. He theorized that this temperature change was due to \"calorific rays\", a type of light ray that could not be seen. The next year, Johann Ritter, working at the other end of the spectrum, noticed what he called \"chemical rays\" (invisible light rays that induced certain chemical reactions). These behaved similarly to visible violet light rays, but were beyond them in the spectrum. They were later renamed ultraviolet radiation.\nThe study of electromagnetism began in 1820 when Hans Christian \u00d8rsted discovered that electric currents produce magnetic fields (Oersted's law). Light was first linked to electromagnetism in 1845, when Michael Faraday noticed that the polarization of light traveling through a transparent material responded to a magnetic field (see Faraday effect). During the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell developed four partial differential equations (Maxwell's equations) for the electromagnetic field. Two of these equations predicted the possibility and behavior of waves in the field. Analyzing the speed of these theoretical waves, Maxwell realized that they must travel at a speed that was about the known speed of light. This startling coincidence in value led Maxwell to make the inference that light itself is a type of electromagnetic wave. Maxwell's equations predicted an infinite range of frequencies of electromagnetic waves, all traveling at the speed of light. This was the first indication of the existence of the entire electromagnetic spectrum.\nMaxwell's predicted waves included waves at very low frequencies compared to infrared, which in theory might be created by oscillating charges in an ordinary electrical circuit of a certain type. Attempting to prove Maxwell's equations and detect such low frequency electromagnetic radiation, in 1886, the physicist Heinrich Hertz built an apparatus to generate and detect what are now called radio waves. Hertz found the waves and was able to infer (by measuring their wavelength and multiplying it by their frequency) that they traveled at the speed of light. Hertz also demonstrated that the new radiation could be both reflected and refracted by various dielectric media, in the same manner as light. For example, Hertz was able to focus the waves using a lens made of tree resin. In a later experiment, Hertz similarly produced and measured the properties of microwaves. These new types of waves paved the way for inventions such as the wireless telegraph and the radio.\nIn 1895, Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen noticed a new type of radiation emitted during an experiment with an evacuated tube subjected to a high voltage. He called this radiation \"x-rays\" and found that they were able to travel through parts of the human body but were reflected or stopped by denser matter such as bones. Before long, many uses were found for this radiography.\nThe last portion of the electromagnetic spectrum was filled in with the discovery of gamma rays. In 1900, Paul Villard was studying the radioactive emissions of radium when he identified a new type of radiation that he at first thought consisted of particles similar to known alpha and beta particles, but with the power of being far more penetrating than either. However, in 1910, British physicist William Henry Bragg demonstrated that gamma rays are electromagnetic radiation, not particles, and in 1914, Ernest Rutherford (who had named them gamma rays in 1903 when he realized that they were fundamentally different from charged alpha and beta particles) and Edward Andrade measured their wavelengths, and found that gamma rays were similar to X-rays, but with shorter wavelengths.\nThe wave-particle debate was rekindled in 1901 when Max Planck discovered that light is absorbed only in discrete \"quanta\", now called photons, implying that light has a particle nature. This idea was made explicit by Albert Einstein in 1905, but never accepted by Planck and many other contemporaries. The modern position of science is that electromagnetic radiation has both a wave and a particle nature, the wave-particle duality. The contradictions arising from this position are still being debated by scientists and philosophers.\nRange.\nElectromagnetic waves are typically described by any of the following three physical properties: the frequency \"f\", wavelength \u03bb, or photon energy \"E\". Frequencies observed in astronomy range from (1 GeV gamma rays) down to the local plasma frequency of the ionized interstellar medium (~1\u00a0kHz). Wavelength is inversely proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma rays have very short wavelengths that are fractions of the size of atoms, whereas wavelengths on the opposite end of the spectrum can be indefinitely long. Photon energy is directly proportional to the wave frequency, so gamma ray photons have the highest energy (around a billion electron volts), while radio wave photons have very low energy (around a femtoelectronvolt). These relations are illustrated by the following equations:\n formula_1\nwhere:\nWhenever electromagnetic waves travel in a medium with matter, their wavelength is decreased. Wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, whatever medium they are traveling through, are usually quoted in terms of the \"vacuum wavelength\", although this is not always explicitly stated.\nGenerally, electromagnetic radiation is classified by wavelength into radio wave, microwave, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays and gamma rays. The behavior of EM radiation depends on its wavelength. When EM radiation interacts with single atoms and molecules, its behavior also depends on the amount of energy per quantum (photon) it carries.\nSpectroscopy can detect a much wider region of the EM spectrum than the visible wavelength range of 400\u00a0nm to 700\u00a0nm in a vacuum. A common laboratory spectroscope can detect wavelengths from 2\u00a0nm to 2500\u00a0nm. Detailed information about the physical properties of objects, gases, or even stars can be obtained from this type of device. Spectroscopes are widely used in astrophysics. For example, many hydrogen atoms emit a radio wave photon that has a wavelength of 21.12\u00a0cm. Also, frequencies of 30 Hz and below can be produced by and are important in the study of certain stellar nebulae and frequencies as high as have been detected from astrophysical sources.\nRegions.\nThe types of electromagnetic radiation are broadly classified into the following classes (regions, bands or types):\nThis classification goes in the increasing order of wavelength, which is characteristic of the type of radiation.\nThere are no precisely defined boundaries between the bands of the electromagnetic spectrum; rather they fade into each other like the bands in a rainbow. Radiation of each frequency and wavelength (or in each band) has a mix of properties of the two regions of the spectrum that bound it. For example, red light resembles infrared radiation, in that it can excite and add energy to some chemical bonds and indeed must do so to power the chemical mechanisms responsible for photosynthesis and the working of the visual system.\nIn atomic and nuclear physics, the distinction between X-rays and gamma rays is based on sources: the photons generated from nuclear decay or other nuclear and subnuclear/particle process are termed gamma rays, whereas X-rays are generated by electronic transitions involving energetically deep inner atomic electrons. Electronic transitions in muonic atoms transitions are also said to produce X-rays. In astrophysics, energies below 100keV are called X-rays and higher energies are gamma rays.\nThe region of the spectrum where electromagnetic radiation is observed may differ from the region it was emitted in due to relative velocity of the source and observer, (the Doppler shift), relative gravitational potential (gravitational redshift), or expansion of the universe (cosmological redshift). For example, the cosmic microwave background, relic blackbody radiation from the era of recombination, started out at energies around 1eV, but as has undergone enough cosmological red shift to put it into the microwave region of the spectrum for observers on Earth.\nRationale for names.\nElectromagnetic radiation interacts with matter in different ways across the spectrum. These types of interaction are so different that historically different names have been applied to different parts of the spectrum, as though these were different types of radiation. Thus, although these \"different kinds\" of electromagnetic radiation form a quantitatively continuous spectrum of frequencies and wavelengths, the spectrum remains divided for practical reasons arising from these qualitative interaction differences.\nTypes of radiation.\nRadio waves.\nRadio waves are emitted and received by antennas, which consist of conductors such as metal rod resonators. In artificial generation of radio waves, an electronic device called a transmitter generates an alternating electric current which is applied to an antenna. The oscillating electrons in the antenna generate oscillating electric and magnetic fields that radiate away from the antenna as radio waves. In reception of radio waves, the oscillating electric and magnetic fields of a radio wave couple to the electrons in an antenna, pushing them back and forth, creating oscillating currents which are applied to a radio receiver. Earth's atmosphere is mainly transparent to radio waves, except for layers of charged particles in the ionosphere which can reflect certain frequencies.\nRadio waves are extremely widely used to transmit information across distances in radio communication systems such as radio broadcasting, television, two way radios, mobile phones, communication satellites, and wireless networking. In a radio communication system, a radio frequency current is modulated with an information-bearing signal in a transmitter by varying either the amplitude, frequency or phase, and applied to an antenna. The radio waves carry the information across space to a receiver, where they are received by an antenna and the information extracted by demodulation in the receiver. Radio waves are also used for navigation in systems like Global Positioning System (GPS) and navigational beacons, and locating distant objects in radiolocation and radar. They are also used for remote control, and for industrial heating.\nThe use of the radio spectrum is strictly regulated by governments, coordinated by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) which allocates frequencies to different users for different uses.\nMicrowaves.\nMicrowaves are radio waves of short wavelength, from about 10 centimeters to one millimeter, in the SHF and EHF frequency bands. Microwave energy is produced with klystron and magnetron tubes, and with solid state devices such as Gunn and IMPATT diodes. Although they are emitted and absorbed by short antennas, they are also absorbed by polar molecules, coupling to vibrational and rotational modes, resulting in bulk heating. Unlike higher frequency waves such as infrared and visible light which are absorbed mainly at surfaces, microwaves can penetrate into materials and deposit their energy below the surface. This effect is used to heat food in microwave ovens, and for industrial heating and medical diathermy. Microwaves are the main wavelengths used in radar, and are used for satellite communication, and wireless networking technologies such as Wi-Fi. The copper cables (transmission lines) which are used to carry lower-frequency radio waves to antennas have excessive power losses at microwave frequencies, and metal pipes called waveguides are used to carry them. Although at the low end of the band the atmosphere is mainly transparent, at the upper end of the band absorption of microwaves by atmospheric gases limits practical propagation distances to a few kilometers.\nTerahertz radiation or sub-millimeter radiation is a region of the spectrum from about 100\u00a0GHz to 30 terahertz (THz) between microwaves and far infrared which can be regarded as belonging to either band. Until recently, the range was rarely studied and few sources existed for microwave energy in the so-called \"terahertz gap\", but applications such as imaging and communications are now appearing. Scientists are also looking to apply terahertz technology in the armed forces, where high-frequency waves might be directed at enemy troops to incapacitate their electronic equipment. Terahertz radiation is strongly absorbed by atmospheric gases, making this frequency range useless for long-distance communication.\nInfrared radiation.\nThe infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum covers the range from roughly 300\u00a0GHz to 400\u00a0THz (1\u00a0mm \u2013 750\u00a0nm). It can be divided into three parts:\nVisible light.\nAbove infrared in frequency comes visible light. The Sun emits its peak power in the visible region, although integrating the entire emission power spectrum through all wavelengths shows that the Sun emits slightly more infrared than visible light. By definition, visible light is the part of the EM spectrum the human eye is the most sensitive to. Visible light (and near-infrared light) is typically absorbed and emitted by electrons in molecules and atoms that move from one energy level to another. This action allows the chemical mechanisms that underlie human vision and plant photosynthesis. The light that excites the human visual system is a very small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. A rainbow shows the optical (visible) part of the electromagnetic spectrum; infrared (if it could be seen) would be located just beyond the red side of the rainbow whilst ultraviolet would appear just beyond the opposite violet end.\nElectromagnetic radiation with a wavelength between 380 nm and 760\u00a0nm (400\u2013790 terahertz) is detected by the human eye and perceived as visible light. Other wavelengths, especially near infrared (longer than 760\u00a0nm) and ultraviolet (shorter than 380\u00a0nm) are also sometimes referred to as light, especially when the visibility to humans is not relevant. White light is a combination of lights of different wavelengths in the visible spectrum. Passing white light through a prism splits it up into the several colours of light observed in the visible spectrum between 400\u00a0nm and 780\u00a0nm.\nIf radiation having a frequency in the visible region of the EM spectrum reflects off an object, say, a bowl of fruit, and then strikes the eyes, this results in visual perception of the scene. The brain's visual system processes the multitude of reflected frequencies into different shades and hues, and through this insufficiently understood psychophysical phenomenon, most people perceive a bowl of fruit.\nAt most wavelengths, however, the information carried by electromagnetic radiation is not directly detected by human senses. Natural sources produce EM radiation across the spectrum, and technology can also manipulate a broad range of wavelengths. Optical fiber transmits light that, although not necessarily in the visible part of the spectrum (it is usually infrared), can carry information. The modulation is similar to that used with radio waves.\nUltraviolet radiation.\nNext in frequency comes ultraviolet (UV). In frequency (and thus energy), UV rays sit between the violet end of the visible spectrum and the X-ray range. The UV wavelength spectrum ranges from 399\u00a0nm to 10\u00a0nm and is divided into 3 sections: UVA, UVB, and UVC.\nUV is the lowest energy range energetic enough to ionize atoms, separating electrons from them, and thus causing chemical reactions. UV, X-rays, and gamma rays are thus collectively called \"ionizing radiation\"; exposure to them can damage living tissue. UV can also cause substances to glow with visible light; this is called \"fluorescence\". UV fluorescence is used by forensics to detect any evidence like blood and urine, that is produced by a crime scene. Also UV fluorescence is used to detect counterfeit money and IDs, as they are laced with material that can glow under UV.\nAt the middle range of UV, UV rays cannot ionize but can break chemical bonds, making molecules unusually reactive. Sunburn, for example, is caused by the disruptive effects of middle range UV radiation on skin cells, which is the main cause of skin cancer. UV rays in the middle range can irreparably damage the complex DNA molecules in the cells producing thymine dimers making it a very potent mutagen. Due to skin cancer caused by UV, the sunscreen industry was invented to combat UV damage. Mid UV wavelengths are called UVB and UVB lights such as germicidal lamps are used to kill germs and also to sterilize water.\nThe Sun emits UV radiation (about 10% of its total power), including extremely short wavelength UV that could potentially destroy most life on land (ocean water would provide some protection for life there). However, most of the Sun's damaging UV wavelengths are absorbed by the atmosphere before they reach the surface. The higher energy (shortest wavelength) ranges of UV (called \"vacuum UV\") are absorbed by nitrogen and, at longer wavelengths, by simple diatomic oxygen in the air. Most of the UV in the mid-range of energy is blocked by the ozone layer, which absorbs strongly in the important 200\u2013315\u00a0nm range, the lower energy part of which is too long for ordinary dioxygen in air to absorb. This leaves less than 3% of sunlight at sea level in UV, with all of this remainder at the lower energies. The remainder is UV-A, along with some UV-B. The very lowest energy range of UV between 315\u00a0nm and visible light (called UV-A) is not blocked well by the atmosphere, but does not cause sunburn and does less biological damage. However, it is not harmless and does create oxygen radicals, mutations and skin damage.\nX-rays.\nAfter UV come X-rays, which, like the upper ranges of UV are also ionizing. However, due to their higher energies, X-rays can also interact with matter by means of the Compton effect. Hard X-rays have shorter wavelengths than soft X-rays and as they can pass through many substances with little absorption, they can be used to 'see through' objects with 'thicknesses' less than that equivalent to a few meters of water. One notable use is diagnostic X-ray imaging in medicine (a process known as radiography). X-rays are useful as probes in high-energy physics. In astronomy, the accretion disks around neutron stars and black holes emit X-rays, enabling studies of these phenomena. X-rays are also emitted by stellar corona and are strongly emitted by some types of nebulae. However, X-ray telescopes must be placed outside the Earth's atmosphere to see astronomical X-rays, since the great depth of the atmosphere of Earth is opaque to X-rays (with areal density of 1000 g/cm2), equivalent to 10 meters thickness of water. This is an amount sufficient to block almost all astronomical X-rays (and also astronomical gamma rays\u2014see below).\nGamma rays.\nAfter hard X-rays come gamma rays, which were discovered by Paul Ulrich Villard in 1900. These are the most energetic photons, having no defined lower limit to their wavelength. In astronomy they are valuable for studying high-energy objects or regions, however as with X-rays this can only be done with telescopes outside the Earth's atmosphere. Gamma rays are used experimentally by physicists for their penetrating ability and are produced by a number of radioisotopes. They are used for irradiation of foods and seeds for sterilization, and in medicine they are occasionally used in radiation cancer therapy. More commonly, gamma rays are used for diagnostic imaging in nuclear medicine, an example being PET scans. The wavelength of gamma rays can be measured with high accuracy through the effects of Compton scattering.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10136", "revid": "28365693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10136", "title": "Expert system", "text": "Computer system emulating the decision-making ability of a human expert\nIn artificial intelligence (AI), an expert system is a computer system emulating the decision-making ability of a human expert.\nExpert systems are designed to solve complex problems by reasoning through bodies of knowledge, represented mainly as if\u2013then rules rather than through conventional procedural programming code. Expert systems were among the first truly successful forms of AI software. They were created in the 1970s and then proliferated in the 1980s, being then widely regarded as the future of AI \u2014 before the advent of successful artificial neural networks.\nAn expert system is divided into two subsystems: 1) a \"knowledge base\", which represents facts and rules; and 2) an \"inference engine\", which applies the rules to the known facts to deduce new facts, and can include explaining and debugging abilities.\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nSoon after the dawn of modern computers in the late 1940s and early 1950s, researchers started realizing the immense potential these machines had for modern society. One of the first challenges was to make such machines able to \u201cthink\u201d like humans \u2013 in particular, making these machines able to make important decisions the way humans do. The medical\u2013healthcare field presented the tantalizing challenge of enabling these machines to make medical diagnostic decisions.\nThus, in the late 1950s, right after the information age had fully arrived, researchers started experimenting with the prospect of using computer technology to emulate human decision making. For example, biomedical researchers started creating computer-aided systems for diagnostic applications in medicine and biology. These early diagnostic systems used patients\u2019 symptoms and laboratory test results as inputs to generate a diagnostic outcome.\nThese systems were often described as the early forms of expert systems. However, researchers realized that there were significant limits when using traditional methods such as flow charts,\n statistical pattern matching, or probability theory.\nFormal introduction and later developments.\nThis previous situation gradually led to the development of expert systems, which used knowledge-based approaches. These expert systems in medicine were the MYCIN expert system, the Internist-I expert system and later, in the middle of the 1980s, the CADUCEUS.\nExpert systems were formally introduced around 1965 by the Stanford Heuristic Programming Project led by Edward Feigenbaum, who is sometimes termed the \"father of expert systems\"; other key early contributors were Bruce Buchanan and Randall Davis. The Stanford researchers tried to identify domains where expertise was highly valued and complex, such as diagnosing infectious diseases (Mycin) and identifying unknown organic molecules (Dendral). The idea that \"intelligent systems derive their power from the knowledge they possess rather than from the specific formalisms and inference schemes they use\" \u2013 as Feigenbaum said \u2013 was at the time a significant step forward, since the past research had been focused on heuristic computational methods, culminating in attempts to develop very general-purpose problem solvers (foremostly the conjunct work of Allen Newell and Herbert Simon). Expert systems became some of the first truly successful forms of artificial intelligence (AI) software.\nResearch on expert systems was also active in Europe. In the US, the focus tended to be on the use of production rule systems, first on systems hard coded on top of Lisp programming environments and then on expert system shells developed by vendors such as Intellicorp. In Europe, research focused more on systems and expert systems shells developed in Prolog. The advantage of Prolog systems was that they employed a form of rule-based programming that was based on formal logic.\nOne such early expert system shell based on Prolog was APES.\nOne of the first use cases of Prolog and APES was in the legal area namely, the encoding of a large portion of the British Nationality Act. Lance Elliot wrote: \"The British Nationality Act was passed in 1981 and shortly thereafter was used as a means of showcasing the efficacy of using Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques and technologies, doing so to explore how the at-the-time newly enacted statutory law might be encoded into a computerized logic-based formalization. A now oft-cited research paper entitled \u201cThe British Nationality Act as a Logic Program\u201d was published in 1986 and subsequently became a hallmark for subsequent work in AI and the law.\"\nIn the 1980s, expert systems proliferated. Universities offered expert system courses and two-thirds of the Fortune 500 companies applied the technology in daily business activities. Interest was international with the Fifth Generation Computer Systems project in Japan and increased research funding in Europe.\nIn 1981, the first IBM PC, with the PC DOS operating system, was introduced. The imbalance between the low cost of the relatively powerful chips in the PC, compared to the much more expensive cost of processing power in the mainframes that dominated the corporate IT world at the time, created a new type of architecture for corporate computing, termed the client\u2013server model. Calculations and reasoning could be performed at a fraction of the price of a mainframe using a PC. This model also enabled business units to bypass corporate IT departments and directly build their own applications. As a result, client-server had a tremendous impact on the expert systems market. Expert systems were already outliers in much of the business world, requiring new skills that many IT departments did not have and were not eager to develop. They were a natural fit for new PC-based shells that promised to put application development into the hands of end users and experts. Until then, the main development environment for expert systems had been high end Lisp machines from Xerox, Symbolics, and Texas Instruments. With the rise of the PC and client-server computing, vendors such as Intellicorp and Inference Corporation shifted their priorities to developing PC-based tools. Also, new vendors, often financed by venture capital started appearing regularly.\nThe first expert system to be used in a design capacity for a large-scale product was the Synthesis of Integral Design (SID) software program, developed in 1982. Written in Lisp, SID generated 93% of the VAX 9000 CPU logic gates. Input to the software was a set of rules created by several expert logic designers. SID expanded the rules and generated software logic synthesis routines many times the size of the rules themselves. Surprisingly, the combination of these rules resulted in an overall design that exceeded the capabilities of the experts themselves, and in many cases out-performed the human counterparts. While some rules contradicted others, top-level control parameters for speed and area provided the tie-breaker. The program was highly controversial but used nevertheless due to project budget constraints. It was terminated by logic designers after the VAX 9000 project completion.\nDuring the years before the middle of the 1970s, the expectations of what expert systems can accomplish in many fields tended to be extremely optimistic. At the start of these early studies, researchers were hoping to develop entirely automatic (i.e., completely computerized) expert systems. The expectations of people of what computers can do were frequently too idealistic. This situation radically changed after Richard M. Karp published his breakthrough paper: \u201cReducibility among Combinatorial Problems\u201d in the early 1970s. Thanks to Karp's work, together with other scholars, like Hubert L. Dreyfus, it became clear that there are certain limits and possibilities when one designs computer algorithms. His findings describe what computers can do and what they cannot do. Many of the computational problems related to this type of expert systems have certain pragmatic limits. These findings laid down the groundwork that led to the next developments in the field.\nIn the 1990s and beyond, the term \"expert system\" and the idea of a standalone AI system mostly dropped from the IT lexicon. There are two interpretations of this. One is that \"expert systems failed\": the IT world moved on because expert systems did not deliver on their over hyped promise. The other is the mirror opposite, that expert systems were simply victims of their success: as IT professionals grasped concepts such as rule engines, such tools migrated from being standalone tools for developing special purpose \"expert\" systems, to being one of many standard tools. Other researchers suggest that Expert Systems caused inter-company power struggles when the IT organization lost its exclusivity in software modifications to users or Knowledge Engineers.\nIn the first decade of the 2000s, there was a \"resurrection\" for the technology, while using the term \"rule-based systems\", with significant success stories and adoption. Many of the leading major business application suite vendors (such as SAP, Siebel, and Oracle) integrated expert system abilities into their suite of products as a way to specify business logic. Rule engines are no longer simply for defining the rules an expert would use but for any type of complex, volatile, and critical business logic; they often go hand in hand with business process automation and integration environments.\nCurrent approaches to expert systems.\nThe limits of prior type of expert systems prompted researchers to develop new types of approaches. They have developed more efficient, flexible, and powerful methods to simulate the human decision-making process. Some of the approaches that researchers have developed are based on new methods of artificial intelligence (AI), and in particular in machine learning and data mining approaches with a feedback mechanism. Recurrent neural networks often take advantage of such mechanisms. Related is the discussion on the disadvantages section.\nModern systems can incorporate new knowledge more easily and thus update themselves easily. Such systems can generalize from existing knowledge better and deal with vast amounts of complex data. Related is the subject of big data here. Sometimes these types of expert systems are called \"intelligent systems.\"\nMore recently, it can be argued that expert systems have moved into the area of business rules and business rules management systems.\nSoftware architecture.\nAn expert system is an example of a knowledge-based system. Expert systems were the first commercial systems to use a knowledge-based architecture. In general view, an expert system includes the following components: a knowledge base, an inference engine, an explanation facility, a knowledge acquisition facility, and a user interface.\nThe knowledge base represents facts about the world. In early expert systems such as Mycin and Dendral, these facts were represented mainly as flat assertions about variables. In later expert systems developed with commercial shells, the knowledge base took on more structure and used concepts from object-oriented programming. The world was represented as classes, subclasses, and instances and assertions were replaced by values of object instances. The rules worked by querying and asserting values of the objects.\nThe inference engine is an automated reasoning system that evaluates the current state of the knowledge-base, applies relevant rules, and then asserts new knowledge into the knowledge base. The inference engine may also include abilities for explanation, so that it can explain to a user the chain of reasoning used to arrive at a particular conclusion by tracing back over the firing of rules that resulted in the assertion.\nThere are mainly two modes for an inference engine: forward chaining and backward chaining. The different approaches are dictated by whether the inference engine is being driven by the antecedent (left hand side) or the consequent (right hand side) of the rule. In forward chaining an antecedent fires and asserts the consequent. For example, consider the following rule:\nformula_1\nA simple example of forward chaining would be to assert Man(Socrates) to the system and then trigger the inference engine. It would match R1 and assert Mortal(Socrates) into the knowledge base.\nBackward chaining is a bit less straight forward. In backward chaining the system looks at possible conclusions and works backward to see if they might be true. So if the system was trying to determine if Mortal(Socrates) is true it would find R1 and query the knowledge base to see if Man(Socrates) is true. One of the early innovations of expert systems shells was to integrate inference engines with a user interface. This could be especially powerful with backward chaining. If the system needs to know a particular fact but does not, then it can simply generate an input screen and ask the user if the information is known. So in this example, it could use R1 to ask the user if Socrates was a Man and then use that new information accordingly.\nThe use of rules to explicitly represent knowledge also enabled explanation abilities. In the simple example above if the system had used R1 to assert that Socrates was Mortal and a user wished to understand why Socrates was mortal they could query the system and the system would look back at the rules which fired to cause the assertion and present those rules to the user as an explanation. In English, if the user asked \"Why is Socrates Mortal?\" the system would reply \"Because all men are mortal and Socrates is a man\". A significant area for research was the generation of explanations from the knowledge base in natural English rather than simply by showing the more formal but less intuitive rules.\nAs expert systems evolved, many new techniques were incorporated into various types of inference engines. Some of the most important of these were:\nAdvantages.\nThe goal of knowledge-based systems is to make the critical information required for the system to work explicit rather than implicit. In a traditional computer program, the logic is embedded in code that can typically only be reviewed by an IT specialist. With an expert system, the goal was to specify the rules in a format that was intuitive and easily understood, reviewed, and even edited by domain experts rather than IT experts. The benefits of this explicit knowledge representation were rapid development and ease of maintenance.\nEase of maintenance is the most obvious benefit. This was achieved in two ways. First, by removing the need to write conventional code, many of the normal problems that can be caused by even small changes to a system could be avoided with expert systems. Essentially, the logical flow of the program (at least at the highest level) was simply a given for the system, simply invoke the inference engine. This also was a reason for the second benefit: rapid prototyping. With an expert system shell it was possible to enter a few rules and have a prototype developed in days rather than the months or year typically associated with complex IT projects.\nA claim for expert system shells that was often made was that they removed the need for trained programmers and that experts could develop systems themselves. In reality, this was seldom if ever true. While the rules for an expert system were more comprehensible than typical computer code, they still had a formal syntax where a misplaced comma or other character could cause havoc as with any other computer language. Also, as expert systems moved from prototypes in the lab to deployment in the business world, issues of integration and maintenance became far more critical. Inevitably demands to integrate with, and take advantage of, large legacy databases and systems arose. To accomplish this, integration required the same skills as any other type of system.\nSumming up the benefits of using expert systems, the following can be highlighted:\nDisadvantages.\nThe most common disadvantage cited for expert systems in the academic literature is the knowledge acquisition problem. Obtaining the time of domain experts for any software application is always difficult, but for expert systems it was especially difficult because the experts were by definition highly valued and in constant demand by the organization. As a result of this problem, a great deal of research in the later years of expert systems was focused on tools for knowledge acquisition, to help automate the process of designing, debugging, and maintaining rules defined by experts. However, when looking at the life-cycle of expert systems in actual use, other problems \u2013 essentially the same problems as those of any other large system \u2013 seem at least as critical as knowledge acquisition: integration, access to large databases, and performance.\nPerformance could be especially problematic because early expert systems were built using tools (such as earlier Lisp versions) that interpreted code expressions without first compiling them. This provided a powerful development environment, but with the drawback that it was virtually impossible to match the efficiency of the fastest compiled languages (such as C). System and database integration were difficult for early expert systems because the tools were mostly in languages and platforms that were neither familiar to nor welcome in most corporate IT environments \u2013 programming languages such as Lisp and Prolog, and hardware platforms such as Lisp machines and personal computers. As a result, much effort in the later stages of expert system tool development was focused on integrating with legacy environments such as COBOL and large database systems, and on porting to more standard platforms. These issues were resolved mainly by the client\u2013server paradigm shift, as PCs were gradually accepted in the IT environment as a legitimate platform for serious business system development and as affordable minicomputer servers provided the processing power needed for AI applications.\nAnother major challenge of expert systems emerges when the size of the knowledge base increases. This causes the processing complexity to increase. For instance, when an expert system with 100 million rules was envisioned as the ultimate expert system, it became obvious that such system would be too complex and it would face too many computational problems. An inference engine would have to be able to process huge numbers of rules to reach a decision.\nHow to verify that decision rules are consistent with each other is also a challenge when there are too many rules. Usually such problem leads to a satisfiability (SAT) formulation. This is a well-known NP-complete problem Boolean satisfiability problem. If we assume only binary variables, say n of them, and then the corresponding search space is of size 2formula_2. Thus, the search space can grow exponentially.\nThere are also questions on how to prioritize the use of the rules to operate more efficiently, or how to resolve ambiguities (for instance, if there are too many else-if sub-structures within one rule) and so on.\nOther problems are related to the overfitting and overgeneralization effects when using known facts and trying to generalize to other cases not described explicitly in the knowledge base. Such problems exist with methods that employ machine learning approaches too.\nAnother problem related to the knowledge base is how to make updates of its knowledge quickly and effectively. Also how to add a new piece of knowledge (i.e., where to add it among many rules) is challenging. Modern approaches that rely on machine learning methods are easier in this regard.\nBecause of the above challenges, it became clear that new approaches to AI were required instead of rule-based technologies. These new approaches are based on the use of machine learning techniques, along with the use of feedback mechanisms.\nThe key challenges that expert systems in medicine (if one considers computer-aided diagnostic systems as modern expert systems), and perhaps in other application domains, include issues related to aspects such as: big data, existing regulations, healthcare practice, various algorithmic issues, and system assessment.\nFinally, the following disadvantages of using expert systems can be summarized:\nApplications.\nHayes-Roth divides expert systems applications into 10 categories illustrated in the following table. The example applications were not in the original Hayes-Roth table, and some of them arose well afterward. Any application that is not footnoted is described in the Hayes-Roth book. Also, while these categories provide an intuitive framework to describe the space of expert systems applications, they are not rigid categories, and in some cases an application may show traits of more than one category.\nHearsay was an early attempt at solving voice recognition through an expert systems approach. For the most part this category of expert systems was not all that successful. Hearsay and all interpretation systems are essentially pattern recognition systems\u2014looking for patterns in noisy data. In the case of Hearsay recognizing phonemes in an audio stream. Other early examples were analyzing sonar data to detect Russian submarines. These kinds of systems proved much more amenable to a neural network AI solution than a rule-based approach.\nCADUCEUS and MYCIN were medical diagnosis systems. The user describes their symptoms to the computer as they would to a doctor and the computer returns a medical diagnosis.\nDendral was a tool to study hypothesis formation in the identification of organic molecules. The general problem it solved\u2014designing a solution given a set of constraints\u2014was one of the most successful areas for early expert systems applied to business domains such as salespeople configuring Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) VAX computers and mortgage loan application development.\nSMH.PAL is an expert system for the assessment of students with multiple disabilities.\nGARVAN-ES1 was a medical expert system, developed at the Garvan Institute of Medical Research, that provided automated clinical diagnostic comments on endocrine reports from a pathology laboratory. It was one of the first medical expert systems to go into routine clinical use internationally and the first expert system to be used for diagnosis daily in Australia. The system was written in \"C\" and ran on a PDP-11 in 64K of memory. It had 661 rules that were compiled; not interpreted.\nMistral is an expert system to monitor dam safety, developed in the 1990s by Ismes (Italy). It gets data from an automatic monitoring system and performs a diagnosis of the state of the dam. Its first copy, installed in 1992 on the Ridracoli Dam (Italy), is still operational 24/7/365. It has been installed on several dams in Italy and abroad (e.g., Itaipu Dam in Brazil), and on landslide sites under the name of Eydenet, and on monuments under the name of Kaleidos. Mistral is a registered trade mark of CESI.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10137", "revid": "29210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10137", "title": "Evolution of an idea", "text": ""}
{"id": "10138", "revid": "38934791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10138", "title": "Earl of Abercorn", "text": ""}
{"id": "10139", "revid": "770058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10139", "title": "Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford", "text": "English peer and courtier (1550\u20131604)\nEdward de\u00a0Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford (; 12 April 1550\u00a0\u2013 24 June 1604), was an English peer and courtier of the Elizabethan era. Oxford was heir to the second oldest earldom in the kingdom, a court favourite for a time, a sought-after patron of the arts, and noted by his contemporaries as a lyric poet and court playwright, but his volatile temperament precluded him from attaining any courtly or governmental responsibility and contributed to the dissipation of his estate.\nEdward de Vere was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and Margery Golding. After the death of his father in 1562, he became a ward of Queen Elizabeth I and was sent to live in the household of her principal advisor, Sir William Cecil. He married Cecil's daughter, Anne, with whom he had five children. Oxford was estranged from her for five years and refused to acknowledge he was the father of their first child.\nA champion jouster, Oxford travelled widely throughout France and the many states of Italy. He was among the first to compose love poetry at the Elizabethan court and was praised as a playwright, though none of the plays known as his survive. A stream of dedications praised Oxford for his generous patronage of literary, religious, musical, and medical works, and he patronised both adult and boy acting companies, as well as musicians, tumblers, acrobats and performing animals.\nHe fell out of favour with the Queen in the early 1580s and was exiled from court and briefly imprisoned in the Tower of London when his mistress, Anne Vavasour, one of Elizabeth's maids of honour, gave birth to his son in the palace. Vavasour was also incarcerated and the affair instigated violent street brawls between Oxford and her kinsmen. He was reconciled to the Queen in May 1583 at Theobalds, but all opportunities for advancement had been lost. In 1586, the Queen granted Oxford \u00a31,000 annually (\u00a3274,359 in 2024) to relieve the financial distress caused by his extravagance and the sale of his income-producing lands for ready money. After the death of his first wife, Anne Cecil, Oxford married Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's maids of honour, with whom he had an heir, Henry de Vere, Viscount Bulbeck (later 18th Earl of Oxford). Oxford died in 1604, having spent the entirety of his inherited estates.\nSince the 1920s, Oxford has been among the most prominent alternative candidates proposed for authorship of Shakespeare's works.\nFamily and childhood.\nEdward de\u00a0Vere was born heir to the second-oldest extant earldom in England at the de\u00a0Vere ancestral home, Hedingham Castle, in Essex, northeast of London. He was the only son of John de Vere, 16th Earl of Oxford, and his second wife, Margery Golding and was probably named to honour Edward VI, from whom he received a gilded christening cup. He had an older half-sister, Katherine, the child of his father's first marriage to Dorothy Neville, and a younger sister, Mary de Vere. Both his parents had established court connections: the 16th Earl accompanying Princess Elizabeth from her house arrest at Hatfield to the throne, and the countess being appointed a maid of honour in 1559.\nBefore his father's death, Edward de\u00a0Vere was styled \"Viscount Bulbeck\", or \"Bolebec\", and was raised in the English reformed faith. Like many children of the nobility, he was raised by surrogate parents, in his case in the household of Sir Thomas Smith. At eight he entered Queens' College, Cambridge, as an \"impubes\", or immature fellow-commoner, later transferring to St\u00a0John's. Thomas Fowle, a former fellow of St John's College, Cambridge, was paid \u00a310 annually as de\u00a0Vere's tutor.\nHis father died on 3 August 1562, shortly after making his will. Because he held lands from the Crown by knight service, his son became a royal ward of the Queen and was placed in the household of Sir William Cecil, her secretary of state and chief advisor. At 12, de\u00a0Vere had become the 17th\u00a0Earl of Oxford, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, and heir to an estate whose annual income, though assessed at approximately \u00a32,500, may have run as high as \u00a33,500 (\u00a3 as of 2023).\nWardship.\nWhile living at the Cecil House, Oxford's daily studies consisted of dancing instruction, French, Latin, cosmography, writing exercises, drawing, and common prayers. During his first year at Cecil House, he was briefly tutored by Laurence Nowell, the antiquarian and Anglo-Saxon scholar. In a letter to Cecil, Nowell explains: \"I clearly see that my work for the Earl of Oxford cannot be much longer required\", and his departure after eight\u00a0months has been interpreted as either a sign of the thirteen-year-old Oxford's intractability as a pupil, or an indication that his precocity surpassed Nowell's ability to instruct him. In May\u00a01564 Arthur Golding, in his dedication to his \"Th' Abridgement of the Histories of Trogus Pompeius\", attributed to his young nephew an interest in ancient history and contemporary events.\nIn 1563, Oxford's older half-sister, Katherine, then Lady Windsor, challenged the legitimacy of the marriage of de\u00a0Vere's parents in the Ecclesiastical court. His uncle Golding argued that the Archbishop of Canterbury should halt the proceedings since a proceeding against a ward of the Queen could not be brought without prior licence from the Court of Wards and Liveries.\nSome time before October\u00a01563, Oxford's mother married secondly Charles Tyrrell, a Gentleman Pensioner. In May\u00a01565 she wrote to Cecil, urging that the money from family properties set aside by Oxford's father's will for his use during his minority should be entrusted to herself and other family friends, to protect it and to ensure that Oxford would be able to meet the expenses of furnishing his household and suing his livery when he reached his majority; this last would end his wardship, through cancelling his debt with the Court of Wards, and convey to him the powers attached to his titles. There is no evidence that Cecil ever replied to her request. She died three years later, and was buried beside her first husband at Earls Colne. Oxford's stepfather, Charles Tyrrell, died in March 1570.\nIn August\u00a01564 Oxford was among 17\u00a0noblemen, knights, and esquires in the Queen's entourage who were awarded the honorary degree of Master of Arts by the University of Cambridge, and he was awarded another by the University of Oxford on a Royal progress in 1566. His future father-in-law, William Cecil, also received honorary degrees of Master of Arts on the same progresses. There is no evidence that Oxford ever received a Bachelor of Arts degree. In February\u00a01567 he was admitted to Gray's Inn to study law.\nOn 23 July 1567, while practising fencing in the backyard of Cecil House in the Strand, the seventeen-year-old Oxford killed Thomas Brincknell, an under-cook in the Cecil household. At the coroner's inquest the next day, the jury, which included Oxford's servant, and Cecil's prot\u00e9g\u00e9, the future historian Raphael Holinshed, found that Brincknell, drunk, had deliberately committed suicide by running onto Oxford's blade. As a suicide, he was not buried in consecrated ground, and all his worldly possessions were confiscated, leaving his pregnant wife destitute. She delivered a stillborn child shortly after Brinknell's death. Cecil later wrote that he attempted to have the jury find that Oxford had acted in self-defence.\nRecords of books purchased for Oxford in 1569 attest to his continued interest in history, as well as literature and philosophy. Among them were editions of a gilt Geneva Bible, Chaucer, Plutarch, two books in Italian, and folio editions of Cicero and Plato. In the same year Thomas Underdown dedicated his translation of the \"\u00c6thiopian History\" of Heliodorus to Oxford, praising his 'haughty courage', 'great skill' and 'sufficiency of learning'. In the winter of 1570, Oxford made the acquaintance of the mathematician and astrologer John Dee and became interested in occultism, studying magic and conjuring.\nIn 1569, Oxford received his first vote for membership in the Order of the Garter, but never attained the honour in spite of his high rank and office. In November of that year, Oxford petitioned Cecil for a foreign military posting. Although the Roman Catholic Revolt of the Northern Earls had broken out that year, Elizabeth refused to grant the request. Cecil eventually obtained a position for Oxford under the Earl of Sussex in a Scottish campaign the following spring. He and Sussex became staunch mutual supporters at court.\nComing of age.\nOn 12 April 1571, Oxford attained his majority and took his seat in the House of Lords. Great expectations attended his coming of age; Sir\u00a0George Buck recalled predictions that 'he was much more like ... to acquire a new erldome then to wast &amp; lose an old erldom', a prophecy that was never fulfilled.\nAlthough formal certification of his freedom from Burghley's control was deferred until May\u00a01572, Oxford was finally granted the income of \u00a3666 which his father had intended him to have earlier, but properties set aside to pay his father's debts would not come his way for another decade. During his minority as the Queen's ward, one-third of his estate had already reverted to the Crown, much of which Elizabeth had long since settled on Robert Dudley. Elizabeth demanded a further payment of \u00a33,000 for overseeing the wardship and a further \u00a34,000 for suing his livery. Oxford pledged double the amount if he failed to pay when it fell due, effectively risking a total obligation of \u00a321,000.\nBy 1571, Oxford was a court favourite of Elizabeth's. In May, he participated in the three-day tilt, tourney and barrier at which, although he did not win, he was given chief honours in celebration of the attainment of his majority, his prowess winning admiring comments from spectators. In August, Oxford attended Paul de Foix, who had come to England to negotiate a marriage between the Protestant Queen Elizabeth and the Catholic Prince Fran\u00e7ois de France, duc d'Anjou, the youngest brother of King Henry III of France of the House of Valois-Angoul\u00eame. The marriage had been proposed in 1572 as part of the negotiations between England and France to break the power of Spain. In November 1579 the husband of Oxford's first cousin Anne Vere, John Stubbs, and William Page had their right hand publicly cut off for the pamphlet critical of the Queen's proposed marriage to Prince Fran\u00e7ois and therefore judged seditious.\nOxford's published poetry dates from this period and, along with Edward Dyer he was one of the first courtiers to introduce vernacular verse to the court.\nMarriage.\nIn 1562, the 16th Earl of Oxford had contracted with Henry Hastings, 3rd Earl of Huntingdon, for his son Edward to marry one of Huntingdon's sisters; when he reached the age of eighteen, he was to choose either Elizabeth or Mary Hastings. However, after the death of the 16th Earl, the indenture was allowed to lapse. Elizabeth Hastings later married Edward Somerset, while Mary Hastings died unmarried.\nIn the summer of 1571, Oxford declared an interest in Cecil's 14\u00a0year-old daughter, Anne, and received the queen's consent to the marriage. Anne had been pledged to Philip Sidney two years earlier, but after a year of negotiations Sidney's father, Sir Henry, was declining in the Queen's favour and Cecil suspected financial difficulties. In addition, Cecil had been elevated to the peerage as Lord Burghley in February\u00a01571, thus elevating his daughter's rank, so the negotiations were cancelled. Cecil was displeased with the arrangement, given his daughter's age compared to Oxford's, and had entertained the idea of marrying her to the Earl of Rutland instead. The marriage was deferred until Anne was fifteen and finally took place at the Palace of Whitehall on 16 December 1571, in a triple wedding with that of Lady\u00a0Elizabeth Hastings and Edward Somerset, Lord Herbert, and Edward Sutton, 4th Baron Dudley and bride, Mary Howard, with the Queen in attendance.\nThe tying of two young English noblemen of great fortune into Protestant families was not lost on Elizabeth's Catholic enemies. Burghley gave Oxford for his daughter's dowry land worth \u00a3800, and a cash settlement of \u00a33,000. This amount was equal to Oxford's livery fees and was probably intended to be used as such, but the money vanished without a trace.\nOxford assigned Anne a jointure of some \u00a3669, but even though he was of age and a married man, he was still not in possession of his inheritance. After finally paying the Crown the \u00a34,000 it demanded for his livery, he was finally licensed to enter on his lands in May 1572. He was entitled to yearly revenues from his estates and the office of Lord Great Chamberlain of approximately \u00a32,250, but he was not entitled to the income from his mother's jointure until after her death, nor to the income from certain estates set aside until 1583 to pay his father's debts. In addition, the fines assessed against Oxford in the Court of Wards for his wardship, marriage, and livery already totalled some \u00a33,306. To guarantee payment, he entered into bonds to the Court totalling \u00a311,000, and two further private bonds for \u00a36,000 apiece.\nIn 1572, Oxford's first cousin and closest relative, the Duke of Norfolk, was found guilty of a Catholic conspiracy against Elizabeth and was executed for treason. Oxford had earlier petitioned both the Queen and Burghley on the condemned Norfolk's behalf, to no avail, and it was claimed in a \"murky petition from an unidentified woman\" that he had plotted to provide a ship to assist his cousin's escape attempt to Spain.\nThe following summer, Oxford planned to travel to Ireland; at this point, his debts were estimated at a minimum of \u00a36,000.\nIn the summer of 1574, Elizabeth admonished Oxford \"for his unthriftyness\", and on 1 July he bolted to the continent without permission, travelling to Calais with Lord Edward Seymour, and then to Flanders, \"carrying a great sum of money with him\". Coming as it did during a time of expected hostilities with Spain, Mary, Queen of Scots, interpreted his flight as an indication of his Catholic sympathies, as did the Catholic rebels then living on the continent. Burghley, however, assured the queen that Oxford was loyal, and she sent two Gentlemen Pensioners to summon him back, under threat of heavy penalties. Oxford returned to England by the end of the month and was in London on the 28th. His request for a place on the Privy Council was rejected, but the queen's anger was abated and she promised him a licence to travel to Paris, Germany, and Italy on his pledge of good behaviour.\nForeign travel.\nIn January 1575 Elizabeth issued a licence to Oxford to travel, and provided him with letters of introduction to foreign monarchs. Prior to his departure, he entered into two indentures. In the first contract, he sold his manors in Cornwall, Staffordshire and Wiltshire to three trustees for \u00a36,000. \nIn the second, to prevent his estates passing by default to his sister Mary in the event of his dying abroad without heirs, he entailed the lands of the earldom on his first cousin, Hugh Vere. The indenture also provided for payment of debts amounting to \u00a39,096, \u00a33,457 of which was still owed to the Queen as expenses for his wardship.\nOxford left England in the first week of February 1575, and a month later was presented to the King and Queen of France. News that his new wife, Anne, was pregnant had reached him in Paris, and he sent her many extravagant presents in the coming months. But somewhere along the way, his mind was poisoned against Anne and the Cecils, and he became convinced that the expected child was not his. The elder Cecils loudly voiced their outrage at the rumours, which probably worsened the situation. In mid-March he travelled to Strasbourg, and then made his way to Venice, via Milan. Although his daughter, Elizabeth, was born at the beginning of July, for unexplained reasons Oxford did not learn of her birth until late September.\nOxford remained in Italy for a year, during which he was evidently captivated by Italian fashions in clothing, jewellery and cosmetics. He is recorded by John Stow as having introduced various Italian luxury items to the English court which immediately became fashionable, such as embroidered or trimmed scented gloves. Elizabeth had a pair of decorated gloves scented with perfume that for many years was known as the \"Earl of Oxford's perfume\". Lacking evidence, his interest in higher Italian culture, its literature, music and visual art, is less sure. His only recorded judgement about the country itself was unenthusiastic. In a letter to Burghley he wrote, \".\"\nIn January\u00a01576 Oxford wrote to Lord Burghley from Siena about complaints that had reached him about his creditors' demands, which included the Queen and his sister, and directing that more of his land be sold to pay them. He left Venice in March, intending to return home by way of Lyons and Paris; although one later report has him as far south as Palermo in Sicily. At this point the Italian financier Benedict Spinola had lent Oxford over \u00a34,000 for his 15-month-long continental tour, while in England over a hundred tradesmen were seeking settlement of debts totalling thousands of pounds.\nOn Oxford's return across the Channel in April 1576, his ship was seized by pirates from Flushing, who took his possessions, stripped him to his shirt, and might have murdered him had not one of them recognized him.\nQuarrels, plots and scandals.\nOxford had sold his inherited lands in Cornwall, Staffordshire, and Wiltshire prior to his continental tour. On his return to England in 1576 he sold his manors in Devonshire; by the end of 1578 he had sold at least seven more.\nAlso upon his return, Oxford refused to live with his wife and took rooms at Charing Cross. Aside from the unspoken suspicion that Elizabeth was not his child, Burghley's papers reveal a flood of bitter complaints by Oxford against the Cecil family. Upon the Queen's request, he allowed his wife to attend the Queen at court, but only when he was not present, and he insisted that she not attempt to speak to him. He also stipulated that Burghley must make no further appeals to him on Anne's behalf. He was estranged from Anne for five\u00a0years.\nIn February\u00a01577 it was rumoured that Oxford's sister Mary would marry Lord Gerald Fitzgerald (1559\u20131580), but by 2 July her name was linked with that of Peregrine Bertie, later Lord Willoughby d'Eresby. Bertie's mother, the Duchess of Suffolk, wrote to Lord Burghley that \"my wise son has gone very far with my Lady Mary Vere, I fear too far to turn\". Both the Duchess and her husband Richard Bertie first opposed the marriage, and the Queen initially withheld her consent. Oxford's own opposition to the match was so vehement that for some time Mary's prospective husband feared for his life. On 15 December the Duchess of Suffolk wrote to Burghley describing a plan she and Mary had devised to arrange a meeting between Oxford and his daughter. Whether the scheme came to fruition is unknown. Mary and Bertie were married sometime before March of the following year.\nIn 1577 Oxford invested \u00a325 in the second of Martin Frobisher's expeditions in search of the Northwest Passage. In July\u00a01577, he asked the Crown for the grant of Castle Rising, which had been forfeited to the Crown due to his cousin Norfolk's attainder in 1572. As soon as it was granted to him, he sold it, along with two other manors, and sank some \u00a33,000 into Frobisher's third expedition. The 'gold' ore brought back turned out to be worthless, and Oxford lost the entire investment.\nIn the summer of 1578, Oxford attended the Queen's progress through East Anglia. The royal party stayed at Lord Henry Howard's residence at Audley End. A contretemps occurred during the progress in mid-August when the Queen twice asked Oxford to dance before the French ambassadors, who were in England to negotiate a marriage between the 46-year-old English queen and the younger brother of Henri\u00a0III of France, the 24\u00a0year-old Duke of Anjou. Oxford refused, on the grounds that he \"would not give pleasure to Frenchmen\".\nIn April 1578, the Spanish ambassador, Bernardino de\u00a0Mendoza, had written to King\u00a0Philip II of Spain that it had been proposed that if Anjou were to travel to England to negotiate his marriage to the Queen, Oxford, Surrey, and Windsor should be hostages for his safe return. Anjou himself did not arrive in England until the end of August, but his ambassadors were already in England. Oxford was sympathetic to the proposed marriage; Leicester and his nephew Philip Sidney were adamantly opposed to it. This antagonism may have triggered the famous quarrel between Oxford and Sidney on the tennis court at Whitehall. It is not entirely clear who was playing on the court when the fight erupted; what is undisputed is that Oxford called Sidney a 'puppy', while Sidney responded that \"all the world knows puppies are gotten by dogs, and children by men\". The French ambassadors, whose private galleries overlooked the tennis court, were witness to the display. Whether it was Sidney who next challenged Oxford to a duel or the other way around, the matter was not taken further, and the Queen personally took Sidney to task for not recognizing the difference between his status and Oxford's. Christopher Hatton and Sidney's friend Hubert Languet also tried to dissuade Sidney from pursuing the matter, and it was eventually dropped. The specific cause is not known, but in January\u00a01580 Oxford wrote and challenged Sidney; by the end of the month Oxford was confined by the Queen to his chambers, and was not released until early February.\nOxford openly quarrelled with the Earl of Leicester at about this time; he was confined to his chamber at Greenwich for some time 'about the libelling between him and my Lord of Leicester'. In the summer of 1580, Gabriel Harvey, apparently motivated by a desire to ingratiate himself with Leicester, satirized Oxford's love for things Italian in verses entitled \"Speculum Tuscanismi\" and in \"Three Proper and Witty Familiar Letters\".\nAlthough details are unclear, there is evidence that in 1577 Oxford attempted to leave England to see service in the French Wars of Religion on the side of King\u00a0Henry III. Like many members of older established aristocratic families in England, he inclined to Roman Catholicism; and after his return from Italy, he was reported to have embraced the religion, perhaps after a distant kinsman, Charles Arundell, introduced him to a seminary priest named Richard Stephens. But just as quickly, by late in 1580 he had denounced a group of Catholics, among them Arundell, Francis Southwell, and Henry Howard, for treasonous activities and asking the Queen's mercy for his own, now repudiated, Catholicism. Elizabeth characteristically delayed in acting on the matter and Oxford was detained under house arrest for a short time.\nLeicester is credited by author Alan H. Nelson with having \"dislodged Oxford from the pro-French group\", i.e., the group at court which favoured Elizabeth's marriage to the Duke of Anjou. The Spanish ambassador, Mendoza, was also of the view that Leicester was behind Oxford's informing on his fellow Catholics in an attempt to prevent the French marriage. Peck concurs, stating that Leicester was \"intent upon rendering Sussex's allies politically useless\".\nThe Privy Council ordered the arrest of both Howard and Arundel; Oxford immediately met secretly with Arundell to convince him to support his allegations against Howard and Southwell, offering him money and a pardon from the Queen. Arundell refused this offer, and he and Howard initially sought asylum with Mendoza. Only after being assured that they would be placed under house arrest in the home of a Privy Councillor, did the pair give themselves up. During the first weeks after their arrest they pursued a threefold strategy: they would admit to minor crimes, attempt to prove Oxford a liar by his offers of money to testify to his accusations, and try to demonstrate that their accuser posed the real danger to the Crown. Their allegations against Oxford included atheism, lying, heresy, disobedience to the crown, treason, murder for hire, sexual perversion, habitual drunkenness, vowing to murder various courtiers, and criticizing the Queen for doing \"everything with the worst grace that ever woman did.\"\nMost seriously, Howard and Arundell charged Oxford with serial child rape, claiming he'd abused \"so many boyes it must nedes come out.\" Detailed testimony from nearly a dozen victims and witnesses substantiated the charge and included names, dates, and places. Two of the six boys named had sought help from adults after Oxford raped them violently and denied them medical care. A young cook named Powers reported being subjected to multiple assaults at Hampton Court in the winter of 1577\u201378, at Whitehall, and in Oxford's Broad Street home. Orazio Coquo's account is well documented outside the Howard-Arundel report. In testimony to the Venetian Inquisition dated 27 August 1577, Coquo explained that he was singing in the choir at Venice's Santa Maria Formosa on 1 March 1576 when Oxford invited him to work in England as his page. Then 15, the boy sought his parents' advice and departed Venice just 4 days later. Coquo arrived with Oxford in Dover on 20 April 1576 and fled 11 months later on 20 March 1577, aided by a Milanese merchant who gave him 25 ducats for the journey: He \"told me that I would be corrupted if I remained,\" Orazio testified, \"and he didn't want me to stay there any longer.\" When asked whether he sought Oxford's permission before leaving, the boy replied, \"Sirs, no, because he would not have allowed me to leave.\"\nArundell and Howard cleared themselves of Oxford's accusations, although Howard remained under house arrest into August, while Arundell was not freed until October or November. None of the three was ever indicted or tried. Neither Arundell nor Howard ever returned to court favour, and after the Throckmorton Plot of 1583 in support of Mary, Queen of Scots, Arundell fled to Paris with Thomas, Lord Paget, the elder brother of the conspirator Charles Paget. In the meantime, Oxford won a tournament at Westminster on 22 January. His page's speech at the tournament, describing Oxford's appearance as the Knight of the Tree of the Sun, was published in 1592 in a pamphlet entitled \"Plato, Axiochus\".\nOn 14 April 1589 Oxford was among the peers who found Philip Howard, Earl of Arundel, the eldest son and heir of Oxford's cousin, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, guilty of treason; Arundel later died in prison. Oxford later insisted that \"the Howards were the most treacherous race under heaven\" and that \"my Lord Howard [was] the worst villain that lived in this earth.\"\nDuring the early 1580s, it is likely that the Earl of Oxford lived mainly at one of his Essex country houses, Wivenhoe, which was sold in 1584. In June\u00a01580 he purchased a tenement and seven acres of land near Aldgate in London from the Italian merchant Benedict Spinola for \u00a32,500. The property, located in the parish of St\u00a0Botolphs, was known as the Great Garden of Christchurch and had formerly belonged to Magdalene College, Cambridge. He also purchased a London residence, a mansion in Bishopsgate known as Fisher's Folly. According to Henry Howard, Oxford paid a large sum for the property and renovations to it.\nOn 23 March 1581 Sir Francis Walsingham advised the Earl of Huntingdon that two\u00a0days earlier Anne Vavasour, one of the Queen's maids of honour, had given birth to a son, and that \"the Earl of Oxford is avowed to be the father, who hath withdrawn himself with intent, as it is thought, to pass the seas\". Oxford was arrested and imprisoned in the Tower of London, as was Anne and her infant, who would later be known as Sir\u00a0Edward Vere. Burghley interceded for Oxford, and he was released from the Tower on 8 June, but he remained under house arrest until some time in July.\nWhile Oxford was under house arrest in May, Thomas Stocker dedicated to him his \"Divers Sermons of Master John Calvin\", stating in the dedication that he had been \"brought up in your Lordship's father's house\".\nOxford was still under house arrest in mid-July, but took part in an Accession Day tournament at Whitehall on 17 November 1581. He was then banished from court until June\u00a01583. He appealed to Burghley to intervene with the Queen on his behalf, but his father-in-law repeatedly put the matter in the hands of Sir\u00a0Christopher Hatton.\nAt Christmas 1581, Oxford was reconciled with his wife, Anne, but his affair with Anne Vavasour continued to have repercussions. In March\u00a01582 there was a skirmish in the streets of London between Oxford and Anne's uncle, Sir\u00a0Thomas Knyvet. Oxford was wounded, and his servant killed; reports conflict as to whether Knyvet was also injured. There was another fray between Knyvet's and Oxford's retinues on 18 June, and a third six\u00a0days later, when it was reported that Knyvet had \"slain a man of the Earl of Oxford's in fight\". In a letter to Burghley three\u00a0years later Oxford offered to attend his father-in-law at his house \"as well as a lame man might\"; it is possible his lameness was a result of injuries from that encounter. On 19 January 1585 Anne Vavasour's brother Thomas sent Oxford a written challenge; it appears to have been ignored.\nMeanwhile, the street brawling between factions continued. Another of Oxford's men was killed in January, and in March Burghley wrote to Sir\u00a0Christopher Hatton about the death of one of Knyvet's men, thanking Hatton for his efforts \"to bring some good end to these troublesome matters betwixt my Lord Oxford and Mr\u00a0Thomas Knyvet\".\nOn 6 May 1583, eighteen months after their reconciliation, Edward and Anne's only son was born, but died the same day. The infant was buried at Castle Hedingham three\u00a0days later.\nAfter intervention by Burghley and Sir Walter Raleigh, Oxford was reconciled to the Queen, and his two-year exile from court ended at the end of May on condition of his guarantee of good behaviour. However, he never regained his position as a courtier of the first magnitude.\nTheatrical enterprises.\nThe previous Earl of Oxford had maintained a company of players known as Oxford's Men, which was discontinued by the 17th Earl two\u00a0years after his father's death. Beginning in 1580, Oxford patronised both adult and boy companies and a company of musicians, and also sponsored performances by tumblers, acrobats, and performing animals. The new Oxford's Men toured the provinces between 1580 and 1587. Sometime after November\u00a01583, Oxford bought a sublease of the premises used by the boy companies in the Blackfriars, and then gave it to his secretary, the writer John Lyly. Lyly installed Henry Evans, a Welsh scrivener and theatrical affectionado, as the manager of the new company of Oxford's Boys, composed of the Children of the Chapel and the Children of Paul's, and turned his talents to playwriting until the end of June\u00a01584, when the original playhouse lease was voided by its owner. In 1584\u20131585, \"the Earl of Oxford's musicians\" received payments for performances in the cities of Oxford and Barnstaple. Oxford's Men (also known as Oxford's Players) stayed active until 1602.\nRoyal annuity.\nOn 6 April 1584, Oxford's daughter Bridget was born, and two works were dedicated to him, Robert Greene's \"Gwydonius; The Card of Fancy\", and John Southern's \"Pandora\". Verses in the latter work mention Oxford's knowledge of astronomy, history, languages, and music.\nOxford's financial situation was steadily deteriorating. At this point, he had sold almost all his inherited lands, which cut him off from what had been his principal source of income. Moreover, because the properties were security for his unpaid debt to the Queen in the Court of Wards, he had had to enter into a bond with the purchaser, guaranteeing that he would indemnify them if the Queen were to make a claim against the lands to collect on the debt. To avoid this eventuality, the purchasers of his estates agreed to pay Oxford's debt to the Court of Wards in instalments.\nIn 1585 negotiations were underway for King\u00a0James VI of Scotland to come to England to discuss the release of his mother, Mary, Queen of Scots, and in March Oxford was to be sent to Scotland as one of the hostages for James's safety.\nIn 1586, Oxford petitioned the Queen for an annuity to relieve his distressed financial situation. His father-in-law made him several large loans, and Elizabeth granted him a \u00a31,000 annuity, to be continued at her pleasure or until he could be provided for otherwise. This annuity was later continued by James\u00a0I. De\u00a0Vere's widow, Elizabeth, petitioned James\u00a0I for an annuity of \u00a3250 on behalf of her 11-year-old son, Henry, to continue the \u00a31,000 annuity granted to de\u00a0Vere. Henry was ultimately awarded a \u00a3200 annuity for life. James I would continue the grant after her death.\nAnother daughter, Susan, was born on 26 May 1587. On 12 September, another daughter, Frances, is recorded as buried at Edmonton. Her birthdate is unknown; presumably, she was between one and three years of age.\nIn July Elizabeth granted the Earl property which had been seized from Edward Jones, who had been executed for his role in the Babington Plot. In order to protect the land from Oxford's creditors, the grant was made in the name of two trustees. At the end of November it was agreed that the purchasers of Oxford's lands would pay his entire debt of some \u00a33,306 due to the Court of Wards over a five-year period, finishing in 1592.\nIn July and August\u00a01588 England was threatened by the Spanish Armada. On 28 July Leicester, who was in overall command of the English land troops, asked for instructions regarding Oxford, stating that \"he seems most willing to hazard his life in this quarrel\". The Earl was offered the governorship of the port of Harwich, but he thought it was unworthy and declined the post; Leicester was glad to be rid of him.\nIn December\u00a01588 Oxford had secretly sold his London mansion \"Fisher's Folly\" to Sir\u00a0William Cornwallis; by January\u00a01591 the author Thomas Churchyard was dealing with rent owing for rooms he had taken in a house on behalf of his patron. Oxford wrote to Burghley outlining a plan to purchase the manorial lands of Denbigh, in Wales, if the Queen would consent, offering to pay for them by commuting his \u00a31,000 annuity and agreeing to abandon his suit to regain the Forest of Essex (Waltham Forest), and to deed over his interests in Hedingham and Brets for the use of his children, who were living with Burghley under his guardianship.\nIn the spring of 1591, the plan for the purchasers of his land to discharge his debt to the Court of Wards was disrupted by the Queen's taking extents, or writs allowing a creditor to temporarily seize a debtor's property. Oxford complained that his servant Thomas Hampton had taken advantage of these writs by taking money from the tenants for his own use, and had also conspired with another of his servants to pass a fraudulent document under the Great Seal of England. The Lord Mayor, Thomas Skinner, was also involved. In June, Oxford wrote to Burghley reminding him that he had made an agreement with Elizabeth to relinquish his claim to the Forest of Essex for three reasons, one of which was the Queen's reluctance to punish Skinner's felony, which had caused Oxford to forfeit \u00a320,000 in bonds and statutes.\nIn 1586 Angel Day dedicated \"The English Secretary\", the first epistolary manual for writing model letters in English, to Oxford, and William Webbe praised him as \"most excellent among the rest\" of our poets in his \"Discourse of English Poetry\". In 1588 Anthony Munday dedicated to Oxford the two parts of his \"Palmerin d'Oliva\". The following year \"The Arte of English Poesie\", attributed to George Puttenham, placed Oxford among a \"crew\" of courtier poets; Puttenham also considered him among the best comic playwrights of the day. In 1590 Edmund Spenser addressed to Oxford the third of seventeen dedicatory sonnets which preface \"The Faerie Queene\", celebrating his patronage of poets. The composer John Farmer, who was in Oxford's service at the time, dedicated \"The First Set of Divers &amp; Sundry Ways of Two Parts in One\" to him in 1591, noting in the dedication his patron's love of music.\nRemarriage and later life.\nOn 5 June 1588 Oxford's wife Anne Cecil died at court of a fever; she was 31.\nOn 4 July 1591 Oxford sold the Great Garden property at Aldgate to John Wolley and Francis Trentham. The arrangement was stated to be for the benefit of Francis's sister, Elizabeth Trentham, one of the Queen's Maids of Honour, whom Oxford married later that year. On 24 February 1593, at Stoke Newington, she gave birth to his only surviving son, Henry de Vere, Viscount Bulbeck, who was his heir.\nBetween 1591 and 1592 Oxford disposed of the last of his large estates; Castle Hedingham, the seat of his earldom, went to Lord Burghley; it was held in trust for Oxford's three daughters by his first marriage. He commissioned his servant, Roger Harlakenden, to sell Colne Priory. Harlekenden contrived to undervalue the land, then purchase it (as well as other parcels that were not meant to be sold) under his son's name; the suits Oxford brought against Harlakenden for fraud dragged out for decades and were never settled in his lifetime.\nProtracted negotiations to arrange a match between his daughter Elizabeth and Henry Wriothesley, 3rd Earl of Southampton, did not result in marriage; on 19 November 1594, six\u00a0weeks after Southampton turned 21, 'the young Earl of Southampton, refusing the Lady\u00a0Vere, payeth \u00a35000 of present money'. In January Elizabeth married William Stanley, 6th Earl of Derby. Derby had promised Oxford his new bride would have \u00a31,000 a year, but the financial provision for her was slow in materializing.\nHis father-in-law, Lord\u00a0Burghley, died on 4 August 1598 at the age of 78, leaving substantial bequests to Oxford's two unmarried daughters, Bridget and Susan. The bequests were structured to prevent Oxford from gaining control of his daughters' inheritances by assuming custody of them.\nEarlier negotiations for a marriage to William Herbert having fallen through, in May or June\u00a01599 Oxford's 15\u00a0year-old daughter Bridget married Francis Norris. Susan married Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.\nFrom March to August\u00a01595 Oxford actively importuned the Queen, in competition with Lord Buckhurst, to operate the tin mines in Cornwall. He wrote to Burghley, enumerating years of fruitless attempts to amend his financial situation and complained: 'This last year past I have been a suitor to her Majesty that I might farm her tins, giving \u00a33000 a year more than she had made.' Oxford's letters and memoranda indicate that he pursued his suit into 1596, and renewed it again three\u00a0years later, but was ultimately unsuccessful in obtaining the tin monopoly.\nIn October\u00a01595, Oxford wrote to his brother-in-law, Sir\u00a0Robert Cecil, of friction between himself and the ill-fated Earl of Essex, partly over his claim to property, terming him 'the only person that I dare rely upon in the court'. Cecil seems to have done little to further Oxford's interests in the suit.\nIn March he was unable to go to court due to illness, in August he wrote to Burghley from Byfleet, where he had gone for his health: 'I find comfort in this air, but no fortune in the court.' In September, he again wrote of ill health, regretting he had not been able to pay attendance to the Queen. Two\u00a0months later Rowland Whyte wrote to Sir\u00a0Robert Sidney that 'Some say my Lord of Oxford is dead'. Whether the rumour of his death was related to the illness mentioned in his letters earlier in the year is unknown. Oxford attended his last Parliament in December, perhaps another indication of his failing health.\nOn 28 April 1599 Oxford was sued by the widow of his tailor for a debt of \u00a3500 for services rendered some two decades earlier. He claimed that not only had he paid the debt, but that the tailor had absconded with 'cloth of gold and silver and other stuff' belonging to him, worth \u00a3800. The outcome of the suit is unknown.\nIn July\u00a01600 Oxford wrote requesting Sir\u00a0Robert Cecil's help in securing an appointment as Governor of the Isle of Jersey, once again citing the Queen's unfulfilled promises to him. In February he again wrote for his support, this time for the office of President of Wales. As with his former suits, Oxford was again unsuccessful; during this time he was listed on the Pipe rolls as owing \u00a320 for the subsidy.\nAfter the abortive Essex rebellion in February\u00a01601, Oxford was 'the senior of the twenty-five noblemen' who rendered verdicts at the trials of Essex and Southampton for treason. After Essex's co-conspirator Sir Charles Danvers was executed in March, Oxford became a party to a complicated suit regarding lands which had reverted to the Crown by escheat at Danvers's attainder, a suit opposed by Danvers's kinsmen. De\u00a0Vere continued to suffer from ill health, which kept him from court. On 4 December, Oxford was shocked that Cecil, who had encouraged him to undertake the Danvers suit on the Crown's behalf, had now withdrawn his support for it. As with all his other suits aimed at improving his financial situation, this last of Oxford's suits to the Queen ended in disappointment.\nLast years.\nIn the early morning of 24 March 1603, Queen Elizabeth died without naming a successor. A few days beforehand, at his house at Hackney, Oxford had entertained the Earl of Lincoln, a nobleman known for erratic and violent behaviour similar to his host's. Lincoln reported that after dinner Oxford spoke of the Queen's impending death, claiming that the peers of England should decide the succession, and suggested that since Lincoln had 'a nephew of the blood royal ... Lord\u00a0Hastings', he should be sent to France to find allies to support this claim. Lincoln relayed this conversation to Sir John Peyton, Lieutenant of the Tower, who, knowing how physically and financially infirm Oxford was, refused to take Lincoln's report as a serious threat to King\u00a0James's accession.\nOxford expressed his grief at the late Queen's death, and his apprehension for the future. These fears were unfounded; in letters to Cecil in May and June\u00a01603 he again pressed his decades-long claim to have Waltham Forest (Forest of Essex) and the house and park of Havering restored to him, and on 18 July the new King granted his suit. On 25 July, Oxford was among those who officiated at the King's coronation, and a month later James confirmed his annuity of \u00a31,000.\nLong weakened by poor health, Oxford passed custody of the Forest of Essex to his son-in-law Francis Norris and his cousin Sir Francis Vere on 18 June 1604. He died on 24 June of unknown causes at King's Place, Hackney, and was buried on 6 July in the Hackney churchyard of St Augustine's (now the parish of St. John-at-Hackney). Oxford's death passed without public or private notice. His grave was still unmarked on 25 November 1612 when his widow Elizabeth Trentham signed her will. She asked \"to be buried in the Church of Hackney within the Countie of Middlesex, as neare vnto [unto] the bodie of my said late deare and noble lorde and husband as may bee,\" and she requested that \"there bee in the said Church erected for vs [us] a tombe fittinge our degree.\" The 18th Earl of Oxford failed to fulfil his mother's request, and the location of his parents' graves has been lost.\nLiterary reputation.\nOxford's manuscript verses circulated widely in courtly circles. Three of his poems, , , and , are among the texts that repeatedly appear in the surviving 16th-century manuscript miscellanies and poetical anthologies. His earliest published poem was in Thomas Bedingfield's translation of Cardano's \"Comforte\" (1573). Bedingfield's dedication to Oxford is dated 1 January 1572. In addition to his poem, Oxford also contributed a commendatory letter setting forth the reasons why Bedingfield should publish the work.\nIn 1576 eight of his poems were published in the poetry miscellany \"The Paradise of Dainty Devises\". According to the introduction, all the poems in the collection were meant to be sung, but Oxford's were almost the only genuine love songs in the collection. Oxford's was published in \"The Phoenix Nest\" (1593) and republished in \"England's Helicon\" (1600). appeared in \"The Teares of Fancie\" (1593). \"Brittons Bowre of Delight\" (1597) published under Oxford's name, but the attribution today is not considered certain.\nContemporary critics praised Oxford as a poet and a playwright. William Webbe names him as \"the most excellent\" of Elizabeth's courtier poets. Puttenham's \"The Arte of English Poesie\" (1589), places him first on a list of courtier poets and includes an excerpt from \"When wert thou born desire\" as an example of \"his excellance and wit\". Puttenham also says that \"highest praise\" should be given to Oxford and Richard Edwardes for \"Comedy and Enterlude\". Francis Meres' \"Palladis Tamia\" (1598) names Oxford first by social rank of 17\u00a0playwrights listed who are \"the best for comedy amongst us\", and he also appears first on a list of seven Elizabethan courtly poets \"who honoured Poesie with their pens and practice\" in Henry Peacham's 1622 \"The Compleat Gentleman\".\nSteven W. May writes that the Earl of Oxford was Elizabeth's \"first truly prestigious courtier poet ... [whose] precedent did at least confer genuine respectability upon the later efforts of such poets as Sidney, Greville, and Raleigh.\" He describes de\u00a0Vere as a \"competent, fairly experimental poet working in the established modes of mid-century lyric verse\" and his poetry as \"examples of the standard varieties of mid-Elizabethan amorous lyric\". May says that Oxford's youthful love lyrics, which have been described as experimental and innovative, \"create a dramatic break with everything known to have been written at the Elizabethan court up to that time\" by virtue of being lighter in tone and metre and more imaginative and free from the moralizing tone of the courtier poetry of the \"drab\" age, which tended to be occasional and instructive. and describes one poem, in which the author cries out against \"this loss of my good name\", as a \"defiant lyric without precedent in English Renaissance verse\".\n May says that Oxford's poetry was \"one man's contribution to the rhetorical mainstream of an evolving Elizabethan poetic\" indistinguishable from \"the output of his mediocre mid-century contemporaries\". However, C. S. Lewis wrote that his poetry shows \"a faint talent\", but is \"for the most part undistinguished and verbose.\" Nelson says that \"contemporary observers such as Harvey, Webbe, Puttenham, and Meres clearly exaggerated de\u00a0Vere's talent in deference to his rank. By any measure, his poems pale in comparison with those of Sidney, Lyly, Spenser, Shakespeare, Donne, and Jonson.\" He says that his known poems are \"astonishingly uneven\" in quality, ranging from the \"fine\" to the \"execrable\".\nOxford was sought after for his literary and theatrical patronage; between 1564 and 1599, twenty-eight works were dedicated to him by authors, including Arthur Golding, John Lyly, Robert Greene, and Anthony Munday. Of his 33\u00a0dedications, 13\u00a0appeared in original or translated works of literature, a higher percentage of literary works than other patrons of similar means. His lifelong patronage of writers, musicians, and actors prompted May to term Oxford \"a nobleman with extraordinary intellectual interests and commitments\", whose biography exhibits a \"lifelong devotion to learning\". He goes on to say that \"Oxford's genuine commitment to learning throughout his career lends a necessary qualification to Stone's conclusion that de\u00a0Vere simply squandered the more than 70,000\u00a0pounds he derived from selling off his patrimony ... for which some part of this amount de\u00a0Vere acquired a splendid reputation for nurture of the arts and sciences\".\nOxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship.\nThe Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship proposes that the Earl of Oxford wrote the plays and poems traditionally attributed to William Shakespeare. It was introduced by J. Thomas Looney, an English schoolmaster, in a book published in 1920. Though rejected by nearly all academic Shakespeareans, it has been among the most popular alternative Shakespeare authorship theories since the 1920s.\nThe Oxfordian theory was the central theme of the 2011 drama film \"Anonymous\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10141", "revid": "73920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10141", "title": "Erinyes", "text": "Chthonic female deities of vengeance in Greek mythology\nThe Erinyes ( ; , sg. ), also known as the Eumenides (, the \"Gracious ones\"), are chthonic goddesses of vengeance in ancient Greek religion and mythology. A formulaic oath in the \"Iliad\" invokes them as \"the Erinyes, that under earth take vengeance on men, whosoever hath sworn a false oath\". Walter Burkert suggests that they are \"an embodiment of the act of self-cursing contained in the oath\". Their Roman counterparts are the Furies, also known as the Dirae. The Roman writer Maurus Servius Honoratus (c.\u2009400 AD) wrote that they are called \"Eumenides\" in hell, \"Furiae\" on Earth, and \"Dirae\" in heaven. Erinyes are akin to some other Greek deities, called Poenai.\nAccording to Hesiod's \"Theogony\", when the Titan Cronus castrated his father, Uranus, and threw his genitalia into the sea, the Erinyes (along with the Giants and the Meliae) emerged from the drops of blood which fell on the Earth (Gaia), while Aphrodite was born from the crests of sea foam. Apollodorus also reports this lineage. According to variant accounts, they are the daughters of Nyx ('Night'), while in Virgil's \"Aeneid\", they are daughters of Pluto and Nox (the Roman name for Nyx). In some accounts, they were the daughters of Eurynome (a name for Earth) and Cronus, or of Earth and Phorcys (i.e., the sea). In Orphic literature, they are the daughters of Hades and Persephone.\nTheir number is usually left indeterminate. Virgil, probably working from an Alexandrian source, recognized three: Alecto or Alekto (\"endless anger\"), Megaera (\"jealous rage\"), and Tisiphone or Tilphousia (\"vengeful destruction\"), all of whom appear in the \"Aeneid\". Dante Alighieri followed Virgil in depicting the same three-character triptych of Erinyes; in Canto IX of the \"Inferno,\" they confront the poets at the gates of the city of Dis. Whilst the Erinyes were usually described as three maiden goddesses, \"Telphousia\" (a name for Erinys) was a byname for the wrathful goddess Demeter, who was worshipped under the title of Erinys in the Arcadian town of Thelpusa.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Erinyes\" is of uncertain etymology; connections with the verb \u1f40\u03c1\u03af\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03bd \"orinein\", \"to raise, stir, excite\", and the noun \u1f14\u03c1\u03b9\u03c2 \"eris\", \"strife\" have been suggested; Robert Beekes suggests that the word probably has a Pre-Greek origin. The word \"Erinys\" in the singular and as a theonym is first attested in Mycenaean Greek, written in Linear B, in the following forms: , \"e-ri-nu\", and , \"e-ri-nu-we\". These words are found on the KN Fp 1, KN V 52, and KN Fh 390 tablets.\nDescription.\nThe Erinyes live in Erebus and are more ancient than any of the Olympian deities. Their task is to hear complaints brought by mortals against the insolence of the young to the aged, of children to parents, of hosts to guests, and of householders or city councils to suppliants\u2014and to punish such crimes by hounding culprits relentlessly. The appearance of the Erinyes differs between sources, though they are frequently described as wearing black. In Aesychlus' \"Eumenides,\" the Priestess of Pythian Apollo compares their monstrosity to that of the gorgon and harpies, but adds that they are wingless, with hatred dripping from their eyes. Euripides, on the other hand, gives them wings, as does Virgil. They are often envisaged as having snakes in their hair.\nThe Erinyes are commonly associated with night and darkness. With varying accounts claiming that they are the daughters of Nyx, the goddess of night, they're also associated with darkness in the works of Aeschylus and Euripides in both their physical appearance and the time of day that they manifest.\nDescription of Tisiphone in Statius' Thebaid:\nSo prayed he, and the cruel goddess turned her grim visage to hearken. By chance she sat beside dismal Cocytus, and had loosed the snakes from her head and suffered them to lap the sulphurous waters. Straightway, faster than fire of Jove or falling stars she leapt up from the gloomy bank: the crowd of phantoms gives way before her, fearing to meet their queen; then, journeying through the shadows and the fields dark with trooping ghosts, she hastens to the gate of Taenarus, whose threshold none may cross and again return. Day felt her presence, Night interposed her pitchy cloud and startled his shining steeds; far off towering Atlas shuddered and shifted the weight of heaven upon his trembling shoulders. Forthwith rising aloft from Malea\u2019s vale she hies her on the well-known way to Thebes: for on no errand is she swifter to go and to return, not kindred Tartarus itself pleases her so well. A hundred horned snakes erect shaded her face, the thronging terror of her awful head; deep within her sunken eyes there glows a light of iron hue, as when Atracian spells make travailing Phoebe redden through the clouds; suffused with venom, her skin distends and swells with corruption; a fiery vapour issues from her evil mouth, bringing upon mankind thirst unquenchable and sickness and famine and universal death. From her shoulders falls a stark and grisly robe, whose dark fastenings meet upon her breast: Atropos and Proserpine herself fashion her this garb anew. Then both her hands are shaken in wrath, the one gleaming with a funeral torch, the other lashing the air with a live water-snake.\nCult.\nPausanias describes a sanctuary in Athens dedicated to the Erinyes under the name Semnai:Hard by [the Areopagos the murder court of Athens] is a sanctuary of the goddesses which the Athenians call the August, but Hesiod in the Theogony calls them Erinyes (Furies). It was Aeschylus who first represented them with snakes in their hair. But on the images neither of these nor of any of the under-world deities is there anything terrible. There are images of Pluto, Hermes, and Earth, by which sacrifice those who have received an acquittal on the Hill of Ares; sacrifices are also offered on other occasions by both citizens and aliens. The \"Orphic Hymns\", a collection of 87 religious poems as translated by Thomas Taylor, contains two stanzas regarding the Erinyes. Hymn 68 refers to them as the Erinyes, while hymn 69 refers to them as the Eumenides.\nHymn 68, to the Erinyes:\nVociferous Bacchanalian Furies [Erinyes], hear! Ye, I invoke, dread pow'rs, whom all revere; Nightly, profound, in secret who retire, Tisiphone, Alecto, and Megara dire: Deep in a cavern merg'd, involv'd in night, near where Styx flows impervious to the sight; Ever attendant on mysterious rites, furious and fierce, whom Fate's dread law delights; Revenge and sorrows dire to you belong, hid in a savage veil, severe and strong, Terrific virgins, who forever dwell endu'd with various forms, in deepest hell; Aerial, and unseen by human kind, and swiftly coursing, rapid as the mind. In vain the Sun with wing'd refulgence bright, in vain the Moon, far darting milder light, Wisdom and Virtue may attempt in vain; and pleasing, Art, our transport to obtain Unless with these you readily conspire, and far avert your all-destructive ire. The boundless tribes of mortals you descry, and justly rule with Right's [Dike's] impartial eye. Come, snaky-hair'd, Fates [Moirai] many-form'd, divine, suppress your rage, and to our rites incline.Hymn 69, to the Eumenides:Hear me, illustrious Furies [Eumenides], mighty nam'd, terrific pow'rs, for prudent counsel fam'd; Holy and pure, from Jove terrestrial [Zeus Khthonios](Hades) born and Proserpine [Phersephone], whom lovely locks adorn: Whose piercing sight, with vision unconfin'd, surveys the deeds of all the impious kind: On Fate attendant, punishing the race (with wrath severe) of deeds unjust and base. Dark-colour'd queens, whose glittering eyes, are bright with dreadful, radiant, life-destroying, light: Eternal rulers, terrible and strong, to whom revenge, and tortures dire belong; Fatal and horrid to the human sight, with snaky tresses wand'ring in the night; Either approach, and in these rites rejoice, for ye, I call, with holy, suppliant voice.\nIn ancient Greek literature.\nMyth fragments dealing with the Erinyes are found among the earliest extant records of ancient Greek culture. The Erinyes are featured prominently in the myth of Orestes, which recurs frequently throughout many works of ancient Greek literature.\nAeschylus.\nFeatured in ancient Greek literature, from poems to plays, the Erinyes form the Chorus and play a major role in the conclusion of Aeschylus's dramatic trilogy the \"Oresteia\". In the first play, \"Agamemnon\", King Agamemnon returns home from the Trojan War, where he is slain by his wife, Clytemnestra, who wants vengeance for her daughter Iphigenia, whom Agamemnon had sacrificed to obtain favorable winds to sail to Troy. In the second play, \"The Libation Bearers\", their son Orestes has reached manhood and has been commanded by Apollo's oracle to avenge his father's murder at his mother's hand. Returning home and revealing himself to his sister Electra, Orestes pretends to be a messenger bringing the news of his own death to Clytemnestra. He then slays his mother and her lover Aegisthus. Although Orestes' actions were what Apollo had commanded him to do, Orestes has still committed matricide, a grave sacrilege. Because of this, he is pursued and tormented by the terrible Erinyes, who demand yet further blood vengeance.\nIn \"The Eumenides\", Orestes is told by Apollo at Delphi that he should go to Athens to seek the aid of the goddess Athena. In Athens, Athena arranges for Orestes to be tried by a jury of Athenian citizens, with her presiding. The Erinyes appear as Orestes' accusers, while Apollo speaks in his defense. The trial becomes a debate about the necessity of blood vengeance, the honor that is due to a mother compared to that due to a father, and the respect that must be paid to ancient deities such as the Erinyes compared to the newer generation of Apollo and Athena. The jury vote is evenly split. Athena participates in the vote and chooses for acquittal. Athena declares Orestes acquitted because of the rules she established for the trial. Despite the verdict, the Erinyes threaten to torment all inhabitants of Athens and to poison the surrounding countryside. Athena, however, offers the ancient goddesses a new role, as protectors of justice, rather than vengeance, and of the city. She persuades them to break the cycle of blood for blood (except in the case of war, which is fought for glory, not vengeance). While promising that the goddesses will receive due honor from the Athenians and Athena, she also reminds them that she possesses the key to the storehouse where Zeus keeps the thunderbolts that defeated the other older deities. This mixture of bribes and veiled threats satisfies the Erinyes, who are then led by Athena in a procession to their new abode. In the play, the \"Furies\" are thereafter addressed as \"Semnai\" (Venerable Ones), as they will now be honored by the citizens of Athens and ensure the city's prosperity.\nEuripides.\nIn Euripides' \"Orestes\" the Erinyes are for the first time \"equated\" with the 'Eumenides' (\u0395\u1f50\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03af\u03b4\u03b5\u03c2, pl. of \u0395\u1f50\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03af\u03c2; literally \"the gracious ones\", but also translated as \"Kindly Ones\"). This is because it was considered unwise to mention them by name (for fear of attracting their attention); the ironic name is similar to how Hades, god of the dead is styled Pluton, or Pluto, \"the Rich One\". Using euphemisms for the names of deities serves many religious purposes.\nOther.\nAccording to the \"Odyssey\" and later scholia on it, the Erinyes once snatched Pandareus' daughters Cleothera and Merope, who after the death of the parents had been adopted by Aphrodite. While the goddess was trying to arrange suitable matches for them once they became of age, the Erinyes with the help of the wind gods or the Harpies carried away the girls and made them their handmaidens.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10142", "revid": "10406357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10142", "title": "Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair", "text": "Title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom\nMarquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll, is a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom. It was created on 4 January 1916 for John Hamilton-Gordon, 7th Earl of Aberdeen.\nFamily history.\nBaronetcy of Haddo.\nThe Gordon family descends from John Gordon, who fought as a Royalist against the Covenanters in the Civil War. In 1642 he was created a baronet, of Haddo in the County of Aberdeen, in the Baronetage of Nova Scotia. In 1644 he was found guilty of treason and beheaded, with the baronetcy forfeited. The title was restored after the Restoration for his son John, the second Baronet.\nEarldom of Aberdeen.\nThe second Baronet died without male issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Baronet. He was a noted advocate and served as Lord President of the Court of Session and as Lord Chancellor of Scotland. On 30 November 1682 he was raised to the Peerage of Scotland as Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, Viscount of Formartine and Earl of Aberdeen. He was succeeded by his only surviving son, the second Earl. He sat in the House of Lords as a Scottish representative peer from 1721 to 1727. On his death the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage, the third Earl. He was a Scottish Representative Peer from 1747 to 1761 and from 1774 to 1790.\nLord Aberdeen, Prime Minister.\nThe third earl was succeeded by his grandson, the fourth Earl, who was the eldest son of George Gordon, Lord Haddo. On 1 June 1814 he was created Viscount Gordon, of Aberdeen in the County of Aberdeen, in the Peerage of the United Kingdom, which entitled him to an automatic seat in the House of Lords. Lord Aberdeen was a distinguished diplomat and statesman and served as Foreign Secretary from 1828 to 1830 and from 1841 to 1846 and as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1852 to 1855. Aberdeen married firstly Lady Catherine Elizabeth (1784\u20131812), daughter of John Hamilton, 1st Marquess of Abercorn, and assumed by Royal licence the additional surname of Hamilton in 1818.\nWhen Lord Aberdeen died, the titles passed to his eldest son from his second marriage to Harriet Douglas, the fifth Earl. He sat as Liberal member of parliament (MP) for Aberdeenshire. His eldest son, the sixth Earl, was a sailor and adventurer. He was accidentally drowned off the coast of America in 1870, without marrying or having children.\nMarquess of Aberdeen and Temair.\nThe sixth earl of Aberdeen was succeeded by his younger brother, the seventh Earl. John Hamilton-Gordon, was a Liberal politician and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland in 1886 and from 1905 to 1915 and as Governor General of Canada from 1893 to 1898. On 4 January 1916 he was created Earl of Haddo, in the County of Aberdeen, and Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, in the County of Aberdeen, in the County of Meath and in the County of Argyll. Both titles are in the Peerage of the United Kingdom.\nHe was succeeded by his eldest son, the second Marquess, who was a member of the London County Council and served as Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He was childless and was succeeded by his younger brother, the third Marquess. He was notably President of the Federation of British Industries. When he died the titles passed to his eldest son, the fourth Marquess. He was a member of the Aberdeenshire County Council and Lord-Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire. He had four adopted children but no biological issue and was succeeded by his younger brother, the fifth Marquess. He was a broadcaster working for the BBC. He never married and on his death in 1984 the titles passed to his fourth and youngest brother, the sixth Marquess. He was Chairman of The Arts Club. Upon his death in 2002, the seventh Marquess, who was a Deputy Lieutenant of Aberdeenshire, inherited the titles. As of 2020[ [update]], the Marquessate is held by George Gordon, who is the eighth Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, having succeeded in that year.\nOther family members.\nNumerous other members of the Gordon family have also gained distinction. The Hon. William Gordon (died 1816), eldest son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a general in the Army. The Hon. Cosmo Gordon, second son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a colonel in the Army. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1739\u20131792), third son from the third marriage of the second Earl, was a Lord of Session from 1788 to 1792 under the judicial title of Lord Rockville. His son William Duff-Gordon was member of parliament for Worcester. In 1815 he succeeded his uncle as second Baron of Halkin according to a special remainder and assumed the additional surname of Duff (see Duff-Gordon baronets for further history of this branch of the family). The Hon. William Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a vice-admiral in the Royal Navy and sat as member of parliament for Aberdeenshire. The Hon. Alexander Gordon (1786\u20131815), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a soldier and was killed at the Battle of Waterloo.\nThe Hon. Sir Robert Gordon, younger brother of the fourth Earl, was a diplomat and served as British Ambassador to Austria. The Hon. John Gordon (1792\u20131869), younger brother of the fourth Earl, was an admiral in the Royal Navy. The Hon. Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon (1817\u20131890), eldest son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a general in the Army and sat as member of parliament for Aberdeenshire East. His eldest son, Sir Alexander Hamilton-Gordon was also a general in the Army. Reverend the Hon. Douglas Hamilton-Gordon (1824\u20131901), third son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was Chaplain-in-Ordinary to Queen Victoria and Canon of Salisbury. The Hon. Arthur Hamilton-Gordon, fourth son of the second marriage of the fourth Earl, was a Liberal politician and was created Baron Stanmore in 1893 (see this title for more information on him and this branch of the family). Ishbel Hamilton-Gordon, Marchioness of Aberdeen and Temair, daughter of Dudley Marjoribanks, 1st Baron Tweedmouth, and wife of the first Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, was an author, philanthropist and an advocate of woman's interests.\nThe family seat is Haddo House, Aberdeenshire. The title Earl of Haddo is the courtesy title for the Marquess's eldest son and heir, the eldest son of whom uses the courtesy title Viscount of Formartine. The Marquesses of Aberdeen and Temair are related to the Marquesses of Huntly. Sir John Gordon (died c. 1395) of Strathbogie, ancestor of Sir John Gordon, 1st Baronet, was the brother of Elizabeth Gordon. She married Sir Alexander Seton (died 1438) and was the mother of Alexander Gordon, 1st Earl of Huntly (ancestor of the Marquesses of Huntly).\n\"Other titles (1st Earl onwards): Viscount of Formartine (Sc 1682), Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie (Sc 1682)\"\n\"Other titles (4th Earl onwards): Viscount Gordon (UK 1814)\"\n\"Other titles (1st Marquess onwards): Earl of Haddo (UK 1916), Viscount Gordon (UK 1814), Viscount of Formartine (Sc 1682), Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie (Sc 1682)\"\nPresent peer.\nGeorge Ian Alastair Gordon, 8th Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair (born 4 May 1983) is the son of the 7th Marquess and his wife Joanna Clodagh Houldsworth. Styled formally as Viscount Formartine from 1984, he was educated at Harrow School.\nHe was styled as Earl of Haddo between 2002 and 12 March 2020, when he succeeded his father as Marquess of Aberdeen and Temair, Earl of Haddo, Earl of Aberdeen, Viscount of Formartine, Viscount Gordon of Aberdeen, Lord Haddo, Methlick, Tarves and Kellie, and also as a baronet (Gordon, of Haddo, Aberdeenshire, 1642).\nAs Lord Haddo he married Isabelle Coaten, daughter of David Coaten, and they have four children \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10143", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10143", "title": "East Brunswick", "text": ""}
{"id": "10147", "revid": "33921713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10147", "title": "East Coast Swing", "text": "Type of dance\nEast Coast Swing (ECS) is a form of social partner dance. It belongs to the group of swing dances. It is danced under fast swing music, including: big band, rock and roll, rockabilly, and boogie-woogie.\nYerrington and Outland equated East Coast Swing to the New Yorker in 1961. Originally known as \"Eastern Swing\" by Arthur Murray Studios, the name East Coast Swing became more common between 1975 and 1980.\nHistory.\nThe dance was created by dance studios including the Arthur Murray dance studios in the 1940s, based on the Lindy Hop. Lindy Hop was felt by dance studios to be both too difficult and too unstructured to teach to beginners, but there was market demand for training in swing dance. The dance studios had initially dismissed Lindy Hop in particular as a fad. East Coast Swing can be referred to by many different names in different regions of the United States and the world. It has alternatively been called Eastern Swing, Jitterbug, American Swing, East Coast Lindy, Lindy (not to be confused with Lindy Hop), and Triple Swing (or Triple-step swing). Other variants of East Coast Swing that use altered footwork forms are known as Single Swing or \"Single-step Swing\" (where the triple step is replaced by a single step forming a slow, slow, quick, quick rhythm common to Foxtrot), and Double Swing (using a tap-step footwork pattern).\nEast Coast Swing is a rhythm dance that has both 6 and 8 beat patterns.\nThe name \"East Coast Swing\" was coined initially to distinguish the dance from the street form and the new variant used in the competitive ballroom arena (as well as separating the dance from West Coast Swing, which was developed in California). While based on Lindy Hop, it does have clear distinctions. East Coast Swing is a standardized form of dance developed first for instructional purposes in the Arthur Murray studios, and then later codified to allow for a medium of comparison for competitive ballroom dancers. It can be said that there is no right or wrong way to dance it; however, certain styles of the dance are considered correct \"form\" within the technical elements documented and governed by the National Dance Council of America. The N.D.C.A. oversees all the standards of American Style Ballroom and Latin dances. Lindy Hop was never standardized and later became the inspiration for several other dance forms such as: (European) Boogie Woogie, Jive, West Coast Swing and Rock and Roll.\nIn practice on the social dance floor, the six count steps of the East Coast Swing are sometimes mixed with the eight count steps of Lindy Hop, Charleston, and less frequently, Balboa.\nBasic Positions/Moves.\nThe 5 basic positions/moves are:\nBasic technique.\nSingle-step Swing\nEast Coast Swing has a 6-count basic step. This is in contrast to the meter of most swing music, which has a 4-count basic rhythm. In practice, however, the 6-count moves of East Coast Swing are sometimes combined with 8-count moves from Lindy hop, Charleston, and Balboa.\nDepending on the region and instructor, the basic step of single-step East Coast Swing is either \"rock step, step, step\" or \"step, step, rock step\". In both cases, the rock step always starts on the downbeat.\nFor \"rock step, step, step\" the beats, or counts, are the following:\nSteps for the \"lead\" (traditionally, the man's part)\nSteps for the \"follow\" (traditionally, the woman's part which mirrors the lead's part)\nFor \"step, step, rock step,\" the rock step occurs on beats 5 and 6, but the overall progression remains the same.\nThe normal steps can be substituted with a triple step or double step \"step-tap\" or \"kick-step\" instead of a single step. This is commonly used during songs when a slower tempo makes the single step difficult (an example progression would be \"rock step, triple step, triple step\").\nTiming.\nBecause East Coast uses a six-step pattern with music employing four beats per measure, three measures of music are required to complete two sets of steps, as shown in the following table.\nThe rock step starts on 1, 2 the first triple step starts 3a4 and the second on 5a6.\nIn single time style (used with faster music) the triple steps are replaced by single steps, so two beats of music are used for each single step while each step in the rock (R) step (S) is still completed in one beat, finishing the cycle in six musical beats. Some instructors will teach vocalizing the single time style as\" \"Quick. Quick. Slow. Slow. \" or \"Back Step. Slow. Slow.\"\nThere is the choice to start with triples or with a rock step, however if you check the above chart where a triple step starts on a 1, 2 you can see that the pattern progresses and wraps back around. The choice of starting with a triple or a rock step does have musical consequences as music has phrasing with hits that often happen on 12, or 24 or 36... This means that dancers who choose to start with a rock step will probably find themselves on a rock step on every new phrase. Those who start with a triple will start with a triple on each new phrase. An advantage of starting with the triple step is that dancers can more easily change their foot work right at the start of the musical phrase.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10148", "revid": "6015862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10148", "title": "Ernst Kaltenbrunner", "text": "Austrian SS official (1903\u20131946)\nErnst Kaltenbrunner (4 October 1903 \u2013 16 October 1946) was an Austrian high-ranking SS official during the Nazi era, major perpetrator of the Holocaust and convicted war criminal. After the assassination of Reinhard Heydrich in 1942, and a brief period under Heinrich Himmler, Kaltenbrunner was the third Chief of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), which included the offices of Gestapo, Kripo and SD, from January 1943 until the end of World War II in Europe.\nKaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party in 1930 and the SS in 1931, and by 1935 he was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. In 1938, he assisted in the \"Anschluss\" and was given command of the SS and police force in Austria. In January 1943, Kaltenbrunner was appointed chief of the RSHA, succeeding Reinhard Heydrich, who was assassinated in May 1942.\nA committed antisemite, Kaltenbrunner played a pivotal role in orchestrating the Holocaust, which intensified under his leadership. He oversaw the coordination of security and law enforcement agencies involved in widespread extermination, the suppression of resistance movements in occupied territories, extensive arrests, deportations, and executions. He was the highest-ranking member of the SS to face trial (Himmler having died of suicide in May 1945) at the Nuremberg trials, where he was found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity. Kaltenbrunner was sentenced to death, and was executed by hanging on 16 October 1946.\nPersonal life.\nKaltenbrunner was born in Ried im Innkreis, Austria, and growing up had a close relationship with his mother (born Theresia Utwardy). His father Hugo was a lawyer, and Kaltenbrunner spent his early years and primary education in Raab, later attending the Realgymnasium in Linz. Raised in a nationalist family, his ideological understanding of the world was shaped to some extent by the \"v\u00f6lkisch\" Pan-Germanism movement in Austria, since his father was an adherent to its ideals. Like his father, the younger Kaltenbrunner's pan-Germanism\u2014replete with antisemitism and the notion that political conflict was a racial struggle\u2014was cultivated in the nationalist student fraternities known as \"Burschenschaften\". Kaltenbrunner was incidentally also childhood friends with Adolf Eichmann, the infamous SS officer who later played a key role in implementing the Nazis' \"Final Solution\" against Europe's Jews. \nAfter finishing gymnasium in 1921, Kaltenbrunner first studied chemistry at the University of Graz, where his father had matriculated, but switched to law in 1923. While studying at Graz, he joined the Arminia fraternity, became active in student politics, and participated in demonstrations against Marxism and clerical influence. He obtained his doctorate in 1926. Kaltenbrunner then worked at a law firm in Salzburg for a year before opening his own law office in Linz. He had deep scars on his face reportedly from duelling in his student days, although some sources attribute them to a drunk-driving crash.\nBy 1928, Kaltenbrunner was bored, lonely, and unfulfilled according to historian Peter Black; however Kaltenbrunner's work as a provincial lawyer in Linz also brought him into the right-wing \"gymnastic circles in Linz\" where he joined the \"Deutsch-Volkischer Turnverein\", an organization with close ties to the paramilitary formation of the Austrian \"Heimwehr\". Black described this latter organization as \"a training ground for the illegal Nazi SA and SS\". In the summer of 1929, Kaltenbrunner joined the \"Heimwehr\", which Black claims merged his \"emotional need for membership in a community\" with his political ideals. \nOn 14 January 1934, Kaltenbrunner married Elisabeth Eder (20 October 1908 \u2013 20 May 2002), who was also a Nazi Party member; the couple had three children. In addition to the children from his marriage, Kaltenbrunner had twins, Ursula and Wolfgang (b. 1945) with his long-time mistress, Gisela Gr\u00e4fin von Westarp (27 June 1920 \u2013 2 June 1983). All the children survived the war.\nSS career.\nOn 18 October 1930, Kaltenbrunner joined the Nazi Party as member number 300,179. In 1931, he was the \"Bezirksredner\" (district speaker) for the Nazi Party in Upper Austria. Kaltenbrunner joined the \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) on 31 August 1931 after encouragement by then leader of Hitler's bodyguard, SS-\"Standartenf\u00fchrer\" Sepp Dietrich; his SS number being 13,039. Black writes that \"Kaltenbrunner found in the Nazi movement and the SS what he politically desired and emotionally needed: a world where the ideal of the racial community was prized, where the theory of racial struggle was accepted as an obvious fact, where all doubts about the meaning of existence were swept away.\"\nKaltenbrunner first became a \"Rechtsberater\" (legal consultant) for the Nazi Party in 1929 and later held this same position for SS Abschnitt (Section) VIII, beginning in 1932. That same year he began working at the law practice of his father, who had taken ill. In October 1932, Ernst R\u00f6hm appointed Kaltenbrunner as an \"SA- und SS-Gruppenrechtsberater\", making it his job to provide free legal counsel for members of either unit should they be arrested for \"performing their duty\". By 1933, Kaltenbrunner had become head of the National-Socialist Lawyers' League in Linz.\nIn January 1934, Kaltenbrunner was briefly jailed at the Kaisersteinbruch detention camp with other Nazis for conspiracy by the Engelbert Dollfuss government. While there, he led a hunger strike against the inadequate food rations, poor sanitary conditions, and unfair treatment by the \"Heimwehr\" guards at the camp, which forced the government to release 490 of the party members. In 1935, he was jailed again on suspicion of high treason; more specifically, Kaltenbrunner was accused of spreading Nazi propaganda materials to the army. This charge was dropped, but he was sentenced to six months imprisonment for conspiracy and he lost his license to practice law. Although many of the accused and arrested Austrian Nazis emigrated to Germany, Kaltenbrunner remained in Austria\u2014a fact he shared with an acquaintance in 1935\u2014at Himmler's insistence, who saw in the Austrian a useful associate for strengthening the SS there. \nFrom mid-1935 Kaltenbrunner was head of the illegal SS Abschnitt VIII in Linz and was considered a leader of the Austrian SS. To provide Heinrich Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich and Heinz Jost with new information, Kaltenbrunner repeatedly made trips to Bavaria. He would hide on a train and on a ship that traveled to Passau, then return with money and orders for Austrian comrades. During his trips between the two countries, he frequently carried detailed reports gathered by the Nazi underground in Austria, including photos Kaltenbrunner had taken in autumn 1936 of confidential documents that detailed Austria's foreign policy. During January 1937, Himmler appointed Kaltenbrunner chief of the entire Austrian SS. Kaltenbrunner was arrested again by Austrian authorities on charges of heading the illegal Nazi Party organization (the Nazi Relief Office) in Ober\u00f6sterreich. He was released in September.\nActing on orders from Hermann G\u00f6ring, Kaltenbrunner assisted in bringing about the \"Anschluss\" with Germany (13 March 1938); he was awarded the role of State Secretary for Public Security in the Seyss-Inquart cabinet of 11 to 13 March 1938. Controlled from behind the scenes by Himmler, Kaltenbrunner still led, albeit clandestinely, the Austrian SS as part of his duty to \"coordinate\" and manage the Austrian population \u2013 this entailed the Nazification of all aspects of Austrian society. Then on 21 March 1938, he was promoted to SS-\"Brigadef\u00fchrer\". At the 10 April 1938 parliamentary election, he was elected to the \"Reichstag\" as a deputy from Ostmark. He retained this seat until the fall of the Nazi regime on 8 May 1945. Amid this activity, he helped establish the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp near Linz. Mauthausen was the first Nazi concentration camp opened in Austria following the \"Anschluss\". On 11 September 1938, Kaltenbrunner was promoted to the rank of SS-\"Gruppenf\u00fchrer\" (equivalent to a lieutenant general in the German Army) while holding the position of leader of \"SS-Oberabschnitt \u00d6sterreich\" (re-designated SS-Oberabschnitt Donau in November 1938). Also in 1938, he was appointed Higher SS and Police Leader (\"H\u00f6herer SS- und Polizeif\u00fchrer\"; HSSPF) for \"Oberabschnitt Donau\", which was the primary SS command in Austria (he held that post until 30 January 1943).\nWorld War II.\nIn June 1940, Kaltenbrunner was appointed Vienna's chief of police and held that additional post for a year. In July 1940, he was commissioned as an SS-\"Untersturmf\u00fchrer\" into the Waffen-SS Reserve. Alongside his many official duties, Kaltenbrunner also developed an intelligence network across Austria, moving southeastwards, which eventually brought him to Himmler's attention for appointment as chief of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) in January 1943. The RSHA was composed of the SiPo (\"Sicherheitspolizei\"; the combined forces of the Gestapo and Kripo) along with the SD (\"Sicherheitsdienst\", Security Service). Kaltenbrunner replaced Heydrich, who had been assassinated in June 1942. Kaltenbrunner held this position until the end of World War II. Hardly anyone knew Kaltenbrunner, and upon his appointment, Himmler transferred responsibility both for SS personnel and for economics from the RSHA to the SS Main Economic and Administrative Office. Nonetheless, Kaltenbrunner was promoted to SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer und General der Polizei\" on 21 June 1943. He also replaced Heydrich as president (serving from 1943 to 1945) of the International Criminal Police Commission (ICPC), the organization today known as Interpol.\nFearing a collapsing home-front due to the Allied bombing campaigns, and worried that another \"stab-in-the-back\" at home could arise as a result, Kaltenbrunner immediately tightened the Nazi grip within Germany. From what historian Anthony Read relates, Kaltenbrunner's appointment as RSHA chief came as a surprise given the other possible candidates like the head of the Gestapo, Heinrich M\u00fcller, or even the SD foreign-intelligence chief, Walter Schellenberg. Historian Richard Grunberger also added the name of Wilhelm Stuckart, the future minister of the German Interior, as another potential candidate for head of the RSHA; however, he suggests that Kaltenbrunner was most likely selected since he was a comparative \"newcomer\", expected to be more \"pliable\" in Himmler's hands.\nLike many of the ideological fanatics in the regime, Kaltenbrunner was a committed antisemite. According to former SS-\"Sturmbannf\u00fchrer\" Hans Georg Mayer, Kaltenbrunner was present at a December 1940 meeting among Adolf Hitler, Joseph Goebbels, Himmler and Heydrich where it was decided to gas all Jews incapable of heavy physical work. Under Kaltenbrunner's command, the genocide of Jews picked up pace as \"the process of extermination was to be expedited and the concentration of the Jews in the Reich itself and the occupied countries were to be liquidated as soon as possible.\" Kaltenbrunner stayed constantly informed over the status of concentration-camp activities, receiving periodic reports at his office in the RSHA.\nTo combat homosexuality across the greater Reich, Kaltenbrunner pushed the Ministry of justice in July 1943 for an edict mandating compulsory castration for anyone found guilty of this offence. While this was rejected, he still took steps to get the army to review some 6,000 cases to prosecute homosexuals.\nDuring the summer of 1943, Kaltenbrunner conducted his second inspection of the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp. While he was there, 15 prisoners were selected to demonstrate for Kaltenbrunner three methods of killing: by a gunshot to the neck, hanging, and gassing. After the killings were performed, Kaltenbrunner inspected the crematorium and later the quarry. In October 1943, he told Herbert Kappler, the head of German police and security services in Rome, that the \"eradication of the Jews in Italy\" was of \"special interest\" for \"general security\". Four days later, Kappler's SS and police units began rounding up and deporting Jews by train to Auschwitz concentration camp.\nIn 1944, during an arranged meeting in Klessheim Castle near Salzburg, when Hitler was in the process of strong-arming Admiral Horthy into a closer integration between Hungary and Nazi Germany, Kaltenbrunner was present for the negotiations and escorted Horthy out once they were over. Accompanying Horthy and Kaltenbrunner on the journey back to Hungary, Adolf Eichmann brought with him a special \"Einsatzkommando\" unit to begin the process of rounding up and deporting Hungary's 750,000 Jews.\nIt was said that even Himmler feared him, as Kaltenbrunner was an intimidating figure with 1.94m (6'4\u00bd\") in height, facial scars, and volatile temper. Kaltenbrunner was also a longtime friend of Otto Skorzeny and recommended him for many secret missions, allowing Skorzeny to become one of Hitler's favourite agents. Kaltenbrunner also allegedly headed Operation Long Jump, an alleged plan to assassinate Stalin, Churchill, and Roosevelt in Tehran in 1943.\nImmediately in the wake of the 20 July Plot on Hitler's life in 1944, Kaltenbrunner was summoned to Hitler's wartime headquarters at the \"Wolfsschanze\" (Wolf's Lair) in East Prussia to begin the investigation into who had planned the assassination attempt. Once it was revealed that an attempted military coup against Hitler had been launched, Himmler and Kaltenbrunner had to tread carefully, as the military was not under the jurisdiction of the Gestapo or the SD. When the attempt failed, the conspirators were soon identified. Kaltenbrunner called for the execution of those implicated in the plot. An estimated 5,000 people were eventually executed, with many more sent to concentration camps.\nHistorian Heinz H\u00f6hne counted Kaltenbrunner among the fanatical Hitler loyalists and described him as being committed \"to the bitter end\". Field reports from the SD in October 1944 about deteriorating morale in the military prompted Kaltenbrunner to urge the involvement of the RSHA in military court-martial proceedings, but this was rejected by Himmler, who thought it unwise to interfere in \"Wehrmacht\" (military) affairs. In December 1944, Kaltenbrunner was granted the additional rank of General of the Waffen-SS. On 15 November 1944, he was awarded the Knights Cross of the War Merit Cross with Swords. In addition, he was awarded the Nazi Party Golden Party Badge and the \"Blutorden\" (Blood Order). Using his authority as Chief of the RSHA, Kaltenbrunner issued a decree on 6 February 1945 that allowed policemen to shoot people at their own discretion deemed \"disloyal\", without any form of judicial review.\nOn 12 March 1945, a meeting took place in Vorarlberg between Kaltenbrunner and Carl Jacob Burckhardt, president of the International Committee of the Red Cross (1945\u201348). Just over a month later, Himmler was informed that SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" (general) Karl Wolff had been negotiating with the Allies for the capitulation of Italy. When questioned by Himmler, Wolff explained that he was operating under Hitler's orders and attempting to play separate Allies against one another. Himmler believed him, but Kaltenbrunner did not, and told Himmler that an informant claimed that Wolff had also negotiated with Cardinal Schuster of Milan and was about to surrender occupied Italy to the Allies. Himmler angrily repeated the allegations; Wolff, feigning offence, challenged Himmler to present these statements to Hitler. Unnerved by Wolff's demands, Himmler backed down, and Hitler sent Wolff back to Italy to continue his purported disruption of the Allies.\nOn 18 April 1945, three weeks before the war ended, Himmler named Kaltenbrunner commander-in-chief of the remaining German forces in southern Europe. Kaltenbrunner attempted to organize cells for post-war sabotage in the region and Germany but accomplished little. Hitler made one of his last appearances on 20 April 1945 outside the subterranean in Berlin, where he pinned medals on boys from the Hitler Youth for their bravery. Kaltenbrunner was among those present, but realizing the end was near, he then fled from Berlin.\nArrest.\nOn 12 May 1945 Kaltenbrunner was apprehended along with his adjutant, Arthur Scheidler, and two SS guards in a remote cabin at the top of the Totes Gebirge mountains near Altaussee, Austria, by a search party initiated by the 80th Infantry Division, Third U.S. Army. Information had been gained from Johann Brandauer, the assistant burgermeister of Altaussee, that the party was hiding out with false papers in the cabin. This was supported by an eyewitness sighting by the Altaussee mountain ranger five days earlier. Special Agent Robert E. Matteson from the U.S. Army's Counterintelligence Corps Detachment organized and led a patrol consisting of Brandauer, four ex-\"Wehrmacht\" soldiers, and a squad of U.S. soldiers to effect the arrest. The party climbed over mountainous and glacial terrain for six hours in darkness before arriving at the cabin. After a short standoff, all four men exited the cabin and surrendered without a shot fired. Kaltenbrunner claimed to be a doctor and offered a false name. However, upon their arrival back to town his last mistress, Countess Gisela von Westarp, and the wife (Iris) of his adjutant Arthur Scheidler chanced to spot the men being led away; the ladies called out to both men and embraced them. This action resulted in their identification and arrest by U.S. troops.\nIn 2001, Ernst Kaltenbrunner's personal Nazi security seal was found in an Alpine lake in Styria, Austria, 56 years after he had thrown it away to hide his identity. The seal was recovered by a Dutch citizen on holiday. The seal has the words \"Chef der Sicherheitspolizei und des SD\" (Chief of the Security Police and SD) engraved on it. Experts have examined the seal and believe it was discarded in the final days of the European war in May 1945.\nNuremberg trials.\nAt the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was charged with conspiracy to commit crimes against peace, war crimes and crimes against humanity. Due to the areas over which he exercised responsibility as an SS general and as chief of the RSHA, he was acquitted of crimes against peace, but held responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity.\nDuring the initial stages of the Nuremberg trials, Kaltenbrunner was absent because of two episodes of subarachnoid hemorrhage, which required several weeks of recovery time. He was examined by Chief Medical Officer Lt. Col. Rene Juchli who reported that Kaltenbrunner was suffering from gallstones. After his health improved, the tribunal denied his request for pardon. When he was released from a military hospital he pleaded not guilty to the charges of the indictment against him. Kaltenbrunner said all decrees and legal documents that bore his signature were \"rubber-stamped\" and filed by his adjutant(s). He also said Gestapo Chief Heinrich M\u00fcller had illegally affixed his signature to numerous documents in question.\nKaltenbrunner argued in his defence that his position as RSHA chief existed only theoretically and said he was only active in matters of espionage and intelligence. He maintained that Himmler, as his superior, was the person culpable for the atrocities committed during his tenure as chief of the RSHA. Kaltenbrunner also asserted that he had no knowledge of the Final Solution before 1943 and went on to claim that he protested against the ill-treatment of the Jews to Himmler and Hitler. Further denials from Kaltenbrunner included statements that he knew nothing of the Commissar Order and that he never visited Mauthausen concentration camp, despite documentation of his visit. At one point, Kaltenbrunner went so far as to avow that \"he\" was responsible for bringing the Final Solution to an end. In response to his denials, people in the courtroom laughed. During the trial, Hans Bernd Gisevius described Kaltenbrunner as \"even worse than that monster Heydrich\".\nConviction and execution.\nOn 30 September 1946, the International Military Tribunal (IMT) found Kaltenbrunner not guilty of crimes against peace, but guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity (counts three and four). On 1 October 1946, the IMT sentenced him to death by hanging.\nKaltenbrunner was executed on 16 October 1946, around 1:15\u00a0am, in Nuremberg. His body, like those of the other nine executed men and that of Hermann G\u00f6ring (who committed suicide the previous day), was cremated at the Eastern Cemetery in Munich and the ashes were scattered in a tributary of the River Isar.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10149", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10149", "title": "Englebert Dolfuss", "text": ""}
{"id": "10150", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10150", "title": "Engelbert Dollfuss", "text": "Chancellor of Austria from 1932 to 1934\nEngelbert Dollfuss (alternatively Dollfu\u00df; 4 October 1892 \u2013 25 July 1934) was an Austrian politician and dictator who served as chancellor of Austria between 1932 and 1934. Having served as Minister for Forests and Agriculture, he ascended to Federal Chancellor in 1932 in the midst of a crisis for the conservative and nationalist government. This crisis culminated in the self-elimination of the Austrian Parliament, a coup sparked by the resignation of the presiding officers of the National Council. Suppressing the Socialist movement in the Austrian Civil War and later banning the Austrian Nazi Party, he cemented his rule through the \"First of May Constitution\" in 1934. Later that year, Dollfuss was assassinated as part of a failed coup attempt by Nazi agents. His successor Kurt Schuschnigg maintained the regime until Adolf Hitler's Anschluss in 1938.\nEarly life.\nDollfuss was born to a poor, peasant, lower middle-class family in the hamlet of Great Maierhof in the commune of St. Gotthard near Texingtal in Lower Austria. Young Dollfuss spent his childhood in his step-father's house in the nearby commune of Kirnberg, where he also went to elementary school. The local parish priests helped to finance Dollfuss's education, as his parents were unable to do so by themselves alone. He attended high school in Hollabrunn. After graduating from high school, Dollfuss intended to become a priest, and thus he enrolled at the University of Vienna to study theology, but after a few months changed course and started studying law in 1912. As a student, he earned a livelihood by giving lessons. He became a member of the Students' Social Movement, a student organisation dedicated to social and charitable work among the workers.\nAs World War I broke out, Dollfuss was reported to be recruited in Vienna but was rejected because he was two centimetres shorter than the minimum. Fully grown, he was less than 1.52 m (5 ft 0 in) in height, and later was nicknamed \"Millimetternich\", a portmanteau of \"Millimeter\" (German for millimetre) and Klemens von Metternich. The same day he was rejected in Vienna, Dollfuss went to St. P\u00f6lten where the recruiting commission for his district was located and insisted on being recruited, and, even though he did not meet the minimum height standards, he was accepted. As a volunteer, he had a right to choose a regiment in which he would serve, and Dollfuss opted for the Tyrolese militia also known as the \"Kaisersch\u00fctzen\". In September 1914 he graduated from the Brixener Officer's School with the rank of Ensign and was transferred to the Imperial-Royal 2nd Tyrolian Rifle (Landessch\u00fctzen) Regiment in Bosen. He was soon promoted to the rank of Lieutenant. He served for 37 months at the Italian Front, south of Tyrol. By 1916 he was promoted to First lieutenant. He was awarded the following medals: 1916 the Silver Bravery Medal 1st Class, 1917 the Karl Troop Cross, Wound Medal with one would stripe and the Bronze Military Merit Medal two times and in 1918 the Military Merit Cross 3. Class with War Decoration and Swords and after the war the Austrian War Memorial Medal with Swords. \nAfter the war, he was still a student and was employed by the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union, which helped him to secure his material existence, and it was here where Dollfuss gained his first political experience. There, he organised peasants to help them recover from the war, as well as shield them from the influences of Judaism, Freemasonry and Marxism. Being recognised for the abilities he showed at the Union, he was sent for further studies to Berlin. In Berlin, he began to garner dislike for some of his professors, as academia there was substantially influenced by liberalism and socialism. In his studies, he devoted himself to the Christian principles of economics. In Germany, he became a member of the Federation of German Peasants' Union and of the Preussenkasse \u2013 essentially, a central bank for member cooperatives, where he gained practical experience. In Germany, he met his future wife Alwine Glienke, a descendant of a Pomeranian family. Dollfuss often met with Carl Sonnenschein, leader of social activities of students and the pioneer of the Catholic movement in Berlin.\nAfter returning to Vienna, he was a secretary of the Lower Austrian Peasants' Union. He devoted his efforts to consolidating that industry. Dollfuss was instrumental in the founding of the regional Chamber of Agriculture of Lower Austria, becoming its secretary and a director; the Federation of Agriculture and the Agricultural Labourers' Insurance Institute; in organising the new Agrarian policy of Lower Austria and in laying the foundations for the corporative organisation of agriculture. A few years later, he was a representative of Austria at the International Agrarian Congress, where his proposals made him internationally known in that sphere. He was seen as an unofficial leader of the Austrian peasantry.\nOn 1 October 1930 Dollfuss was appointed the president of the Federal Railways, the largest industrial corporation in Austria. There, Dollfuss came into contact with all branches of the industry. In March 1931, he was appointed Federal Minister of Agriculture and Forestry.\nChancellor of Austria.\nOn 10 May 1932, Dollfuss, aged 39 and with only one year's experience in the Federal Government, was offered the office of Chancellor by President Wilhelm Miklas, also a member of the Christian-Social Party. Dollfuss did not immediately respond, instead spending the night in his favourite church praying, returning in the morning for a bath and a spartan meal before finally replying to the President that he would accept the offer. Dollfuss was sworn in on 20 May 1932 as head of a coalition government between the Christian-Social Party, the Landbund \u2013 a right-wing agrarian party \u2013 and Heimatblock, the parliamentary wing of the \"Heimwehr\", a paramilitary ultra-nationalist group. The coalition assumed the pressing task of tackling the problems of the Great Depression. Much of the Austro-Hungarian Empire's industry had been situated in the areas that became part of Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia after World War I as a result of the Treaty of Saint-Germain. Postwar Austria was therefore economically disadvantaged.\nDollfuss's support in Parliament was marginal; his coalition had only a one-vote majority.\nDollfuss as dictator of Austria.\nAscent to power.\nIn March 1933, a constitutional impasse arose over irregularities in the voting procedure in the Austrian parliament. The Social Democratic president of the National Council (the lower house of parliament), Karl Renner, resigned to be able to cast a vote as a parliament member. As a consequence, the two vice presidents, belonging to other parties, resigned as well in order to be able to vote. Without a president, the parliament could not conclude the session. Dollfuss took the three resignations as a pretext to declare that the National Council had become unworkable and advised President Wilhelm Miklas to issue a decree adjourning it indefinitely. \nOn March 7, Dolfuss announced his government had assumed emergency powers based on the \"Wartime Economy Authority Law,\" which had been passed in 1917. From that point onwards, he governed by emergency decree, effectively seizing dictatorial powers. When the National Council wanted to reconvene on 15 March, days after the resignation of the three presidents, Dollfuss had the police bar entrance to the chamber, effectively eliminating democracy in Austria.\nDollfuss was concerned that with German National Socialist leader Adolf Hitler as Chancellor of Germany from January 1933, the Austrian National Socialists (DNSAP) could gain a significant minority in future elections (according to fascism scholar Stanley G. Payne, should elections have been held in 1933, the DNSAP could have mustered about 25% of the votes \u2013 contemporary \"Time\" magazine analysts suggest higher support of 50%, with a 75% approval rate in the Tyrol region bordering Nazi Germany). In addition, the Soviet Union's influence in Europe had increased throughout the 1920s and early 1930s. Dollfuss banned the Communist Party of Austria on 26 May 1933 and the DNSAP on 19 June 1933. Under the banner of the Fatherland Front, he later established a one-party dictatorship rule largely modelled after fascism in Italy, banning all other Austrian parties \u2013 including the Social Democratic Labour Party (SDAP\u00d6). Social Democrats however continued to exist as an independent organization, nevertheless, though without its paramilitary \"Republikanischer Schutzbund\", which until banned on 31 March 1933 could have mustered tens of thousands against Dollfuss's government.\nThe Fatherland Front.\nDollfuss modelled the Fatherland Front according to Catholic corporatist ideals with anti-secularist tones and in a similar way to Italian fascism, dropping Austrian pretenses of unification with Germany as long as the Nazi Party remained in power there. In August 1933, Benito Mussolini's regime issued a guarantee of Austrian independence. Dollfuss also exchanged \"Secret Letters\" with Mussolini about ways to guarantee Austrian independence. Mussolini had an interest in Austria forming a buffer zone against Nazi Germany. Dollfuss always stressed the similarity of the regimes of Hitler in Germany and Joseph Stalin in the Soviet Union and was convinced that Austria and Italy could counter totalitarian national-socialism and communism in Europe. \nIn September 1933 Dollfuss merged his Christian Social Party with elements of other nationalist and conservative groups, including the Heimwehr (which encompassed many workers who were unhappy with the radical leadership of the socialist party) to form the \"Vaterl\u00e4ndische Front\", though the Heimwehr continued to exist as an independent organization until 1936, when Dollfuss's successor Kurt von Schuschnigg forcibly merged it into the Front, instead creating the unabidingly loyal \"Frontmiliz\" as a paramilitary task-force. Dollfuss was shot and wounded in an assassination attempt on 3 October 1933 by Rudolf Dertil, a 22-year-old who had been ejected from the military for his pro-Nazi views and had joined the Nazi Party in 1932. Dertil was sentenced to five years in prison for attempted murder. In the aftermath of the attempted assassination, Dollfuss declared martial law, which allowed for the resumption of capital punishment in Austria.\nAustrian Civil War.\nIn its drive to eliminate the Social Democrats' \"Schutzbund\", the Dollfuss government searched the homes and meeting places of its members for weapons. On 12 February 1934, the Austrian Civil War was sparked by the armed resistance of the Linz branch of the Social Democrats to the search of their party headquarters. Word of the fighting in Linz spread quickly, and additional armed conflicts broke out, primarily in Austria's industrial regions and Vienna. The \"Schutzbund\" was greatly outnumbered by the police and army, which used artillery against the insurgents. In addition, the general strike which had been called to support the uprising failed to materialize. The result was the collapse of the rebellion by 15 February, with the deaths of about 350 persons, roughly equally divided between civilians, insurgents, and government forces. The Social Democrats were outlawed by the Federal government on 12 February 1934, and their leaders were imprisoned or fled abroad.\nNew constitution.\nDollfuss staged a rump parliamentary session with just Fatherland Front members present in April 1934 to have a new constitution approved, effectively the second constitution in the world espousing corporatist ideas (after that of the Portuguese \"Estado Novo\"). The session retrospectively made all the decrees already passed since March 1933 legal. The new constitution became effective on 1 May 1934 and swept away the last remnants of democracy and the system of the First Austrian Republic, establishing the Federal State of Austria. Based on Italian Fascism, Austria officially became a one-party authoritarian state. Opposing the Anschluss, Dollfuss and the Fatherland Front made heavy use of the Austrians' Catholic religion in an attempt to cultivate a sense of nationalism and prevent it from being absorbed by Nazi Germany.\nAssassination.\nAs a result of his consistent opposition to Nazi demands, Dollfuss was assassinated on 25 July 1934 by a group of Austrian Nazis, including Otto Planetta, Franz Holzweber, Ernst Feike, Franz Leeb, Josef Hackl, Ludwig Maitzen, Erich Wohlraab, and Paul Hudl, who entered the Chancellery building and shot him in an attempted \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". During mass trials which took place after the coup, Hudl was sentenced to life in prison, while the others were sentenced to death for their involvement. Planetta and Holzweber were hanged on 31 July 1934, Feike was hanged on 7 August 1934, and Leeb, Hackl, Maitzen, and Wohlraab were hanged on 13 August 1934. Hudl was released under an amnesty in 1938.\nIn his dying moments, Dollfuss asked for Viaticum, the Eucharist administered to a dying person, but his assassins refused to give it to him. Mussolini had no hesitation in attributing the attack to the German dictator: the news reached him at Cesena, where he was examining the plans for a psychiatric hospital. Mussolini personally gave the announcement to Dollfuss's widow, who was a guest at his villa in Riccione with her children. He also put at the disposal of Ernst R\u00fcdiger Starhemberg, who spent a holiday in Venice, a plane that allowed the prince to rush back to Vienna and to face the assailants with his militia, with the permission of President Wilhelm Miklas.\nMussolini also mobilised a part of the Italian army on the Austrian border and threatened Hitler with war in the event of a German invasion of Austria to thwart the putsch. Then he announced to the world: \"The independence of Austria, for which he has fallen, is a principle that has been defended and will be defended by Italy even more strenuously\", and then replaced in the main square of Bolzano the statue of Walther von der Vogelweide, a Germanic troubadour, with that of Drusus, a Roman general who conquered part of Germany. This was the greatest moment of friction between Italian Fascism and National Socialism and Mussolini himself came down several times to reaffirm the differences in the field.\nThe assassination of Dollfuss was accompanied by uprisings in many regions in Austria, resulting in further deaths. In Carinthia, a large contingent of northern German Nazis tried to seize power but were subdued by the Italian units nearby. At first, Hitler was jubilant, but the Italian reaction surprised him. Hitler became convinced that he could not face a conflict with the Western European powers, and he officially denied liability, stating his regret for the murder of the Austrian Chancellor. He replaced the ambassador to Vienna with Franz von Papen and prevented the conspirators from entering Germany, also expelling them from the Austrian Nazi Party. The Nazi assassins in Vienna, after declaring the formation of a new government under Austrian Nazi Anton Rintelen, previously exiled by Dollfuss as Austrian Ambassador to Rome, surrendered after threats from the Austrian military of blowing up the Chancellery using dynamite, and were subsequently tried and executed by hanging. Kurt Schuschnigg, previously Minister of Education, was appointed new chancellor of Austria after a few days, assuming the office from Dollfuss's deputy Starhemberg.\nOut of a population of 6.5 million, approximately 500,000 Austrians were present at Dollfuss's burial in Vienna. He is interred in the Hietzing cemetery in Vienna. His wife, Alwine Dollfuss (who died in 1973) was later buried beside him. Two of his children, Rudolf and Eva, were in Italy as guests of Rachele Mussolini at the time of his death, an event which saw Mussolini himself shed tears over his slain ally.\nIn literature.\nIn Bertolt Brecht's 1941 play \"The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui\", Dollfuss is represented by the character \"Dullfeet\".&lt;ref name=\"The New York Times - 9 May 1991- Review/Theater; Brecht's Cauliflower King In Another Resistible Rise\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nGordon Brook Shepard wrote a book in 1961 detailing Dolfuss and his rise to power.\nIn the novel Vienna Melody by Ernst Lothar the younger brother / son of the two major characters participates in the assassination of Dolfuss and is executed by firing squad for his role.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10151", "revid": "48523215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10151", "title": "E. T. A. Hoffmann", "text": "German author (1776\u20131822)\nErnst Theodor Amadeus Hoffmann (born Ernst Theodor Wilhelm Hoffmann; 24 January 1776 \u2013 25 June 1822) was a German Romantic author of fantasy and gothic horror, a jurist, composer, music critic and artist. He is the author of the novella \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", on which Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" is based. In addition, his stories form the basis of Jacques Offenbach's opera \"The Tales of Hoffmann\", in which Hoffmann appears (heavily fictionalized) as the hero. The ballet \"Copp\u00e9lia\" is based on two other stories that Hoffmann wrote, while Schumann's \"Kreisleriana\" is based on Hoffmann's character Johannes Kreisler.\nHoffmann's stories highly influenced 19th-century literature, and he is one of the major authors of the Romantic movement.\nLife.\nYouth.\nHoffmann's ancestors, both maternal and paternal, were jurists. His father, Christoph Ludwig Hoffmann (1736\u201397), was a barrister in K\u00f6nigsberg, Prussia (now Kaliningrad, Russia), as well as a poet and amateur musician who played the viola da gamba. In 1767 he married his cousin, Lovisa Albertina Doerffer (1748\u201396). Ernst Theodor Wilhelm, born on 24 January 1776, was the youngest of three children, of whom the second died in infancy.\nWhen his parents separated in 1778, his father went to Insterburg (now Chernyakhovsk) with his elder son, Johann Ludwig Hoffmann (1768\u20131822), while Hoffmann's mother stayed in K\u00f6nigsberg with her relatives: two aunts, Johanna Sophie Doerffer (1745\u20131803) and Charlotte Wilhelmine Doerffer (c. 1754\u201379) and their brother, Otto Wilhelm Doerffer (1741\u20131811), who were all unmarried. The trio raised the youngster.\nThe household, dominated by the uncle (whom Ernst nicknamed \"O Weh\"\u2014\"Oh dear!\"\u2014in a play on his initials \"O.W.\"), was pietistic and uncongenial. Hoffmann was to regret his estrangement from his father. Nevertheless, he remembered his aunts with great affection, especially the younger, Charlotte, whom he nicknamed \"Tante F\u00fc\u00dfchen\" (\"Aunt Tootsy-Wootsy\"). Although she died when he was only three years old, he treasured her memory (a character in Hoffmann's \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\" is named after her) and embroidered stories about her to such an extent that later biographers sometimes assumed her to be imaginary, until proof of her existence was found after World War II.\nBetween 1781 and 1792 he attended the Lutheran school or \"Burgschule\", where he made good progress in classics. Ernst showed great talent for piano-playing, and busied himself with writing and drawing. The provincial setting was not, however, conducive to technical progress, and despite his many-sided talents he remained rather ignorant of both classical forms and of the new artistic ideas that were developing in Germany. He had, however, read Schiller, Goethe, Swift, Sterne, Rousseau and Jean Paul, and wrote part of a novel titled \"Der Geheimnisvolle\".\nAround 1787 he became friends with Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Younger (1775\u20131843), the son of a pastor, and nephew of Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel the Elder, the well-known writer friend of Immanuel Kant. During the year 1792, both attended some of Kant's lectures at the University of K\u00f6nigsberg. Their friendship, although often tested by an increasing social difference, was to be lifelong.\nIn 1794, Hoffmann became enamored of Dora Hatt, a married woman to whom he had given music lessons. She was ten years older, and gave birth to her sixth child in 1795. In February 1796, her family protested against his attentions and, with his hesitant consent, asked another of his uncles to arrange employment for him in Glogau (G\u0142og\u00f3w), Prussian Silesia.\nThe provinces.\nFrom 1796, Hoffmann obtained employment as a clerk for his uncle, Johann Ludwig Doerffer, who lived in Glogau with his daughter Minna. After passing further examinations he visited Dresden, where he was amazed by the paintings in the gallery, particularly those of Correggio and Raphael. During the summer of 1798, his uncle was promoted to a court in Berlin, and the three of them moved there in August\u2014Hoffmann's first residence in a large city. It was there that Hoffmann first attempted to promote himself as a composer, writing an operetta called \"Die Maske\" and sending a copy to Queen Luise of Prussia. The official reply advised to him to write to the director of the Royal Theatre, a man named Iffland. By the time the latter responded, Hoffmann had passed his third round of examinations and had already left for Posen (Pozna\u0144) in South Prussia in the company of his old friend Hippel, with a brief stop in Dresden to show him the gallery.\nFrom June 1800 to 1803, he worked in Prussian provinces in the area of Greater Poland and Masovia. This was the first time he had lived without supervision by members of his family, and he started to become \"what school principals, parsons, uncles, and aunts call dissolute.\"\nHis first job, at Posen, was endangered after Carnival on Shrove Tuesday 1802, when caricatures of military officers were distributed at a ball. It was immediately deduced who had drawn them, and complaints were made to authorities in Berlin, who were reluctant to punish the promising young official. The problem was solved by \"promoting\" Hoffmann to P\u0142ock in New East Prussia, the former capital of Poland (1079\u20131138), where administrative offices were relocated from Thorn (Toru\u0144). He visited the place to arrange lodging, before returning to Posen where he married Mischa (Maria or Marianna Thekla Michalina Rorer, whose Polish surname was Trzci\u0144ska). They moved to P\u0142ock in August 1802.\nHoffmann despaired because of his exile, and drew caricatures of himself drowning in mud alongside ragged villagers. He did make use, however, of his isolation, by writing and composing. He started a diary on 1 October 1803. An essay on the theatre was published in Kotzebue's periodical, \"Die Freim\u00fcthige\", and he entered a competition in the same magazine to write a play. Hoffmann's was called \"Der Preis\" (\"The Prize\"), and was itself about a competition to write a play. There were fourteen entries, but none was judged worthy of the award: 100 Friedrichs d'or. Nevertheless, his entry was singled out for praise. This was one of the few good times of a sad period of his life, which saw the deaths of his uncle J. L. Hoffmann in Berlin, his Aunt Sophie, and Dora Hatt in K\u00f6nigsberg.\nAt the beginning of 1804, he obtained a post at Warsaw. On his way there, he passed through his hometown and met one of Dora Hatt's daughters. He was never to return to K\u00f6nigsberg.\nWarsaw.\nHoffmann assimilated well with Polish society; the years spent in Prussian Poland he recognized as the happiest of his life. In Warsaw he found the same atmosphere he had enjoyed in Berlin, renewing his friendship with Zacharias Werner, and meeting his future biographer, a neighbour and fellow jurist called Julius Eduard Itzig (who changed his name to Hitzig after his baptism). Itzig had been a member of the Berlin literary group called the \"Nordstern,\" or \"North Star\", and he gave Hoffmann the works of Novalis, Ludwig Tieck, Achim von Arnim, Clemens Brentano, Gotthilf Heinrich von Schubert, Carlo Gozzi and Calder\u00f3n. These relatively late introductions marked his work profoundly.\nHe moved in the circles of August Wilhelm Schlegel, Adelbert von Chamisso, Friedrich de la Motte Fouqu\u00e9, Rahel Levin and David Ferdinand Koreff.\nBut Hoffmann's fortunate position was not to last: on 28 November 1806, during the War of the Fourth Coalition, Napoleon Bonaparte's troops captured Warsaw, and the Prussian bureaucrats lost their jobs. They divided the contents of the treasury between them and fled. In January 1807, Hoffmann's wife and two-year-old daughter C\u00e4cilia returned to Posen, while he pondered whether to move to Vienna or go back to Berlin. A delay of six months was caused by severe illness. Eventually the French authorities demanded that all former officials swear allegiance or leave the country. As they refused to grant Hoffmann a passport to Vienna, he was forced to return to Berlin.\nHe visited his family in Posen before arriving in Berlin on 18 June 1807, hoping to further his career there as an artist and writer.\nBerlin and Bamberg.\nThe next fifteen months were some of the worst in Hoffmann's life.\nThe city of Berlin was also occupied by Napoleon's troops. Obtaining only meagre allowances, he had frequent recourse to his friends, constantly borrowing money and still going hungry for days at a time; he learned that his daughter had died. Nevertheless, he managed to compose his Six Canticles for \"a cappella\" choir: one of his best compositions, which he would later attribute to Kreisler in \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\".\nOn 1 September 1808 he arrived with his wife in Bamberg, where he began a job as theatre manager. The director, Count Soden, left almost immediately for W\u00fcrzburg, leaving a man named Heinrich Cuno in charge. Hoffmann was unable to improve standards of performance, and his efforts caused intrigues against him which resulted in him losing his job to Cuno. He began work as music critic for the \"Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung\", a newspaper in Leipzig, and his articles on Beethoven were especially well received, and highly regarded by the composer himself. It was in its pages that the \"Kapellmeister Johannes Kreisler\" character made his first appearance.\nHoffmann's breakthrough came in 1809, with the publication of \"Ritter Gluck\", a story about a man who meets, or believes he has met, the composer Christoph Willibald Gluck (1714\u201387) more than twenty years after the latter's death. The theme alludes to the work of Jean Paul, who invented the term Doppelg\u00e4nger the previous decade, and continued to exact a powerful influence over Hoffmann, becoming one of his earliest admirers. With this publication, Hoffmann began to use the pseudonym E. T. A. Hoffmann, telling people that the \"A\" stood for \"Amadeus\", in homage to the composer Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756\u201391). However, he continued to use Wilhelm in official documents throughout his life, and the initials E. T. W. also appear on his gravestone.\nThe next year, he was employed at the Bamberg Theatre as stagehand, decorator, and playwright, while also giving private music lessons.\nHe became so enamored of a young singing student, Julia Marc, that his feelings were obvious whenever they were together, and Julia's mother quickly found her a more suitable match. When Joseph Seconda offered Hoffmann a position as musical director for his opera company (then performing in Dresden), he accepted, leaving on 21 April 1813.\nDresden and Leipzig.\nPrussia had declared war against France on 16 March during the War of the Sixth Coalition, and their journey was fraught with difficulties. They arrived on the 25th, only to find that Seconda was in Leipzig; on the 26th, they sent a letter pleading for temporary funds. That same day Hoffmann was surprised to meet Hippel, whom he had not seen for nine years.\nThe situation deteriorated, and in early May Hoffmann tried in vain to find transport to Leipzig. On 8 May, the bridges were destroyed, and his family were marooned in the city. During the day, Hoffmann would roam, watching the fighting with curiosity. Finally, on 20 May, they left for Leipzig, only to be involved in an accident which killed one of the passengers in their coach and injured his wife.\nThey arrived on 23 May, and Hoffmann started work with Seconda's orchestra, which he found to be of the best quality. On 4 June an armistice began, which allowed the company to return to Dresden. But on 22 August, after the end of the armistice, the family was forced to relocate from their pleasant house in the suburbs into the town, and during the next few days the Battle of Dresden raged. The city was bombarded; many people were killed by bombs directly in front of him. After the main battle was over, he visited the gory battlefield. His account can be found in \"Vision auf dem Schlachtfeld bei Dresden\". After a long period of continued disturbance, the town surrendered on 11 November, and on 9 December the company travelled to Leipzig.\nOn 25 February, Hoffmann quarrelled with Seconda, and the next day he was given notice of twelve weeks. When asked to accompany them on their journey to Dresden in April, he refused, and they left without him. But during July his friend Hippel visited, and soon he found himself being guided back into his old career as a jurist.\nBerlin.\nAt the end of September 1814, in the wake of Napoleon's defeat, Hoffmann returned to Berlin and succeeded in regaining a job at the \"Kammergericht\", the chamber court. His opera \"Undine\" was performed by the Berlin Theatre. Its successful run came to an end only after a fire on the night of the 25th performance. Magazines clamoured for his contributions, and after a while his standards started to decline. Nevertheless, many masterpieces date from this time.\nDuring the period from 1819, Hoffmann was involved with legal disputes, while fighting ill health. Alcohol abuse and syphilis eventually caused weakening of his limbs during 1821, and paralysis from the beginning of 1822. His last works were dictated to his wife or to a secretary.\nPrince Metternich's anti-liberal programs began to put Hoffmann in situations that tested his conscience. Thousands of people were accused of treason for having certain political opinions, and university professors were monitored during their lectures.\nKing Frederick William III of Prussia appointed an Immediate Commission for the investigation of political dissidence; when he found its observance of the rule of law too frustrating, he established a Ministerial Commission to interfere with its processes. The latter was greatly influenced by Commissioner Kamptz. During the trial of \"Turnvater\" Jahn, the founder of the gymnastics association movement, Hoffmann found himself annoying Kamptz, and became a political target. When Hoffmann caricatured Kamptz in a story (\"Meister Floh\"), Kamptz began legal proceedings. These ended when Hoffmann's illness was found to be life-threatening. The King asked for a reprimand only, but no action was ever taken. Eventually \"Meister Floh\" was published with the offending passages removed.\nDeath.\nHoffmann died of syphilis in Berlin on 25 June 1822 at the age of 46. His grave is preserved in the Protestant \"Friedhof III der Jerusalems- und Neuen Kirchengemeinde\" (Cemetery No. III of the congregations of Jerusalem Church and New Church) in Berlin-Kreuzberg, south of Hallesches Tor at the underground station Mehringdamm.\nAssessment.\nHoffmann is one of the best-known representatives of German Romanticism, and a pioneer of the fantasy genre, with a taste for the macabre combined with realism that influenced such authors as Edgar Allan Poe (1809\u20131849), Nikolai Gogol (1809\u20131852), Charles Dickens (1812\u20131870), Charles Baudelaire (1821\u20131867), George MacDonald (1824\u20131905), Fyodor Dostoevsky (1821\u20131881), Vernon Lee (1856\u20131935), Franz Kafka (1883\u20131924) and Alfred Hitchcock (1899\u20131980). Hoffmann's story \"Das Fr\u00e4ulein von Scuderi\" is sometimes cited as the first detective story and a direct influence on Poe's \"The Murders in the Rue Morgue\"; Characters from it also appear in the opera \"Cardillac\" by Paul Hindemith.\nThe twentieth-century Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin characterised Hoffmann's works as Menippean Satire, essentially satirical and self-parodying in form, thus including him in a tradition that includes Cervantes, Diderot and Voltaire.\nRobert Schumann's piano suite Kreisleriana (1838) takes its title from one of Hoffmann's books (and according to Charles Rosen's \"The Romantic Generation\", is possibly rather inspired by \"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", in which Kreisler appears). Jacques Offenbach's masterwork, the opera \"Les contes d'Hoffmann\" (\"The Tales of Hoffmann\", 1881), is based on the stories, principally \"Der Sandmann\" (\"The Sandman\", 1816), \"Rat Krespel\" (\"Councillor Krespel\", 1818), and \"Das verlorene Spiegelbild\" (\"The Lost Reflection\") from \"Die Abenteuer der Silvester-Nacht\" (\"The Adventures of New Year's Eve\", 1814). \"Klein Zaches genannt Zinnober\" (\"Little Zaches called Cinnabar\", 1819) inspired an aria as well as the operetta \"Le Roi Carotte\" (1872). Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Nutcracker\" (1892) is based on \"The Nutcracker and the Mouse King\", and the ballet \"Copp\u00e9lia\", with music by Delibes, is based on two eerie Hoffmann stories.\nHoffmann also influenced 19th-century musical opinion directly through his music criticism. His reviews of Beethoven's Symphony No. 5 in C minor, Op. 67 (1808) and other important works set new literary standards for writing about music, and encouraged later writers to consider music as \"the most Romantic of all the arts.\" Hoffmann's reviews were first collected for modern readers by Friedrich Schnapp, ed., in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann: Schriften zur Musik; Nachlese\" (1963) and have been made available in an English translation in \"E.T.A. Hoffmann's Writings on Music, Collected in a Single Volume\" (2004).\nHoffmann strove for artistic polymathy. He created far more in his works than mere political commentary achieved through satire. His masterpiece novel \"Lebensansichten des Katers Murr\" (\"The Life and Opinions of Tomcat Murr\", 1819\u20131821) deals with such issues as the aesthetic status of true artistry and the modes of self-transcendence that accompany any genuine endeavour to create. Hoffmann's portrayal of the character Kreisler (a genius musician) is wittily counterpointed with the character of the tomcat Murr \u2013 a virtuoso illustration of artistic pretentiousness that many of Hoffmann's contemporaries found offensive and subversive of Romantic ideals.\nHoffmann's literature indicates the failings of many artists to differentiate between the superficial and the authentic aspects of such Romantic ideals. The \"self-conscious\" effort to impress must, according to Hoffmann, be divorced from the \"self-aware\" effort to create. This essential duality in \"Kater Murr\" is conveyed structurally through a discursive \"splicing together\" of two biographical narratives.\nScience fiction.\nWhile disagreeing with E. F. Bleiler's claim that Hoffmann was \"one of the two or three greatest writers of fantasy\", Algis Budrys of \"Galaxy Science Fiction\" said that he \"did lay down the groundwork for some of our most enduring themes\".\nHistorian Martin Willis argues that Hoffmann's impact on science fiction has been overlooked, saying \"his work reveals a writer dynamically involved in the important scientific debates of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.\" Willis points out that Hoffmann's work is contemporary with \"Frankenstein\" (1818) and with \"the heated debates and the relationship between the new empirical science and the older forms of natural philosophy that held sway throughout the eighteenth century.\" His \"interest in the machine culture of his time is well represented in his short stories, of which the critically renowned \"The Sandman\" (1816) and \"Automata\" (1814) are the best examples. ...Hoffmann's work makes a considerable contribution to our understanding of the emergence of scientific knowledge in the early years of the nineteenth century and to the conflict between science and magic, centred mainly on the 'truths' available to the advocates of either practice. ...Hoffmann's balancing of mesmerism, mechanics, and magic reflects the difficulty in categorizing scientific knowledge in the early nineteenth century.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10152", "revid": "47198456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10152", "title": "Erasmus", "text": "Dutch humanist (c. 1469\u20131536)\nDesiderius Erasmus Roterodamus ( ; ; 28 October c. 1466 \u2013 12 July 1536), commonly known in English as Erasmus of Rotterdam or simply Erasmus, was a Dutch humanist, Christian theologian, and philosopher. He was, through his writings, one of the most influential scholars of the Northern Renaissance and a major figure of Western culture.\nErasmus was an important figure in classical scholarship who wrote in a spontaneous, copious and natural Latin style. As a Catholic priest developing humanist techniques for working on texts, he prepared pioneering new Latin and Greek scholarly editions of the New Testament and of the Church Fathers, with annotations and commentary that were immediately and vitally influential in both the Protestant Reformation and the Catholic Reformation. He also wrote \"On Free Will\", \"The Praise of Folly\", \"The Complaint of Peace\", \"Handbook of a Christian Knight\", \"On Civility in Children\", \"\" and many other popular and pedagogical works.\nErasmus lived against the backdrop of the growing European religious reformations. He developed a biblical humanistic theology in which he advocated the religious and civil necessity both of peaceable concord and of pastoral tolerance on \"matters of indifference\". He remained a member of the Catholic Church all his life, remaining committed to reforming the church from within. He promoted what he understood as the traditional doctrine of synergism, which some prominent reformers such as Martin Luther and John Calvin rejected in favour of the doctrine of monergism. His influential middle-road approach disappointed, and even angered, partisans in both camps.\nWorks.\nErasmus was the most popular, most printed and arguably most influential author of the early sixteenth century, read in all nations in the West and frequently translated. By the 1530s, his writings accounted for 10\u201320% of book sales in Europe. \"Undoubtedly he was the most read author of his age.\" His vast number of Latin and Greek publications included translations, paraphrases, letters, textbooks, plays for schoolboys, commentary, poems, liturgies, satires, sermons, and prayers. A large number of his later works were defences of his earlier work from attacks by Catholic and Protestant theological and literary opponents.\nThe \"Catalogue of the Works of Erasmus\" (2023) runs to 444 entries (120 pages), almost all from the latter half of his life. He usually wrote books in particular classical literary genres with their different rhetorical conventions: complaint, diatribe, dialogue, encomium, epistle, commentary, liturgy, sermon, etc. His letter to Ulrich von Hutten on Thomas More's household has been called \"the first real biography in the real modern sense.\"\nFrom his youth, Erasmus had been a voracious writer. Erasmus wrote or answered up to 40 letters per day, usually waking early in the morning and writing them in his own hand. He did not work after dinner. His writing method (recommended in \"De copia\" and \"De ratione studii\") was to make notes on whatever he was reading, categorised by theme: he carted these commonplaces in boxes that accompanied him. When assembling a new book, he would go through the topics and cross out commonplace notes as he used them. This catalogue of research notes allowed him to rapidly create books, though woven from the same topics. Towards the end of his life, as he lost dexterity, he employed secretaries or amanuenses who performed the assembly or transcription, re-wrote his writing, and in his last decade, recorded his dictation; letters were usually in his own hand, unless formal. For much of his career he wrote standing at a desk, as shown in D\u00fcrer's portrait.\nNew Testament editions.\nIn the second half of his life, Erasmus worked on New Testament studies in a project that eventually saw his intended detailed Annotations on the New Testament (modeled on a work by Lorenzo Valla) expand with a revised Vulgate recension, his own new Latin translation, an accompanying Greek text, essays justifying his approach, and lengthy Paraphrases of the entire New Testament except \"Revelation\".\nThese went through multiple revisions and editions, and progressively involved many leading scholars and introduced several readings which were taken up by Protestant and Catholic reformers. Other publishers, such as Erasmus's earlier collaborator Aldine Press in Venice, immediately brought out their own editions, sometimes with their own corrections, and sometimes without the Annotations, or the Latin, or the Greek. Up to 300,000 copies of the various editions appear to have been printed in Erasmus's lifetime.\nThis body of work formed the basis for the majority of \"Textus Receptus\" Protestant translations of the New Testament in the 16th\u201319th centuries, including those of Martin Luther, William Tyndale and the King James Version.\nErasmus denied he was making a critical edition: \"I certainly did not undertake this task [of revising the New Testament] to provide a standard from which it would not be possible to diverge, but to make a substantial contribution both to the correction and to the understanding of the sacred books.\" He also later wrote to several Protestant and Catholic friends and critics, notably to his friend Pope Adrian, that \"(to be quite frank) had I known that a generation such as this would appear, I should either not have written at all some things that I have written or should have written them differently.\"\nNotable writings.\nErasmus wrote for educated audiences both\nHe is noted for his extensive scholarly editions of the New Testament in Latin and Greek, and the complete works of numerous Church Fathers. These formed the basis of the so-called Textus Receptus Protestant bibles. His editions of Greek and Roman moralists and rhetoricians such as Plutarch, Ovid, Ptolemy, Lucian, Seneca and Cicero re-introduced their broader thought to the West. \nThe only works with enduring popularity in modern time are his satires and semi-satires: \"The Praise of Folly\", \"Julius Excluded from Heaven\" and \"The Complaint of Peace\". However, his other works, such as his several thousand letters, continue to be a vital source of information to historians of numerous disciplines.\nLife and career.\nErasmus's almost 70 years may be divided into quarters.\nEarly life.\nDesiderius Erasmus is reported to have been born in Rotterdam on 27 or 28 October (\"the vigil of Simon and Jude\") in the late 1460s. He was named after Erasmus of Formiae, whom Erasmus's father Gerard (Gerardus Helye) personally favored. Although associated closely with Rotterdam, he lived there for only four years, never to return afterwards.\nThe year of Erasmus's birth is unclear: in later life he calculated his age as if born in 1466, but frequently his remembered age at major events actually implies 1469. (This article currently gives 1466 as the birth year. To handle this disagreement, ages are given first based on 1469, then in parentheses based on 1466: e.g., \"20 (or 23)\".) Furthermore, many details of his early life must be gleaned from a fictionalized third-person account he wrote in 1516 (published in 1529) in a letter to a fictitious Papal secretary, Lambertus Grunnius (\"Mr. Grunt\").\nHis parents could not be legally married: his father, Gerard, was a Catholic priest who may have spent up to six years in the 1450s or 60s in Italy as a scribe and scholar. His mother was Margaretha Rogerius (Latinized form of Dutch surname Rutgers), the daughter of a doctor from Zevenbergen. She may have been Gerard's housekeeper. \nAlthough he was born out of wedlock, Erasmus was cared for by his parents, with a loving household and the best education, until their early deaths from the bubonic plague in 1483. His only sibling Peter might have been born in 1463, and some writers suggest Margaret was a widow and Peter was the half-brother of Erasmus; Erasmus on the other hand called him his brother.\nErasmus's own story, in the possibly forged 1524 \"\" was along the lines that his parents were engaged, with the formal marriage blocked by his relatives (presumably a young widow or unmarried mother with a child was not an advantageous match); his father went to Italy to study Latin and Greek, and the relatives misled Gerard that Margaretha had died, on which news grieving Gerard romantically took Holy Orders, only to find on his return that Margaretha was alive; many scholars dispute this account.\nIn 1471 his father became the vice-curate of the small town of Woerden (where young Erasmus may have attended the local vernacular school to learn to read and write) and in 1476 was promoted to vice-curate of Gouda.\nErasmus was given the highest education available to a young commoner of his day, in a series of private, monastic or semi-monastic schools. In 1476, at the age of 6 (or 9), his family moved to Gouda and he started at the school of Pieter Winckel, who later became his guardian (and, perhaps, squandered Erasmus and Peter's inheritance.) Historians who date his birth in 1466 have Erasmus in Utrecht at the choir school at this period.\nIn 1478, at the age of 9 (or 12), he and his older brother Peter were sent to one of the best Latin schools in the Netherlands, located at Deventer and owned by the chapter clergy of the Lebu\u00efnuskerk (St. Lebuin's Church). A notable previous student was Thomas \u00e0 Kempis. Towards the end of his stay there the curriculum was renewed by the new principal of the school, Alexander Hegius, a correspondent of pioneering rhetorician Rudolphus Agricola. For the first time in Europe north of the Alps, Greek was taught at a lower level than a university and this is where he began learning it. His education there ended when plague struck the city about 1483, and his mother, who had moved to provide a home for her sons, died from the infection; then his father. Following the death of his parents, as well as 20 fellow students at his school, he moved back to his \"\" (Rotterdam?) where he was supported by Berthe de Heyden, a compassionate widow. \nIn 1484, around the age 14 (or 17), he and his brother went to a cheaper grammar school or seminary at 's-Hertogenbosch run by the Brethren of the Common Life: Erasmus's \"Epistle to Grunnius\" (see above) satirises them as the \"Collationary Brethren\" who select and sort boys for monkhood. He was exposed there to the Devotio moderna movement and the Brethren's famous book \"The Imitation of Christ\" but resented the harsh rules and strict methods of the religious brothers and educators. The two brothers made an agreement that they would resist the clergy but attend the university; Erasmus longed to study in Italy, the birthplace of Latin, and have a degree from an Italian university. Instead, Peter left for the Augustinian canonry in Stein, which left Erasmus feeling betrayed. Around this time he wrote forlornly to his friend Elizabeth de Heyden \"Shipwrecked am I, and lost, 'mid waters chill'.\" He suffered quartan fever for over a year. Eventually Erasmus moved to the same abbey as a postulant in or before 1487, around the age of 16 (or 19.)\nVows, ordination and canonry experience.\nPoverty had forced the sickly, bookish, teenaged orphan Erasmus into the consecrated life, entering the novitiate in 1487 at the canonry at rural Stein, very near Gouda, South Holland: the \"Chapter of Sion\" community largely borrowed its rule from the larger monkish Congregation of Windesheim who had historical associations with the Brethren of the Common Life, but also with the notable pastoral, mystical and anti-speculative post-scholastic theologians Jean Gerson and Gabriel Biel: positions associated also with Erasmus. In 1488\u20131490, the surrounding region was plundered badly by armies fighting the Squire Francis War of succession and then suffered a famine. Erasmus professed his vows as a Canon regular of St. Augustine there in late 1488 at age 19 (or 22).\nHistorian Fr. Aiden Gasquet later wrote: \"One thing, however, would seem to be quite clear; he could never have had any vocation for the religious life. His whole subsequent history shows this unmistakably.\" But according to one Catholic biographer, Erasmus had a spiritual awakening at the monastery.\nCertain abuses in religious orders were among the chief objects of his later calls to reform the Western Church from within, particularly coerced or tricked recruitment of immature boys (the fictionalised account in the \"Letter to Grunnius\" calls them \"victims of Dominic and Francis and Benedict\"): Erasmus felt he had belonged to this class, joining \"voluntarily but not freely\" and so considered himself, if not morally bound by his vows, certainly legally, socially and honour-bound to keep them, yet to look for his true vocation.\nWhile at Stein, 18-(or 21-)year-old Erasmus fell in unrequited love, forming what he called a \"passionate attachment\" (), with a fellow canon, Servatius Rogerus, and wrote a series of love letters in which he called Rogerus \"half my soul\", writing that \"it was not for the sake of reward or out of a desire for any favour that I have wooed you both unhappily and relentlessly. What is it then? Why, that you love him who loves you.\" This correspondence contrasts with the generally detached and much more restrained attitude he usually showed in his later life, though he had a capacity to form and maintain deep male friendships, such as with More, Colet, and Ammonio. No mentions or sexual accusations were ever made of Erasmus during his lifetime. His works notably praise moderate sexual desire in marriage between men and women.\nHe was ordained to the Catholic priesthood either on 25 April 1492, or 25 April 1495, at age 25 (or 28). Either way, he did not actively work as a choir priest for very long, though his many works on confession and penance suggests experience of dispensing them.\nDisengagement.\nIn 1493, his prior arranged for him to leave the Stein house and move to Brabant, to take up the post of Latin Secretary to the ambitious Bishop of Cambrai, Henry of Bergen, on account of his great skill in Latin and his reputation as a man of letters. Following this, he went to Paris to study theology. His status as priest, latinist and student, and his habit of being far away, afforded a measure of disengagement from the Stein canonry.\nFrom 1500, he avoided returning to the canonry at Stein even insisting the diet and hours would kill him, though he did stay with other Augustinian communities and at monasteries of other orders in his travels. Rogerus, who became prior at Stein in 1504, and Erasmus corresponded over the years, with Rogerus demanding Erasmus return after his studies were complete. Nevertheless, the library of the canonry ended up with by far the largest collection of Erasmus's publications in the Gouda region.\nIn 1505, Pope Julius II granted a dispensation from the vow of poverty to the extent of allowing Erasmus to hold certain benefices, and from the control and habit of his order, though he remained a priest and, formally, an Augustinian canon regular the rest his life. In 1517, Pope Leo X granted legal dispensations for Erasmus's \"defects of natality\" and confirmed the previous dispensation, allowing the 48-(or 51-)year-old his independence but still, as a canon, capable of holding office as a prior or abbot. Indeed, in 1535, incoming Pope Paul III provided a letter, never used, appointing him Provost of the \"Canons of Deventer\" (i.e., the semi-monastic Brethren of the Common Life chapter, which had long resisted titles such as Provost, and/or perhaps the canons of the Grote or Lebu\u00efnuskerk): this may also have been related to his intended return to the Low Countries. In 1525, Pope Clement VII granted, for health reasons, a dispensation to eat meat and dairy in Lent and on fast days. \nHe received dispensations (from Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and from Emperor Charles V in 1530) to make a will rather than have his wealth revert to his canonrical community (the Chapter of Sion) or to the state.\nTravels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nErasmus travelled widely and regularly, for reasons of poverty, \"escape\" from his Stein canonry (to Cambrai), education (to Paris, Turin), escape from the sweating sickness plague (to Orl\u00e9ans), employment (to England), searching libraries for manuscripts, writing (Brabant), royal counsel (Cologne), patronage, tutoring and chaperoning (North Italy), networking (Rome), seeing books through printing in person (Paris, Venice, Louvain, Basel), and avoiding the persecution of religious fanatics (to Freiburg). He enjoyed horseback riding.\nParis.\nIn 1495 with Bishop Henry's consent and a stipend, Erasmus went on to study at the University of Paris in the Coll\u00e8ge de Montaigu, a centre of reforming zeal, under the direction of the ascetic Jan Standonck, of whose rigors he complained. The university was then the chief seat of Scholastic learning but already coming under the influence of Renaissance humanism. For instance, Erasmus became an intimate friend of an Italian humanist Publio Fausto Andrelini, poet and \"professor of humanity\" in Paris, and part of the \"rhetorical-grammatical-poetical nexus\" flourishing there.\nHis health failed in the first year. After returning to Bergen and Stein to recuperate, Erasmus returned to Paris, and rented a room at the English boarding house (whose \"propri\u00e9taire\" tolerated his tardy or partial payments) where he tutored wealthy boarders, notably Thomas Grey (future Marquess of Dorset, and grandfather of Lady Jane Grey.) \nDuring this time, Erasmus developed a deep aversion to exclusive or excessive Aristotelianism and Scholasticism and started finding work as a tutor/chaperone to visiting English and Scottish aristocrats, most importantly in his life William Blount, 4th Baron Mountjoy. There is no record of him graduating.\nFirst visit to England (1499\u20131500).\nErasmus stayed in England at least three times. In between he had periods studying in Paris, Orl\u00e9ans, Leuven and other cities.\nIn 1499 he was invited to England by Blount, who offered to accompany him on his trip to England. His six months in England was fruitful in the making of lifelong friendships with the leaders of English thought in the days of King Henry VIII. He reported gaining new skills important in his future: becoming \"a better horse-man, and a tolerable courtier.\"\nDuring his first visit to England in 1499, he stayed for two months at the University of Oxford, at St Mary's College, the college for Augustinian canons, where he befriended the leading Greek scholars Thomas Linacre, William Grocyn and William Lily. Erasmus was particularly impressed by the Bible teaching of the humanist John Colet, who pursued a preaching style more akin to the church fathers than the Scholastics. Through the influence of Colet, his interests turned towards patristic theology. Other distinctive features of Colet's thought that may have influenced Erasmus are his pacifism, reform-mindedness, anti-Scholasticism and pastoral esteem for the sacrament of Confession.\nThis prompted him, upon his return from England to Paris, to intensively study the Greek language, which would enable him to study patristic theology on a more profound level.\nErasmus also became fast friends with Thomas More, a young law student considering becoming a monk, whose thought (e.g., on conscience and equity) had been influenced by 14th century French theologian Jean Gerson, and whose intellect had been developed by his powerful patron Cardinal John Morton (d. 1500) who had famously attempted reforms of English monasteries.\nErasmus left London with a full purse from his generous friends, to allow him to complete his studies. However, he had been provided with bad legal advice by his friends: the English customs officials confiscated all the gold and silver, leaving him with nothing except a night fever that lasted several months.\nFrance and Brabant.\nFollowing his first trip to England, Erasmus returned first to poverty in Paris, where he started to compile the \"Adagio\" for his students, then to Orl\u00e9ans to escape the plague, and then to semi-monastic life, scholarly studies and writing in France, notably at the Benedictine Abbey of Saint Bertin at St Omer (1501,1502) where he wrote the initial version of the \"Enchiridion\" (\"Handbook of the Christian Knight\"). A particular influence was his encounter in 1501 with Jean (Jehan) Vitrier, a radical Franciscan who consolidated Erasmus's thoughts against excessive valorisation of monasticism, ceremonialism and fasting in a kind of conversion experience, and introduced him to Origen.\nIn 1502, Erasmus went to Brabant, ultimately to the university at Louvain. In 1504 he was hired by the leaders of the Brabantian \"Provincial States\" to deliver one of his few public speeches, a very long formal panegyric for Philip \"the Fair\", Duke of Burgundy and later King of Castille: the first half being the conventional extravagant praise, but the second half being a strong treatment of the miseries of war, the need for neutrality and conciliation (with the neighbours France and England), and the excellence of peaceful rulers: that real courage in a leader was not to wage war but to put a bridle on greed, etc. This was later published as \"Panegyricus\". Erasmus then returned to Paris in 1504.\nSecond visit to England (1505\u20131506).\nFor Erasmus's second visit, he spent over a year staying at recently married Thomas More's house, now a lawyer and Member of Parliament, honing his translation skills.\nErasmus preferred to live the life of an independent scholar and made a conscious effort to avoid any actions or formal ties that might inhibit his individual freedom. In England Erasmus was approached with prominent offices but he declined them all, until the King himself offered his support. He was inclined, but eventually did not accept and longed for a stay in Italy.\nItaly.\nIn 1506 he was able to accompany and tutor the sons of the personal physician of the English King through Italy to Bologna.\nHis discovery en route at Park Abbey of Lorenzo Valla's \"New Testament Notes\" was a major event in his career and prompted Erasmus to study the New Testament using philology.\nIn 1506 they passed through Turin and he arranged to be awarded the degree of Doctor of Sacred Theology (, the highest theological degree, conferring the \"\" right to teach theology anywhere), from the University of Turin at age 37 (or 40). Erasmus stayed tutoring in Bologna for a year; in the winter, Erasmus was present when Pope Julius II entered victorious into the conquered Bologna which he had besieged before.\nErasmus travelled on to Venice, working on an expanded version of his Adagia at the Aldine Press of the famous printer Aldus Manutius, advised him which manuscripts to publish, and was an honorary member of the graecophone Aldine \"New Academy\" (). From Aldus he learned the in-person workflow that made him productive at Froben: making last-minute changes, and immediately checking and correcting printed page proofs as soon as the ink had dried. Aldus wrote that Erasmus could do twice as much work in a given time as any other man he had ever met.\nIn 1507, according to his letters, he studied advanced Greek in Padua with the Venetian natural philosopher, Giulio Camillo. He found employment tutoring and escorting Scottish nobleman Alexander Stewart, the 24-year-old Archbishop of St Andrews, through Padua, Florence, and Siena, Erasmus made it to Rome in 1509, visiting three times and seeking the acquaintance of some notable librarians and cardinals, but having a less active association with Italian scholars; one notable minor friendship was with Cardinal Giovanni di Lorenzo de' Medici who later became Pope Leo X and a leading supporter of Erasmus's Biblical program.\nIn 1509, William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord Mountjoy lured him back to England, now ruled by what was hoped would be a wise and benevolent king (Henry VIII) educated by humanists. Warham and Mountjoy sent Erasmus \u00a310 to cover his expenses on the journey. On his trip over the Alps via Spl\u00fcgen Pass, and down the Rhine toward England, Erasmus began to compose \"The Praise of Folly\".\nThird visit to England (1510\u20131515).\nIn 1510, Erasmus arrived at More's bustling house, was confined to bed to recover from his recurrent illness, and wrote \"The Praise of Folly\", which was to be a best-seller. More was at that time the undersheriff of the City of London. His wife Jane died, aged 21, in 1511, and More quickly remarrried.\nAfter his glorious reception in Italy, Erasmus had returned broke and jobless, with strained relations with former friends and benefactors on the continent, and he regretted leaving Italy, despite being horrified by papal warfare. There is a gap in his usually voluminous correspondence: his so-called \"two lost years\", perhaps due to self-censorship of dangerous or disgruntled opinions; he shared lodgings with his friend Andrea Ammonio (Latin secretary to Mountjoy, and the next year, to Henry VIII, who had been lodging in Thomas More's large and welcoming household but did not get on with the new wife) provided at the London Austin Friars' compound, skipping out after a disagreement with the friars over rent that caused bad blood.\nHe assisted his friend John Colet by authoring Greek textbooks and securing members of staff for the newly established St Paul's School and was in contact when Colet gave his notorious 1512 Convocation sermon which called for a reformation of ecclesiastical affairs. At Colet's instigation, Erasmus started work on .\nIn 1511, the University of Cambridge's chancellor, John Fisher, arranged for Erasmus to be (or to study to prepare to be) the Lady Margaret's Professor of Divinity, though whether he actually was accepted for it or took it up is contested by historians. He studied and taught Greek and researched and lectured on Jerome.\nErasmus mainly stayed at Queens' College while lecturing at the university, between 1511 and 1515. Erasmus's rooms were located in the \"I\" staircase of Old Court. Despite a chronic shortage of money, he succeeded in mastering Greek by an intensive, day-and-night study of three years, taught by Thomas Linacre, continuously begging in letters that his friends send him books and money for teachers.\nErasmus suffered from poor health and was especially concerned with heating, clean air, ventilation, draughts, fresh food and unspoiled wine: he complained about the draughtiness of English buildings. He complained that Queens' College could not supply him with enough decent wine (wine was the Renaissance medicine for gallstones, from which Erasmus suffered). As Queens' was an unusually humanist-leaning institution in the 16th century, Queens' College Old Library still houses many first editions of Erasmus's publications, many of which were acquired during that period by bequest or purchase, including Erasmus's New Testament translation, which is signed by friend and Polish religious reformer Jan \u0141aski.\nBy this time More was a judge on the poorman's equity court (Master of Requests) and a Privy Counsellor.\nFlanders and Brabant.\nHis residence at Leuven, where he lectured at the University, exposed Erasmus to much criticism from those ascetics, academics and clerics hostile to the principles of literary and religious reform to which he was devoting his life. In 1514, \"en route\" to Basel, he made the acquaintance of Hermannus Buschius, Ulrich von Hutten and Johann Reuchlin who introduced him to the Hebrew language in Mainz. In 1514, he suffered a fall from his horse and injured his back.\nErasmus may have made several other short visits to England or English territory while living in Brabant. Happily for Erasmus, More and Tunstall were posted in Brussels or Antwerp on government missions around 1516, More for six months, Tunstall for longer. Their circle include Pieter Gillis of Antwerp, in whose house Thomas More's wrote \"Utopia\" (1516) with Erasmus's encouragement, Erasmus editing and perhaps even contributing fragments. His old Cambridge friend Richard Sampson was vicar general running the nearby diocese of Tournai, recently under English control and governed by his former pupil William Blount.\nIn 1516, Erasmus accepted an honorary position as a Councillor to Charles V with an annuity of 200 guilders (over US$100,000), rarely paid, and tutored Charles' brother, the teenage future Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand of Hapsburg.\nIn 1516, Erasmus published the first edition of his scholarly Latin-Greek New Testament with annotations, his complete works of Jerome, and \"The Education of a Christian Prince\" () for Charles and Ferdinand.\nIn 1517, he supported the foundation at the university of the Collegium Trilingue for the study of Hebrew, Latin, and Greek\u2014after the model of Cisneros' College of the Three Languages at the University of Alcal\u00e1\u2014financed by his late friend Hieronymus van Busleyden's will. On being asked by Jean Le Sauvage, former Chancellor of Brabant and now Chancellor of Burgundy, Erasmus wrote \"The Complaint of Peace\".\nIn 1517, his great friend Ammonio died in England of the Sweating Sickness. In 1518, Erasmus was diagnosed with the plague; despite the danger, he was taken in and cared for in the home of his Flemish friend and publisher Dirk Martens in Antwerp for a month and recovered.\nBy 1518, he reported to Paulus Bombasius that his income was over 300 ducats per year (over US$150,000) without including patronage. By 1522 he reported his annual income as 400 gold florins (over US$200,000).\nIn 1520 he was present at the Field of the Cloth of Gold with Guillaume Bud\u00e9, probably his last meetings with Thomas More and William Warham. His friend Richard Pace gave the main sermon to the kings. His friends and former students and old correspondents were the incoming political elite, and he had risen with them.\nHe stayed in various locations including Anderlecht (near Brussels) in the summer of 1521.\nBasel (1521\u20131529).\nFrom 1514, Erasmus regularly travelled to Basel to coordinate the printing of his books with Froben. He developed a lasting association with the great Basel publisher Johann Froben and later his son Hieronymus Froben (Erasmus's godson) who together published over 200 works with Erasmus, working with expert scholar-correctors who went on to illustrious careers.\nHis initial interest in Froben's operation was aroused by his discovery of the printer's folio edition of the (Adagia) (1513). Froben's work was notable for using the new Roman type (rather than blackletter) and Aldine-like Italic and Greek fonts, as well as elegant layouts using borders and fancy capitals; Hans Holbein the Younger cut several woodblock capitals for Erasmus's editions. The printing of many his books was supervised by his Alsatian friend, the Greek scholar Beatus Rhenanus.\nIn 1521 he settled in Basel. He was weary of the controversies and hostility at Louvain, and feared being dragged further into the Lutheran controversy. He agreed to be the Froben press' literary superintendent writing dedications and prefaces for an annuity and profit share. Apart from Froben's production team, he had his own household with a formidable housekeeper, stable of horses, and up to eight boarders or paid servants who acted as assistants, correctors, amanuenses, dining companions, international couriers, and carers. It was his habit to sit at times by a ground-floor window, to make it easier to see and be seen by strolling humanists for chatting.\nIn collaboration with Froben and his team, the scope and ambition of Erasmus's \"Annotations\", Erasmus's long-researched project of philological notes of the New Testament along the lines of Valla's \"Adnotations\", had grown to also include a lightly revised Latin Vulgate, then the Greek text, then several edifying essays on methodology, then a highly revised Vulgate\u2014all bundled as his and pirated individually throughout Europe\u2014 then finally his amplified \"Paraphrases\".\nIn 1522, Erasmus's compatriot, former teacher (c. 1502) and friend from the University of Louvain unexpectedly became Pope Adrian VI, after having served as Regent (and/or Grand Inquisitor) of Spain for six years. Like Erasmus and Luther, he had been influenced by the Brethren of the Common Life. He tried to entice Erasmus to Rome. His reforms of the Roman Curia which he hoped would meet the objections of many Lutherans were stymied (partly because the Holy See was broke), though re-worked at the Council of Trent, and he died in 1523.\nAs the popular and nationalist responses to Luther gathered momentum, the social disorders, which Erasmus dreaded and Luther disassociated himself from, began to appear, including the German Peasants' War (1524\u20131525), the Anabaptist insurrections in Germany and in the Low Countries, iconoclasm, and the radicalisation of peasants across Europe. If these were the outcomes of reform, Erasmus was thankful that he had kept out of it. Yet he was ever more bitterly accused of having started the whole \"tragedy\" (as Erasmus dubbed the matter).\nIn 1523, he provided financial support to the impoverished and disgraced former Latin Secretary of Antwerp Cornelius Grapheus, on his release from the newly introduced Inquisition. In 1525, a former student of Erasmus who had served at Erasmus's father's former church at Woerden, Jan de Bakker (Pistorius) was the first priest to be executed as a heretic in the Netherlands. In 1529, his French translator and friend Louis de Berquin was burnt in Paris, following his condemnation as an anti-Rome heretic by the Sorbonne theologians.\nFreiburg (1529\u20131535).\nFollowing sudden, violent, iconoclastic rioting in early 1529 led by \u0152colampadius his former assistant, in which elected Catholic councilmen were deposed, the city of Basel definitely adopted the Reformation\u2014finally banning the Catholic Mass on 1 April 1529. \nErasmus, in company with other Basel Catholic priests including Bishop Augustin Mair, left Basel on 13 April 1529 and departed by ship to the Catholic university town of Freiburg im Breisgau to be under the protection of his former student, Archduke Ferdinand of Austria. Erasmus wrote somewhat dramatically to Thomas More of his frail condition at the time: \"I preferred to risk my life rather than appear to approve a programme like theirs. There was some hope of a return to moderation.\"\nIn Spring early 1530 Erasmus was bedridden for three months with an intensely painful infection, likely carbunculosis, that, unusually for him, left him too ill to work. He declined to attend the Diet of Augsburg to which both the Bishop of Augsburg and the Papal legate Campeggio had invited him, and he expressed doubt on non-theological grounds, to Campeggio and Melanchthon, that reconciliation was then possible: he wrote to Campeggio, \"I can discern no way out of this enormous tragedy unless God suddenly appears like a and changes the hearts of men\"; and later, \"What upsets me is not so much their teaching, especially Luther's, as the fact that, under the pre-text of the gospel, I see a class of men emerging whom I find repugnant from every point of view.\"\nHe stayed for two years on the top floor of the Whale House, then following another rent dispute bought and refurbished a house of his own, where he took in scholar/assistants as table-boarders such as Cornelius Grapheus' friend Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is, some of them fleeing persecution.\nDespite increasing frailty Erasmus continued to work productively, notably on a new \"magnum opus\", his manual on preaching \"Ecclesiastes\", and his small book on preparing for death. His boarder for five months, the Portuguese scholar/diplomat Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is, worked on his lobbying on the plight of the S\u00e1mi in Sweden and on the Ethiopian church, and stimulated Erasmus's increasing awareness of foreign missions.\nThere are no extant letters between More and Erasmus from the start of More's period as Lord Chancellor until his resignation (1529\u20131532), almost to the day. Erasmus wrote several important non-political works under the surprising patronage of Thomas Bolyn: his or \"Triple Commentary on Psalm 23\" (1529); his catechism to counter Luther or \"A Playne and Godly Exposition or Declaration of the Commune Crede\" (1533) which sold out in three hours at the Frankfurt Book Fair; and or \"Preparation for Death\" (1534), which would be one of Erasmus's most popular and most hijacked works.\nFates of friends.\nIn the 1530s, life became more dangerous for Spanish Erasmians when Erasmus's protector, the Inquisitor General Alonso Manrique de Lara fell out of favour with the royal court and lost power within his own organisation to friar-theologians. In 1532 Erasmus's friend, \"converso\" Juan de Vergara (Cisneros' Latin secretary who had worked on the Complutensian Polyglot and published Stunica's criticism of Erasmus) was arrested by the Spanish Inquisition and had to be ransomed from them by the humanist Archbishop of Toledo Alonso III Fonseca, also a correspondent of Erasmus', who had previously rescued Ignatius of Loyola from them.\nThere was a generational change in the Catholic hierarchy. In 1530, the reforming French bishop Guillaume Bri\u00e7onnet died. In 1532 his beloved long-time mentor English Primate Warham died of old age, as did reforming cardinal Giles of Viterbo and Swiss bishop Hugo von Hohenlandenberg. In 1534 his distrusted protector Clement VII (the \"inclement Clement\") died, his recent Italian ally Cardinal Cajetan (widely tipped as the next pope) died, and his old ally Cardinal Campeggio retired.\nAs more friends died (in 1533, his friend Pieter Gillis; in 1534, William Blount; in early 1536, Catherine of Aragon and Richard Pace;) and as Luther and some Lutherans and some powerful Catholic theologians renewed their personal attacks on Erasmus, his letters are increasingly focused on concerns on the status of friendships and safety as he considered moving from bland Freiburg despite his health.\nIn 1535, Erasmus's friends Thomas More, Bishop John Fisher and the Brigittine monk Richard Reynolds were executed as pro-Rome traitors by Henry VIII, who Erasmus (with More) had first met as a boy and had corresponded with each other numerous times over the years. Despite illness Erasmus wrote the first biography of More (and Fisher), the short, anonymous \"Expositio Fidelis\", which Froben published, at the instigation of de G\u00f3is. He called them the 'new martyrs' of Christendom slain by 'another Herod.'\nAfter Erasmus's time, numerous of Erasmus's translators later met similar fates at the hands of Anglican, Catholic and Reformed sectarians and autocrats: including Margaret Pole, William Tyndale, Michael Servetus. Others, such as Charles V's Latin secretary Juan de Vald\u00e9s, fled to neutral grounds.\nErasmus's friend and collaborator Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall eventually died in prison under Elizabeth I for finally refusing the Oath of Supremacy. Erasmus's correspondent Bishop Stephen Gardiner, who he had known as a teenaged student in Paris and Cambridge, was later imprisoned in the Tower of London for five years under Edward VI for impeding Protestantism. Dami\u00e3o de G\u00f3is was tried before the Portuguese Inquisition at age 72, detained almost \"incommunicado\", finally exiled to a monastery, and on release perhaps murdered. His amanuensis Gilbert Cousin died in prison at age 66, shortly after being arrested on the personal order of Pope Pius V.\nDeath in Basel.\nWhen his strength began to fail, he finally decided to accept an invitation by Queen Mary of Hungary, Regent of the Netherlands (sister of his former student Archduke Ferdinand I and Emperor Charles V), to move from Freiburg to Brabant. In 1535, he moved back to the Froben compound in Basel in preparation (\u0152colampadius having died, and private practice of his religion now possible) and saw his last major works such as \"Ecclesiastes\" through publication, though he grew more frail.\nOn 12 July 1536, he died from an attack of dysentery. \"The most famous scholar of his day died in peaceful prosperity and in the company of celebrated and responsible friends.\" His last words, as recorded by his friend and biographer Beatus Rhenanus, were apparently \"Lord, put an end to it\" (, the same last words as Melanchthon) then \"Dear God\" ().\nHe had remained loyal to Roman Catholicism, but biographers have disagreed whether to treat him as an insider or an outsider. He may not have received or had the opportunity to receive the last rites of the Catholic Church; the contemporary reports of his death do not mention whether he asked for a Catholic priest or not, if any were secretly or privately in Basel.\nHe was buried with great ceremony in the Basel Minster (the former cathedral). The Protestant city authorities remarkably allowed his funeral to be an ecumenical Catholic requiem Mass.\nErasmus had received dispensations (from Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and from Emperor Charles V in 1530) to make a will rather than have his wealth revert to his order (the Chapter of Sion), or to the state, and had long pre-sold most of his personal library of almost 500 books to Polish humanist Jan \u0141aski. \nAs his heir or executor he instated Bonifacius Amerbach to give scholarships to local students and the needy. One of the eventual recipients was the impoverished Protestant humanist Sebastian Castellio, who had fled from Geneva to Basel, who subsequently translated the Bible into Latin and French, and who worked for the repair of the breach and divide of Western Christianity in its Catholic, Anabaptist, and Protestant branches. As well as those 5,000 florins, up to 2,000 florins had long been held in Brabant by friends, and Goclenius was appointed to administer that charity.\nThought and views.\nBiographers, such as Johan Huizinga, frequently draw connections between many of Erasmus's convictions and his early biography: esteem for the married state and appropriate marriages, support for priestly marriage, concern for improving marriage prospects for women, opposition to inconsiderate rules (notably, institutional dietary rules), a desire to make education engaging for the participants, interest in classical languages, horror of poverty and spiritual hopelessness, distaste for friars begging when they could study or work, unwillingness to be under the direct control of authorities, laicism, the need for those in authority to act in the best interest of their charges, a prizing of mercy and peace, an anger over unnecessary war, especially between avaricious princes, an awareness of mortality, the wisdom of avoiding danger, etc.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;More than any other Renaissance \ufb01gure, the humanist from the Low Countries was committed to the goal of building an alternative to medieval civilisation...As a rule, the ancient elements were essential to him, whereas he tended to discard most \u201crecent\u201d (that is, medieval) phenomena as super\ufb02uous or harmful.\u2014\u200a\nManner of thinking.\nErasmus had a distinctive manner of thinking, a Catholic historian suggests: one that is capacious in its perception, agile in its judgements, and unsettling in its irony with \"a deep and abiding commitment to human flourishing\". \"In all spheres, his outlook was essentially pastoral.\" He was an \"incurable idealist\".\nErasmus has been called a seminal rather than a consistent or systematic thinker, notably averse to over-extending from the specific to the general, who nevertheless should be taken very seriously as a pastoral and rhetorical theologian, with a philological and historical approach\u2014rather than a metaphysical approach\u2014to interpreting Scripture and interested in the literal and tropological senses. French theologian Louis Bouyer commented, \"Erasmus was to be one of those who can get no edification from exegesis where they suspect some misinterpretation.\"\nA theologian has written of \"Erasmus' preparedness completely to satisfy no-one but himself\". He has been called moderate, judicious and constructive even when being critical or when mocking extremes; but thin-skinned against slanders of heterodoxy.\nManner of expression.\nIrony.\nErasmus often wrote in a highly ironical idiom, especially in his letters, which makes them prone to different interpretations when taken literally rather than ironically.\nHe frequently wrote about controversial subjects using the dialogue to avoid direct statements clearly attributable to himself. For Martin Luther, he was an eel, slippery, evasive and impossible to capture.\nCopiousness.\nErasmus's literary theory of \"copiousness\" endorses a large stockpile of rich adages, analogies, tropes and symbolic figures, which leads to compressed communication of complex ideas (between those educated in the stockpile) but some of which, to modern sensibilities, may promote, rather than play off, stereotypes.\nTerence J. Martin identifies an \"Erasmian pattern\" that the supposed (by the reader) otherness (of Turks, Lapplanders, Indians, Amerindians, Jews, and even women and heretics) \"provides a foil against which the failures of Christian culture can be exposed and criticized.\" \nPacifism.\nPeace, peaceableness, and peacemaking, in all spheres from the domestic to the religious to the political, were central distinctives of Erasmus's writing on Christian living and his mystical theology: \"the sum and summary of our religion is peace and unanimity\" At the Nativity of Jesus \"the angels sang not the glories of war, nor a song of triumph, but a hymn of peace\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He (Christ) conquered by gentleness; He conquered by kindness; he conquered by truth itself. [...] Long ago, he was called God of Powers, the 'Lord of Hosts/Armies'; for us he is called 'God of Peace'.\u2014\u200a\nErasmus was not an absolute pacifist but promoted political pacificism and religious Irenicism. Notable writings on irenicism include , \"On the War with the Turks\", \"The Education of a Christian Prince\", \"On Restoring the Concord of the Church\", and \"The Complaint of Peace\". Erasmus's ecclesiology of peacemaking held that the church authorities had a divine mandate to settle religious disputes, in an as non-excluding way as possible, including by the preferably-minimal development of doctrine.\nIn the latter, Lady Peace insists on peace as the crux of Christian life and for understanding Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I give you my peace, I leave you my peace\" (John 14:27). You hear what he leaves his people? Not horses, bodyguards, empire or riches \u2013 none of these. What then? He gives peace, leaves peace \u2013 peace with friends, peace with enemies.\u2014\u200a\nA historian has called him \"The 16th Century's Pioneer of Peace Education and a Culture of Peace\".\nErasmus's emphasis on peacemaking reflects a typical pre-occupation of medieval lay spirituality as historian John Bossy (as summarised by Eamon Duffy) puts it: \"medieval Christianity had been fundamentally concerned with the creation and maintenance of peace in a violent world. 'Christianity' in medieval Europe denoted neither an ideology nor an institution, but a community of believers whose religious ideal\u2014constantly aspired to if seldom attained\u2014was peace and mutual love.\"\nWar.\nHistorians have written that \"references to conflict run like a red thread through the writings of Erasmus\". Erasmus had a simple view of the renaissance state, where ultimately warfare was determined by single individuals: sovereign rulers (i.e. pope, emperor, king, duke, etc.) with malformed ambitions; so directing sovereigns towards inter-Christendom pacifism was thus a key practical prescription for peace, which in turn required a new curriculum for educating princes that did not encourage vainglorious milititarism. \nErasmus had experienced war as a child and was particularly concerned about wars between Christian kings, who should be brothers and not start wars; a theme in his book \"The Education of a Christian Prince\". His \"Adages\" included \"War is sweet to those who have never tasted it\" ( from 's Greek).\nHe promoted and was present at the Field of Cloth of Gold, and his wide-ranging correspondence frequently related to issues of peacemaking. He saw a key role of the Church in peacemaking by arbitration and mediation, and the office of the Pope was necessary to rein in tyrannical princes and bishops.\nHe questioned the practical usefulness and abuses of just war theory, further limiting it to feasible defensive actions with popular support and that \"war should never be undertaken unless, as a last resort, it cannot be avoided\". Appeasement should be considered. Defeat should be endured rather than fighting to the end. In his he discusses (common translation) \"\", which owes to Cicero and John Colet's \"Better an unjust peace than the justest war.\" Expansionism could not be justified. Taxes to pay for war should cause the least possible hardship on the poor. \nHe hated sedition as, often, an excuse or cause of oppression.\nErasmus was highly critical of the warlike way of important European princes of his era, including some princes of the church. He described these princes as corrupt and greedy. Erasmus believed that these princes \"collude in a game, of which the outcome is to exhaust and oppress the commonwealth\". Further, \"'When princes purpose to exhaust a commonwealth, they speak of a just war; when they unite for that object, they call it peace.\" He spoke more freely about this matter in letters sent to his friends like Thomas More, Beatus Rhenanus and Adrianus Barlandus: a particular target of his criticisms was the Emperor Maximilian I, whom Erasmus blamed for allegedly preventing the Netherlands from signing a peace treaty with Guelders and other schemes to cause wars to extract money from his subjects. \nOne of his approaches was to send and publish congratulatory and lionising letters to princes who, though in a position of strength, negotiated peace with neighbours, such as King Sigismund I the Old of Poland in 1527.\nErasmus \"constantly and consistently\" opposed the mooted idea of a Christian \"universal monarch\" with an over-extended empire who could supposedly defeat the Ottoman forces: such universalism did not \"hold any promise of generating less conflict than the existing political plurality\"; instead, advocating concord between princes, both temporal and spiritual. The spiritual princes, by their arbitration and mediation do not \"threaten political plurality, but acts as its defender.\"\nIntra-Christian religious toleration.\nHe referred to his irenical disposition in the Preface to \"On Free Will\" as a \"secret inclination of nature\" that would make him even prefer the views of the Sceptics over intolerant assertions, though he sharply distinguished from what was uncontentiously explicit in the New Testament or absolutely mandated by Church teaching. Concord demanded unity and assent: Erasmus was anti-sectarian as well as non-sectarian. To follow the law of love, our intellects must be humble and friendly when making any assertions: he called contention \"earthly, beastly, demonic\" and a good-enough reason to reject a teacher or their followers. In Melanchthon's view, Erasmus taught charity, not faith. The centrality of Christian concord to Erasmus's theology contrasted with the insistence of Martin Luther and, for example, later English Puritans, that (Protestant) truth naturally would create discord and opposition.\nCertain works of Erasmus laid a foundation for religious toleration of private opinions and ecumenism. For example, in , opposing particular views of Martin Luther, Erasmus noted that religious disputants should be temperate in their language \"because in this way the truth, which is often lost amidst too much wrangling may be more surely perceived\". Gary Remer writes, \"Like Cicero, Erasmus concludes that truth is furthered by a more harmonious relationship between interlocutors.\"\nIn a letter to Cardinal Lorenzo Campeggio, Erasmus lobbied diplomatically for toleration: \"If the sects could be tolerated under certain conditions (as the Bohemians pretend), it would, I admit, be a grievous misfortune, but one more endurable than war.\" But the same dedication to avoiding conflict and bloodshed should be shown by those tempted to join (anti-popist) sects:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Perhaps evil rulers should sometimes be tolerated. We owe some respect to the memory of those whose places we think of them as occupying. Their titles have some claim on us. We should not seek to put matters right if there is a real possibility that the cure may prove worse than the disease.\u2014\u200a\nHeresy and sedition.\nErasmus had been privately involved in early attempts to protect Luther and his sympathisers from charges of heresy. Erasmus wrote to say that the Lutherans (of 1523) were not formally heretics: he pushed back against the willingness of some theologians to cry heresy fast in order to enforce their views in universities and at inquisitions.\nFor Erasmus, punishable heresy had to involve fractiously, dangerously, and publicly agitating against essential doctrines relating to Christ (i.e., blasphemy), with malice, depravity, obstinacy. As with St Theodore the Studite, Erasmus was against the death penalty merely for private or peaceable heresy or for dissent on non-essentials: \"It is better to cure a sick man than to kill him.\" The Church, he said, has the duty to protect believers and convert or heal heretics; he invoked Jesus' parable of the wheat and tares.\nErasmus's pacificism included a particular dislike for sedition, which caused warfare:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was the duty of the leaders of this (reforming) movement, if Christ was their goal, to refrain not only from vice, but even from every appearance of evil; and to offer not the slightest stumbling block to the Gospel, studiously avoiding even practices which, although allowed, are yet not expedient. Above all they should have guarded against all sedition.\u2014\u200a\nErasmus allowed the death penalty against violent seditionists to prevent bloodshed and war: he allowed that the state has the right to execute those who are a necessary danger to public order\u2014whether heretic or orthodox\u2014but noted (e.g., to Natalis Beda) that Augustine had been against the execution of even violent Donatists: Johannes Trapman states that Erasmus's endorsement of suppression of the Anabaptists springs from their refusal to heed magistrates and the criminal violence of the M\u00fcnster rebellion, not because of their heretical views on baptism. Despite these concessions to state power, Erasmus suggested that religious persecution could still be challenged as inexpedient (ineffective).\nOutsiders.\nMost of his political writing focused on peace within Christendom with almost a sole focus on Europe. In 1516, Erasmus wrote, \"It is the part of a Christian prince to regard no one as an outsider unless he is a nonbeliever, and even on them he should inflict no harm\", which entails not attacking outsiders, not taking their riches, not subjecting them to political rule, no forced conversions, and keeping promises made to them.\nIn common with his times, Erasmus regarded the Jewish and Islamic religions as Christian heresies (and therefore competitors to orthodox Christianity) rather than separate religions, using the inclusive term \"half-Christian\" for the latter.\nHowever, there is a wide range of scholarly opinion on the extent and nature of antisemitic and anti-Muslim prejudice in his writings: historian Nathan Ron has found his writing to be harsh and racial in its implications, with contempt and hostility to Islam.\nTurks.\nIn his last decade, he involved himself in the public policy debate on war with the Ottoman Empire, which was then invading , notably in his book \"On the war against the Turks\" (1530), as the \"reckless and extravagant\" Pope Leo X had in previous decades promoted going on the offensive with a new crusade. Erasmus reworked Luther's rhetoric that the invading Turks represent God's judgement of decadent Christendom, but without Luther's fatalism: Erasmus not only accused Western leaders of kingdom-threatening hypocrisy, he reworked a remedy already decreed by the Fifth Council of the Lateran: anti-expansionist moral reforms by Europe's disunited leaders as a necessary unitive political step before any aggressive warfare against the Ottoman threat, reforms which might themselves, if sincere, prevent both the internecine and foreign warfare.\nJews.\nErasmus perceived and championed strong Hellenistic rather than exclusively Hebraic influences on the intellectual milieux of Jesus, Paul, and the early church: \"If only the Christian church did not attach so much importance to the Old Testament!\" Perhaps the only Jewish book he published was his loose translation of the first century Hellenistic-Judaic \"On the Sovereignty of Reason\", better known as 4 Maccabees.\nErasmus's pervasive anti-ceremonialism treated the early Church debates on circumcision, food, and special days as manifestations of cultural chauvinism by the initial Jewish Christians in Antioch.\nWhile many humanists, from Pico della Mirandola to Johannes Reuchlin, were intrigued by Jewish mysticism, Erasmus came to dislike it: \"I see them as a nation full of most tedious fabrications, who spread a kind of fog over everything, Talmud, Cabbala, Tetragrammaton, Gates of Light, words, words, words. I would rather have Christ mixed up with Scotus than with that rubbish of theirs.\"\nIn his \"Paraphrase on Romans\", Erasmus voiced, as Paul, the \"secret\" that in the end times, \"all of the Israelites will be restored to salvation\" and accept Christ as their Messiah, \"although now part of them have fallen away from it\".\nSeveral scholars have identified cases where Erasmus's comments appear to go beyond theological anti-Judaism into slurs or approving certain anti-semitic policies, though there is some controversy.\nSlaves.\nOn the subject of slavery, Erasmus characteristically treated it in passing under the topic of tyranny: Christians were not allowed to be tyrants, which slave-owning required, but especially not to be the masters of other Christians. Erasmus had various other piecemeal arguments against slavery: for example, that it was not legitimate to enslave people taken in an unjust war; but it was not a subject that occupied him. However, his belief that \"nature created all men free\" (and slavery was imposed) was a rejection of Aristotle's category of natural slaves.\nPolitics.\nErasmus promoted the idea that a prince rules with the consent of his people, notably in his book \"The Education of a Christian Prince\" (and, through More, in the book \"Utopia\", which proposed a \"republic completely lacking sovereignty\"). He may have been influenced by the Brabantine custom of an incoming ruler being officially told of his duties and welcomed: the Joyous Entry was a kind of contract. A monarchy should not be absolute: it should be \"checked and diluted with a mixture of aristocracy and democracy to prevent it ever breaking out into tyranny\". The same considerations applied to church princes.\nErasmus contrasts the Christian Prince with the Tyrant, who has no love from the people, will be surrounded by flatterers, and can expect no loyalty or peace. Unspoken in Erasmus's views may have been the idea that the people can remove a tyrant; however, espousing this explicitly could expose people to capital charges of sedition or treason. Erasmus typically limited his political discussion to what could be couched as personal faith and morality by or between Christians, his business as a doctor of theology.\nHe produced a Latin edition of Plutarch's \"How to tell a flatterer from a friend\" () with an introductory dedication to Henry VIII, humourously over-praising Henry while raising the serious concern.\nReligious reform.\nPersonal Reform.\nProper attitude to sacraments.\nErasmus expressed much of his reform program in terms of the proper attitude towards the sacraments and their ramifications: notably for the underappreciated sacraments of Baptism and Marriage (see \"On the Institution of Christian Marriage\") considered as vocations more than events; and for the mysterious Eucharist, pragmatic Confession, the dangerous Last Rites (writing \"On the Preparation for Death\"), and the pastoral Holy Orders (see \"Ecclesiastes\"). Historians have noted that Erasmus's commendation of the benefits of immersive, docile scripture-reading is put in sacramental terms.\nA test of the Reformation was the doctrine of the sacraments, and the crux of this question was the observance of the Eucharist. Erasmus was concerned that the sacramentarians, headed by \u0152colampadius of Basel, were claiming Erasmus held views similar to their own to try to claim him for their schismatic and \"erroneous\" movement. When the Mass was finally banned in Basel in 1529, Erasmus immediately abandoned the city, as did the other expelled Catholic clergy.\nIn 1530, Erasmus published a new edition of the orthodox treatise of Algerus against the heretic Berengar of Tours in the eleventh century. He added a dedication, affirming his belief in the reality of the Body of Christ after consecration in the Eucharist, commonly referred to as transubstantiation. Erasmus seems to have suspected that the scholastic formulation of transubstantiation stretched language past its breaking point, however he noted that even if transubstantiation were not true, as some Protestants has started to claim, it should not be a cause of preventing people with traditional views from worshipping (\"latria\") God in the Host, as the divinity of God is everywhere present.\nBy and large, the miraculous real change that interested Erasmus, the author, more than that of the bread is the transformation in the humble partaker. Erasmus wrote several notable pastoral books and pamphlets on sacraments, always looking through rather than at the rituals or forms:\nCatholic reform.\nInstitutional reforms.\nThe Protestant Reformation began in the year following the publication of his pathbreaking edition of the New Testament in Latin and Greek (1516). The issues between the reforming and reactionary tendencies of the church, from which Protestantism later emerged, had become so clear that many intellectuals and churchmen could not escape the summons to join the debate.\nAccording to historian C. Scott Dixon, Erasmus not only criticised church failings but questioned many of his Church's basic teachings; however, according to biographer Erika Rummel, \"Erasmus was aiming at the correction of abuses rather than at doctrinal innovation or institutional change.\"\nIn theologian Louis Bouyer's interpretation, Erasmus's agenda was \"to reform the Church from within by a renewal of biblical theology, based on philological study of the New Testament text, and supported by a knowledge of patristics, itself renewed by the same methods. The final object of it all was to nourish [...] chiefly moral and spiritual reform\".\nAt the height of his literary fame, Erasmus was called upon to take one side, but public partisanship was foreign to his beliefs, nature, and habits. Despite all his criticism of clerical corruption and abuses within the Western Church, especially at first he sided unambiguously with neither Luther nor the anti-Lutherans publicly (though in private he lobbied assiduously against extremism from both parties), but eventually shunned the breakaway Protestant Reformation movements along with their most radical offshoots.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have constantly declared, in countless letters, booklets, and personal\nstatements, that I do not want to be involved with either party.\u2014\u200a\nThe world had laughed at his satire, \"The Praise of Folly\", but few had interfered with his activities. He believed that his work had commended itself to the religious world's best minds and dominant powers. Erasmus chose to write in Latin (and Greek), the languages of scholars. He did not build a large body of supporters among the unlettered; his critiques reached a small but elite audience.\nErasmus was also notable for exposing several important historical documents of theological and political importance as forgeries or misattributions: including pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, the attributed to St Augustine, the attributed to Cicero, and (by reprinting Lorenzo Valla's work) the Donation of Constantine.\nAnti-fraternalism.\nReacting from his own experiences, Erasmus came to believe that monastic life and institutions no longer served the positive spiritual or social purpose they once may have: in the \"Enchiridion\" he controversially put it \"Monkishness is not piety.\" At this time, it was better to live as \"a monk in the world\" than in the monastery.\nMany of his works contain diatribes against supposed monastic corruption and careerism, particularly against the mendicant friars (Franciscans and Dominicans). These orders also typically ran the university's Scholastic theology programs, from whose ranks came his most dangerous enemies. The more some attacked him, the more offensive he became about what he saw as their political influence and materialistic opportunism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nHe was scandalised by superstitions (such as that if a person were buried in a Franciscan habit, they would go directly to heaven), crime, and child novices. He advocated various reforms, including a ban on taking orders until the 30th year; the closure of corrupt and smaller monasteries; respect for bishops; requiring work, not begging (reflecting the practice of his own order of Augustinian Canons); the downplaying of monastic hours, fasts and ceremonies; and a less mendacious approach to gullible pilgrims and tenants.\nHowever, he was not in favour of speedy closures of monasteries, nor of closing larger reformed monasteries with important libraries: in his account of his pilgrimage to Walsingham, he noted that the funds extracted from pilgrims typically supported houses for the poor and elderly.\nThese ideas widely influenced his generation of humanists, both Catholic and Protestant, and the lurid hyperbolic attacks in his half-satire \"The Praise of Folly\" were later treated by Protestants as objective reports of near-universal corruption. Furthermore, \"what is said over a glass of wine, ought not to be remembered and written down as a serious statement of belief\", such as his proposal to marry all monks to all nuns or to send them all away to fight the Turks and colonise new islands.\nHe believed the only vow necessary for Christians should be the vow of baptism, and others such as the vows of the evangelical counsels, while admirable in intent and content, were now mainly counter-productive.\nHowever, Erasmus frequently commended the evangelical counsels for all believers, and with more than lip service: for example, the first adage of his reputation-establishing was \"Between friends all is common\", where he tied common ownership (such as practised by his order's style of poverty) with the teachings of classical philosophers and Christ.\nHis main Catholic opposition was from scholars in the mendicant orders. He purported that \"Saint Francis came lately to me in a dream and thanked me for chastising them.\" After his lifetime, scholars of mendicant orders have sometimes disputed Erasmus as hyperbolic and ill-informed. A 20th-century Benedictine scholar wrote of him as \"all sail and no rudder\".\nErasmus did also have significant support and contact with reform-minded friars, including Franciscans such as Jean Vitrier and Cardinal Cisneros, and Dominicans such as Cardinal Cajetan, the former master of the Order of Preachers.\nProtestant reform.\nThe early reformers built their theology on Erasmus's philological analyses of specific verses in the New Testament: repentance over penance (the basis of the first thesis of the Luther's 95 Theses), justification by imputation, grace as favour or clemency, faith as hoping trust, human transformation over reformation, congregation over church, mystery over sacrament, etc. In Erasmus's view, they went too far, downplayed Sacred Tradition such as Patristic interpretations, and irresponsibly fomented bloodshed.\nErasmus was one of many scandalised by the sale of indulgences to fund Pope Leo X's projects. His view, given in a 1518 letter to John Colet, was less theological than political: \"The Roman curia has abandoned any sense of shame. What could be more shameless than these constant indulgences? And now they put up war against the Turks as a pretext, when their aim really is to drive the Spaniards from Naples.\"\nIncreasing disagreement with Luther.\nErasmus and Luther impacted each other greatly. Each had misgivings about each other from the beginning (Erasmus on Luther's rash and antagonistic character, Luther on Erasmus's focus on morality rather than grace) but strategically agreed not to be negative about the other in public.\nNoting Luther's criticisms of corruption in the Church, Erasmus described Luther to Pope Leo X as \"a mighty trumpet of gospel truth\" while agreeing, \"It is clear that many of the reforms for which Luther calls\" (e.g., on the sale of indulgences) \"are urgently needed.\" However, behind the scenes Erasmus forbade his publisher Froben from handling the works of Luther and tried to keep the reform movement focused on institutional rather than theological issues, yet he also privately wrote to authorities to prevent Luther's persecution. In the words of one historian, \"at this earlier period he was more concerned with the fate of Luther than his theology.\"\nIn 1520, Erasmus wrote that \"Luther ought to be answered and not crushed.\" However, the publication of Luther's \"On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church\" (October 1520), which largely repudiated Church teaching on sacraments, and his subsequent bellicosity drained Erasmus's and many humanists' sympathy, even more as Christians became partisans and the partisans took to violence.\nLuther hoped for his cooperation in a work which seemed only the natural outcome of Erasmus's own, and spoke with admiration of Erasmus's superior learning. In their early correspondence, Luther expressed boundless admiration for all Erasmus had done in the cause of a sound and reasonable Christianity and urged him to join the Lutheran party. Erasmus declined to commit himself, arguing his usual \"small target\" excuse, that to do so would endanger the cause of which he regarded as one of his purposes in life. Only as an independent scholar could he hope to influence the reform of religion. When Erasmus declined to support him, the \"straightforward\" Luther became angered that Erasmus was avoiding the responsibility due either to cowardice or a lack of purpose.\nHowever, any hesitancy on the part of Erasmus may have stemmed not from lack of courage or conviction, but rather from a concern over the mounting disorder and violence of the reform movement. To Philip Melanchthon in 1524 he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know nothing of your church; at the very least it contains people who will, I fear, overturn the whole system and drive the princes into using force to restrain good men and bad alike. The gospel, the word of God, faith, Christ, and Holy Spirit \u2013 these words are always on their lips; look at their lives and they speak quite another language.\nErasmus attempted various distinctions to escape accusations of Lutheranism: for example for the claim that he emphasized faith to the exclusion of charity he wrote \"[My paraphrases] do not offer even the tiniest support to the Lutheran heresy, since my propositions [faith alone suffices without merits] speak of those who are purified by baptism, whereas Luther speaks of the good works of adults after baptism.\"\nCatholic theologian George Chantraine notes that, where Luther quotes Luke 11:21 \"He that is not with me is against me\", Erasmus takes Mark 9:40 \"For he that is not against us, is on our part.\"\nThough he sought to remain accommodative in doctrinal disputes, each side accused him of siding with the other, perhaps because of his perceived influence and what they regarded as his dissembling neutrality, which he regarded as peacemaking accommodation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I detest dissension because it goes both against the teachings of Christ and against a secret inclination of nature. I doubt that either side in the dispute can be suppressed without grave loss.\u2014\u200a\nDispute on free will.\nBy 1523, and first suggested in a letter from Henry VIII, Erasmus had been convinced that Luther's ideas on necessity/free will were a subject of core disagreement deserving a public airing, and strategised with friends and correspondents on how to respond with proper moderation without making the situation worse for all, especially for the humanist reform agenda. He eventually chose a campaign that involved an irenical 'dialogue' \"The Inquisition of Faith\", a positive, evangelical model sermon \"On the Measureless Mercy of God\", and a gently critical 'diatribe' \"On Free Will\".\nThe publication of his brief book \"On Free Will\" initiated what has been called \"The greatest debate of that era\", which still has ramifications today. They bypassed discussion on reforms which they both agreed on in general, and instead dealt with authority and biblical justifications of synergism versus monergism in relation to salvation.\nLuther responded with \"On the Bondage of the Will\" () (1525).\nErasmus replied to this in his lengthy two-volume \"Hyperaspistes\" and other works, which Luther ignored. Apart from the perceived moral failings among followers of the Reformers\u2014an important sign for Erasmus\u2014he also dreaded any change in doctrine, citing the long history of the Church as a bulwark against innovation. He put the matter bluntly to Luther:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are dealing with this: Would a stable mind depart from the opinion handed down by so many men famous for holiness and miracles, depart from the decisions of the Church, and commit our souls to the faith of someone like you who has sprung up just now with a few followers, although the leading men of your flock do not agree either with you or among themselves \u2013 indeed though you do not even agree with yourself, since in this same \"Assertion\" you say one thing in the beginning and something else later on, recanting what you said before.\u2014\u200a\nContinuing his chastisement of Luther \u2013 and undoubtedly put off by the notion of there being \"no pure interpretation of Scripture anywhere but in Wittenberg\" \u2013 Erasmus touches upon another important point of the controversy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You stipulate that we should not ask for or accept anything but Holy Scripture, but you do it in such a way as to require that we permit you to be its sole interpreter, renouncing all others. Thus the victory will be yours if we allow you to be not the steward but the lord of Holy Scripture.\u2014\u200a\n\"False evangelicals\".\nIn 1529, Erasmus wrote \"An epistle against those who falsely boast they are Evangelicals\" to Gerardus Geldenhouwer (former Bishop of Utrecht, also schooled at Deventer).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You declaim bitterly against the luxury of priests, the ambition of bishops, the tyranny of the Roman Pontiff, and the babbling of the sophists; against our prayers, fasts, and Masses; and you are not content to retrench the abuses that may be in these things, but must needs abolish them entirely.\nHere Erasmus complains of the doctrines and morals of the Reformers, applying the same critique he had made about public Scholastic disputations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Look around on this 'Evangelical' generation, and observe whether among them less indulgence is given to luxury, lust, or avarice, than among those whom you so detest. Show me any one person who by that Gospel has been reclaimed from drunkenness to sobriety, from fury and passion to meekness, from avarice to liberality, from reviling to well-speaking, from wantonness to modesty. I will show you a great many who have become worse through following it. [...] The solemn prayers of the Church are abolished, but now there are very many who never pray at all. [...]\nI have never entered their conventicles, but I have sometimes seen them returning from their sermons, the countenances of all of them displaying rage, and wonderful ferocity, as though they were animated by the evil spirit. [...]\nWho ever beheld in their meetings any one of them shedding tears, smiting his breast, or grieving for his sins? [...] Confession to the priest is abolished, but very few now confess to God. [...] They have fled from Judaism that they may become Epicureans.\u2014\u200a\nOther.\nAccording to historian Christopher Ocker, the early reformers \"needed tools that let their theological distinctions pose as commonplaces in a textual theology; [...] Erasmus provided the tools\", but this tendentious distinction-making, reminiscent of the recent excesses of Scholasticism to Erasmus's eyes, \"was precisely what Erasmus disliked about Luther\" and \"Protestant polemicists\".\nErasmus wrote books against aspects of the teaching, impacts or threats of several other Reformers:\nHowever, Erasmus maintained friendly relations with other Protestants, notably the irenic Melanchthon and Albrecht D\u00fcrer.\nA common accusation, supposedly started by antagonistic monk-theologians, made Erasmus responsible for Martin Luther and the Reformation: \"Erasmus laid the egg, and Luther hatched it.\" Erasmus wittily dismissed the charge, claiming that Luther had \"hatched a different bird entirely\". Erasmus-reader Peter Canisius commented: \"Certainly there was no lack of eggs for Luther to hatch.\"\nPhilosophy.\nErasmus has a problematic standing in the history of philosophy: whether he should be called a philosopher at all, (as, indeed, some question whether he should be considered a theologian either). Erasmus deemed himself to be a rhetorician (rhetoric being the art of argumentation to find what was most probably true on questions where logic could not provide certainty) or grammarian rather than a philosopher. He was particularly influenced by satirist and rhetorician Lucian. Erasmus's writings shifted \"an intellectual culture from logical disputation about things to quarrels about texts, contexts, and words\".\nClassical.\nErasmus syncretistically took phrases, ideas and motifs from many classical philosophers to furnish discussions of Christian themes: academics have identified aspects of his thought as variously Platonist (duality), Cynical (asceticism),\n Stoic (adiaphora), Epicurean (ataraxia, pleasure as virtue), realist/non-voluntarist,\nand Isocratic (rhetoric, political education, syncretism). However, his Christianized version of Epicureanism is regarded as his own.\nErasmus was sympathetic to a kind of epistemological (Ciceronian not Cartesian) Scepticism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A Sceptic is not someone who doesn't care to know what is true or false\u00a0... but rather someone who does not make a final decision easily or fight to the death for his own opinion, but rather accepts as probable what someone else accepts as certain\u00a0... I explicitly exclude from Scepticism whatever is set forth in Sacred Scripture or whatever has been handed down to us by the authority of the Church.\u2014\u200a\nHistorian Kirk Essary has noted that from his earliest to last works Erasmus \"regularly denounced the Stoics as specifically unchristian in their hardline position and advocacy of \": warm affection and an appropriately fiery heart being inalienable parts of human sincerity; however, historian Ross Dealy sees Erasmus's decrial of other non-gentle \"perverse affections\" as having Stoical roots.\nFollowing Rufinus' translation of Origen's commentary on Romans, Erasmus wrote in terms of a tri-partite nature of man, with the soul () as the seat of free will: choosing the spirit () over the warring flesh/carnality () creates right order.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The body is purely material; the spirit is purely divine; the soul\u00a0... is tossed back and forward between the two according to whether it resists or gives way to the temptations of the flesh. The spirit makes us gods; the body makes us beasts; the soul makes us men.\u2014\u200a\nErasmus also put it that the mind () should act a ruler over the body () and the spirit, which he used to provide political analogies: correct rule (by the prince=mind) produces peace in the body and the body politic.\nAccording to theologian George van Kooten, Erasmus was the first modern scholar \"to note the similarities between Plato's \"Symposium\" and John's Gospel\", first in the \"Enchiridion\" then in the \"Adagia\", pre-dating other scholarly interest by 400 years.\nAnti-scholasticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Erasmus did not have a metaphysical bone in his frail body, and had no real feeling for the philosophical concerns of scholastic theology.\u2014\u200a\nHe usually eschewed metaphysical, epistemological and logical philosophy as found in Aristotle: in particular the curriculum and systematic methods of the post-Aquinas Schoolmen (Scholastics) and what he regarded as their frigid, counter-productive Aristoteleanism: \"What has Aristotle to do with Christ?\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They can deal with any text of scripture as with a nose of wax, and knead it into what shape best suits their interest.\u2014\u200a\nErasmus held that academics must avoid philosophical factionalism as an offence against Christian concord, to \"make the whole world Christian\". \"Men are drawn to Godliness by a thousand means.\" Indeed, Erasmus warned that Scholastic philosophy actually could distract participants from their proper focus on immediate morality, unless used moderately, and by \"excluding the Platonists from their commentaries, they strangle the beauty of revelation.\" \"They are windbags blown up with Aristotle, sausages stuffed with a mass of theoretical definitions, conclusions, and propositions.\" Duns Scotus, or his uninspiring proponents, generally came off even worse than Aquinas, nevertheless, despite his biting sharp comments, Erasmus paraded that he did not reject any medieval theologians totally, merely that he was championing the return to the fresh springs.\nNevertheless, church historian Ernst Kohls has commented on a certain closeness of Erasmus's thought to Thomas Aquinas', despite Erasmus's scepticism about runaway Aristotelianism and his methodological dislike of collections of disconnected sentences for quotation. Ultimately, Erasmus personally owned Aquinas' , the and his commentary on Paul's epistles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nErasmus approached classical philosophers theologically and rhetorically: their value was in how they pre-saged, explained or amplified the unique teachings of Christ (particularly the Sermon on the Mount): the .\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A great part of the teaching of Christ is to be found in some of the philosophers, particularly Socrates, Diogenes and Epictetus. But Christ taught it much more fully, and exemplified it better\u00a0...\u2014\u200a\nIn fact, he said, Christ was \"the very father of philosophy\" (). His characteristic combination of a Hellenic-informed Jesus whose teaching emphasis was on inter-personal relations more than abstract spiritual truths has been criticized e.g. by a view \"however, Erasmus sought only what was human in the Sermon on the Mount, just as he found what was Christian in the moral philosophy of the Stoics.\"\nIn works such as his \"Enchiridion\", \"The Education of a Christian Prince\" and the \"Colloquies\", Erasmus developed his idea of the , a life lived according to the teachings of Jesus taken as a spiritual-ethical-social-political-legal philosophy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Christ the heavenly teacher has founded a new people on earth,\u00a0... Having eyes without guile, these folk know no spite or envy; having freely castrated themselves, and aiming at a life of angels while in the flesh, they know no unchaste lust; they know not divorce, since there is no evil they will not endure or turn to the good; they have not the use of oaths, since they neither distrust nor deceive anyone; they know not the hunger for money, since their treasure is in heaven, nor do they itch for empty glory, since they refer all things to the glory of Christ.\u2026these are the new teachings of our founder, such as no school of philosophy has ever brought forth.\u2014\u200a\nIn philosopher \u00c9tienne Gilson's summary: \"the quite precise goal he pursues is to reject Greek philosophy outside of Christianity, into which the Middle Ages introduced Greek philosophy with the risk of corrupting this Christian Wisdom.\"\nUseful \"philosophy\" needed to be limited to (or re-defined as) the practical and moral: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You must realize that 'philosopher' does not mean someone who is clever at dialectics or science but someone who rejects illusory appearance and undauntedly seeks out and follows what is true and good. Being a philosopher is in practice the same as being a Christian; only the terminology is different.\u2014\u200a\nTheology.\nThree key distinctive features of the spirituality Erasmus proposed are accommodation, inverbation, and . \nIn the view of literary historian Chester Chapin, Erasmus's tendency of thought was \"towards cautious \"dulcification\" of the traditional [Catholic] view\".\nAccommodation.\nHistorian Manfred Hoffmann has described accommodation as \"the single most important concept in Erasmus's hermeneutic\".\nFor Erasmus, accommodation is a universal concept: humans must accommodate each other, must accommodate the church and \"vice versa\", and must take as their model how Christ accommodated the disciples in his interactions with them, and accommodated humans in his incarnation; which in turn merely reflects the eternal mutual accommodation within the Trinity. And the primary mechanism of accommodation is language, which mediates between reality and abstraction, which allows disputes of all kinds to be resolved and the gospel to be transmitted: in his New Testament, Erasmus notably translated the Greek \"logos\" in \"In the beginning was the Word\" more like \"In the beginning was Speech: using Latin \"sermo\" (discourse, conversation, language) not \"verbum\" (word) emphasizing the dynamic and interpersonal communication rather than static principle: \"Christ incarnate as the eloquent oration of God\": \"He is called Speech [sermo], because through him God, who in his own nature cannot be comprehended by any reasoning, wished to become known to us.\"\nThe role models of accommodation were Paul, that \"chameleon\" (or \"slippery squid\") and Christ, who was \"more mutable than Proteus himself\".\nFollowing Paul, Quintillian () and Gregory the Great's \"Pastoral Care\", Erasmus wrote that the orator, preacher or teacher must \"adapt their discourse to the characteristics of their audience\"; this made pastoral care the \"art of arts\". Erasmus wrote that most of his original works, from satires to paraphrases, were essentially the same themes packaged for different audiences.\nIn this light, Erasmus's ability to have friendly correspondence with both Thomas More and Thomas Bolyn, and with both Philip Melanchthon and Pope Adrian VI, can be seen as outworkings of his theology, rather than slippery insincerity or flattery of potential patrons. Similarly, it shows the theological basis of his pacificism, and his view of ecclesiastical authorities\u2014from priests like himself to Church Councils\u2014as necessary mediating peace-brokers.\nInverbation.\nFor Erasmus, further to accommodating humans in his Incarnation, Christ accommodated humans by a kind of \"inverbation\" through text: we now knowing the resurrection, Christ is revealed by the Gospels in a way that we can know him better by reading him than those who actually heard him speak; this will or may transform us.\nSince the Gospels become in effect like sacraments, for Erasmus reading them becomes a form of prayer which is spoiled by taking single sentences in isolation and using them as syllogisms. Instead, learning to understand the context, genres and literary expression in the New Testament becomes a spiritual more than academic exercise. Erasmus's has been called rhetorical theology ().\nScopus christi.\n is the unifying reference point, the navigation goal, or the organising principle of topics. According to his assistant-turned-foe, \u0152colampadius, Erasmus's rule was (\"nothing is to be sought in the sacred letters but Christ\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nIn Hoffmann's words, for Erasmus \"Christ is the of everything\": \"the focus in which both dimensions of reality, the human and the divine, intersect\" and so He himself is the hermeneutical principle of scripture\": \"the middle is the medium, the medium is the mediator, the mediator is the reconciler\". In Erasmus's early \"Enchiridion\" he had given this in typical medieval terms of an ascent of being to God (vertical), but from the mid-1510s life he moved to an analogy of Copernican planetary circling around Christ the centre (horizontal) or Columbian navigation towards a destination.\nOne effect is that scriptural interpretation must be done starting with the teachings and interactions of Jesus in the Gospels, with the Sermon on the Mount serving as the starting point, and arguably with the Beatitudes and the Lord's Prayer at the head of the queue. This privileges peacemaking, mercy, meekness, purity of heart, hungering after righteousness, poverty of spirit, etc. as the unassailable core of Christianity and piety and true theology.\nThe Sermon on the Mount provides the axioms on which every legitimate theology must be built, as well as the ethics governing theological discourse, and the rules for validating theological products; Erasmus's treats the primary and initial teaching of Jesus in the first Gospel as a theological methodology.\nFor example, \"peacemaking\" is a possible topic in any Christian theology; but for Erasmus, from the Beatitude, it must be a starting, reference and ending point when discussing all other theological notions, such as church authority, the Trinity, etc. Moreover, Christian theology must only be \"done\" in a peacemaking fashion for peacemaking purposes; and any theology that promotes division and warmongering is thereby anti-Christian.\nMystical theology.\nAnother important concept to Erasmus was \"the Folly of the Cross\" (which \"The Praise of Folly\" explored): the view that Truth belongs to the exuberant, perhaps ecstatic, world of what is foolish, strange, unexpected and even superficially repellent to us, rather than to the frigid worlds which intricate scholastic dialectical and syllogistic philosophical argument all too often generated; this produced in Erasmus a profound disinterest in hyper-rationality, and an emphasis on verbal, rhetorical, mystical, pastoral and personal/political moral concerns instead.\nTheological writings.\nSeveral scholars have suggested Erasmus wrote as an evangelist not an academic theologian. Even \"theology was to be metamorphic speech, converting persons to Christ\". Erasmus did not conceive of Christianity as fundamentally an intellectual system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Yet these ancient fathers were they who confuted both the Jews and Heathens [...]; they confuted them (I say), yet by their lives and miracles, rather than by words and syllogisms; and the persons they thus proselyted were downright honest, well meaning people, such as understood plain sense better than any artificial pomp of reasoning [...]\u2014\u200a\nHistorian William McCuaig commented \"I have never read a work by him on any subject that was not at bottom a piece of evangelical literature.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We may distinguish four different lines of work, parallel with each other, and complementary. First, the establishing and critical elucidation of the \"biblical texts\"; alongside it, the editions of the great \"patristic commentators\"; then, the \"exegetical works\" properly so called, in which these two fundamental researches yield their fruit; and finally, the \"methodological works\", which in their first state constitute a sort of preface to the various other studies, but which\u2014in return\u2014were nourished and enlarged by them as they went along.\u2014\u200a\nApart from these programmatic works, Erasmus also produce a number of prayers, sermons, essays, masses and poems for specific benefactors and occasions, often on topics where Erasmus and his benefactor agreed. His thought was particularly influenced by Origen.\nHe often set himself the challenge of formulating positive, moderate, non-superstitious versions of contemporary Catholic practices that might be more acceptable both to scandalised Catholics and Protestants of good will: the better attitudes to the sacraments, saints, Mary, indulgences, statues, scriptural ignorance and fanciful Biblical interpretation, prayer, dietary fasts, external ceremonialism, authority, vows, docility, submission to Rome, etc. For example, in his \"Paean in Honour of the Virgin Mary\" (1503) Erasmus elaborated his theme that the Incarnation had been hinted far and wide, which could impact the theology of the fate of the remote unbaptised and grace, and the place of classical philosophy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You are assuredly the Woman of renown: both heaven and earth and the succession of all the ages uniquely join to celebrate your praise in a musical concord. [...]\nDuring the centuries of the previous age the oracles of the gentiles spoke of you in obscure riddles. Egyptian prophecies, Apollo's tripod, the Sibylline books, gave hints of you. The mouths of learned poets predicted your coming in oracles they did not understand. [...]\nBoth the Old and the New Testament, like two cherubim with wings joined and unanimous voices, repeatedly sing your praise. [...]\nThus indeed have writers religiously vied to proclaim you, on the one hand inspired prophets, on the other eloquent Doctors of the church, both filled with the same spirit, as the former foretold your coming in joyful oracles before your birth and the latter heaped prayerful praise on you when you appeared.\u2014\u200a\nLegacy and evaluations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Since the origin of Christianity there have been perhaps only two other men\u2014St Augustine and Voltaire\u2014whose influence can be paralleled with Erasmus.\u2014\u200a\nErasmus was much later given the sobriquet \"Prince of the Humanists\", and has been called \"the crowning glory of the Christian humanists\". He has also been called \"the most illustrious rhetorician and educationalist of the Renaissance\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By the 1570s, \"Everyone had assimilated Erasmus to one extent or another.\"\u2014\u200a\nHowever, at times he has been viciously criticised, his works suppressed, his expertise corralled, his writings misinterpreted, his thought demonised, and his legacy marginalised. He was never judged and declared a heretic by the Catholic Church, during his lifetime or after: a semi-secret trial in Vallodolid Spain, in 1527 found him not to be a heretic, and he was sponsored and protected by Popes and Bishops. In 1531 the prestigious theology faculty of the University of Paris censured over 100 propositions they claimed were in his writings, however he denied the accuracy of the interpretations and the logic of the conclusions.\nPersonal.\nHealth.\nErasmus was a quite sickly man and frequently worked from his sickbed. As a teenager he contracted Quartan fever, a non-lethal type of malaria which recurred numerous times for the rest of his life: he attributed his survival to the intercession of St Genevieve. His digestion gave him trouble: he was intolerant of fish, beer and some wines, which were the standard diet for members of religious orders; he eventually died following an attack of dysentery.\nIn Cambridge he was ill, possibly with the English sweating sickness. He suffered kidney stones from his time in Venice and, in late life, with gout In 1514, he suffered a fall from his horse and injured his back.\nIn 1528 he suffered recurrent episodes of the stone, \"from which he almost died.\"\nIn 1529 his self-removal from Basel was delayed because of headcold and fever. In 1530 while travelling he suffered some near-fatal illness which several doctors diagnosed as the plague (which had killed his parents) but several others diagnosed as not the plague.\nVarious illnesses have been diagnosed of the skeletons claimed to be his, including pustulotic arthro-osteitis, syphilis or yaws. Other doctors have diagnosed from his written descriptions ailments such as rheumatoid arthritis, enteric rheumatism and spondylarthritis.\nClothing.\nUntil Erasmus received his 1505 and 1517 Papal dispensations to wear clerical garb, Erasmus wore versions of the local habit of his order, the Canons regular of St Augustine, Chapter of Sion, which varied by region and house, unless travelling: in general, a white or perhaps black cassock with linen and lace choir rochet for liturgical contexts, or otherwise with white ' (scarf) (over left shoulder), or almuce (cape), perhaps with an asymmetrical black cope of cloth or sheepskin (') or long black cloak.\nFrom 1505, and certainly after 1517, he dressed as a scholar-priest. He preferred warm and soft garments: according to one source, he arranged for his clothing to be stuffed with fur to protect him against the cold, and his habit counted with a collar of fur which usually covered his nape.\nAll Erasmus's portraits show him wearing a knitted scholar's bonnet.\nSignet ring and personal motto.\nErasmus chose the Roman god of borders and boundaries Terminus as a personal symbol and had a signet ring with a herm he thought depicted Terminus carved into a carnelian. The herm was presented to him in Rome by his student Alexander Stewart and in reality depicted the Greek god Dionysus. The ring was also depicted in a portrait of his by the Flemish painter Quentin Matsys.\nThe herm became part of the Erasmus branding at Froben, and is on his tombstone. In the early 1530s, Erasmus was portrayed as Terminus by Hans Holbein the Younger.\nThe diamond ring Erasmus wears in the famous Holbein portrait was a gift from his long-time friend and corespondent, Cardinal Lorenzo Campeggio, as a \"memorial of our friendship\" (\"\"amicitiae nostrae\" no\u03bc\u03bd\u03b7\u03bc\u03cc\u03c3\u03c5\u03bd\u03bf\u03bd\").\nHe chose \"\" (Lat. \"I concede to no-one\") as his personal motto. The obverse of the medal by Quintin Matsys featured the Terminus herm. Mottoes on medals, along the circumference, included \"A better picture of Erasmus is shown in his writing\", and \"Contemplate the end of a long life\" and Horace's \"Death is the ultimate boundary of things,\" which re-casts the motto as a \"memento mori\". There were anachronistic claims that his motto was a favourable nod to Luther's \"Here I stand\" which Erasmus denied.\nVisual representations.\nErasmus frequently gifted portraits and medals with his image to friends and patrons.\nInterest in developments of visual arts or artists is notably absent in Erasmus's writing, despite moving in circles where he shared friends and patron with famous artists: for example, in Venice Erasmus's friend Giulio Camillo worked with Titian. Erasmus was personal friends of Hans Holbein and Albrecht D\u00fcrer.\nExhumation.\nIn 1928, the site of Erasmus's grave was dug up, and a body identified in the bones and examined. In 1974, remains were dug up in a slightly different location, accompanied by an Erasmus medal. Both remains have been claimed to be Erasmus'. However, it is possible neither is. The first bones were taller than expected and syphilitic; the second fitted the reported size and age but were accidentally smashed during photography.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTopics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10153", "revid": "577285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10153", "title": "Encyclopedia Brown", "text": "Children's book series by Donald J. Sobol\nEncyclopedia Brown is a series of children\u2019s books featuring the adventures of boy detective Leroy Brown, nicknamed \"Encyclopedia\" for his intelligence and range of knowledge. The 29 books in the children's literature series were written (one co-written) by Donald J. Sobol, with the first book published in 1963 and the last published posthumously in 2012. In addition to the main books, the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" series has spawned a comic strip, a TV series, and compilation books of puzzles and games.\nSobol's first \"Encyclopedia Brown\" book was written in two weeks; subsequent books took about six months to write. Its main publisher was Bantam Skylark.\nStyle.\nEach book in the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" mystery series is self-contained in that the reader is not required to have read earlier books in order to understand the stories. The major characters, settings, etc. are usually introduced (or reintroduced) in each book.\nBooks featuring Brown are subdivided into a number\u2014usually ten or more\u2014of (possibly interlinked) short stories, each of which presents a mystery. The mysteries are intended to be solved by the reader, thanks to the placement of a logical or factual inconsistency somewhere within the text. This is very similar to the layout of Donald Sobol's other book series, \"Two-Minute Mysteries\". Many of the mysteries involve Brown helping his father, the local police chief, solve a crime; Brown outwitting town bully Bugs Meany, the leader of a gang known as the Tigers; or Brown being aided by Sally Kimball, his partner, close friend, and bodyguard. Brown, his father, or Sally invariably solves the case by exposing this inconsistency, detailed in the \"Answers\" section in the back of the book.\nFormula.\nThe books often follow a formula where the first chapter involves Brown solving a case at the dinner table for his father, the local police chief in the fictional seaside town of Idaville in an unspecified state. When Chief Brown barely tastes his meal, that is a clue he was handed a difficult case. He pulls out his casebook and goes over it with the family. Encyclopedia solves these cases by briefly closing his eyes while he thinks deeply, then asking a single question which directly leads to his finding the solution.\nThe second mystery often begins in the Brown garage on Rover Avenue, where Encyclopedia has set up a detective agency to help neighborhood children solve cases for \"25 cents per day, plus expenses\u2014No case too small.\" This second case usually involves the town bully and mischief maker Bugs Meany, leader of a gang called the Tigers, who, after being foiled, will attempt revenge in the third mystery.\nIn the third mystery, the plot involves Encyclopedia's partner, close friend, and bodyguard, Sally Kimball, the one person under 14 years of age to physically stand up to Bugs. She is the only reason that Bugs and his Tigers do not try to physically attack Encyclopedia. Encyclopedia tends to dislike anyone whom Sally has a crush on, possibly indicating that he has a crush on her. Also intelligent, Sally once attempted\u2014in the series' first book\u2014to prove herself smarter than Encyclopedia by stumping him with a mystery of her own creation. Ironically, the contest was held at the Tigers' clubhouse, with Bugs and the others cheering him on. However, she was beaten in the contest (although Encyclopedia admitted that she almost tricked him), after which she became his friend. In subsequent storylines Bugs or his gang usually set up some sort of trap to get Encyclopedia or Sally in trouble. However, as in the previous story, they make a key mistake which Encyclopedia exposes.\nLater cases may find Encyclopedia assisting his father at a crime scene (rarely more serious than larceny, and Encyclopedia is always discreet when helping his father) or interacting with people around town, often exposing scams. One such example is a high school dropout and would-be con artist named Wilford Wiggins who spends time trying to dream up schemes to fleece kids out of their money. Like Bugs, his schemes have an inconsistency which Encyclopedia exposes.\nIn some cases it is Sally and not Encyclopedia who figures it out because, as she tells Encyclopedia, \"You are a boy.\" In other words, she notices things that only a girl would find inconsistent. Sally further displays her intelligence in the various mysteries in that she often can deduce who committed the crime, or whether a certain person is lying, but she simply cannot always prove it.\nLegacy.\nThe \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books have experienced some enduring popularity.\nIn 1976, the Mystery Writers of America honored Sobol and his Encyclopedia Brown series with a special Edgar Award.\nEducators have used Encyclopedia Brown in classrooms to instruct students in skills such as writing reports. In 1986, the Society for Visual Education, Inc. published a filmstrip series with accompanying audio cassette tapes and workbooks for elementary and middle schools' use. Four Encyclopedia Brown stories were utilized: \"The Case of the Missing Statue\", \"The Case of the Happy Nephew\", \"The Case of the Kidnapped Pigs\", and \"The Case of the Marble Shooter\". According to WorldCat's library catalog listing, \"As super-sleuth Encyclopedia Brown solves four mysteries, he shows students how he fills out his reports, including selecting a topic, gathering information, taking notes, making an outline, and revising and editing.\"\nAdaptations.\nComic strip.\nFrom December 3, 1978, to September 20, 1980, \"Encyclopedia Brown\" was a daily and Sunday comic strip syndicated by Universal Press Syndicate. The artwork was done by Frank Bolle, and Donald J. Sobol was credited as the writer. When the strips were collected into books in the mid-1980s, the strip was credited to Elliot Caplin, based on Sobol's characters. The strips adapted Sobol stories, both ones that had originally been Encyclopedia Brown tales and ones that had been part of Sobol's syndicated \"Two-Minute Mysteries\" features.\nTV series.\nA live action television series adaptation, also called \"Encyclopedia Brown\", ran on HBO starting in 1989. Scott Bremner played the title role with Laura Bridge playing Sally. The series ran for eight episodes. It was produced by Howard David Deutsch and directed by Savage Steve Holland. Parts of the series were filmed in Provo, Utah.\nThe series began with an hour-long special, \"The Case of the Missing Time Capsule\", and subsequent six episodes were 30 minutes long.\nMany of these episodes were later released on VHS.\nFilm.\nIn June 2013, Warner Bros. optioned the \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books into a feature film. Matt Johnson was in talks to write the movie. Roy Lee and Howard David Deutsch (producer of the 1989 \"Encyclopedia Brown\" TV series) and Jonathan Zakin were announced as producing.\nBooks.\nThe \"Encyclopedia Brown\" books, in order of publication (parentheses indicate numbers on original release cover art):\nSolve-It-Yourself Mystery Sweepstakes.\nFrom January 15 to June 30, 1989, a special Solve-It-Yourself Mystery Sweepstakes was held in conjunction with the Encyclopedia Brown books and Bantam Books. In the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\", Sobol presented an unsolved mystery for the contestant to solve and submit an answer for a chance to win a prize. The mystery for the contest was called \"The Case of the Missing Birthday Gift\", wherein Encyclopedia must solve the case of a stolen bicycle given as a birthday gift to Willie Grant on his tenth birthday. The Tigers make an appearance as the suspects in the case; Bugs Meany, Jack Beck, and Rocky Graham all show up at the Tigers' clubhouse.\nContestants were allowed to enter as many times as they wished if they used a separate envelope for each entry. The sweepstakes was only available to US and Canada residents. No purchase was necessary, as one could either use the official form in the back of specially marked copies of \"Encyclopedia Brown and the Case of the Treasure Hunt\" or submit a 3\" by 5\" index card with the solution and the contestant's contact information.\nParodies and tributes.\nThe satirical newspaper \"The Onion\" ran an article in 2003 titled \"Idaville Detective 'Encyclopedia' Brown Found Dead In Library Dumpster\", which stated that Encyclopedia Brown, now a middle-aged police detective, had been murdered. The article parodied the books' tendency to have crimes solved through knowledge of trivia, and ended with Bugs Meany, who was now police commissioner, stating that he had an alibi for the murder in that \"I was at the North Pole watching the penguins.\" This is a reference to \"The Case of the Explorer's Money\", where Encyclopedia Brown solves a case by noting that penguins and polar bears live on opposite hemispheres.\nEd Brubaker and Sean Phillips' \"Criminal: Last of the Innocent\" graphic novel features a reference to Encyclopedia Brown, with a grown-up analogue of Encyclopedia featured in the comic, as confirmed by Ed Brubaker himself.\nThe comic strip \"FoxTrot\" ran a 2000 storyline where Jason and Marcus try their hand at being private investigators, out to solve a theft perpetrated on their girlfriends. One agency name they tried was \"Encyclopedias Brown And White\" (because Marcus is African-American and Jason is Caucasian), which became the title of \"FoxTrot\"'s next book of comics.\nThe protagonist of the 2020 comedic noir film \"The Kid Detective\" is a former child prodigy detective, now an unsuccessful adult, living in a small town.\nIn \"The Simpsons\" episode \"500 Keys\", the grave of Encyclopedia Brown is shown briefly next to those of Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys, to which Lisa comments \"Jeez, they're dropping like flies\".\nIn the \"Futurama\" episode \"The Futurama Mystery Liberry\", the character is parodied as Wikipedia Brown.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10156", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10156", "title": "Evolved", "text": ""}
{"id": "10158", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10158", "title": "Empire", "text": "Multiple states under one central authority, usually created by conquest\nAn empire is a realm controlled by an emperor or an empress and divided between a dominant center and subordinate peripheries. The center of the empire (sometimes referred to as the metropole) has political control over the peripheries. Within an empire, different populations may have different sets of rights and may be governed differently. The word \"empire\" derives from the Roman concept of . Narrowly defined, an empire is a sovereign state whose head of state uses the title of \"emperor\" or \"empress\"; but not all states with aggregate territory under the rule of supreme authorities are called \"empires\" or are ruled by an emperor; nor have all self-described empires been accepted as such by contemporaries and historians (the Central African Empire of 1976 to 1979, and some Anglo-Saxon kingdoms in early England being examples).\nThere have been \"ancient and modern, centralized and decentralized, ultra-brutal and relatively benign\" empires. An important distinction has been between land empires made up solely of contiguous territories, such as the Achaemenid Empire, Roman Empire, the Mongol Empire, or the Russian Empire; and those - based on sea-power - which include territories that are remote from the 'home' country of the empire, such as the Dutch colonial empire, the Empire of Japan, the Chola Empire or the British Empire.\nAside from the more formal usage, the concept of \"empire\" in popular thought is associated with such concepts as \"imperialism\", \"colonialism\", and \"globalization\", with \"imperialism\" referring to the creation and maintenance of unequal relationships between nations and not necessarily the policy of a state headed by an emperor or empress. The word \"empire\" can also refer colloquially to a large-scale business enterprise (e.g. a transnational corporation), to a political organization controlled by a single individual (a political boss) or by a group (political bosses). \"Empire\" is often used as a term to describe overpowering situations causing displeasure.\nDefinition.\nAn empire is an aggregate of many separate states or territories under a supreme ruler or oligarchy. This is in contrast to a federation, which is an extensive state voluntarily composed of autonomous states and peoples. An empire is a large polity which rules over territories outside of its original borders.\nDefinitions of what physically and politically constitutes an empire vary. It might be a state affecting imperial policies or a particular political structure. Empires are typically formed from diverse ethnic, national, cultural, and religious components. 'Empire' and 'colonialism' are used to refer to relationships between a powerful state or society versus a less powerful one; Michael W. Doyle has defined empire as \"effective control, whether formal or informal, of a subordinated society by an imperial society\". Imperialism for Doyle is simply the process of establishing and maintaining an empire. Similarly, for Rein Taagepera imperialism is a policy of conquest and domination of foreign lands and populations. \nThis is not to be confused with the Imperialism in the Marxist-Leninst sense of the late modern phenomenon following the European colonialism and representing the last stage of capitalism. Initially, the term was New Imperialism, where the qualifier \"new\" differentiated the contemporary imperialism from earlier imperialism, such as the formation of ancient empires and the first wave of European colonization. Eventually, Lenin cancelled all earlier forms and began the history of Imperialism in the 1760s. The Leninist definition of imperialism removed the essence of empire from politics to economics and explicitly denied that modern capitalist imperialism had anything in common with the empires of the past.\nSince the beginning, mainstream historians of empire were puzzled: as the highest stage of capitalism, imperialism cannot exist before 1876. Such a concept is not very helpful \u201cif we do not know for certain whether it fits the facts of two millennia or\u2026 two generations.\u201d Kenneth Waltz believed that the cause (capitalism) appears much younger than the effect (imperialism). He believed that it is as though Newton explained gravitation by a certain 17th century phenomenon ignoring that gravitation operated earlier. Lenin\u2019s work was interpreted as political pamphlet rather than scientific thesis, suitable for \"the half-educated whose power of criticism was not fully developed,\" and calling them to hunt the \u201cinvisible hand\u201d of economic exploitation. According to Michael Doyle, thus imperialism turned into an economic and European phenomenon. The pamphlet re-defined empire as the original sin of European peoples, who corrupted an 'innocent world', and the belief became wholeheartedly shared all over the non-Western world. In this world, the word \"imperialist\" became \"the 20th-century version of the devil\" who has constant designs on their sovereignty and economic growth.\nFew historians follow the Marxist approach and most recognize that imperialism predates the European colonialism and capitalism by at least four millenia. In the early 21st century, most theories of empire still were Eurocentric, reflecting the brief period when European empires dominated the world. This perspective, according to the 2021 \"Oxford World History of Empire\", must be widened and the \"Age of Imperialism\" situated within a proper world history of empires. Millennia had passed before Europe could claim to dictate the course of world history and a significant time has passed since. \nAccording to historians such as George Steinmetz, involving the cessation of state sovereignty, empires should properly be studied in the domain of politics rather than economics. The essential core of the definition is political. Lenin\u2019s usage of the term 'empire' primarily deals with imperialism during the 20th century. Mainstream and Marxist historians heavily disagree on the topic of imperialism\nTom Nairn and Paul James define empires as polities that \"extend relations of power across territorial spaces over which they have no prior or given legal sovereignty, and where, in one or more of the domains of economics, politics, and culture, they gain some measure of extensive hegemony over those spaces to extract or accrue value\". Rein Taagepera has defined an empire as \"any relatively large sovereign political entity whose components are not sovereign\". Peter Bang characterizes empire as \"composite, layered and anything but uniform in their internal organization of power,\" and comprising \"a range of different territories and communities, subjected hierarchically in various ways to a dominant power.\"\nHowever, sometimes an empire is only a semantic construction, such as when a ruler assumes the title of \"emperor\". That polity over which the ruler reigns logically becomes an \"empire\", despite having no additional territory or hegemony. Examples of this form of empire are the Central African Empire, Mexican Empire, or the Korean Empire proclaimed in 1897 when Korea, far from gaining new territory, was on the verge of being annexed by the Empire of Japan, one of the last to use the name officially. Among the last states in the 20th century known as empires in this sense were the Central African Empire, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Manchukuo, Russia, Germany, and Korea.\nScholars typically distinguish empires from nation-states. In an empire, there is a hierarchy whereby one group of people (usually, the metropole) has command over other groups of people, and there is a hierarchy of rights and prestige for different groups of people. Josep Colomer distinguished between empires and states in the following way:\nCharacteristics.\nMany empires were the result of military conquest, incorporating the vanquished states into a political union, but imperial hegemony can be established in other ways. According to Edward Luttwak, there are two main ways to establish and maintain an imperial political structure: (i) as a territorial empire of direct conquest and control by force or (ii) as a coercive, hegemonic empire of indirect control. The former method provides greater tribute and direct political control, yet limits further expansion because it absorbs military forces to fixed garrisons. The latter method provides less tribute and indirect control, but avails military forces for further expansion.\nEmpires can expand by both land and sea. Territorial empires (e.g. the Macedonian Empire and Byzantine Empire) tend to be contiguous areas extending directly outwards from the original frontier. The terrestrial empire's maritime analogue is the thalassocracy, an empire composed of islands and coasts which are accessible to its terrestrial homeland, such as the Athenian-dominated Delian League and British empires) with looser structures and more scattered territories, often consisting of many islands and other forms of possessions which required the creation and maintenance of a powerful navy.\nThe Athenian Empire, the Roman Empire, and the British Empire developed at least in part under elective auspices. Empires such as the Holy Roman Empire also came together by electing the emperor with votes from member realms through the Imperial election. The Empire of Brazil declared itself an empire after separating from the Portuguese Empire in 1822. France has twice transitioned from being called the French Republic to being called the French Empire while it retained an overseas empire. Europeans began applying the designation of \"empire\" to non-European monarchies, such as the Qing Empire and the Mughal Empire, as well as the Maratha Confederacy, eventually leading to the looser denotations applicable to any political structure meeting their criteria of \"imperium\". Some monarchies styled themselves as having greater size, scope, and power than the territorial, politico-military, and economic facts support. As a consequence, some monarchs assumed the title of \"emperor\" (or its corresponding translation, \"tsar\", \"empereur\", \"kaiser\", \"shah\" etc.) and renamed their states as \"The Empire of ...\"\nEmpires were seen as expanding power and administration, and guaranteeing stability, security and legal order for their subjects. They tried to minimize ethnic and religious antagonism inside the empire. Some empires tended to impose their ideas, beliefs and cultural habits on the subject states to strengthen the imperial structure; others opted for multicultural and cosmopolitan policies. Anthony Pagden estimates that most of the early empires were multicultural and attempted to incorporate various groups into some larger cosmopolitan whole. The aristocracies that ruled empires were often more cosmopolitan and broad-minded than their nationalistic successors. Cultures generated by empires could have notable effects that outlasted the empire itself.\nIn the mid-twentieth century, the word \"empire\" obtained a negative connotation, viewed as inherently immoral or illegitimate. Traditional or overt empire destroyed and discredited itself in the World Wars. The matters are worse in the German language where empire is \"reich\" and immediately associates with the Third Reich. For the first time in history, countries which proudly called themselves empires disappeared from the map. The postwar world came under the domination of two superpowers both of which proclaimed themselves to be enemies of empire. The West contained the imperialist East and the East and the South resisted the imperialist West. Imperialism became a cosmopolitan, multi-front battle cry wielding many diverse and distant peoples in fighting a common enemy. As former colonies came to make up the majority of states in the United Nations, \"empire\" lost all legitimacy in this major international forum. \"Any state stupid enough to call itself an empire became subject automatically to UN resolutions on decolonisation.\" Most postwar histories of empires have been hostile, especially if the authors were promoting nationalism.\nHistory.\nStephen Howe writes that with the exception of the Roman, Chinese and \"perhaps ancient Egyptian states\", early empires seldom survived the death of their founder and were usually limited in scope to conquest and collection of tribute, having little impact on the everyday lives of their subjects.\nWith the exception of Rome, the periods of dissolution following imperial falls were equally short. Successor states seldom outlived their founders and disappeared in the next and often larger empire. Only in the wreckage of the Roman Empire, distinguished Robert G. Wesson, a system of full-fledged nation-states evolved and it took a millennium. \"It seems almost impossible for a community of free states to reemerge where a universal empire has once stretched across the land and fixed its ways and symbols of authority.\" Walter Scheidel also finds Europe exceptional among civilizations which experienced imperial\u00a0unity because for an entire millennium (between Charlemagne and Napoleon) no single power managed to control more than one-fifth of the region\u2019s population. Some empires, like the Neo-Babylonian, Median and Lydian were outright conquered by a larger empire. The historical pattern was not a simple rise-and-fall cycle; rather it was rise, fall, and greater rise, taking on an increasingly global scale. Raoul Naroll called it \"expanding pulsation,\" Christopher Chase-Dunn \"upward sweeps,\" and Ian Morris \"exponential growth.\"\nPeter Turchin, Walter Scheidel and Rein Taagepera demonstrated this millennia-long trend in mathematically calculated graphs. Turchin showed the largest empire in total area for 2800 BC \u2013 AD 1800. Scheidel demonstrated population of the largest empire and three largest empires as a share of world population from 700 BC to AD 2000. Taagepera showed the largest empire in total area and share of world population for 3000 BC - AD 2000 and for the same period five largest empires as share of world land and world population. The general vector of these graphs, according to Max Ostrovsky, represents a fragment in hyperbola \"Y = Arctg X\" when the hyperbola takes off.\nEmpires were limited in scope to conquest, as Howe observed, but conquest is a considerable scope. Many fought to the death to avoid it or to be liberated from it. Imperial conquests and attempts of conquest significantly contributed to the list of wars by death toll. The imperial impact on subjects can be regarded as \"little,\" but only on those subjects who survived the imperial conquest and rule. We cannot ask the inhabitants of Carthage and Masada, for example, whether empire had little impact on their lives. We seldom hear the voices of subject peoples because history is mostly written by winners, that is, by the great empires themselves. The imperial sources tend to ignore or reduce the resistance by subdued states. But two rich primary sources of the subject population are the Hebrew Prophetic books and the \"Sibylline Oracles\". The hatred towards the ruling empires expressed in these sources makes impression of an impact more serious than estimated by Howe. A classical writer and adherent of empire, Orosius explicitly preferred to avoid the views of subject populations. And another classical Roman patriot, Lucan confessed that \"words cannot express how bitterly we are hated\" by subject peoples. More subject voices were revealed by Historian Timothy H. Parson in his research of seven empires from the perspective of their subjects.\nEarly empires.\nThe earliest known empire appeared in southern Egypt sometime around 3200 BC. Southern Egypt was divided by three kingdoms each centered on a powerful city. Hierapolis conquered the other two cities over two centuries, and later grew into the country of Egypt. The Akkadian Empire, established by Sargon of Akkad (24th century BC), was an early all-Mesopotamian empire which spread into Anatolia, the Levant and Ancient Iran. This imperial achievement was repeated by Shamshi-Adad I of Assyria and Hammurabi of Babylon in the 19th and 18th centuries BC. In the 15th century BC, the New Kingdom of Ancient Egypt, ruled by Thutmose III, was ancient Africa's major force upon incorporating Nubia and the ancient city-states of the Levant.\nIn the Amarna Period (15th-13th centuries BC), Egypt, the Middle Assyrian Empire, Hittite Empire, and those of the Mitanni and Elamites formed club of great powers. Egypt and the Hittites emerged as two dominant Empires of the club and in 1274 BC clashed in the Battle of Kadesh. The confrontation was not decisive and soon the Amarna international system was dissolved during the late Bronze Age collapse. All its empires declined. The first empire to recover from the collapse was the Neo-Assyrian Empire (916\u2013612 BC). By 673 BC, Assyria conquered the entire Fertile Crescent including Cyprus and Egypt.\nThe Assyrian achievement, however, was short lived. In the 6th century BC, the Median Empire, Babylonians, Scythians and Cimmerians allied and defeated the Assyrian Empire. The Assyrian capital, Nineveh, was razed by their combined armies in 612 BC. Never again a world leading empire would be centered in a great River Valley. The fall of Nineveh marks the end of the River Valleys age and the beginning of the Axial Age, when the center of power shifted away from the great River Valleys, and empires suddenly became significantly larger. The Median Empire became the first leading empire, the largest of its day, centered beyond River Valleys. This Empire lasted for about sixty years and was conquered by the Persian Empire.\nFrom 1500 BC in China rose the Shang Empire which was succeeded by the Zhou Empire around 1100 BC. Chronologically, the collapse of Shang also coincides with the late Bronze Age collapse. Both Shang and Zhou equalled or surpassed in territory their contemporary Near Eastern empires. The Zhou Empire dissolved in 770 BC into feudal multi-state system which lasted for five and a half centuries until the universal conquest of Qin in 221 BC.\nClassical period.\nThe Axial Age (mid-First Millennium BC) witnessed unprecedented imperial expansion in the Indo-Mediterranean region and China, distinguished as the most \"dramatic\" surge in premodern history. The array of successive and parallel empires of the Age makes \"bewildering\" impression on imperiometric experts. The Axial threshold is remarkable in world history. From 600 BC, the area of the largest empire would never fell below \u2013 a size never reached before 600 BC. The Colonial surge was less exponential. The Axial surge culminated with the Roman, Kushan and Han Empires ruling over as many as two-thirds of all people on Earth, the most extreme ever degree of imperial consolidation. The relative demographic size of the three largest empires in the world was not as massive before and ever since.\nThe successful and extensive Achaemenid Empire (550\u2013330 BC), also known as the first Persian Empire, covered Mesopotamia, Egypt, parts of Greece, Thrace, the Middle East, much of Central Asia, and North-Western India. It is considered the first great empire in history or the first \"world empire\". It was overthrown and replaced by the short-lived empire of Alexander the Great. His Empire was succeeded by three Empires ruled by the Diadochi\u2014the Seleucid, Ptolemaic, and Antigonid, which, despite being independent, are called the \"Hellenistic Empire\" by virtue of their similarities in culture and administration.\nMeanwhile, in the western Mediterranean the Empires of Carthage and Rome began their rise. Having decisively defeated Carthage in 202 BC, Rome defeated Macedonia in 200 BC and the Seleucids in 190\u2013189 BC to establish an all-Mediterranean Empire. The Seleucid Empire broke apart and its former eastern part was absorbed by the Parthian Empire. In 30 BC Rome annexed Ptolemaic Egypt.\nIn India during the Axial Age appeared the Maurya Empire\u2014a geographically extensive and powerful empire, ruled by the Mauryan dynasty from 321 to 185 BC. The empire was founded in 322 BC by Chandragupta Maurya through the help of Chanakya, who rapidly expanded his power westward across central and western India, taking advantage of the disruptions of local powers following the withdrawal by Alexander the Great. By 320 BC, the Maurya Empire had fully occupied northwestern India as well as defeating and conquering the satraps left by Alexander. Under Emperor Ashoka the Great, the Maurya Empire became the first Indian empire to conquer the whole Indian Peninsula \u2014 an achievement repeated only twice, by the Gupta and Mughal Empires. In the reign of Ashoka Buddhism spread to become the dominant religion in many parts of the ancient India.\nIn 221 BC, China became an empire when the State of Qin ended the chaotic Warring States period through its conquest of the other six states, starting the Qin Empire (221\u2013207 BC). Its sovereign adopted the new title of \"Huangdi\" (\u7687\u5e1d), which is translated in English as \"Emperor\". The Qin Empire is known for the construction of the Great Wall of China and the Terracotta Army, as well as the standardization of currency, weights, measures and writing system. It laid the foundation for China's first golden age, the Han dynasty (202 BC\u2013AD 9, AD 25\u2013220). The Han Empire expanded into Central Asia and established trade through the Silk Road. Confucianism was, for the first time, adopted as an official state ideology. During the reign of the Emperor Wu of Han (156\u201387 BC), the Xiongnu were pacified. In the first two centuries of the Common Era, only four empires stretched between the Pacific and the Atlantic: the Han Empire of China, the Kushan Empire, the Parthian Empire of Persia, and the Roman Empire. The collapse of the Han Empire in AD 220 saw China fragmented into the Three Kingdoms, only to be unified once again by the Jin Empire (AD 266\u2013420). The relative weakness of the Jin Empire plunged China into political disunity that would last from AD 304 to AD 589 when the Sui Empire (AD 581\u2013618) reunited China.\nThe Romans were the first people to invent and embody the concept of \"empire\" in their two mandates: to wage war and to make and execute laws. They were the most extensive Western empire until the early modern period, and left a lasting impact on European society. Many languages, cultural values, religious institutions, political divisions, urban centers, and legal systems can trace their origins to the Roman Empire. The Roman Empire governed and rested on exploitative actions. They took slaves and money from the peripheries to support the imperial center. However, the absolute reliance on conquered peoples to carry out the empire's fortune, sustain wealth, and fight wars would ultimately lead to the collapse of the Roman Empire. The Romans were strong believers in what a later imperial age called their \"civilizing mission\". This term was legitimized and justified by writers like Cicero who wrote that only under Roman rule could the world flourish and prosper. This ideology, that was envisioned to bring a new world order, was eventually spread across the Mediterranean world and beyond. People started to build houses like Romans, eat the same food, wear the same clothes and engage in the same games. Even rights of citizenship and authority to rule were granted to people not born within Roman territory.\nThe Latin word \"imperium\" derives from \"imperare\", meaning \"to command\", and originally referred to a magistrate's authority (usually in a military sense). As the Roman state expanded overseas, the term began to be used to describe Rome's authority over its colonies and client states. Successful generals were often given the title \"imperator\", an honorific roughly meaning \"commander\". Although historians use the terms \"Republic\" and \"Empire\" to identify the periods of Roman history before and after absolute power was assumed by Augustus, the Romans themselves continued to refer to their government as the \"Res publica\", meaning \"public affair\". On the other hand, the concept of \"imperium Romanum\", as in, the authority of the Romans, is attested since the 2nd century BC. The modern concepts of \"Empire\" and \"Emperor\" did not appear until several centuries later, long after the fall of Rome in the West. Augustus established a new \"de facto\" monarchy, but sought to maintain the appearance of a republican government. He and his early successors used the informal titles of \"augustus\" and \"princeps\", but over time the title of \"imperator\" came to denote the office of (what is now referred to as) \"emperor\".\nThe Roman Catholic Church, founded in the early Imperial Period, spread across Europe, first by the activities of Christian evangelists, and later by official imperial promulgation. The legal systems of France and its former colonies are strongly influenced by Roman law. Similarly, the United States was founded on a model inspired by the Roman Republic, with upper and lower legislative assemblies, and executive power vested in a single individual, the president. The president, as \"commander-in-chief\" of the armed forces, reflects the ancient Roman titles \"imperator princeps\". Since 2002, all the world is divided between US \"commands\" literally reflecting Roman \"imperia\".\nPost-classical period.\nThe fall of Rome looms large in the Eurocentric view of history but it did not alter the general imperial trend and the rest of Eurasia does not fit the \"Middle Ages\" of the Eurocentric periodization. Far from a graveyard of empires, the new age is marked by vibrant imperial formations continuing the earlier imperial impulse undimmed. Empires continued to establish new records, albeit with longer intervals, and some experienced Golden Ages. China reunified by the 6th century and under the Tang dynasty pushed into Central Asia. In the 8th century, the Caliphate became the largest so far empire in area. The Caliphate and China crossed the whole Old World from the Atlantic to the Pacific. In the 9th century, China under the Song dynasty established the all-time record in the share of world population (38%). And in the 13th century, the Mongols created the largest ever contigous empire. The two last records still hold.\nIn Western Asia, the term \"Persian Empire\" came to denote the Iranian imperial states established in the pre\u2013Islamic and, beginning with the Safavid Empire, modern Persia. In the 7th century, the Arab Empire was established by Muhammad, the founder of Islam. Over the next century, in one of the fastest and vastest expansions in history, his Empire conquered Persia and expanded on three continents (Asia, Africa, and Europe). At their height, under the Umayyad Caliphate, the territory that was conquered by the Arab Empire stretched from Iberia (at the Pyrenees) in the west to India (at Sind) in the east. In 751 AD, the Arab and Chinese Empires clashed in the Battle of Talas.\nIn East Asia, various Chinese empires (or dynasties) dominated the political, economic and cultural landscapes during this era, the most powerful of which was probably the Tang Empire (618\u2013690, 705\u2013907). Other influential Chinese empires during the post-classical period include the Sui Empire (581\u2013618), the Great Liao Empire, the Song Empire, the Western Xia Empire (1038\u20131227), the Great Jin Empire (1115\u20131234), the Western Liao Empire (1124\u20131218), the Great Yuan Empire (1271\u20131368), and the Great Ming Empire (1368\u20131644). During this period, Japan and Korea underwent voluntary Sinicization. The Sui, Tang and Song empires had the world's largest economy and were the most technologically advanced during their time. The Song population reached 125 million in 1125, representing 38% of a world population \u2013 the largest percentage any empire has ever reached. The Great Yuan Empire was the world's ninth largest empire by total land area; while the Great Ming Empire is famous for the seven maritime expeditions led by Zheng He.\nAround the 6th century, the Yamato clan set up Japan's first empire and first and only dynasty. During the next two centuries, Japan's kingdoms and tribes came to be unified under this dynasty. The Japanese emperor adopted the Chinese title Son of Heaven. Emperor Kinmei (509\u2013571) is considered the first historically verifiable Japanese emperor. The Japanese imperial dynasty continues to this day, albeit in an almost entirely ceremonial role, and represents the oldest continuous hereditary monarchy in the world.\nThe Ajuran Sultanate was a Somali empire in the medieval times that dominated the Indian Ocean trade. It was a Somali Muslim sultanate that ruled over large parts of the Horn of Africa in the Middle Ages. Through a strong centralized administration and an aggressive military stance towards invaders, the Ajuran Sultanate successfully resisted an Oromo invasion from the west and a Portuguese incursion from the east during the Gaal Madow and the Ajuran-Portuguese wars. Trading routes dating from the ancient and early medieval periods of Somali maritime enterprise were strengthened or re-established, and foreign trade and commerce in the coastal provinces flourished with ships sailing to and coming from many kingdoms and empires in East Asia, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Europe, Middle East, North Africa and East Africa.\nIn the 7th century, Maritime Southeast Asia witnessed the rise of a Buddhist thallasocracy, the Srivijaya Empire, which thrived for 600 years and was succeeded by the Hindu-Buddhist Majapahit Empire that ruled from the 13th to 15th centuries. In the Southeast Asian mainland, the Hindu-Buddhist Khmer Empire was centered in the city of Angkor and flourished from the 9th to 13th centuries. Following the demise of the Khmer Empire, the Siamese Empire flourished alongside the Burmese and Lan Chang Empires from the 13th through the 18th centuries.\nIn Southeastern and Eastern Europe, during 917, the Eastern Roman Empire, sometimes called the Byzantine Empire, was forced to recognize the Imperial title of Bulgarian ruler Simeon the Great, who were then called Tsar, the first ruler to hold that precise imperial title. The Bulgarian Empire, established in the region in 680\u2013681, remained a major power in Southeast Europe until its fall in the late 14th century. Bulgaria gradually reached its cultural and territorial apogee in the 9th century and early 10th century under Prince Boris I and Simeon I, when it became one of the largest states in Europe. This period is considered the Golden Age of medieval Bulgarian culture.\nAt the time, in the Medieval West, the title \"empire\" had a specific technical meaning that was exclusively applied to states that considered themselves the heirs and successors of the Roman Empire. Among these were the \"Byzantine Empire\", which was the actual continuation of the Eastern portion of the Roman Empire, the Carolingian Empire, the largely Germanic Holy Roman Empire, and the Russian Empire. Yet, these states did not always fit the geographic, political, or military profiles of empires in the modern sense of the word. To legitimise their \"imperium\", these states directly claimed the title of \"Empire\" from Rome. Both German \"Kaiser\" and Russian \"Tsar\" derive from Caesar. In its peak under Charlemagne (748-814), the Carolingian Empire remained modest compared to the contemporary Caliphate or Song \u2013 \"lots of Charles but little of magnum.\"\nThe \"sacrum Romanum imperium\" (Holy Roman Empire), which lasted from 800 to 1806, claimed to have exclusively comprehended Christian principalities, and was only nominally a discrete imperial state. The Holy Roman Empire was not always centrally-governed, as it had neither core nor peripheral territories, and was not governed by a central, politico-military elite. Hence, Voltaire's remark that the Holy Roman Empire \"was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire\" is accurate to the degree that it ignores German rule over Italian, French, Proven\u00e7al, Polish, Flemish, Dutch, and Bohemian populations, and the efforts of the ninth-century Holy Roman Emperors (i.e., the Ottonians) to establish central control. Voltaire's \"nor an empire\" observation applies to its late period.\nIn the thirteenth century, Genghis Khan expanded the Mongol Empire to be the largest contiguous empire in the world history. It traversed nine modern time zones. For the first time, all of the major regional powers of Eurasia were integrated into a single geopolitical space. Nikolay Kradin calls the phenomenon \"medieval globalization.\" However, within two generations, the empire was separated into four discrete khanates under Genghis Khan's grandsons. One of them, Kublai Khan, conquered China and established the Yuan dynasty with the imperial capital at Beijing. One family ruled the whole Eurasian land mass from the Pacific to the Adriatic and Baltic Seas. The emergence of the Pax Mongolica had significantly eased trade and commerce across Asia.\nIn 1204, after the Fourth Crusade conquered Constantinople, the crusaders established a Latin Empire (1204\u20131261) in that city, while the defeated Byzantine Empire's descendants established two smaller, short-lived empires in Asia Minor: the Empire of Nicaea (1204\u20131261) and the Empire of Trebizond (1204\u20131461). Constantinople was retaken in 1261 by the Byzantine successor state centered in Nicaea, re-establishing the Byzantine Empire until 1453, by which time the Turkish-Muslim Ottoman Empire (ca. 1300\u20131918), had conquered most of the region. The Ottoman Empire was a successor of the Abbasid Empire and one of the most powerful empires in the world. Centered on modern day Turkey, the Ottoman Empire overthrew the Byzantine Empire and dominated the eastern Mediterranean, battering at Austria and Malta, key geographical locations to central and south-west Europe respectively.\nThis was not just a rivalry of East and West but a rivalry between Christians and Muslims. Both the Christians and Muslims had alliances with other countries. The flows of trade and of cultural influences across the supposed great divide never ceased, so the countries never stopped bartering with each other. These epochal clashes between civilizations profoundly shaped many people's thinking back then, and continues to do so in the present day. Modern hatred against Muslim communities in South-Eastern Europe, mainly in Bosnia and Kosovo, has often been articulated in terms of seeing them as unwelcome residues of this imperialism: in short, as Turks.\nEarly Modern period.\nIn 1547, Ivan the Terrible was coronated as Emperor of Russia. He transformed Russia from a medieval state to a fledgling empire and began the conquest of Siberia. With this conquest completed by 1778, the Russian Empire became the second contiguous empire in size after the Mongol Empire.\nThe Islamic gunpowder empires started to develop from the 15th century. In the Indian subcontinent, the Delhi Sultanate conquered most of the Indian peninsula and spread Islam across it. It later disintegrated with the establishment of the Bengal, Gujarat, and Bahmani Sultanate. In the 16th century, the Mughal Empire was founded by Timur and Genghis Khan's direct descendant Babur. His successors such Humayun, Akbar, Jahangir and Shah Jahan extended the empire. In the 17th century, Aurangzeb expanded the Mughal Empire over most of the South Asia and imposed Sharia. The Mughal Empire became the world's largest economy and leading manufacturing power with a nominal GDP that valued a quarter of world GDP, superior than the combination of Europe's GDP. It has been estimated that the Mughal emperors controlled an unprecedented one-fourth of the world's entire economy and was home to one-fourth of the world's population at the time. After the death of Aurangzeb, which marks the end of the medieval India and the beginning of European invasion in India, the empire was weakened by Nader Shah's invasion. The Mysore Empire was established by Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan, who allied with Napoleon Bonaparte. Other independent empires were also established, such as those ruled by the Nawabs of Bengal and Nizam of Hyderabad.\nThe Great Qing Empire of China (1644\u20131912) was the fourth largest empire in world history by total land area, and laid the foundation for the modern territorial claims of both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China. Apart from having direct control over much of East Asia, the empire also exerted domination over other states through the Chinese tributary system. The multiethnic and multicultural nature of the Great Qing Empire was crucial to the subsequent birth of the nationalistic concept of \"zhonghua minzu\". The empire reached its peak during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor, after which the empire entered a period of prolonged decline, culminating in its collapse as a result of the Xinhai Revolution.\nThe Ashanti Empire (or Confederacy), also Asanteman (1701\u20131896), was a West African state of the Ashanti, the Akan people of the Ashanti Region, Akanland in modern-day Ghana. The Ashanti (or Asante) were a powerful, militaristic and highly disciplined people in West Africa. Their military power, which came from effective strategy and an early adoption of European firearms, created an empire that stretched from central Akanland (in modern-day Ghana) to present day Benin and Ivory Coast, bordered by the Dagomba kingdom to the north and Dahomey to the east. Due to the empire's military prowess, sophisticated hierarchy, social stratification and culture, the Ashanti empire had one of the largest historiographies of any indigenous Sub-Saharan African political entity.\nIn the pre-Columbian Americas, two Empires were prominent\u2014the Azteca in Mesoamerica and Inca in Peru. Both existed for several generations before the arrival of the Europeans. Inca had gradually conquered the whole of the settled Andean world as far south as today Santiago in Chile. In Oceania, the Tonga Empire was a lonely empire that existed from the Late Middle Ages to the Modern period.\nColonial empires.\nBeginning in the 15th century, a number of west European countries reached and colonized overseas regions across the globe. Ushering the Age of Discovery, the imperial expansion advanced to a new global scale. The extensive overseas expansion, particularly in the South Asia and Americas by the Portuguese and Spanish, later joined by the English, French and Dutch, created empires on which the Sun never sets. The global scale is one of main distinctions between the colonial and traditional land empires. Colonial empires were a transformative period in world history when previously isolated parts of the world became connected to form one world system. They laid the groundwork for globalization, and set human history on the global common course. For this reason, Adam Smith in 1776 named the voyages of Columbus and Vasco da Gama \"the two greatest and most important events recorded in the history of mankind.\"\nThe Portuguese Empire colonized vast portions of the Americas, Africa, Asia and Oceania to become one of the most powerful empires of the period, the longest-lived colonial empire in European history, and one of the largest empires in history. The Spanish Empire expanded over the same continents as well as in Europe, exceeding the Portuguese rival in size and, among colonial empires, remaining second only to Britain.\nThe British Empire established an absolute imperial record in size and, for a century, was the foremost global power. The British established their first empire (1583\u20131783) in North America by colonising lands that made up British America, including parts of Canada, the Caribbean and the Thirteen Colonies. In 1776, the Continental Congress of the Thirteen Colonies declared itself independent from the British Empire, thus beginning the American Revolution. Britain turned towards Asia, the Pacific, and later Africa, with subsequent exploration and conquests leading to the rise of the Second British Empire (1783\u20131815), which was followed by the Industrial Revolution and Britain's Imperial Century (1815\u20131914). It became the largest empire in world history, encompassing one quarter of the world's land area and one fifth of its population. The impacts of this period are still prominent in the current age \"including widespread use of the English language, belief in Protestant religion, economic globalization, modern precepts of law and order, and representative democracy.\"\nIn India, Britain confronted the Sikh Empire (1799\u20131849) in the Punjab region. Weakened by the death of its founder, Ranjit Singh, in 1839, the empire fell to the British after the Second Anglo-Sikh War in 1849. During the same period, the Maratha Empire (also known as the Maratha Confederacy) was a Hindu state located in present-day India. It existed from 1674 to 1818, and at its peak, the empire's territories covered much of Southern Asia. The empire was founded and consolidated by Shivaji. After the death of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb, it expanded greatly under the rule of the Peshwas. In 1761, the Maratha army lost the Third Battle of Panipat, which halted the expansion of the empire. Later, the empire was divided into a confederacy of states which, in 1818, were lost to the British during the Anglo-Maratha wars.\nFrance was a dominant empire possessing many colonies in various locations around the world. During Louis XIV's long reign, from 1643 to 1715, France was Europe's most populous, richest and powerful country. From the 16th to the 17th centuries, the First French colonial empire\u2019s total area at its peak in 1680 was over , the second largest empire in the world at the time behind only the Spanish Empire. It had many possessions around the world, mainly in the Americas, Asia and Africa. At its peak in 1750, French India had an area of 1.5 million km2 and a total population of 100 million people and was the most populous colony under French rule. The Napoleonic Empire (1804\u20131814) conquered much of the continental Europe. It ruled over 90 million people and was the leading world power of the time. In the 19th and 20th centuries, the colonial empire of France was the second largest in the world behind the British Empire. The French colonial empire extended over of land at its height in the 1920s and 1930s with a totaled population of 150 million people. Including metropolitan France, the total amount of land under French sovereignty reached at the time, which is 10.0% of the Earth's total land area. The total area of the French colonial empire, with the first (mainly in the Americas and Asia) and second (mainly in Africa and Asia), the French colonial empires combined, reached , the second largest in the world (the first being the British Empire).\nThe Empire of Brazil (1822\u20131889) was the only South American modern monarchy, established by the heir of the Portuguese Empire as an independent nation eventually became an emerging international power. The new country was huge but sparsely populated and ethnically diverse. In 1889 the monarchy was overthrown in a sudden coup d'\u00e9tat led by a clique of military leaders whose goal was the formation of a republic.\nLate modern period.\nBeginning around 1760, the New Imperialism or characterizes a period of colonial expansion by European powers, the United States and Japan. Though the American Revolutionary War (1775\u20131783) and the collapse of the Spanish Empire in Latin America in the 1820s ended the first era of European colonialism, the period featured an unprecedented pursuit of overseas territorial acquisitions. At the time, states focused on building their empires with new technological advances and developments. During the era of New Imperialism, the European powers and Japan conquered almost all of Africa and most of Asia. The new wave of imperialism reflected ongoing imperial rivalries, their imperial ambitions, and a \"civilizing mission\".\nWith the collapse of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806 during the Napoleonic Wars (1803\u20131815), the Austrian Empire (1804\u20131867) emerged reconstituted as the Empire of Austria-Hungary (1867\u20131918) and claimed to \"inherite\" the imperium of Central and Western Europe. Another \"heir to the Holy Roman Empire\", was the German Empire (1871\u20131918).\nIn the course of the Scramble for Africa (1870-1914), European empires separated between themselves almost all the continent. Symbolized by the Pink Map, the Portuguese claimed sovereignty over a wide land corridor stretching between the Atlantic shore of Angola and Indian shore of Mozambique. This led to the 1890 British Ultimatum as Britain aimed to establish their own and longer corridor from Egypt to South Africa. In the clash of the corridors, the British prevailed.\nThe Spanish\u2013American War of 1898 and the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u201305 signaled the advent of new extra-European empires, the United States and Japan respectively. The two events marked the closure of the \"imperial belt\"\u2014belt of great empires stretching from west to east. Originally formed in the Old World during the Axial Age along the Silk Road, this belt shifted northward during the medieval period due to climatic change, penetrated to North America in the colonial period, and \"closed\" in the Far East c.1900. The history of empires ceased being eurocentric. The Pearl Harbor attack symbolized the fact that two non-European empires clashed on the opposite to Europe place of the globe.\nThough seldom viewed through an imperial lens, the World Wars were imperial wars. All great powers which waged both World Wars were empires fighting for their survival or expansion. The alliances and rivalries that brought about World War I were inter-imperial. The empires that came to an end after this War did not die a natural death as an intrinsically anachronistic organizations; their demise was the consequence of the \"clash of empires\" in which stronger empires won, added colonies and introduced \"mandate.\" No victorious empire dissolved. Colonial expansion reached its zenith during the interwar period, when, including the sphere under the Monroe Doctrine, 85% of the earth dry land came under an imperial system. Imperial continuity, transformation and invention characterize the two decades after the enunciation of the doctrine of self-determination. The world order of this time remained an imperial one. In his magnum opus \"Sources of Social Power\", Michael Mann titled the chapter on World War II \"The last interimperial war,\" where he concluded that European and Japanese imperialism was the deeper cause of the War. On January 18, 1942, the Axis powers agreed to divide up Eurasia along the 70th meridian east envisioning \"two large imperial blocs.\" The Axis lost and instead of the 70 meridian the frontier between the two remaining imperial blocs was fixed on the Fulda Gap.\nIn view of Richard Overy, the origins of both World Wars can only be understood through the prism of the fresh drive to empire since the 1870s. He regards both Wars as one Thirty Year War caused by that imperial surge. The concept of Second Thirty Years' War is notable and was shared by Churchill and de Gaulle. According to them, paraphrasing Carl von Clausewitz, World War II was continuation of World War I with the same means. This concept was suppressed in both Western and Soviet historiography because it heavily shares the Axis \"guilt of war\" between all contemporary empires.\nThe world political map was completed c.1900 leaving no sovereign void and with empires ruling over four-fifth of the world. A contemporary observer, Max Weber, generalized that great empires claim spheres of interest over a wide orbit and in the 1900s \"such orbits encompass the whole surface of the planet.\" Many scholars suppose that the end of the overseas space for imperial expansion contributed to the intensity of the World Wars if not was their main factor (chapter \"Circumscription theory\" below). According to one thesis, the overseas world provided European empires with an enormous outlet and thus prevented Europe from unifying into a single European empire. The European powers turned their exceeding energies outward and the internal European power was balanced. Correspondingly, the thesis continues, when the space for expansion ended, the empires became destined for head-on collisions, as reflected in the anxious, claustrophobic mood of the Fin de si\u00e8cle. This was the time when the theory of lebensraum developed and the term geopolitics was coined to designate a new science, accompanied by an avalanche of literature envisaging war. \"Volk ohne Raum\" (\"A People without Space\") by the former colonist Hans Grimm (1926) sold nearly 700,000 copies. \u201cRaving maniacs, described Halford Mackinder the opponents of his Empire, suffering from global claustrophobia.\u201d\nFurthermore, the global closure coincided with unprecedented technological advances in weapons now produced on the industrial scale. The same year (1904), Mackinder outlined the global closure and Henry Brooks Adams the law of acceleration in technological progress and production. These factors caused a \"clash of empires\" of epic proportions, as vividly described by its famous participant:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnd the first gust of wind swept across Europe grown nervous. The time that now followed lay in the chests of men like a heavy nightmare... And then the first mighty lightening flash struck the earth ... and with the thunder of heaven there mingled the roar of World War batteries... The fight for freedom has began mightier than the Earth has ever seen.\nThe Ottoman, Austrian, German and Russian Empires were defeated in the First World War, though the two latter Empires soon reappeared in their Nazi and Soviet forms. The German (once again), Italian and Japanese Empires were defeated in the Second World War. Weakened by the same War, the rest of the European Empires underwent decolonization. The Soviet Empire collapsed in 1989-1991. The United States remained the only superpower, but whether its foreign policy qualifies as imperial is debatable (chapters \"Contemporary usage\" and 'Present\" below).\nEgyptologist Barry Kemp developed a \"basic model\" of imperial evolution. At the start, according to the model, we have a number of roughly equal players. The game inexorably follows a trajectory toward a critical point when one player accumulated sufficient power to outweigh other players and becomes unstoppable. Imagining an imperial game of this kind outlines the \"essence of the basic process at work in history.\" Kemp specialized on the Bronze Age and by accident published his game theory in 1989, the moment before modern empires completed his \"basic process.\"\nAn Historian specializing on the world history explicitly applied Kemp's game analogy to modern empires. The global closure c.1900 marks the point when empires ended their \"regular season\" and entered \"play-offs.\" The knock-out tournament began with \"wild card playoff\" (First World War), proceeded with \"breath-stopping series of quarterfinals and semifinals\" (Second World War), and \"culminated with a deadly boring final that went into triple overtime until the Soviets scored a golden own goal.\"\nFall of empires.\nThe fall of an empire is typically associated with a change in the world order, with a new hegemon replacing the former empire. There is typically a decline in soft power and hard power. During the fall, the empire typically retreats its expanded operations. Trade shrinks as the former empire shifts its priorities towards domestic policy. Living conditions may deteriorate as the economy shrinks. Balkanization or territorial divisions may occur. However, this process is not universal. Some empires are more resilient and fall gracefully while others experience complete chaos.\nRoman Empire.\nThe fall of the western half of the Roman Empire is seen as one of the most pivotal points in all of human history. This event traditionally marks the transition from classical civilization to the birth of Europe. The Roman Empire started to decline at the end of the reign of the last of the Five Good Emperors, Marcus Aurelius in 161\u2013180 A.D. There is still a debate over the cause of the fall of one of the largest empires in history. Historian Andr\u00e9 Piganiol argues that the Roman Empire under its authority can be described as \"a period of terror\", holding its imperial system accountable for its failure. Another theory blames the rise of Christianity as the cause, arguing that the spread of certain Christian ideals caused internal weakness of the military and state. In his book \"The Fall of the Roman Empire\", historian Peter Heather contends that there were many factors, including issues of money and manpower, which produced military limitations and culminated in the Roman army's inability to effectively repel invading barbarians at the frontier. The Western Roman economy was already stretched to its limit in the 4th and 5th centuries C.E. due to continual conflict and loss of territory which, in turn, generated loss of revenue from the tax base. There was also the looming presence of the Persians which, at any time, took a large percentage of the fighting force's attention. At the same time the Huns, a nomadic warrior people from the steppes of Asia, are also putting extreme pressure on the German tribes outside of the Roman frontier, which gave the German tribes no other choice, geographically, but to move into Roman territory. At this point, without increased funding, the Roman army could no longer effectively defend its borders against major waves of Germanic tribes. This inability is illustrated by the crushing defeat at Adrianople in 378 C.E. and, later, the Crossing of the Rhine in 406 C.E.\nAn empire can fall for many reasons. However, why the fall of the Roman Empire was fatal, and why the post-classical Europe never repeated its ancient unity, is a completely different question. Eurocentrism in the Roman case led to the theory of inevitable imperial fall and Western declinism in imperiology, which remains the only widely believed case of historical inevitability. To describe any polity as an empire is usually to damn it as doomed to disappear, usually due to imperial overstretch. Comparative history, however, alters the Eurocentric theory. The Chinese Empire rose synchronously with Rome and never fell. More precisely, China underwent several disintegrations but each time reunified and each time faster. Asking why post-Roman Europe, contrary to China, never reunified reveals factors which the case study of the fall of Rome cannot reveal. The latter question was addressed in this comparative analysis.\nDecolonization.\nAfter 1945 the Empire of Japan retained its Emperor but lost its colonial possessions and became the State of Japan. Despite the semantic reference to imperial power, Japan is a \"de jure\" constitutional monarchy, with a homogeneous population of 127 million people that is 98.5 percent ethnic Japanese, making it one of the largest nation-states. The deconstruction of European colonial empires also quickened and became commonly known as decolonisation. The British Empire evolved into a loose, multinational Commonwealth of Nations, while the French colonial empire metamorphosed to a Francophone commonwealth. The same process happened to the Portuguese Empire, which evolved into a Lusophone commonwealth, and to the former territories of the extinct Spanish Empire, which alongside the Lusophone countries of Portugal and Brazil, created an Ibero-American commonwealth. France returned the French territory of Kwang-Chou-Wan to China in 1946. The British gave Hong Kong back to China in 1997 after 150 years of rule. The Portuguese territory of Macau reverted to China in 1999. Macau and Hong Kong did not become part of the provincial structure of China; they have autonomous systems of government as Special Administrative Regions of the People's Republic of China.\nFrance still governs overseas territories (French Guiana, Martinique, R\u00e9union, French Polynesia, New Caledonia, Saint Martin, Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon, Guadeloupe, French Southern and Antarctic Lands (TAAF), Wallis and Futuna, Saint Barth\u00e9lemy, and Mayotte), and exerts hegemony in Francafrique (\"French Africa\"; 29 francophone countries such as Chad, Rwanda, etc.). Fourteen British Overseas Territories remain under British sovereignty. Fifteen countries of the Commonwealth of Nations share their head of state, King Charles III, as Commonwealth realms.\nTransition from empire.\nIn time, an empire may change from one political entity to another. For example, the Holy Roman Empire, a German re-constitution of the Roman Empire, metamorphosed into various political structures (i.e., federalism), and eventually, under Habsburg rule, re-constituted itself in 1804 as the Austrian Empire, an empire much different politics and scope, which in turn became the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1867. The Roman Empire, perennially reborn, also lived on as the Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire) \u2013 temporarily splitting into the Latin Empire, the Empire of Nicaea and the Empire of Trebizond before its remaining territory and centre became part of the Ottoman Empire. A similarly persistent concept of empire saw the Mongol Empire become the Khanate of the Golden Horde, the Yuan Empire of China, and the Ilkhanate before resurrection as the Timurid Empire and as the Mughal Empire.\nAn autocratic empire can become a republic with its imperial dominions reduced to a core territory (e.g., Weimar Germany shorn of the German colonial empire im 1918\u20131919, the Ottoman Empire in 1918\u20131923, the Austro-Hungarian Empire after 1918, or the Russian Empire after 1918 and again in 1989\u201391). Or it can become a republic within the same borders (e.g., the Central African Empire in 1979).\nAlternatively, an empire can integrate the ruling metropole with the ruled periphery to become state. Originally imperial cores, Wessex, the Capetian \u00cele-de-France, Aragon and Castile, Sardinia, Prussia and Muscovy merged with their imperial peripheries to form the states of England, France, Spain, Italy, Germany and Russia respectively. Many \"nation-states\" of today, including \"the most talked-about model of the nation-state\" (France), were originally formed as empires. \"The later ideology of nationalism of course disguises this unpalatable fact, just as it exhibits amnesia about many other aspects of the violent origins of nations.\"\nEarlier, Narmer, Yamato, and Qin established empires which evolved into states of Egypt, China and Japan. These states count millennia. Sociologists of empires, noted Krishan Kumar, have tended to ignore China because it does not fit neatly into their concept of imperial duration and ethnic composition. \"If there is a successful imposition of the dominant system, the resultant elimination of differences produces a unified 'national' state rather than empire.\" All empires were temporary organizations but not all empires fell. The paradigm \"all empires fall\" is politically correct and historically wrong. However, according to Robert Conquest, deep historical analysis in the case is overshadowed by the popular wish of the US decline. Breaking the law of imperial fall means giving the United States a chance.\nContemporary usage.\nIn \"Prolegomena\" to the 2021 two-volumes \"Oxford World History of Empire\", editor Peter Fibiger Bang stated that humanity has moved beyond the postcolonial moment and imperialism has resurfaced as a global force. Although anti-imperialist in rhetoric, the leading military powers of today\u2014the United States, China, and Russia\u2014pursue imperial policies. In the \"Epilogue\" of this compilation Frederick Cooper added that the United States developed and maintains a form of imperial reach, now in competition with another imperial power of China, while the Russian Empire has reappeared in yet another transmutation on its Eurasian space. One year after the volumes went into press, Russia boldly confirmed these statements for itself. Having listed the United States, China, Russia, Israel and ISIS as his examples of the contemporary imperial phenomena, John M. MacKenzie concludes: \"What is incontrovertible is that empires are vital to an understanding not only of human history, but also of the world we live in now.\" Sandra Halperin and Ronen Palan claim a significant imperial dimension in the contemporary political landscape and challenge the common assumption that nation states have displaced empires. Despite the official definition of empire as illegitimate, Cooper drews his conclusion, it is premature to tell whether we have mastered the skills of turning empire into new forms of political organization. Krishan Kumar explained what in his view means the end of empire. What disappeared in the 20th century is the name \"empire,\" no state calls itself \"empire.\" Meanwhile the phenomenon of empire continues under other names and produces a world significantly different from a theoretical world of equal states. Paraphrasing Mark Twain and William Faulkner, he suggested that rumours of empires' death are greatly exaggerated and their \"past is never dead; it is not even past.\"\nUnited States.\nContemporaneously, the concept of \"empire\" is politically valid, yet is not always used in the traditional sense. One of the most widely discussed cases is the United States. Characterizing aspects of the US in regards to its territorial expansion, foreign policy, and its international behavior as \"American Empire\" is common. The term \"American Empire\" refers to the United States' cultural ideologies and foreign policy strategies. The term is most commonly used to describe the U.S.'s status since the 20th century, but it can also be applied to the United States' world standing before the rise of nationalism in the 20th century. The US itself was at one point a colony in the British Empire. Thomas Jefferson used the term \"Empire of Liberty\" and argued that \"no constitution was ever before so well calculated as ours for extensive empire &amp; self government\". Jefferson in the 1780s while awaiting the fall of the Spanish empire, said: \"till our population can be sufficiently advanced to gain it from them piece by piece\".\nEven so, the ideology that the US was founded on anti-imperialist principles has prevented many from acknowledging America's status as an empire. This active rejection of imperialist status is not limited to high-ranking government officials, as it has been ingrained in American society throughout its entire history. As David Ludden explains, \"journalists, scholars, teachers, students, analysts, and politicians prefer to depict the U.S. as a nation pursuing its own interests and ideals\". This often results in imperialist endeavors being presented as measures taken to enhance state security. Ludden explains this phenomenon with the concept of \"ideological blinders\", which he says prevent American citizens from realizing the true nature of America's current systems and strategies. These \"ideological blinders\" that people wear have resulted in an \"invisible\" American empire of which most American citizens are unaware. Besides its anti-imperialist principles, the United States is not traditionally recognized as an empire, because the U.S. adopted a different political system from those that previous empires had used.\nDespite the anti-imperial ideology and systematic differences, the political objectives and strategies of the United States government have been quite similar to those of previous empires and so similar to Rome that the comparison between the two turned into clich\u00e9. In fact, the \"unipolar moment\" was followed by a so-called \"imperial turn\" in the academic research meaning increased interest in the study of empires. During the war on terror, the number of publications related to empire has increased exponentially, with reviewers complaining that they cannot keep the pace. In 2005, two notable Journals, \"History and Theory\" and \"Daedalus\", devoted a special issue to empires. Reflecting the popularity of the theme, Sinologist Yuri Pines coined the term \"comparative imperiology.\"\nThroughout the 19th century, the United States government attempted to expand its territory by any means necessary. Regardless of the supposed motivation for this constant expansion, all of these land acquisitions were carried out by imperialistic means. This was done by financial means in some cases, and by military force in others. Most notably, the Louisiana Purchase (1803), the Texas Annexation (1845), and the Mexican Cession (1848) highlight the imperialistic goals of the United States during this \"modern period\" of imperialism. The U.S. government has stopped adding additional territories, where they permanently and politically take over since the early 20th century, and instead have established 800 military bases as their outposts. With this overt but subtle military control of other countries, scholars consider U.S. foreign policy strategies to be imperialistic. Academic Krishna Kumar argues that the distinct principles of nationalism and imperialism may result in common practice; that is, the pursuit of nationalism can often coincide with the pursuit of imperialism in terms of strategy and decision making. Stuart Creighton Miller posits that the public's sense of innocence about Realpolitik (politics based on practical considerations, rather than ideals) impacts popular recognition of US imperial conduct since it governed other countries via surrogates. These surrogates were domestically weak, right-wing governments that would collapse without US support.\nFormer President George W. Bush's Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, said: \"We don't seek empires. We're not imperialistic; we never have been.\" This was said in the context of the international opposition to the Iraq War led by the United States in manner widely regarded as imperial. With the 2003 invasion of Iraq underway, historian Sidney Lens argued that, from its inception, the US has used every means available to dominate foreign peoples and states. Another Historian, John Darwin, emphasized that, synchronously with decolonization, proceeded the bipolar empire-building. Two great imperial systems, the United States and the Soviet Union, struggled to contain each other\u2019s expansion. After 1990, the United States became \"the only world empire.\" The Second World War, according to Michael Mann, hastened on the end of Eurasian empires as well as a triumph of the \"American global empire.\" While defeating and containing Eurasian empires and encouraging the liquidation of Colonial empires, the United States built another one\u2014\"and not just any empire, but a globe-spanning leviathan.\" Finding the phenomenon ethically disappointing, Ethicist Gary Dorrien stated that the United States since 1989 has wielded a \"new kind of world empire\" that overshadows all former colonial empires. The decolonized zones were not left with imperial vacuum. The United States appeared operating in areas that derive from the Spanish, Ottoman, British, French, and Soviet Empires. Eliot A. Cohen suggested: \"The Age of Empire may indeed have ended, but then an age of American hegemony has begun, regardless of what one calls it.\" Some scholars did not bother how to call it: \"When it walks like a duck, talks like a duck, it's a duck.\"\nEuropean Union.\nSince the European Union was formed as a polity in 1993, it has established its own currency, its own citizenship, established discrete military forces, and exercises its limited hegemony in the Mediterranean, eastern parts of Europe, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia. The big size and high development index of the EU economy often has the ability to influence global trade regulations in its favor. The political scientist Jan Zielonka suggests that this behavior is imperial because it coerces its neighbouring countries into adopting its \"European\" economic, legal, and political structures. Tony Benn, a left-wing Labour Party MP of the United Kingdom, opposed the European integration policies of the European Union by saying, \"I think they're (the European Union) building an empire there, they want us (the United Kingdom) to be a part of their empire and I don't want that.\"\nRussia.\nIn the aftermath of the annexation of Crimea, political scientist Agnia Grigas argued that Moscow pursues the policy of \"reimperialization.\" Two days after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, historian specializing on empires, Niall Ferguson, interpreted the policy of Putin as an attempt to bring back the tsarist Russian Empire. By this time, the \"neo-imperialism,\" or \"neo-imperial ambitions\" of Russia became widely claimed. When Vladimir Putin denies the reality of the Ukrainian state, says another historian of empires Timothy Snyder, he is speaking the familiar language of empire. For five hundred years, European conquerors saw themselves as actors with purpose, and the colonized as instruments to realize the imperial vision.\nVladimir Putin himself used to state: \"For Russia to survive, it must remain an empire.\" In June 2022, on the 350 anniversary of the birth of the 18th-century Russian tsar Peter the Great, Putin has compared himself to him associating their twin historic quests to win back Russian lands. For critics this association implied that Putin's \"complaints about historical injustice, eastward NATO expansion, and other grievances with the west were all a fa\u00e7ade for a traditional war of conquest\" and imperialism. \"After months of denials that Russia is driven by imperial ambitions in Ukraine, Putin appeared to embrace that mission.\" On the same occasion, Mykhailo Podolyak, an adviser to the Ukrainian government, suggested Russia's \"de-imperialization,\" instead of Russia's official war aim of \"de-Nazification\" of Ukraine.\nLater that year, Anne Applebaum approached the new Russian Empire as a fact and opined that this Empire must be defeated. Other pundits described the new Russian Empire as a failed attempt because Russia failed to annex the whole of Ukraine.\nTimeline of empires.\nThe chart below shows a timeline of polities that have been called empires. Dynastic changes are marked with a white line.\nTheoretical research.\nEmpire versus nation state.\nEmpires can be traced as far back as the recorded history goes and have been the dominant international organization in world history until the 20th century to the least. Yet a century ago, most of the world was ruled by persons who proudly proclaimed themselves Emperors and were proud of their Empires. Of the great powers, only the United States and France were republics. In his textbook on empires, Michael Doyle observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Empires have been the key actors in world politics for millennia. They helped create the interdependent civilizations of all the continents ... Imperial control stretches through history, many say, to the present day. Empires are as old as history itself ... They have held the leading role ever since.\nMany empires endured for centuries, while the age of the ancient Egyptian, Chinese and Japanese Empires is counted in millennia. Most people throughout history have lived under imperial rule. Despite \"efforts in words and wars to put national unity at the center of political imagination, imperial politics, imperial practices, and imperial cultures have shaped the world we live in.\"\nLooking at a time frame of several millennia prior to the emergence of a global system, Robert Gilpin, Daniel Deudney and John Ikenberry observed that all pre-modern regional systems were initially anarchic and marked by high levels of military competition. But almost universally, they tended to consolidate into universal empires. For millennia, this propensity was the principal feature of pre-modern politics. pointing to a fundamental political dynamic.\nThis dynamic, according to Niall Ferguson, Ikenberry and Deudney, is obscured by our fixation on the Westphalian state. Within the macrohistoric trend, however, European political order was distinctly anomalous because it persisted so long as an anarchy. By comparisons of Jane Burbank, Frederick Cooper and Ferguson, nation-state appears as a \"historical novelty\" or a \"blip on the historical horizon,\" that \"emerged recently from under imperial skies\" and whose hold may well prove \"ephemeral.\" Moreover, the consolidations of European states proceeded synchronously with their imperial expansions worldwide. \"Ironically, it was the European empires that carried the idea of the sovereign territorial state to the rest of the world...\"\nPuzzled why there is no non-Western IR theory, Amitav Acharya and Barry Buzan sought to apply the discipline to other Asian civilizations. They found the discipline, created in modern Europe, hardly applicabe for the civilizations they selected. Instead of anarchy, international relations appeared usually fixed by the imperial center. A later attempt of \"Bridging Two Worlds\" aimed to introduce insights from early China and India into their present dialogue for deeper mutual understanding, appreciation and friendship. The project\u2019s goals are laudable, reviewed the book Sinologist Yuri Pines. However, the use of those classics for modern IR woule rather be \"detrimental\" as the outcome invariably was IR \"fiasco\" and \"quagmire.\" Diplomatic failures led to total wars and ultimately to universal empire.\nThe author of \"\", Hans Kohn, acknowledged that it was the opposite idea\u2014of imperialism\u2014that was, perhaps, the most influential single idea for two millennia, the ordering of human society through unified dominion and common civilization. Empire is something like the \"darling of global historians,\" usually not because they like it, but because empire was the way history shifted to transnational and global stages.\nThe prevalence of empire in history was partly due to peace which it establishes for both the conquerors and the conquered, and the by-product of peace, prosperity. The attitude towards the imperial peace since the mid-20th century has been overwhelmingly negative. Within the field of International relations all central concepts have been formulated against a world empire. John Kennedy called the idea of Pax Americana \"the peace of grave\" and the association has been popular ever since. History, however, shows that humans eventually \"prefer the peace of graveyard over the very graveyard.\"\nUniversal empire.\nExpert on warfare Quincy Wright generalized on what he called \"universal empire\"\u2014empire unifying all the contemporary system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Balance of power systems have in the past tended, through the process of conquest of lesser states by greater states, towards reduction in the number of states involved, and towards less frequent but more devastating wars, until eventually a universal empire has been established through the conquest by one of all those remaining.\nGerman Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck finds that the macro-historic process of imperial expansion gave rise to global history in which the formations of universal empires were most significant stages. A later group of political scientists, working on the phenomenon of the current unipolarity, in 2007 edited research on several pre-modern civilizations by experts in respective fields. The overall conclusion was that the balance of power was inherently unstable order and usually soon broke in favor of imperial order. Yet before the advent of the unipolarity, world historian Arnold Toynbee and political scientist Martin Wight had drawn the same conclusion with an unambiguous implication for the modern world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When this [imperial] pattern of political history is found in the New World as well as in the Old World, it looks as if the pattern must be intrinsic to the political history of societies of the species we call civilizations, in whatever part of the world the specimens of this species occur. If this conclusion is warranted, it illuminates our understanding of civilization itself.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMost states systems have ended in universal empire, which has swallowed all the states of the system. The examples are so abundant that we must ask two questions: Is there any states system which has not led fairly directly to the establishment of a world empire? Does the evidence rather suggest that we should expect any states system to culminate in this way? ... It might be argued that every state system can only maintain its existence on the balance of power, that the latter is inherently unstable, and that sooner or later its tensions and conflicts will be resolved into a monopoly of power.\nThe earliest thinker to approach the phenomenon of universal empire from a theoretical point of view was Polybius (2:3):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In previous times events in the world occurred without impinging on one another ... [Then] history became a whole, as if a single body; events in Italy and Libya came to be enmeshed with those in Asia and Greece, and everything gets directed towards one single goal.\nJohann Gottlieb Fichte, having witnessed the battle at Jena in 1806 when Napoleon overwhelmed Prussia, described what he perceived as a deep historical trend:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is necessary tendency in every cultivated State to extend itself generally ... Such is the case in Ancient History ... As the States become stronger in themselves and cast off that [Papal] foreign power, the tendency towards a Universal Monarchy over the whole Christian World necessarily comes to light ... This tendency ... has shown itself successively in several States which could make pretensions to such a dominion, and since the fall of the Papacy, it has become the sole animating principle of our History ... Whether clearly or not\u2014it may be obscurely\u2014yet has this tendency lain at the root of the undertakings of many States in Modern Times ... Although no individual Epoch may have contemplated this purpose, yet is this the spirit which runs through all these individual Epochs, and invisibly urges them onward.\nFichte's later compatriot, Geographer Alexander von Humboldt, in the mid-Nineteenth century observed a macro-historic trend of imperial growth in both Hemispheres: \"Men of great and strong minds, as well as whole nations, acted under influence of one idea, the purity of which was utterly unknown to them.\"\nIn 1870, Argentine diplomat, jurist and political theorist Juan Bautista Alberdi described imperial consolidation. As von Humboldt, he found this trend unplanned and irrational but evident beyond doubt in the \"unwritten history of events.\" He linked this trend to the recent Evolution theory: Nations gravitate towards the formation of a single universal society. The laws that lead the nations in that direction are the same natural laws that has formed societies and are part of evolution. These evolutionary laws exist disregarding whether men recognize them.\nThe Grand Inquisitor of Dostoevski (1880) envisaged a distant future of universal empire ruled by Caesar. The overall unity (human \"anthill\") has always been one of the main aims of men. The greater was the nation, the more they recognized the need for universal unity. History's great conquerors, such as Genghis Khan and Tamerlan, irrationally expressed this greatest necessity of humanity. The world unification entails long suffering but it will be the last suffering of mankind before the universal Caesar stops it and imposes world peace. The Inquisitor reminds Jesus that Satan from the beginning proposed him the sword of Caesar over all kingdoms of the world. The allusion is to where universal empire and absolute Caesarism are the ultimate temptation. This would have stopped all suffering caused by the lack of unity. But Jesus declined the proposal opting instead to grant humans freedom of choice. Due to human nature, however, humans screwed up to choose unity and instead slaughter each other. Stressing that freedom plunged humanity into unbearbale suffering, the Inquisitor blames Jesus for his rejection of Devil's imperial gift. Moreover, people took his freedom to science which, in the absence of unity, will lead to such \"marvels\" that the survivors will crawl to the future Caesar begging him to \"save them from themselves.\" The image of Caesar as Savior from wars is common in Rome and other universal empires. People, adds the Inquisitor, will be free only when they reject freedom and recognize the Caesar. As Jesus failed in his primary mission, earthly rulers took the sword of Caesar. By sword they will wield the world into universal empire and thus fulfill mankind's ancient dream of universal unity as initially proposed to Jesus by Antichrist on the mountain.\nUnder the literary style of Dostoevski appears a deep historical insight. In 1946, with the \"marvels\" of science accomplished, Atomic Scientists repeated the concept of the Grand Inquisitor in their \"One World or None\". In 1967, Robert Wesson published a 500-page comparative research on universal empires searching how these organizations, horrible in his view, repeatedly occurred in history and the next he expected for the same reason on the global scale before the year 2000. His outline of the prime cause seems in agreement with the implication of the Grand Inquisitor: \"Always... we need a higher power to prevent us from abusing our little powers and hurting one another... Let someone save us from ourselves. We long to have peace and security... Yet we cannot have all this with freedom, for freedom means the ability to be disorderly...\"\nIn 1886, Nietzsche perceived the new warlike age which the Europeans have entered in the \"long spun-out comedy of its petty-statism\" and, above all, under \"parliamentary imbecility.\" Blaming the shattering of the European empire into small states when the time for petty politics is past, he stressed the threatening attitude of the immense Russia Empire and warned that the next (20th) century \"will bring the struggle for the dominion of the world\u2014the compulsion to great politics.\"\nThe imperial expansion filled the world c.\u20091900. Three famous contemporary observers\u2014Frederick Turner, Halford Mackinder and Max Weber\u2014emphasized the significance of the event. Turner drew his Frontier Thesis, predicting American overseas expansion, and Mackinder proclaimed that the world empire is now in sight.\nFriedrich Ratzel observed that the \"drive toward the building of continually larger states continues throughout the entirety of history\" and is active in the present. He drew \"Seven Laws of Expansionism\". His seventh law stated: \"The general trend toward amalgamation transmits the tendency of territorial growth from state to state and increases the tendency in the process of transmission.\" He commented on this law to make its meaning clear: \"There is on this small planet sufficient space for only one great state.\"\nThree other contemporaries\u2014Kang Youwei, Josiah Strong and George Vacher de Lapouge\u2014stressed that imperial expansion cannot indefinitely proceed on the definite surface of the globe and therefore world empire is imminent. Kang Youwei in 1885 believed that the imperial trend will culminate in the contest between Washington and Berlin. The same year, Josiah Strong bet on the Anglo-Saxons to establish a world empire centered on the United States. Vacher de Lapouge in 1899 estimated that the final contest will be between Russia and America in which America is likely to triumph. Writing the same year, Charles Oman stressed the technological annihilation of time-space and estimated that a federal union of the Anglo-Saxon race would submit the whole world.\nGabriel de Tarde, also writing in 1899, supposed a \"law of evolution\" forming universal empires which, in his comparison, have nothing else in common. Peoples on all inhabited continents inevitably, it seems, end in gigantic social \"baobabs\" unifying all within each's own sphere. As long as these spheres remain isolated from each other, they are destined for universal pacification by universal conquest. Thus we have had various \"pax imperia\". Unless the French wake up, the future universal pacification will be either Russian or English. Just as all financial competition tends towards a monopoly and the division of parties towards a one party rule, the division of states, all separately eager for domination, runs towards either the \"triumph or accepted preponderance\" of one state.\nThe above envisaged contests indeed took place, known to us as World War I and II. Writing during the First, Oswald Spengler in \"The Decline of the West\" compared two emergences of universal empires and implied for the modern world: The Chinese League of States failed as well as the Taoist idea of intellectual self-disarmament. The Chinese states defended their last independence with bitterness but in vain. Also in vain Rome attempted to avoid conquest of the Hellenistic east. Imperialism is so necessary a product of any civilization that when a strongest people refuse to assume the role of master, it is pushed into it. It is the same with us. The Hague Conference of 1907 was the prelude of World War, the Washington Conference of 1921 will have been that of other wars. Napoleon introduced the idea of military world empire different from the preceding European maritime empires. The contest \"for the heritage of the whole world\" will culminate \"within two generations\" (from 1922). The destinies of small states are \"without importance to the great march of things.\" The strongest race will win and seize the management of the world.\nWriting during the next World War, political scientists Derwent Whittlesey, Robert Strausz-Hup\u00e9 and John H. Herz concluded: \"Now that the earth is at last parceled out, consolidation has commenced.\" In \"this world of fighting superstates there could be no end to war until one state had subjected all others, until world empire had been achieved by the strongest. This undoubtedly is the logical final stage in the geopolitical theory of evolution.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The world is no longer large enough to harbor several self-contained powers ... The trend toward world domination or hegemony of a single power is but the ultimate consummation of a power-system engrafted upon an otherwise integrated world.\nWriting in the last year of the War, American theologian Parley Paul Wormer, German historian Ludwig Dehio, and Hungarian-born writer Emery Reves drew similar conclusions. Fluctuating but persistent movement occurred through the centuries toward ever greater unity. The forward movement toward ever larger unities continues and there is no reason to conclude that it has come to an end. More likely, the greatest convergence of all time is at hand. \"Possibly this is the deeper meaning of the savage world conflicts\" of the 20th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[T]he old European tendency toward division is now being thrust aside by the new global trend toward unification. And the onrush of this trend may not come to rest until it has asserted itself throughout our planet ... The global order still seems to be going through its birth pangs ... With the last tempest barely over, a new one is gathering.\nThe famous \"Anatomy of Peace\" by Reves, written and published in 1945, supposed that without the industrial power of the United States, Hitler already might have established world empire. Proposing world federalism, the book warned: Every dynamic force, every economic and technological reality, every \"law of history\" and logic \"indicates that we are on the verge of a period of empire building,\" which is \"the last phase of the struggle for the conquest of the world.\" As an elimination contest, one of the three remaining powers or a combination \"will achieve by force that unified control made mandatory by the times we live in\u2026 Anyone of three, by defeating the other two, would conquer and rule the world.\" If we fail to institute a unified control over the world in democratic way, the \"iron law of history\" would compel us to wage wars until world empire is finally attained through conquest. Since the former way is improbable due human blindness, we should precipitate the unification by conquest as quickly as possible and start the restoration of human liberties within the world empire.\nAtomic bomb and empire.\nReves added \"Postscript\" to the \"Anatomy\", opening: \"A few weeks after the publication of this book, the first atomic bomb exploded over the city of Hiroshima\u2026\" This new physical fact however has changed nothing in the political situation. The world empire remains inevitable and nothing else in the book would have been said differently had it been written after August 6, 1945. Not much chance we have to establish world government before the next horrible war between the two superpowers and whoever is victorious would establish the world empire. The book sold an exceptional 800,000 copies in thirty languages, was endorsed by Albert Einstein and numerous other prominent figures, and in 1950 Reves was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize.\nThe year after the War and in the first year of the nuclear age, Einstein and British philosopher Bertrand Russell, known as prominent pacifists, outlined for the near future a perspective of world empire (world government established by force). Einstein believed that, unless world government is established by agreement, an imperial world government would come by war or wars. Russell expected a third World War to result in a world government under the empire of the United States and regretted that the United States is not enough \u201cimperialistic\u201d to launch a preventive nuclear war for this cause. Three years later, another prominent pacifist, theologian Reinhold Niebuhr, generalized on the ancient Empires of Egypt, Babylon, Persia and Greece to imply for the modern world: \"The analogy in present global terms would be the final unification of the world through the preponderant power of either America or Russia, whichever proved herself victorious in the final struggle.\"\nRussian colleague of Russell and Niebuhr, Georgy Fedotov, wrote in 1945: All empires are but stages on the way to the sole empire which must swallow all others. The only question is who will build it and on which foundations. Universal unity is the only alternative to annihilation. Unity by conference is utopian but unity by conquest by the strongest power is not and probably the uncompleted in this War will be completed in the next. \"Pax Atlantica\" is the best of possible outcomes.\nOriginally drafted as a secret study for the Office of Strategic Services (the precursor of the CIA) in 1944 and published as a book three years later, \"The Struggle for the World...\" by James Burnham concludes: If either of the two Superpowers wins, the result would be a universal empire which in our case would also be a world empire. The historical stage for a world empire had already been set prior to and independently of the discovery of atomic weapons but these weapons make a world empire inevitable and imminent. \"The atomic weapons ... will not permit the world to wait.\" Only a world empire can establish monopoly on atomic weapons and thus guarantee the survival of civilization. A world empire \"is in fact the objective of the Third World War which, in its preliminary stages, has already began\". The issue of a world empire \"will be decided, and in our day. In the course of the decision, both of the present antagonists may, it is true, be destroyed, but one of them must be.\"\nThe next year, world historian Crane Brinton similarly supposed that the bomb may in the hands of a very skillful and lucky nation prove to be the weapon that permits that nation to unify the world by imperial conquest, to do what Napoleon and Hitler failed to do. Combined with other \"wonders of science,\" it would permit a quick and easy conquest of the world. In 1951, Hans Morgenthau concluded that the \"best\" outcome of World War III would be world empire:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Today war has become an instrument of universal destruction, an instrument that destroys the victor and the vanquished ... At worst, victor and loser would be undistinguishable under the leveling impact of such a catastrophe ... At best, the destruction on one side would not be quite as great as on the other; the victor would be somewhat better off than the loser and would establish, with the aid of modern technology, his domination over the world.\nExpert on earlier civilizations, Toynbee, further developed the subject of World War III leading to world empire:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe outcome of the Third World War ... seemed likely to be the imposition of an ecumenical peace of the Roman kind by the victor whose victory would leave him with a monopoly on the control of atomic energy in his grasp ... This denouement was foreshadowed, not only by present facts, but by historical precedents, since, in the histories of other civilizations, the time of troubles had been apt to culminate in the delivery of a knock-out blow resulting in the establishment of a universal state ...\nThe year this volume of \"A Study of History\" was published, US Secretary of State John Foster Dulles announced \"a knock-out blow\" as an official doctrine, a detailed Plan was elaborated and \"Fortune\" magazine mapped the design. Section VIII, \"Atomic Armaments\", of the famous National Security Council Report 68 (NSC 68), approved by President Harry Truman in 1951, uses the term \"blow\" 17 times, mostly preceded by such adjectives as \"powerful\", \"overwhelming\", or \"crippling\". Another term applied by the strategists was \"Sunday punch\".\nHaving modeled the rise of the world empire on the cases of previous empires, Toynbee noted that, by contrast, the modern ultimate \"blow\" would be atomic. But he remains optimistic: No doubt, the modern world has far greater capacity to reconstruct than the earlier civilizations had.\nA pupil of Toynbee, William McNeill, associated with the case of ancient China, which \"put a quietus upon the disorders of the warring states by erecting an imperial bureaucratic structure ... The warring states of the Twentieth century seem headed for a similar resolution of their conflicts.\" The ancient \"resolution\" McNeill evoked was one of the most sweeping universal conquests in world history, performed by Qin in 230\u2013221 BC. Chinese classic Sima Qian (d. 86 BC) described the event (6:234): \"Qin raised troops on a grand scale\" and \"the whole world celebrated a great bacchanal\". Herman Kahn of the RAND Corporation criticized an assembled group of SAC officers for their war plan (SIOP-62). He did not use the term bacchanal but he coined on the occasion an associating word: \"Gentlemen, you do not have a war plan. You have a \"war orgasm\"!\" History did not completely repeat itself but it passed close.\nCircumscription theory.\nAccording to the circumscription theory of Robert Carneiro, \"the more sharply circumscribed area, the more rapidly it will become politically unified.\" The Empires of Egypt, China and Japan are named the most durable political structures in human history. Correspondingly, these are the three most circumscribed civilizations in human history. The Empires of Egypt (established by Narmer c. 3000 BC) and China (established by Cheng in 221 BC) endured for over two millennia. Expert on comparative imperiology, Robert G. Wesson, emphasized the unique in world history \"repetition of universal empires\" in Egypt and China. German Sociologist Friedrich Tenbruck, criticizing the Western idea of progress, emphasized that China and Egypt remained at one particular stage of development for millennia. This stage was universal empire. The development of Egypt and China came to a halt once their empires \"reached the limits of their natural habitat\". Sinology does not recognize the Eurocentric view of the \"inevitable\" imperial fall; Egyptology and Japanology pose equal challenges.\nCarneiro explored the Bronze Age civilizations. Stuart J. Kaufman, Richard Little and William Wohlforth researched the next three millennia, comparing eight civilizations. They conclude: The \"rigidity of the borders\" contributed importantly to hegemony in every concerned case. Hence, \"when the system's borders are rigid, the probability of hegemony is high\".\nThe circumscription theory was stressed in the comparative studies of the Roman and Chinese Empires. The circumscribed Chinese Empire recovered from all falls, while the fall of Rome, by contrast, was fatal. \"What counteracted this [imperial] tendency in Europe ... was a countervailing tendency for the geographical boundaries of the system to expand.\" If \"Europe had been a closed system, some great power would eventually have succeeded in establishing absolute supremacy over the other states in the region\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ancient Chinese system was relatively enclosed, whereas the European system began to expand its reach to the rest of the world from the onset of system formation... In addition, overseas provided outlet for territorial competition, thereby allowing international competition on the European continent to ... trump the ongoing pressure toward convergence.\nIn the 1945 book, \"The Precarious Balance\", on four centuries of the European power struggle, Ludwig Dehio explained the durability of the European states system by its overseas expansion: \"Overseas expansion and the system of states were born at the same time; the vitality that burst the bounds of the Western world also destroyed its unity.\" In a more famous 1945 book, Reves similarly argued that the era of outward expansion is forever closed and the historic trend of expansion will result in direct collision between the remaining powers. Edward Carr causally linked the end of the overseas outlet for imperial expansion and World Wars. In the nineteenth century, he wrote during the Second World War, imperialist wars were waged against \"primitive\" peoples. \"It was silly for European countries to fight against one another when they could still ... maintain social cohesion by continuous expansion in Asia and Africa. Since 1900, however, this has no longer been possible: \"the situation has radically changed\". Now wars are between \"imperial powers.\"\nHans Morgenthau wrote that the very imperial expansion into relatively empty geographical spaces in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth centuries, in Africa, Eurasia, and western North America, deflected great power politics into the periphery of the earth, thereby reducing conflict. For example, the more attention Russia, France and the United States paid to expanding into far-flung territories in imperial fashion, the less attention they paid to one another, and the more peaceful, in a sense, the world was. But by the late nineteenth century, the consolidation of the great nation-states and empires of the West was consummated, and territorial gains could only be made at the expense of one another. John H. Herz outlined one \"chief function\" of the overseas expansion and the impact of its end:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[A] European balance of power could be maintained or adjusted because it was relatively easy to divert European conflicts into overseas directions and adjust them there. Thus the openness of the world contributed to the consolidation of the territorial system. The end of the 'world frontier' and the resulting closedness of an interdependent world inevitably affected the system's effectiveness.\nSome later commentators drew similar conclusions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor some commentators, the passing of the Nineteenth century seemed destined to mark the end of this long era of European empire building. The unexplored and unclaimed \"blank\" spaces on the world map were rapidly diminishing ... and the sense of \"global closure\" prompted an anxious fin-de-si\u00e8cle debate about the future of the great empires ... The \"closure\" of the global imperial system implied ... the beginning of a new era of intensifying inter-imperial struggle along borders that now straddled the globe.\nThe opportunity for any system to expand in size seems almost a necessary condition for it to remain balanced, at least over the long haul. Far from being impossible or exceedingly improbable, systemic hegemony is likely under two conditions: \"when the boundaries of the international system remain stable and no new major powers emerge from outside the system.\" With the system becoming global, further expansion is precluded. The geopolitical condition of \"global closure\" will remain to the end of history. Since \"the contemporary international system is global, we can rule out the possibility that geographic expansion of the system will contribute to the emergence of a new balance of power, as it did so many times in the past.\" As Quincy Wright had put it, \"this process can no longer continue without interplanetary wars.\"\nSociologist, Michael Mann, developed the cage metaphor to explain the persistent unity of Egypt. The River Valley was a cage. The whole population was \"trapped within the domain of the conqueror,\" unable to turn backs on emerging authority. A veritable unitary society resulted. Comparing Egypt with other civilizations, Mann concludes: \"The social cage was as total as has ever been seen. In this respect it has not been the dominant model of social organization.\u201d Max Ostrovsky remarked that Mann omitted one system which is even more caged\u2014our own. Egypt could be the most caged of historic civilizations but it was not a \u201ctotal cage\u2019. Modern world system, being global, is a total cage, and this \"model of social organization\" will remain until the end of history. One of the leading experts on world-systems theory, Christopher Chase-Dunn, also noted that circumscription theory is applicable to the global system, since the global system is circumscribed. In fact, within less than a century of circumscribed existence, the global system overcame the centuries-old balance of power and reached the state of unipolarity. Given \"constant spatial parameters\" of the global system, its unipolar structure is neither historically unusual nor theoretically surprising.\nRandall Schweller theorized that a \"closed international system\", such as the global system became a century ago, would reach \"entropy\" in a kind of thermodynamic law. Once the state of entropy is reached, there is no going back. The initial conditions are lost forever. Stressing the curiosity of this fact, Schweller writes that since the moment the modern world became a closed system, the process has worked in only one direction: from many poles to two poles to one pole. Thus, unipolarity might represent entropy\u2014stable and permanent loss of variation\u2014in the global system.\nPresent.\nFor Dominic Lieven, empire is all about unequal distribution of power and consequent domination. Thus the 2000s world order is more imperial than the 19th-century one because instead of several empire of roughly equal power there is one imperial superpower. \u2018Empire\u2019 has therefore replaced \"anarchy.\" Chalmers Johnson argues that the US global network of hundreds of military bases already represents a global empire in its initial form:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For a major power, prosecution of any war that is not a defense of the homeland usually requires overseas military bases for strategic reasons. After the war is over, it is tempting for the victor to retain such bases and easy to find reasons to do so. Commonly, preparedness for a possible resumption of hostilities will be invoked. Over time, if a nation's aims become imperial, the bases form the skeleton of an empire.\nSimon Dalby associates the network of bases with the Roman imperial system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Looking at these impressive facilities which reproduce substantial parts of American suburbia complete with movie theatres and restaurant chains, the parallels with Roman garrison towns built on the Rhine, or on Hadrian's wall in England, where the remains are strikingly visible on the landscape, are obvious ... Less visible is the sheer scale of the logistics to keep garrison troops in residence in the far-flung reaches of empire ... That [military] presence literally builds the cultural logic of the garrison troops into the landscape, a permanent reminder of imperial control.\nKenneth Pomeranz and Harvard Historian Niall Ferguson share the above-cited views: \"With American military bases in over 120 countries, we have hardly seen the end of empire.\" This \"vast archipelago of US military bases \u2026 far exceeds 19th-century British ambitions. Britain's imperium consisted of specific, albeit numerous, colonies and clients; the American imperial vision is much more global\u2026\" The greatest conquerors who have ever lived only dreamed of a military presence as expansive as the United States has already achieved.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nConventional maps of US military deployments understate the extent of America's military reach. A Defense Department map of the world, which shows the areas of responsibility of the five major regional commands, suggests that America's sphere of military influence is now literally global ... The regional combatant commanders\u2014the 'pro-consuls' of this imperium\u2014have responsibility for swaths of territory beyond the wildest imaginings of their Roman predecessors.\nAnother Harvard historian Charles S. Maier opens his \"Among Empires: American Ascendancy and Its Predecessors\" with these words: \"What a substratum for empire! Compared with which, the foundation of the Macedonian, the Roman and the British, sink into insignificance.\" On almost any criterion, the American Empire in the 2000s transcends the limits of empire that John Darwin has observed since 1400 AD. Those writers who compare America to Victorian Britain \"betray a staggering ignorance of the history of both.\"\nOne of the most accepted distinctions between earlier empires and the American Empire is the latter's unprecedented \"global\" or \"planetary\" scope. French former Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine wondered: \"The situation is unprecedented: What previous empire subjugated the entire world...?\" The quests for universal empire are old but the present quest outdoes the previous in \"the notable respect of being the first to actually be global in its reach.\" James Kurth found that there was \"only one empire--the global empire of the United States.\" Another historian Paul Kennedy, who in 1986 predicted the imminent US \"imperial overstretch,\" in 2002 acknowledged about the present world system:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing has ever existed like this disparity of power. The Pax Britannica was run on the cheap. Napoleon's France and Philip II's Spain had powerful foes and were part of a multipolar system. Charlemagne's empire was merely western European in stretch. The Roman Empire stretched further afield, but there was another great empire in Persia and a larger one in China. There is ... no comparison.\nWalter Russell Mead observes that the United States attempts to recreate \"globally\" what the ancient empires of Egypt, China and Rome had each accomplished on a regional basis. Professor Emeritus of Sociology at the University of Leeds, Zygmunt Bauman, concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The new 'empire' is not an entity that could be drawn on a map... Drawing a map of the empire would also be a pointless exercise because the most conspicuously 'imperial' trait of the new empire's mode of being consists in viewing and treating the whole of the planet ... as a potential grazing ground...\n\"Times Atlas of Empires\" numbers 70 empires in the world history. Niall Ferguson lists numerous parallels between them and the United States. He concludes: \"To those who would still insist on American exceptionalism, the historian of empires can only retort: as exceptional as all the other 69 empires.\" Fareed Zakaria stressed one element not exceptional for the American Empire\u2014the concept of exceptionalism. All dominant empires thought they were special. \"Each empire is unique, each regards itself as holding the truth of the world, each sees its mission as realizing that truth throughout the whole world.\" Historian Paul A. Kramer suggested a comparative history of imperial exceptionalisms themselves.\nA team of Historians of empire supposed that we witness genesis of the American Empire. Hence, it should not be compared to empires in their height, such as Rome under Hadrian, but rather with emerging empires undergoing their \u201cimperial moment.\u201d In their hypothesis, at a certain moment a powerful state turns into empire. Their research developed into book, titled \"The Imperial Moment\", where each scholar attempted to identify a parallel imperial moment in the empire of his specialization. The six cases of the book are devoted to five historical Empires and the American Empire. Their comparative analysis aims to show how, why and when empires come into being and the American Empire is expected to come.\nThe five past cases under concern demonstrate that very few policy makers were aware that their state was on the brink of empire when the key transformation occurred. Later authors, knowing the outcome (empire), write either teleological or tautological histories. Thucydides and Polybius teleologically described empire as the natural culmination of an impersonal process. Others describe pre-imperial events as rational planning of empire, though the participants of those events had no such idea and acted out of different considerations.\nOne of the contributors to \"The Imperial Moment\", Roman Historian Arthur Eckstein, in his earlier research had already asked the same question, \"At what point does a state begin to have an empire?\" and found that this point pre-dates the collective recognition of the imperial situation. The Mediterranean unipolarity was established in 189 BC, but to many intelligent and experienced Greek politicians, according to Polybius (\"Histories\" 1:1\u20134; 29:21, 27), this did not actually become clear until after 168 BC.\nEmpires evolve from a long series of events in which empire has not been an intended outcome. Having criticized Thucydides and Polybius for their \"teleological\" approach, the Authors of \"The Imperial Moment\" drew the same teleological conclusion of empire as the natural culmination of an impersonal process. Empires often seem inevitable after the fact, but inconceivable beforehand. The fact of empire precedes the understanding of the existence of empire. Ideological recognition comes rather late in the game. Views of empire as impersonal process are most prominent in theses related to defensive imperialism.\nIn the case of the United States, the sixth case in \"The Imperial Moment\", the attitude is similar. The imperial situation is new but well known in history and commonly called \u201cempire.\u201d To avoid the word, many alternative terms were tried, such as liberal hegemony, hyperpower, unipolarity, and others. The very panoply of terms suggests that Americans find themselves in a new imperial situation, \u201clargely of their own making, which they do not fully understand.\u201d Eventually, some \u201cunusually perceptive individuals\u201d will grasp the imperial reality and announce the final destination of a \u201ctorturous\u201d centuries-long journey: \u201cLast stop, \u2018empire.\u2019 Everybody off.\u201d\nFuture.\nIn 1945, Historian Ludwig Dehio predicted global unification due to the circumscription of the global system, although he did not use this term. Being global, the system can neither expand nor be subject to external intrusion as the European states system had been for centuries:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In all previous struggles for supremacy, attempts to unite the European peninsula in a single state have been condemned to failure primarily through the intrusion of new forces from outside the old Occident. The Occident was an open area. But the globe was not, and, for that very reason, ultimately destined to be unified... And this very process [of unification] was clearly reflected in both World Wars.\nFifteen years later, Dehio confirmed his hypothesis: The European system owed its durability to its overseas outlet. \"But how can a multiple grouping of world states conceivably be supported from outside in the framework of a finite globe?\"\nDuring the same time, Quincy Wright developed a similar concept. Balance-of-power politics has aimed less at preserving peace than at preserving the independence of states and preventing the development of world empire. In the course of history, the balance of power repeatedly re-emerged, but on ever-wider scale. Eventually, the scale became global. Unless we proceed to \"interplanetary wars,\" this pattern can no longer continue. In spite of significant reversals, the \"trend towards world unity\" can \"scarcely be denied.\" World unity appears to be \"the limit toward which the process of world history seems to tend.\"\nThe same \"interplanetary\" motif is present also in the Anatomy of Peace: The era of outward expansion is forever closed. \"Until and unless we are able to communicate with another planet, the theater of human history will be limited to geographically determined, constant and known dimensions.\" The historic trend of expansion will result in direct collision between the remaining powers. Multiplied by modern technology, the centripetal forces will accomplish what the greatest empires of the past failed. \"For the first time in human history, one power can conquer and rule the world.\"\nThe \"Father of American Anthropology,\" Franz Boas, known for his historical particularism and cultural relativism, outlined the \"inexorable laws of history\" by which political units grow larger in size and smaller in number. The process began in the earliest times and has continued almost always in the same direction. In the long run, the tendency to unification has been more powerful than of disintegration. \"Thus the history of mankind shows us the grand spectacle of the grouping of man in units of ever increasing size.\" The progress in the direction of unification has been so regular and so marked that we must needs conclude that the same tendencies will govern our history in the future. Today the unity of the world is not less conceivable than the modern nations were in the early history. The practical difficulties that stand in the way of the formation of still larger units count for nothing before the \"inexorable laws of history.\"\nSeven later scholars\u2014Hornell Hart, Raoul Naroll, Louis Morano, Rein Taagepera, the author of the circumscription theory Robert Carneiro and Jesse H. Ausubel &amp; Cesare Marchetti\u2014quantitatively researched expanding imperial cycles. Initially, the imperiometric scholars worked with historical atlases but the advent of YouTube created a more dynamic visualization. Later spot-checks with \"Wikipedia\" showed few disagreements. All seven scholars concluded that imperial cycles represent an historical trend leading to world empire. Naroll and Carneiro found this outcome \"close at hand,\" c. 2200 and 2300 respectively. In 2013, Marchetti and Ausubel estimated that the global empire is to rise within \"a couple more generations.\" These predictions surprised their many contemporaries, as the 20th century has seen falls of empires, decolonization, and increase in the number of independent states. Nevertheless, the authors explained, when viewed within the millennial context, this recent reversal appears akin to random fluctuation. Since the dawn of history, the total number of separate polities has been reduced from thousands of tribes and states to about 200 and the number was even less in recent history. None of the authors is determinist: \"The future is not obliged to continue past trends; it just often does...\"\nThe reversal of the trend in 20th century those scholars stated, according to Max Ostrovsky, does not exist. Instead, the 20th century is the point when the historical atlases they worked with reverse their approach and begin painting every nominal sovereignty in different color. They had not done so for the earlier history. Most imperial provinces in history were nominally independent but historical atlases paint them all in the color of their metropole. Since the 20th century, however, political maps begin painting every Vatican, Monaco and Tuvalu in different color. None of the seven mentioned imperiometric scholars counted the sphere under the Monroe Doctrine, for example, or the sphere after the Monroe Doctrine was extended to Eurasia, named Truman Doctrine, and \"globalized.\" To preserve the consistent approach, Ostrovsky says, in the 20th century we should switch from historical atlases to the map of the Unified Combatant Command.\nThough unnoted by contemporary imperiometric scholars, the phenomenon reflected in the latter map was envisaged by the founder of the Paneuropean Union, Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi yet in 1943, when he drew a specific and immediate future imperial project: After the War America is bound \"to take over the command of the skies.\" The danger of \"the utter annihilation of all enemy towns and lands\" can \"only be prevented by the air superiority of a single power ... America's air role is the only alternative to intercontinental wars.\" Despite his outstanding anti-imperialism, Coudenhove-Kalergi detailed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No imperialism, but technical and strategic problems of security urge America to rule the skies of the globe, just as Britain during the last century ruled the seas of the world... Pacifists and anti-imperialists will be shocked by this logic. They will try to find an escape. But they will try in vain... At the end of the war the crushing superiority of American plane production will be an established fact... The solution of the problem ... is by no means ideal, nor even satisfactory. But it is the minor evil...\nCoudenhove-Kalergi envisaged a kind of Pax Americana modeled on \"Pax Romana\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During the third century BC the Mediterranean world was divided on five great powers\u2014Roma and Carthage, Macedonia, Syria, and Egypt. The balance of power led to a series of wars until Rome emerged the queen of the Mediterranean and established an incomparable era of two centuries of peace and progress, the 'Pax Romana'...\u00a0It may be that America's air power could again assure our world, now much smaller than the Mediterranean at that period, two hundred years of peace...\nThis period would be necessary transitory stage before World State is eventually established, though he did not specify how the last transformation is expected to occur. Coudenhove-Kalergi's follower in the teleological theory of World State, Toynbee, specified two ways. One is by wars going on to a bitter end at which one surviving great power \"knocks out\" its last remaining competitor and establishes world empire, like the earlier empires used to on the regional scale. The other alternative is the United Nations. Having devoted his life to the study of history and international affairs, Toynbee did not bet on the United Nations. Instead, he identified symptoms of the traditional power politics leading to the world empire by a universal conquest.\nToynbee emphasized that the world is ripe for conquest: \"...Hitler's eventual failure to impose peace on the world by the force of arms was due, not to any flaw in his thesis that the world was ripe for conquest, but to an accidental combination of incidental errors in his measures...\" But \"in falling by so narrow a margin to win the prize of world-dominion for himself, Hitler had left the prize dangling within the reach of any successor capable of pursuing the same aims of world-conquest with a little more patience, prudence, and tact.\" With his \"revolution of destruction,\" Hitler has performed the \"yeoman service\" for \"some future architect of a \"Pax Ecumenica\"...\u00a0For a post-Hitlerian empire-builder, Hitler's derelict legacy was a gift of the Gods.\"\nThe next \"architect of a Pax Ecumenica,\" known more commonly as Pax Americana, demonstrated \"more patience, prudence, and tact.\" Consequently, as President Dwight Eisenhower put it, the NATO allies became \"almost psychopathic\" whenever anyone talked about a US withdrawal, and the reception of his successor John F. Kennedy in Berlin was \"almost hysterical,\" as Chancellor Konrad Adenauer characterized it. John Ikenberry finds that the Europeans wanted a stronger, more formal and more imperial system than the United States was initially willing to provide. In the end the United States settled for this \"form of empire\u2014a Pax Americana with formal commitments to Europe.\" According to a much debated thesis, the United States became \"empire by invitation.\" The period discussed in the thesis (1945\u20131952) ended precisely the year Toynbee theorized on \"some future architect of a Pax Ecumenica.\"\nDissociating America from Rome, Eisenhower gave a pessimistic forecast. In 1951, before he became president, he had written on West Europe: \"We cannot be a modern Rome guarding the far frontiers with our legions if for no other reason than that these are not, politically, our frontiers. What we must do is to assist these [West European] peoples.\" Two years later, he wrote: When it was decided to deploy US divisions to Europe, no one had \"for an instant\" thought that they would remain there for \"several decades\"\u2014that the United States could \"build a sort of Roman Wall with its own troops and so protect the world.\"\nEisenhower assured Soviet first secretary Nikita Khrushchev on Berlin in 1959: \"Clearly we did not contemplate 50 years in occupation there.\" It lasted, remarks Marc Trachtenberg, from July 1945 to September 1994, 10 months short of 50 years. Notably, when the US troops eventually left, they left eastward. Confirming the theory of the \"empire by invitation,\" with their first opportunity East European states extended the \"invitation.\"\nOswald Spengler envisaged the \"Imperial Age\" for the world in both senses of \"empire,\" spatial (as a world-wide unit ruled by one center) and governmental (as ruled by Emperor). Published in 1922, \"The Decline of the West\" predicts the triumph of the strongest race in the fight for the whole world within \"two generations\" and of \"Caesarism\" over democracy \"within a century.\" In 2022, the Spenglerian century ended short of global \"Caesarism,\" albeit two years before its end Donald Trump had been advised to cross the Rubicon.\nChalmers Johnson regards the global military reach of the United States as empire in its \"initial\" form. For Charles H. Fairbanks, it is an empire \"in formation\" and for Kimberly Kagan an \"emerging\" empire. Dimitri Simes finds that most of the world sees the United States as a \"nascent\" imperial power. Some scholars concerned how this empire would look in its ultimate form. The ultimate form of empire was described by Michael Doyle in his \"Empires\". It is empire in which its two main components\u2014the ruling core and the ruled periphery\u2014merged to form one integrated whole. At this stage the \"empire\" as defined ceases to exist and becomes \"world state\". Doyle exemplifies the transformation on the case of the Roman Emperor Caracalla whose edict in AD 212 extended the Roman citizenship to all inhabitants of the Mediterranean world.\nDoyle's case of the Roman Empire had also been evoked by Susan Strange in her 1988 article, \"The Future of the American Empire.\" Strange emphasized that the most persistent empires were those which best managed to integrate the ruling core and the peripheral allies. The article is partly a reply on the published a year earlier bestseller \"The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers\" which predicted imminent US \"imperial overstretch.\" Strange found this outcome unlikely, stressing the fact that the peripheral allies have been successfully recruited into the American Empire.\nEnvisaging a world empire of either the United States or the Soviet Union (whoever is victorious in World War III), Bertrand Russell projected the Roman scenario too: \"Like the Romans, they will, in the course of time, extend citizenship to the vanquished. There will then be a true world state, and it will be possible to forget that it will have owed its origin to conquest.\" International Relations scholar Alexander Wendt supposes world empire by universal conquest and subsequent consolidation, provided the conquering power recognizes all conquered members. For his example he also invokes the Roman Empire. In satirical criticism of the European pro-American stance in the wake of September 11, French Philosopher R\u00e9gis Debray warned that the logical culmination of the motto \"We are all Americans\" would be a modernized Edict of Caracalla extending US citizenship to all the West and thus establishing the United States of the West.\nIn the above views, the Edict of Caracalla is an advanced form of empire. Emmanuel Todd and Magdi Allam disregarded this nuance and compared the Edict with the US citizenship policy in the early 21st century. Todd found the US policy of this time lagging far behind the Roman under Caracalla while Allam stressed that the United States is also a nation forged by immigrants and already the most successful contemporary expression of multiculturalism the world has seen.\nTo the case of Caracalla, Toynbee added the Abbasid cosmopolitan reformation of 750 AD. Both \"were good auguries for the prospect that, in a post-Modern chapter of Western history, a supranational commonwealth originally based on the hegemony of a paramount power over its satellites might eventually be put on the sounder basis of a constitutional partnership in which all the people of all the partner states would have their fare share in the conduct of common affairs.\" To the cases of Caracalla and the Abbasid revolution, Max Ostrovsky added the Han overthrow of Qin in 206 BC and more gradual cosmopolitan reformations he finds characteristic to all persistent empires and expects in the future global empire. The tragedy of empire is that it is disastrous for the conquered in the beginning and eventually for the conquerors, as they lose their privileges and often the very identity, becoming assimilated within the conquered population. Rein Taagepera called it imperial \"self-ethnocide.\" When this distant stage comes to the American Empire, according to Ostrovsky, the green card is abolished since all Earth inhabitants have it by birth.\nCrane Brinton expected that the world empire would not be built instantly but not as slowly as Rome, for much in the modern world has been speeded up. Charles Galton Darwin, a grandson of the father of Evolution Theory, suggested that China, as an isolated and enduring civilization, seems to provide the most relevant model for the global future. As the Chinese Empire, the regions of the world, periodically albeit more rarely, will be united by force into an uneasy world-empire, which will endure for a period until it falls. Along China, Ostrovsky mentions Egypt as a model for the future but, by contrast, estimates that the intermediate periods of the global empire will be shorter and rarer.\nSee also.\nLists.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources and further reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10160", "revid": "4677237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10160", "title": "Final Solution", "text": "Nazi plan for the genocide of Jews\nThe Final Solution or the Final Solution to the Jewish Question was a plan orchestrated by Nazi Germany during World War\u00a0II for the genocide of individuals they defined as Jews. The \"Final Solution to the Jewish question\" was the official code name for the murder of all Jews within reach, which was not restricted to the European continent. This policy of deliberate and systematic genocide starting across German-occupied Europe was formulated in procedural and geopolitical terms by Nazi leadership in January 1942 at the Wannsee Conference held near Berlin, and culminated in the Holocaust, which saw the murder of 90% of Polish Jews, and two-thirds of the Jewish population of Europe.\nThe nature and timing of the decisions that led to the Final Solution is an intensely researched and debated aspect of the Holocaust. The program evolved during the first 25 months of war leading to the attempt at \"murdering every last Jew in the German grasp\". Christopher Browning, a historian specializing in the Holocaust, wrote that most historians agree that the Final Solution cannot be attributed to a single decision made at one particular point in time. \"It is generally accepted the decision-making process was prolonged and incremental.\" In 1940, following the Fall of France, Adolf Eichmann devised the Madagascar Plan to move Europe's Jewish population to the French colony, but the plan was abandoned for logistical reasons, mainly the Allied naval blockade. There were also preliminary plans to deport Jews to Palestine and Siberia. Raul Hilberg wrote that, in 1941, in the first phase of the mass-murder of Jews, the mobile killing units began to pursue their victims across occupied eastern territories; in the second phase, stretching across all of German-occupied Europe, the Jewish victims were sent on death trains to centralized extermination camps built for the purpose of systematic murder of Jews.\nBackground.\nThe term \"Final Solution\" was a euphemism used by the Nazis to refer to their plan for the annihilation of the Jewish people. Some historians argue that the usual tendency of the German leadership was to be extremely guarded when discussing the Final Solution. For example, Mark Roseman wrote that euphemisms were \"their normal mode of communicating about murder\". However, Jeffrey Herf has argued that the role of euphemisms in Nazi propaganda has been exaggerated, and in fact Nazi leaders often made direct threats against Jews. For example, during his speech of 30 January 1939, Hitler threatened \"the annihilation of the Jewish race in Europe\".\nFrom gaining power in January 1933 until the outbreak of war in September 1939, the Nazi persecution of the Jews in Germany was focused on intimidation, expropriating their money and property, and encouraging them to emigrate. According to the Nazi Party policy statement, Jews and the Romani people were the only \"alien people in Europe\". In 1936, the Bureau of Romani Affairs in Munich was renamed to the Center for Combating the Gypsy Menace. Introduced at the end of 1937, the \"final solution of the Gypsy Question\" entailed round-ups, expulsions, and incarceration of Romani in concentration camps built at, until this point, Dachau, Buchenwald, Flossenb\u00fcrg, Mauthausen, Natzweiler, Ravensbruck, Taucha and Westerbork. After the Anschluss with Austria in 1938, Central Offices for Jewish Emigration were established in Vienna and Berlin to increase Jewish emigration, without covert plans for their forthcoming annihilation.\nThe outbreak of war and the invasion of Poland brought a population of 3.5 million Polish Jews under the control of the Nazi and Soviet security forces, and marked the start of the Holocaust in Poland. In the German-occupied zone of Poland, Jews were forced into hundreds of makeshift ghettos, pending other arrangements.\nIn April 1941, the German agriculture and interior ministries designated the SS as an authorized applier of Zyklon B, which meant they were able to use it without any further training or governmental oversight. The launch of Operation Barbarossa in June 1941 coincided with the German top echelon's newfound intent to pursue Hitler's new anti-Semitic plan to eradicate, rather than expel, Jews. Hitler's earlier ideas about forcible removal of Jews from the German-controlled territories to achieve \"Lebensraum\" were abandoned after the failure of the air campaign against Britain and the Allied naval blockade of Germany.&lt;ref name=\"CRB/Path\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \"Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS\" Heinrich Himmler became the chief architect of a new plan, which came to be called \"The Final Solution to the Jewish question\". On 31 July 1941, \"Reichsmarschall\" Hermann G\u00f6ring wrote to Reinhard Heydrich (Himmler's deputy and chief of the RSHA), authorising him to make the \"necessary preparations\" for a \"total solution of the Jewish question\" and coordinate with all affected organizations. G\u00f6ring also instructed Heydrich to submit concrete proposals for the implementation of the new projected goal.\nBroadly speaking, the extermination of Jews was carried out in two major operations. With the onset of Operation Barbarossa, mobile killing units of the SS, the \"Einsatzgruppen\", and Order Police battalions were dispatched to the occupied Soviet Union for the express purpose of murdering all Jews. During the early stages of the invasion, Himmler himself visited Bia\u0142ystok at the beginning of July 1941, and requested that, \"as a matter of principle, any Jew\" behind the German-Soviet frontier was to be \"regarded as a partisan\". His new orders gave the SS and police leaders full authority for the mass-murder behind the front lines. By August 1941, all Jewish men, women, and children were shot. In the second phase of annihilation, the Jewish inhabitants of central, western, and south-eastern Europe were transported by Holocaust trains to camps with newly built gassing facilities. Raul Hilberg wrote: \"In essence, the killers of the occupied USSR moved to the victims, whereas outside this arena, the victims were brought to the killers. The two operations constitute an evolution not only chronologically, but also in complexity.\" Massacres of about one million Jews occurred before plans for the Final Solution were fully implemented in 1942, but it was only with the decision to annihilate the entire Jewish population that extermination camps such as Auschwitz II Birkenau and Treblinka were fitted with permanent gas chambers to murder large numbers of Jews in a relatively short period of time.\nThe plans to exterminate all the Jews of Europe were formalized at the Wannsee Conference, held at an SS guesthouse near Berlin, on 20 January 1942. The conference was chaired by Heydrich and attended by 15 senior officials of the Nazi Party and the German government. Most of those attending were representatives of the Interior Ministry, the Foreign Ministry, and the Justice Ministry, including Ministers for the Eastern Territories. At the conference, Heydrich indicated that approximately 11,000,000 Jews in Europe would fall under the provisions of the \"Final Solution\". This figure included not only Jews residing in Axis-controlled Europe, but also the Jewish populations of the United Kingdom and of neutral nations (Switzerland, Ireland, Sweden, Spain, Portugal, and European Turkey). Eichmann's biographer David Cesarani wrote that Heydrich's main purpose in convening the conference was to assert his authority over the various agencies dealing with Jewish issues. \"The simplest, most decisive way that Heydrich could ensure the smooth flow of deportations\" to death camps, according to Cesarani, \"was by asserting his total control over the fate of the Jews in the Reich and the east\" under the single authority of the RSHA. A copy of the minutes of this meeting (later called the Wannsee Conference Protocol) was found by the Allies in March 1947; it was too late to serve as evidence during the first Nuremberg Trial, but was used by prosecutor General Telford Taylor in the subsequent Nuremberg Trials.\nAfter the end of World WarII, surviving archival documents provided a clear record of the Final Solution policies and actions of Nazi Germany. They included the Wannsee Conference Protocol, which documented the co-operation of various German state agencies in the SS-led Holocaust, as well as some 3,000 tons of original German records captured by Allied armies, including the \"Einsatzgruppen\" reports, which documented the progress of the mobile killing units assigned, among other tasks, to murder Jewish civilians during the attack on the Soviet Union in 1941. The evidential proof which documented the mechanism of the Holocaust was submitted at Nuremberg.\nPhase one: death squads of Operation Barbarossa.\nThe Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union codenamed Operation Barbarossa, which commenced on 22 June 1941, set in motion a \"war of annihilation\" which quickly opened the door to the systematic mass murder of European Jews. For Hitler, Bolshevism was merely \"the most recent and most nefarious manifestation of the eternal Jewish threat\". On 3 March 1941, Wehrmacht Joint Operations Staff Chief Alfred Jodl repeated Hitler's declaration that the \"Jewish-Bolshevik intelligentsia would have to be eliminated\" and that the forthcoming war would be a confrontation between two completely opposing cultures. In May 1941, Gestapo leader Heinrich M\u00fcller wrote a preamble to the new law limiting the jurisdiction of military courts in prosecuting troops for criminal actions because: \"This time, the troops will encounter an especially dangerous element from the civilian population, and therefore, have the right and obligation to secure themselves.\"\nHimmler and Heydrich assembled a force of about 3,000 men from Security Police, Gestapo, Kripo, SD, and the Waffen-SS, as the so-called \"special commandos of the security forces\" known as the \"Einsatzgruppen\", to eliminate both communists and Jews in occupied territories. These forces were supported by 21 battalions of Orpo Reserve Police under Kurt Daluege, adding up to 11,000 men. The explicit orders given to the Order Police varied between locations, but for Police Battalion 309 participating in the first mass murder of 5,500 Polish Jews in the Soviet-controlled Bia\u0142ystok (a Polish provincial capital), Major Weiss explained to his officers that Barbarossa is a war of annihilation against Bolshevism, and that his battalions would proceed ruthlessly against all Jews, regardless of age or sex.\nAfter crossing the Soviet demarcation line in 1941, what had been regarded as exceptional in the Greater Germanic Reich became a normal way of operating in the east. The crucial taboo against the murder of women and children was breached not only in Bia\u0142ystok but also in Garg\u017edai in late June. By July, significant numbers of women and children were being murdered behind all front-lines not only by the Germans but also by the local Ukrainian and Lithuanian auxiliary forces. On 29 July 1941, at a meeting of SS officers in Vileyka (Polish Wilejka, now Belarus), the \"Einsatzgruppen\" had been given a dressing-down for their low execution figures. Heydrich himself issued an order to include the Jewish women and children in all subsequent shooting operations. Accordingly, by the end of July the entire Jewish population of Vileyka, men, women and children, were murdered. Around 12 August, no less than two-thirds of the Jews shot in Surazh were women and children of all ages. In late August 1941 the \"Einsatzgruppen\" murdered 23,600 Jews in the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre. A month later, the largest mass shooting of Soviet Jews took place on 29\u201330 September in the ravine of Babi Yar, near Kyiv, where more than 33,000 Jewish people of all ages were systematically machine-gunned. In mid-October 1941, HSSPF South, under the command of Friedrich Jeckeln, had reported the indiscriminate murder of more than 100,000 people.\nBy the end of December 1941, before the Wannsee Conference, over 439,800 Jewish people had been murdered, and the Final Solution policy in the east became common knowledge within the SS. Entire regions were reported \"free of Jews\" by the \"Einsatzgruppen\". Addressing his district governors in the General Government on 16 December 1941, Governor-General Hans Frank said: \"But what will happen to the Jews? Do you believe they will be lodged in settlements in Ostland? In Berlin, we were told: why all this trouble; we cannot use them in the Ostland or the Reichskommissariat either; liquidate them yourselves!\" Two days later, Himmler recorded the outcome of his discussion with Hitler. The result was: \"als Partisanen auszurotten\" (\"exterminate them as partisans\"). Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer wrote that the remark is probably as close as historians will ever get to a definitive order from Hitler for the genocide carried out during the Holocaust. Within two years, the total number of shooting victims in the east had risen to between 618,000 and 800,000 Jews.\n\"Bezirk Bialystok\" and \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\".\nSeveral scholars have suggested that the Final Solution began in the newly formed district of \"Bezirk Bialystok\". The German army took over Bia\u0142ystok within days. On Friday, 27 June 1941, the Reserve Police Battalion 309 arrived in the city and set the Great Synagogue on fire with hundreds of Jewish men locked inside. The burning of the synagogue was followed by a frenzy of murders both inside the homes around the Jewish neighbourhood of Chanajki, and in the city park, lasting until night time. The next day, some 30 wagons of dead bodies were taken to mass graves. As noted by Browning, the murders were led by a commander \"who correctly intuited and anticipated the wishes of his F\u00fchrer\" without direct orders. For reasons unknown, the number of victims in the official report by Major Weis was cut in half. The next mass-shooting of Polish Jews within the newly formed \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\" took place in two days of 5\u20137 August in occupied Pi\u0144sk, where over 12,000 Jews were murdered by the \"Waffen SS\", not the \"Einsatzgruppen\". An additional 17,000 Jews perished there in a ghetto uprising crushed a year later with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police.\nAn Israeli historian Dina Porat claimed that the Final Solution, i.e.: \"the systematic overall physical extermination of Jewish communities one after the other\u2014began in Lithuania\" during the massive German chase after the Red Army across the \"Reichskommissariat Ostland\". The subject of the Holocaust in Lithuania has been analysed by Konrad Kweit from USHMM who wrote: \"Lithuanian Jews were among the first victims of the Holocaust [beyond the eastern borders of occupied Poland]. The Germans carried out the mass executions [...] signaling the beginning of the 'Final Solution'.\" About 80,000 Jews were murdered in Lithuania by October (including in formerly Polish Wilno) and about 175,000 by the end of 1941 according to official reports.\n\"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\".\nWithin one week from the start of Operation Barbarossa, Heydrich issued an order to his \"Einsatzgruppen\" for the on-the-spot execution of all Bolsheviks, interpreted by the SS to mean all Jews. One of the first indiscriminate massacres of men, women, and children in Reichskommissariat Ukraine took the lives of over 4,000 Polish Jews in occupied \u0141uck on 2\u20134 July 1941, murdered by \"Einsatzkommando\" 4a assisted by the Ukrainian People's Militia. Formed officially on 20 August 1941, the \"Reichskommissariat Ukraine\"\u2014stretching from prewar east-central Poland to Crimea\u2014had become operational theatre of the \"Einsatzgruppe\" C. Within the Soviet Union proper, between 9 July 1941 and 19 September 1941 the city of Zhytomyr was made \"Judenfrei\" in three murder operations conducted by German and Ukrainian police in which 10,000 Jews perished. In the Kamianets-Podilskyi massacre of 26\u201328 August 1941 some 23,600 Jews were shot in front of open pits (including 14,000\u201318,000 people expelled from Hungary). After an incident in Bila Tserkva in which 90 small children left behind had to be shot separately, Blobel requested that Jewish mothers hold them in their arms during mass shootings. Long before the conference at Wannsee, 28,000 Jews were shot by SS and Ukrainian military in Vinnytsia on 22 September 1941, followed by the 29 September massacre of 33,771 Jews at Babi Yar. In Dnipropetrovsk, on 13 October 1941 some 10,000\u201315,000 Jews were shot. In Chernihiv, 10,000 Jews were murdered and only 260 Jews were spared. In mid-October, during the Krivoy-Rog massacre of 4,000\u20135,000 Soviet Jews the entire Ukrainian auxiliary police force actively participated. In the first days of January 1942 in Kharkiv, 12,000 Jews were murdered, but smaller massacres continued in this period on daily basis in countless other locations. In August 1942 in the presence of only a few German SS men over 5,000 Jews were massacred in Polish Zofj\u00f3wka by the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police leading to the town's complete sweep from existence.\n\"Distrikt Galizien\".\nHistorians find it difficult to determine precisely when the first concerted effort at annihilation of all Jews began in the last weeks of June 1941 during Operation Barbarossa. Dr. Samuel Drix (\"Witness to Annihilation\"), Jochaim Schoenfeld (\"Holocaust Memoirs\"), and several survivors of the Janowska concentration camp, who were interviewed in the film \"Janovska Camp at Lvov\", among other witnesses, have argued that the Final Solution began in Lw\u00f3w (Lemberg) in \"Distrikt Galizien\" of the General Government during the German advance across Soviet-occupied Poland. Statements and memoirs of survivors emphasize that, when Ukrainian nationalists and \"ad hoc\" Ukrainian People's Militia (soon reorganized as the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police) began to murder women and children, rather than only male Jews, the \"Final Solution\" had begun. Witnesses have said that such murders happened both prior to and during the pogroms reportedly triggered by the NKVD prisoner massacre. The question of whether there was some coordination between the Lithuanian and Ukrainian militias remains open (i.e. collaborating for a joint assault in Kovno, Wilno, and Lw\u00f3w).\nThe murders continued uninterrupted. On 12 October 1941, in Stanis\u0142aw\u00f3w, some 10,000\u201312,000 Jewish men, women, and children were shot at the Jewish cemetery by the German uniformed SS-men and Ukrainian Auxiliary Police during the so-called \"Bloody Sunday\" \"\". The shooters began firing at 12 noon and continued without stopping by taking turns. There were picnic tables set up on the side with bottles of vodka and sandwiches for those who needed to rest from the deafening noise of gunfire. It was the single largest massacre of Polish Jews in \"Generalgouvernement\" prior to mass gassings of \"Aktion Reinhard\", which commenced at Be\u0142\u017cec in March 1942. Notably, the extermination operations in Che\u0142mno had begun on 8 December 1941, one-and-a-half months before Wannsee, but Che\u0142mno\u2014located in \"Reichsgau Wartheland\"\u2014was not a part of Reinhard, and neither was Auschwitz-Birkenau functioning as an extermination center until November 1944 in Polish lands annexed by Hitler and added to Germany proper.\nThe conference at Wannsee gave impetus to the so-called \"second sweep\" of the Holocaust by the bullet in the east. Between April and July 1942 in Volhynia, 30,000 Jews were murdered in death pits with the help of dozens of newly formed Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\". Owing to good relations with the Ukrainian \"Hilfsverwaltung\", these auxiliary battalions were deployed by the SS also in Russia Center, Russia South, and in Byelorussia; each with about 500 soldiers divided into three companies. They participated in the extermination of 150,000 Volhynian Jews alone, or 98 percent of the Jewish inhabitants of the entire region. In July 1942 the Completion of the Final Solution in the General Government territory which included \"Distrikt Galizien\", was ordered personally by Himmler. He set the initial deadline for 31 December 1942.\nPhase two: deportations to extermination camps.\nWhen the Wehrmacht invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, the area of the General Government was enlarged by the inclusion of regions that had been annexed by the Soviet Union since the 1939 invasion. The murders of Jews from the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Ghetto in the \"Warthegau\" district began in early December 1941 with the use of gas vans (approved by Heydrich) at the Kulmhof extermination camp. Victims were misled under the deceptive guise of \"Resettlement in the East\", organised by SS Commissioners, which was also tried and tested at Che\u0142mno. By the time the European-wide Final Solution was formulated two months later, Heydrich's RSHA had already confirmed the effectiveness of industrial murder by exhaust fumes, and the strength of deception.\nConstruction work on the first killing centre at Be\u0142\u017cec in occupied Poland began in October 1941, three months before the Wannsee Conference. The new facility was operational by March the following year.&lt;ref name=\"M/MPwB\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; By mid-1942, two more death camps had been built on Polish lands: Sobib\u00f3r operational by May 1942, and Treblinka operational in July. From July 1942, the mass murder of Polish and foreign Jews took place at Treblinka as part of Operation Reinhard, the deadliest phase of the Final Solution. More Jews were murdered at Treblinka than at any other Nazi extermination camp apart from Auschwitz. By the time the mass killings of Operation Reinhard ended in 1943, roughly two million Jews in German-occupied Poland had been murdered. The total number of people murdered in 1942 in Lublin/Majdanek, Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka was 1,274,166 by Germany's own estimation, not counting Auschwitz II Birkenau nor \"Kulmhof\". Their bodies were buried in mass graves initially. Both Treblinka and Be\u0142\u017cec were equipped with powerful crawler excavators from Polish construction sites in the vicinity, capable of most digging tasks without disrupting surfaces. Although other methods of extermination, such as the cyanic poison Zyklon B, were already being used at other Nazi killing centres such as Auschwitz, the \"Aktion Reinhard\" camps used lethal exhaust gases from captured tank engines.\nThe \"Holocaust by bullets\" (as opposed to the \"Holocaust by gas\") went on in the territory of occupied Poland in conjunction with the ghetto uprisings, irrespective of death camps' quota. In two weeks of July 1942, the S\u0142onim Ghetto revolt, crushed with the help of Latvian, Lithuanian, and Ukrainian \"Schutzmannschaft\", cost the lives of 8,000\u201313,000 Jews. The second largest mass shooting (to that particular date) took place in late October 1942 when the insurgency was suppressed in the Pi\u0144sk Ghetto; over 26,000 men, women and children were shot with the aid of Belarusian Auxiliary Police before the ghetto's closure. During the suppression of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising (the largest single revolt by Jews during World War\u00a0II), 13,000 Jews were killed in action before May 1943. Numerous other uprisings were quelled without impacting the pre-planned Nazi deportations actions.\nAbout two-thirds of the overall number of victims of the Final Solution were murdered before February 1943, which included the main phase of the extermination programme in the West launched by Eichmann on 11 June 1942 from Berlin. The Holocaust trains run by the Deutsche Reichsbahn and several other national railway systems delivered condemned Jewish captives from as far as Belgium, Bulgaria, France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Moravia, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, and even Scandinavia. The cremation of exhumed corpses to destroy any evidence left behind began in early spring and continued throughout summer. The nearly completed clandestine programme of murdering all deportees was explicitly addressed by Heinrich Himmler in his Posen speeches made to the leadership of the Nazi Party on 4 October and during a conference in Posen (Pozna\u0144) of 6 October 1943 in occupied Poland. Himmler explained why the Nazi leadership found it necessary to murder Jewish women and children along with the Jewish men. The assembled functionaries were told that the Nazi state policy was \"the extermination of the Jewish people\" as such.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We were faced with the question: what about the women and children?\u2013I have decided on a solution to this problem. I did not consider myself justified to exterminate the men only\u2014in other words, to kill them or have them killed while allowing the avengers, in the form of their children, to grow up in the midst of our sons and grandsons. The difficult decision had to be made to have this people disappear from the earth.\u2014\u200a\nOn 19 October 1943, five days after the prisoner revolt in Sobib\u00f3r, Operation Reinhard was terminated by Odilo Globocnik on behalf of Himmler. The camps responsible for the murder of nearly 2,700,000 Jews were soon closed. Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka were dismantled and ploughed over before spring. The operation was followed by the single largest German massacre of Jews in the entire war carried out on 3 November 1943; with approximately 43,000 prisoners shot one-by-one simultaneously in three nearby locations by the Reserve Police Battalion 101 hand-in-hand with the Trawniki men from Ukraine. Auschwitz alone had enough capacity to fulfill the Nazis' remaining extermination needs.\nAuschwitz II Birkenau.\nUnlike Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka, and Lublin-Majdanek, which were built in the occupied General Government territory inhabited by the largest concentrations of Jews, the killing centre at Auschwitz subcamp of Birkenau operated directly in Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany. The new gas chambers at Bunker I were finished around March 1942 when the Final Solution was officially launched at Belzec. Until mid June, around 20,000 Silesian Jews were murdered there using Zyklon B. In July 1942, Bunker II became operational. In August, another 10,000\u201313,000 Polish Jews from Silesia were murdered, along with 16,000 French Jews declared 'stateless', and 7,700 Jews from Slovakia.\nThe infamous 'Gate of Death' at Auschwitz II for the incoming freight trains was built of brick and cement mortar in 1943, and the three-track rail spur was added. Until mid-August, 45,000 Thessaloniki Jews were murdered in a mere six months, including over 30,000 Jews from Sosnowiec (Sosnowitz) and Bendzin Ghettos. The spring of 1944 marked the beginning of the last phase of the Final Solution at Birkenau. The new big ramps and sidings were constructed, and two freight elevators were installed inside Crematoria II and III for moving the bodies faster. The size of the \"Sonderkommando\" was nearly quadrupled in preparation for the Special Operation Hungary (\"Sonderaktion Ungarn\"). In May 1944, Auschwitz-Birkenau became the site of one of the two largest mass murder operations in modern history, after the \"Gro\u00dfaktion Warschau\" deportations of the Warsaw Ghetto inmates to Treblinka in 1942. It is estimated that until July 1944 approximately 320,000 Hungarian Jews were gassed at Birkenau in less than eight weeks. The entire operation was photographed by the SS. In total, between April and November 1944, Auschwitz II received over 585,000 Jews from over a dozen regions as far as Greece, Italy, and France, including 426,000 Jews from Hungary, 67,000 from \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, 25,000 from Theresienstadt, and the last 23,000 Jews from the General Government. Auschwitz was liberated by the Red Army on 27 January 1945, when the gassing had already stopped.\nHistoriographic debate about the decision.\nHistorians disagree as to when and how the Nazi leadership decided that the European Jews should be exterminated. The controversy is commonly described as the functionalism versus intentionalism debate which began in the 1960s, and subsided thirty years later. In the 1990s, the attention of mainstream historians moved away from the question of top executive orders triggering the Holocaust and focused on factors that were overlooked earlier, such as personal initiative and ingenuity of countless functionaries in charge of the killing fields. No written evidence of Hitler ordering the Final Solution has ever been found to serve as a \"smoking gun\", and therefore, this one particular question remains unanswered.\nHitler made numerous predictions regarding the Holocaust of the Jews of Europe prior to the beginning of World WarII. During a speech given on 30 January 1939, on the sixth anniversary of his accession to power, Hitler said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Today I will once more be a prophet: If the international Jewish financiers in and outside Europe should succeed in plunging the nations once more into a world war, then the result will not be the Bolshevization of the earth, and thus the victory of Jewry, but the annihilation of the Jewish race in Europe!\u2014\u200a\nRaul Hilberg, in his book \"The Destruction of the European Jews\", was the first historian to systematically document and analyse the Nazi project to murder every Jew in Europe. The book was initially published in 1961, and issued in an enlarged version in 1985.\nHilberg's analysis of the steps that led to the destruction of European Jews revealed that it was \"an administrative process carried out by bureaucrats in a network of offices spanning a continent\". Hilberg divides this bureaucracy into four components or hierarchies: the Nazi Party, the civil service, industry, and the Wehrmacht armed forces\u2014but their cooperation is viewed as \"so complete that we may truly speak of their fusion into a machinery of destruction\". For Hilberg, the key stages in the destruction process were: definition and registration of the Jews; expropriation of property; concentration into ghettoes and camps; and, finally, annihilation. Hilberg gives an estimate of 5.1 million as the total number of Jews murdered. He breaks this figure down into three categories: Ghettoization and general privation: over 800,000; open-air shootings: over 1,300,000; extermination camps: up to 3,000,000.\nWith respect to the \"functionalism versus intentionalism\" debate about a master plan for the Final Solution, or the lack thereof, Hilberg posits what has been described as \"a kind of structural determinism\". Hilberg argues that \"a destruction process has an inherent pattern\" and the \"sequence of steps in a destruction process is thus determined\". If a bureaucracy is motivated \"to inflict maximum damage upon a group of people\", it is \"inevitable that a bureaucracy\u2014no matter how decentralized its apparatus or how unplanned its activities\u2014should push its victims through these stages\", culminating in their annihilation.\nIn his monograph, \"The Origins of the Final Solution: The Evolution of Nazi Jewish Policy, September 1939\u00a0\u2013 March 1942\", Christopher Browning argues that Nazi policy toward the Jews was radicalized twice: in September 1939, when the invasion of Poland implied policies of mass expulsion and massive loss of Jewish lives; and in spring 1941, when preparation for Operation Barbarossa involved the planning of mass execution, mass expulsion, and starvation\u2014to dwarf what had happened in Jewish Poland.\nBrowning believes that the \"Final Solution as it is now understood\u2014the systematic attempt to murder every last Jew within the German grasp\" took shape during a five-week period, from 18 September to 25 October 1941. During this time, the sites of the first extermination camps were selected, different methods of murder were tested, Jewish emigration was forbidden, and 11 transports departed for \u0141\u00f3d\u017a as a temporary holding station. Of this period, Browning writes, \"The vision of the Final Solution had crystallised in the minds of the Nazi leadership, and was being turned into reality.\" This was the peak of Nazi victories against the Soviet Army on the Eastern Front, and, according to Browning, the stunning series of German victories led to both an expectation that the war would soon be won, and the planning of the final destruction of the \"Jewish-Bolshevik enemy\".\nBrowning describes the creation of the extermination camps, which were responsible for the largest number of murders in the Final Solution, as bringing together three separate developments within Nazi Germany: the concentration camps which had been established in Germany since 1933; an expansion of the gassing technology of the Nazi euthanasia programme to provide a murder technique of greater efficiency and psychological detachment; and the creation of \"factories of death\" to be fed endless streams of victims by mass uprooting and deportation that utilized the experience and personnel from earlier population resettlement programmes\u2014especially the HSSPF and Adolf Eichmann's RSHA for \"Jewish affairs and evacuations\".\nPeter Longerich argues that the search for a finite date on which the Nazis embarked upon the extermination of the Jews is futile, in his book \"Holocaust: The Nazi Persecution and Murder of the Jews\" (2011). Longerich writes: \"We should abandon the notion that it is historically meaningful to try to filter the wealth of available historical material and pick out a single decision\" that led to the Holocaust.\nTimothy Snyder writes that Longerich \"grants the significance of Greiser's murder of Jews by gas at Che\u0142mno in December 1941\", but also detects a significant moment of escalation in spring 1942, which includes \"the construction of the large death factory at Treblinka for the destruction of the Warsaw Jews, and the addition of a gas chamber to the concentration camp at Auschwitz for the murder of the Jews of Silesia\". Longerich suggests that it \"was only in the summer of 1942, that mass killing was finally understood as the realization of the Final Solution, rather than as an extensively violent preliminary to some later program of slave labor and deportation to the lands of a conquered USSR\". For Longerich, to see mass-murder as the Final Solution was an acknowledgement by the Nazi leadership that there would not be a German military victory over the USSR in the near future.\nDavid Cesarani emphasises the improvised, haphazard nature of Nazi policies in response to changing war time conditions in his overview, \"Final Solution: The Fate of the European Jews 1933\u201349\" (2016). \"Cesarani provides telling examples\", wrote Mark Roseman, \"of a lack of coherence and planning for the future in Jewish policy, even when we would most expect it. The classic instance is the invasion of Poland in 1939, when not even the most elementary consideration had been given to what should happen to Poland's Jews either in the shorter or longer term. Given that Poland was home to the largest Jewish population in the world, and that, in a couple of years, it would house the extermination camps, this is remarkable.\"\nWhereas Browning places the Nazi plan to exterminate the Jews in the context of the Wehrmacht victories on the Eastern front, Cesarani argues that the German subsequent realisation that there would be no swift victory over the Soviet Union \"scuppered the last territorial 'solution' still on the table: expulsion to Siberia\". Germany's declaration of war on the United States on 11 December 1941, \"meant that holding European Jews hostage to deter the US from entering the conflict was now pointless\". Cesarani concludes, the Holocaust \"was rooted in anti-Semitism, but it was shaped by war\". The fact that the Nazis were, ultimately, so successful in murdering between five and six million Jews was not due to the efficiency of Nazi Germany or the clarity of their policies. \"Rather, the catastrophic rate of killing was due to German persistence ... and the duration of the murderous campaigns. This last factor was largely a consequence of allied military failure.\"\nThe entry of the U.S. into the War is also crucial to the time-frame proposed by Christian Gerlach, who argued in his 1997 thesis that the Final Solution decision was announced on 12 December 1941, when Hitler addressed a meeting of the Nazi Party (the \"Reichsleiter\") and of regional party leaders (the \"Gauleiter\"). The day after Hitler's speech, on 13 December 1941, Joseph Goebbels wrote in his diary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With respect of the Jewish Question, the F\u00fchrer has decided to make a clean sweep. He prophesied to the Jews that if they again brought about a world war, they would see their annihilation in it. That wasn't just a catch-word. The world war is here and the annihilation of the Jews must be the necessary consequence.\nCesarani notes that by 1943, as the military position of the German forces deteriorated, the Nazi leadership became more openly explicit about the Final Solution. In March, Goebbels confided to his diary: \"On the Jewish question especially, we are in it so deeply that there is no getting out any longer. And that is a good thing. Experience teaches that a movement and a people who have burned their bridges fight with much greater determination and fewer constraints than those that have a chance of retreat.\"\nWhen Himmler addressed senior SS personnel and leading members of the regime in the Posen speeches on 4 October 1943, he used \"the fate of the Jews as a sort of blood bond to tie the civil and military leadership to the Nazi cause\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Today, I am going to refer quite frankly to a very grave chapter. We can mention it now among ourselves quite openly and yet we shall never talk about it in public. I'm referring to the evacuation of the Jews, the extermination of the Jewish people. Most of you will know what it's like to see 100 corpses side by side or 500 corpses or 1,000 of them. To have coped with this and\u2014except for cases of human weakness\u2014to have remained decent, that has made us tough. This is an unwritten\u2014never to be written\u2014and yet glorious page in our history.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10163", "revid": "3525933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10163", "title": "Eusebius (disambiguation)", "text": "Eusebius (263\u2013339 AD) was a Christian exegete, historian and polemicist.\nEusebius may also refer to:\nEusebius is also the name of:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "10164", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10164", "title": "Eurystheus", "text": "King of Tiryns in Greek mythology\nIn Greek mythology, Eurystheus (; , ) was king of Tiryns, one of three Mycenaean strongholds in the Argolid, although other authors including Homer and Euripides cast him as ruler of Argos.\nFamily.\nEurystheus was the son of King Sthenelus and Nicippe (also called Antibia or Archippe), and he was a grandson of the hero Perseus. His sisters were Alcyone and Medusa (Astymedusa).\nEurystheus married Antimache, daughter of Amphidamas of Arcadia. Their children were Admete, Alexander, Eurybius, Mentor, Perimedes, Iphimedon, and Eurypylus.\nMythology.\nLabours of Heracles.\nIn the contest of wills between Hera and Zeus over whose candidate would be hero, fated to defeat the remaining creatures representing an old order and bring about the reign of the Twelve Olympians, Eurystheus was Hera's candidate and Heracles\u2014though his name implies that at one archaic stage of myth-making he had carried \"Hera's fame\"\u2014was the candidate of Zeus. The arena for the actions that would bring about this deep change are the Twelve Labors imposed on Heracles by Eurystheus. The immediate necessity for the Labours of Heracles is as penance for Heracles' murder of his own family, in a fit of madness, which had been sent by Hera; however, further human rather than mythic motivation is supplied by mythographers who note that their respective families had been rivals for the throne of Mycenae. Details of the individual episodes may be found in the article on the Labours of Heracles, but Hera was connected to all of the opponents Heracles had to overcome.\nHeracles' human stepfather Amphitryon was also a grandson of Perseus, and since Amphitryon's father (Alcaeus) was older than Eurystheus' father (Sthenelus), he might have received the kingdom, but Sthenelus had banished Amphitryon for accidentally killing (a familiar mytheme) the eldest son in the family (Electryon). When, shortly before his son Heracles was born, Zeus proclaimed the next-born descendant of Perseus should get the kingdom, Hera thwarted his ambitions by delaying Alcmene's labour and having her candidate Eurystheus born prematurely at seven months. Heracles' first task was to slay the Nemean Lion and bring back its skin, which Heracles decided to wear. Eurystheus was so scared by Heracles' fearsome guise that he hid in a subterranean bronze winejar, and from that moment forth all labors were communicated to Heracles through a herald, Copreus.\nFor his second labour, to slay the Lernaean Hydra, Heracles took with him his nephew, Iolaus, as a charioteer. When Eurystheus found out that Heracles' nephew had helped him he declared that the labour had not been completed alone and as a result did not count towards the ten labours set for him.\nEurystheus' third task did not involve killing a beast, but capturing one alive\u2014the Ceryneian Hind, a golden-horned hind or doe sacred to Artemis. Heracles knew that he had to return the hind, as he had promised, to Artemis, so he agreed to hand it over on the condition that Eurystheus himself come out and take it from him. Eurystheus did come out, but the moment Heracles let the hind go, she sprinted back to her mistress, and Heracles departed, saying that Eurystheus had not been quick enough.\nWhen Heracles returned with the Erymanthian Boar, Eurystheus was again frightened and hid in his jar, begging Heracles to get rid of the beast; Heracles obliged.\nThe fifth labour proposed by Eurystheus was to clear out the numerous stables of Augeias. Striking a deal with Augeias, Heracles proposed a payment of a tenth of Augeias' cattle if the labour was completed successfully. Not believing the task feasible, Augeias agreed, asking his son Phyleus to witness.\nHeracles rerouted two nearby rivers (Alpheis and Peneios) through the stable, clearing out the dung rapidly. When Augeias learned of Heracles' bargain for the task, he refused payment. Heracles brought the case to court, and Phyleus testified against his father. Enraged, Augeias banished both Phyleus and Heracles from the land before the court had cast their vote. However, Eurystheus refused to credit the labour to Heracles, as he had performed it for payment. So Heracles went and drove Augeias out of the kingdom and installed Phyleus as king. Heracles then took his tenth of the cattle and left them to graze in a field by his home.\nFor his sixth labour, Heracles had to drive the Stymphalian Birds off the marshes they plagued. He did so, shooting down several birds with his Hydra-poisoned arrows and bringing them back to Eurystheus as proof.\nFor his seventh labour, Heracles captured the Cretan Bull. He used a lasso and rode it back to his cousin. Eurystheus offered to sacrifice the bull to Hera his patron, who hated Heracles. She refused the sacrifice because it reflected glory on Heracles. The bull was released and wandered to Marathon, becoming known as the Marathonian Bull.\nWhen Heracles brought back the man-eating Mares of Diomedes successfully, Eurystheus dedicated the horses to Hera and allowed them to roam freely in the Argolid. Bucephalus, Alexander the Great's horse, was said to be descended from these mares.\nTo acquire the belt of Hippolyte, queen of the Amazons, was Heracles' ninth task. This task was at the request of Eurystheus' daughter, Admete. For the tenth labour, he stole the cattle of the giant Geryon, which Eurystheus then sacrificed to Hera.\nTo extend what may have once been ten Labours to the canonical dozen, it was said that Eurystheus didn't count the Hydra, as he was assisted, nor the Augean stables, as Heracles received payment for his work. For the eleventh labour, Heracles had to obtain the Apples of the Hesperides; he convinced their father, the Titan Atlas, to help him, but did his share of work by temporarily holding up the sky in the Titan's stead. For his final labour, he was to capture Cerberus, the three-headed hound that guarded the entrance to Hades. When he managed to bring the struggling animal back, the terrified Eurystheus hid in his jar one more time, begging Heracles to leave for good and take the dog with him.\nDeath.\nAfter Heracles died, Eurystheus remained bitter over the indignity the hero had caused him. He attempted to destroy Heracles' many children (the Heracleidae, led by Hyllus), who fled to Athens. He attacked the city but was soundly defeated, and Eurystheus and his sons were killed. Though it is widely told that Hyllus killed Eurystheus, the stories about the killer of Eurystheus and the fate of his corpse vary, but the Athenians believed the burial site of Eurystheus remained on their soil and served to protect the country against the descendants of Heracles, who traditionally included the Spartans and Argives.\nAfter Eurystheus' death, the brothers Atreus and Thyestes, whom he had left in charge during his absence, took over the city, the former exiling the latter and assuming the kingship, while Tiryns returned to the kingship of Argos.\nEurystheus in Euripides.\nEurystheus was a character in \"Heracleidae\", a play by Euripides. Macaria, one of the daughters of Heracles, and her brothers and sisters hid from Eurystheus in Athens, which was ruled by King Demophon. As Eurystheus prepared to attack, an oracle told Demophon that he would win if and only if a noble woman was sacrificed to Persephone. Macaria volunteered for the sacrifice and a spring was named the Macarian spring in her honor. Eurystheus speaks prophetically of his burial within Attica, claiming that he will be an anti-hero of sorts, though one who will eventually protect the Athenians.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10165", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10165", "title": "Effects unit", "text": "Electronic device that alters audio\nAn effects unit, effects processor, or effects pedal is an electronic device that alters the sound of a musical instrument or other audio source through audio signal processing.\nCommon effects include distortion/overdrive, often used with electric guitar in electric blues and rock music; dynamic effects such as volume pedals and compressors, which affect loudness; filters such as wah-wah pedals and graphic equalizers, which modify frequency ranges; modulation effects, such as chorus, flangers and phasers; pitch effects such as pitch shifters; and time effects, such as reverb and delay, which create echoing sounds and emulate the sound of different spaces.\nMost modern effects use solid-state electronics or digital signal processors. Some effects, particularly older ones such as Leslie speakers and spring reverbs, use mechanical components or vacuum tubes. Effects are often used as stompboxes, typically placed on the floor and controlled with footswitches. They may also be built into guitar amplifiers, instruments (such as the Hammond B-3 organ), tabletop units designed for DJs and record producers, and rackmounts, and are widely used as audio plug-ins in such common formats as VST, AAX, and AU.\nMusicians, audio engineers and record producers use effects units during live performances or in the studio, typically with electric guitar, bass guitar, electronic keyboard or electric piano. While effects are most frequently used with electric or electronic instruments, they can be used with any audio source, such as acoustic instruments, drums, and vocals.\nTerminology.\nAn effects unit is also called an \"effect box\", \"effects device\", \"effects processor\" or simply an \"effect\". The abbreviation \"F/X\" or \"FX\" is sometimes used. A pedal-style unit may be called a \"stomp box\", \"stompbox\", \"effects pedal\" or \"pedal\". Unprocessed audio coming into an effects unit is referred to as \"dry\", while the processed audio output is referred to as \"wet\".\nA musician bringing many pedals to a live show or recording session often mounts the pedals on a guitar pedalboard, to reduce set-up and tear-down time and, for pedalboards with lids, protect the pedals during transportation. When a musician has multiple effects in a rack mounted road case, this case may be called an \"effects rack\" or \"rig\". When rackmounted effects are mounted in a roadcase, this also speeds up a musician's set-up and tear-down time, because all of the effects can be connected together inside the rack case.\nForm factors.\nEffects units are available in a variety of form factors. Stompboxes are used in both live performance and studio recording. Rackmount devices saw a heavy usage during the later 20th century, due to their superior processing power and desirable tones as compared to pedal-style units. However, by the 21st century, with the advent of digital plugins and more powerful stompboxes for live usage, the use of rack-mounted effect units has declined. An effects unit can consist of analog or digital electronics or a combination of the two. During a live performance, the effect is plugged into the electrical \"signal\" path of the instrument. In the studio, an instrument or another sound source \u2014 possibly an auxiliary output of a mixer or a DAW \u2014 is patched into the effect. Whatever the form factor, effects units are part of a studio or musician's outboard gear.\nStompboxes.\nStompboxes are small plastic or metal chassis that usually lie on the floor or in a pedalboard to be operated by the user's feet. Pedals are often rectangle-shaped, but there are a range of other shapes (e.g., the circular Fuzz Face). Typical simple stompboxes have a single footswitch, one to three potentiometers for controlling the effect, and a single LED that indicates if the effect is on. A typical distortion or overdrive pedal's three potentiometers, for example, control the level or intensity of the distortion effect, the tone of the effected signal and the output level of the effected signal. Depending on the type of pedal, the potentiometers may control different parameters of the effect. For a chorus effect, for example, the knobs may control the depth and speed of the effect. Complex stompboxes may have multiple footswitches, many knobs, additional switches or buttons that are operated with the fingers, and an alphanumeric LED display that indicates the status of the effect with short acronyms (e.g., DIST for \"distortion\").\nAn &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;effects chain is formed by connecting two or more stompboxes forming a signal chain. Effect chains are typically created between the guitar and the amp or between the preamplifier and the power amp. When a pedal is off or inactive, the electric audio signal coming into the pedal diverts onto a \"bypass\", an unaltered \"dry\" signal that continues on to other effects down the chain. In this way, a musician can combine effects within a chain in a variety of ways without having to reconnect boxes during a performance.\nA \"controller\" or \"effects management system\" lets the musician create multiple effect chains, so they can select one or several chains by tapping a single switch. The switches are usually organized in a row or a simple grid.\nIt is common to put compression, wah and overdrive pedals at the start of the chain; modulation (chorus, flanger, phase shifter) in the middle; and time-based units (delay/echo, reverb at the end. When using many effects, unwanted noise and hum can be introduced into the sound. Some performers use a noise gate pedal at the end of a chain to reduce unwanted noise and hum introduced by overdrive units or vintage gear.\nRackmounts.\nRackmount effects units are typically built in a thin metal chassis with \"rack ears\" designed to be screw-mounted into the rack rails of a 19-inch rack that is standard to the music technology industry. Rackmount effects have a standardized 19-inch width, and height of 1 or more rack unit(s). Devices that are less than 19 inches wide can sometimes be made rackmount-compatible via special rackmount adapters.\nA rackmount effects unit may contain electronic circuitry identical to a stompbox's, although its circuits are typically more complex. Unlike stompboxes, rackmounts usually have several different types of effects. Rackmount effects units are controlled by knobs, switches or buttons on their front panel, and often remote-controllable by a MIDI digital control interface or pedal-style \"foot controller\".\nRackmount effects units are most commonly used in recording studios and front of house live sound mixing situations. Musicians may use them in place of stompboxes, as use of a rack can offer space for conveniently mounting additional rackmount equipment or accessories. Rackmounted effects units are typically mounted in a rack, which may be housed within a road case, a durable case with removable access panels that protect the equipment within during transportation. Because of this, rackmount effect units are not always designed with durable protective features such as corner protectors which are used on stompboxes and amps that are designed to be transported as standalone units.\nMulti-effects and tabletop units.\nA multi-effects (MFX) device is a single electronics effects pedal or rackmount device that contains many different electronic effects. multi-effects devices allow users to \"preset\" combinations of different effects, allowing musicians quick on-stage access to different effects combinations. Multi-effects units typically have a range of distortion, chorus, flanger, phaser, delay, looper and reverb effects. Pedal-style multi-effects range from fairly inexpensive stompboxes that contain two pedals and a few knobs to control the effects to large, expensive floor units with many pedals and knobs. Rack-mounted multi-effects units may be mounted in the same rack as preamplifiers and power amplifiers.\nA tabletop unit is a type of multi-effects device that sits on a desk and is controlled manually. One such example is the Pod guitar amplifier modeler. Digital effects designed for DJs are often sold in tabletop models, so that the units can be placed alongside a DJ mixer, turntables and scratching gear.\nBuilt-in units.\nEffects are often incorporated into instrument amplifiers and even some types of instruments. Electric guitar amplifiers often have built-in reverb, chorus and distortion, while acoustic guitar and keyboard amplifiers tend to only have built-in reverb. Some acoustic instrument amplifiers have reverb, chorus, compression and equalization (bass and treble) effects. Vintage guitar amps typically have tremolo and vibrato effects, and sometimes reverb. The Fender Bandmaster Reverb amp, for example, had built-in reverb and vibrato. Built-in effects may offer the user less control than standalone pedals or rackmounted units. For example, on some lower- to mid-priced bass amplifiers, the only control on the audio compression effect is a button or switch to turn it on or off, or a single knob. In contrast, a pedal or rackmounted unit would typically provide ratio, threshold and attack controls or other options to allow the user additional control over the compression.\nSome guitar amplifiers have built-in multi-effects units or digital amplifier modeling effects. Bass amplifiers are less likely to have built-in effects, although some may have a compressor/limiter or fuzz bass effect.\nInstruments with built-in effects include Hammond organs, electronic organs, electronic pianos and digital synthesizers. Built-in effects for keyboards typically include reverb, chorus and, for Hammond organ, vibrato. Many clonewheel organs include an overdrive effect. Occasionally, acoustic-electric and electric guitars will have built-in effects, such as a preamp or equalizer.\nHistory.\nStudio effects and early stand-alone units.\nThe earliest sound effects were strictly used in studio productions. Microphones placed in echo chambers with specially designed acoustic properties simulated the sound of live performances in different environments. In the mid to late 1940s, recording engineers and experimental musicians such as Les Paul began manipulating reel-to-reel recording tape to create echo effects and unusual, futuristic sounds. In 1941, DeArmond released the Model 601 Tremolo Control, the first commercially available stand-alone effects unit. This device produced a tremolo by passing an instrument's electrical signal through a water-based electrolytic fluid. Most stand-alone effects of the 1950s and early 1960s such as the Gibson GA-VI vibrato unit and the Fender reverb box, were expensive and impractical, requiring bulky transformers and high voltages. The original stand-alone units were not especially in-demand as many effects came built into amplifiers. The first popular stand-alone was the 1958 Watkins Copicat, a relatively portable tape echo effect made famous by the British band, The Shadows.\nAmplifiers.\nEffects built into tube-powered guitar amplifiers were the first effects that musicians used regularly outside the studio. From the late 1940s onward, the Gibson began including vibrato circuits in combo amplifiers that incorporated one or more speakers with the amp. The 1950 Ray Butts EchoSonic amp was the first to feature a tape echo, which quickly became popular with guitarists such as Chet Atkins, Carl Perkins, Scotty Moore, Luther Perkins, and Roy Orbison. Both Premier and Gibson built amplifiers with spring reverb. Fender began manufacturing the tremolo amps Tremolux in 1955 and Vibrolux in 1956.\nDistortion was not an effect originally intended by amplifier manufacturers, but could often easily be achieved by \"overdriving\" the power supply in early tube amplifiers. In the 1950s, guitarists began deliberately increasing gain beyond its intended levels to achieve \"warm\" distorted sounds. Among the first musicians to experiment with distortion were Willie Johnson of Howlin' Wolf, Goree Carter, Joe Hill Louis, Ike Turner, Guitar Slim, and Chuck Berry.\nIn 1954, Pat Hare produced heavily distorted power chords for several recordings (including James Cotton's \"Cotton Crop Blues\"), creating \"a grittier, nastier, more ferocious electric guitar sound,\" accomplished by turning the volume knob on his amplifier \"all the way to the right until the speaker was screaming.\" Link Wray's 1958 recording \"Rumble\" inspired young musicians such as Pete Townshend of The Who, Jimmy Page of Led Zeppelin, Jeff Beck, Dave Davies of The Kinks, and Neil Young to explore distortion by various means. In 1966, the British company Marshall Amplification began producing the Marshall 1963, a guitar amplifier capable of producing the distorted \"crunch\" that rock musicians were starting to seek.\nStompboxes.\nThe electronic transistor finally made it possible to fit effects circuitry into highly portable stompbox units. Transistors replaced vacuum tubes, allowing for much more compact formats and greater stability. The first transistorized guitar effect was the 1962 Maestro Fuzz Tone pedal, which became a sensation after its use in the 1965 Rolling Stones hit \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\".\nWarwick Electronics manufactured the first wah-wah pedal, The Clyde McCoy, in 1967 and that same year Roger Mayer developed the first octave effect, which Jimi Hendrix named \"Octavio\". Upon first hearing the Octavia, Hendrix reportedly rushed back to the studio and immediately used it to record the guitar solos on \"Purple Haze\" and \"Fire\". In 1968, Univox began marketing Shin-ei's Uni-Vibe pedal, an effect designed by noted audio engineer Fumio Mieda that mimicked the odd phase shift and chorus effects of the Leslie rotating speakers used in Hammond organs. The pedals soon became favorite effects of guitarists Jimi Hendrix and Robin Trower. In 1976, Roland subsidiary Boss Corporation released the CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, the first chorus pedal, created by taking a chorus circuit from an amplifier and putting it into a stompbox. By the mid-1970s a variety of solid-state effects pedals including flangers, chorus pedals, ring modulators and phase shifters were available.\nIn the 1980s, digital rackmount units began replacing stompboxes as the effects format of choice. Often musicians would record \"dry\", unaltered tracks in the studio and effects would be added in post-production. The success of Nirvana's 1991 album \"Nevermind\" helped to re-ignite interest in stompboxes. Some grunge guitarists would chain several fuzz pedals together and plug them into a tube amplifier. Throughout the 1990s, musicians committed to a lo-fi aesthetic such as J Mascis of Dinosaur Jr., Stephen Malkmus of Pavement and Robert Pollard of Guided by Voices continued to use analog effects pedals.\nEffects and effects units\u2014stompboxes in particular\u2014have been celebrated by pop and rock musicians in album titles, songs and band names. The Big Muff, a fuzzbox manufactured by Electro-Harmonix, is commemorated by the Depeche Mode song \"Big Muff\" and the Mudhoney EP \"Superfuzz Bigmuff\". Nine Inch Nails, Pink Floyd, George Harrison, They Might Be Giants and Joy Division are among the many musicians who have referenced effects units in their music.\nTechniques.\nDistortion.\nDistortion, overdrive, and fuzz effects units add a \"warm\", \"gritty\", or \"fuzzy\" character to an audio signal by re-shaping or clipping it, which distorts the shape of its waveform by flattening its peaks, creating \"warm\" sounds by adding harmonics or \"gritty\" sounds by adding inharmonic overtones. Distortion effects are sometimes called gain effects, as distorted guitar sounds were first achieved by increasing the gain of tube amplifiers.\nWhile distortion effects units produce perfectly flattened peaks or \"hard\" clipping, overdrive effects units produce \"soft\" tube-like distortion by compressing the waveform without completely flattening it. Much like guitar tube amplifiers, overdrive effects units are capable of producing \"clean\" sounds at lower volumes and distorted \"warm\" sounds at higher volumes.\nNotable examples of distortion and overdrive pedals include the Boss DS-1 Distortion, Ibanez Tube Screamer, Marshall ShredMaster, MXR Distortion +, and Pro Co RAT.\nA fuzz pedal, or fuzzbox, is a type of overdrive effects unit that clips a signal until it is nearly a square wave, resulting in a heavily distorted or \"fuzzy\" sound. Fuzzboxes may contain frequency multiplier circuitry to achieve a harsh timbre by adding complex harmonics. The Rolling Stones' song \"(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction\", with a fuzz effect featured prominently on the main electric guitar riff played by Keith Richards, greatly popularized the use of fuzz effects. Fuzz bass (also called bass overdrive) is a style of playing the electric bass that produces a buzzy, overdriven sound via a tube or transistor amp or by using a fuzz or overdrive pedal.\nNotable examples of fuzz effect units include the: Arbiter Fuzz Face, Electro-Harmonix Big Muff, Shin-ei Companion FY-2, Univox Super-Fuzz, Vox Tone Bender, Z.Vex Fuzz Factory.\nWhile distortion effect units are most associated with electric and bass guitar, they are also commonly used on keyboard instruments (i.e. synthesizers, combo and tonewheel organs, electric piano), as well as drums and vocals.\nDynamics.\nAlso called volume and amplitude effects, dynamics effects modify the volume of an instrument. Dynamics effects were among the first effects introduced to guitarists.\n\"Boost/volume pedal\": When activated, a \"boost\" or \"clean boost\" pedal amplifies the volume of an instrument by increasing the amplitude of its audio signal. These units are generally used for \"boosting\" volume during solos and preventing signal loss in long effects chains. A guitarist switching from rhythm guitar to lead guitar for a guitar solo may use a boost to increase the volume of their solo.\nVolume effects: Electro-Harmonix LPB-1, Fender Volume Pedal, MXR Micro Amp, Ernie Ball Volume Pedal. Treadle-based volume pedals are used by electric instrument players (guitar, bass, keyboards) to adjust the volume of their instrument with one foot while their hands are being used to play their instrument. Treadle-style volume pedals are often also used to create swelling effects by removing the attack of a note or chord, as popularised by pedal steel guitar players. This enables electric guitar and pedal steel players to imitate the soft swelling sound that an orchestra string section can produce, in which a note or chord starts very softly and then grows in volume. Treadle-based volume pedals do not usually have batteries or require external power.\n\"Compressor\": Compressors make loud sounds quieter and quiet sounds louder by decreasing or \"compressing\" the dynamic range of an audio signal. A compressor is often used to stabilize volume and alter the sound of a note's \"attack\". With extreme settings of its controls, a compressor can function as a limiter.\nCompressor effects: Keeley Compressor, MXR Dyna Comp, Boss CS-3 Compression Sustainer.\n\"Noise gate\": Noise gates attenuate hum, hiss, and static in the signal by greatly diminishing the volume when the signal falls below a set threshold. Noise gates are expanders\u2014meaning that, unlike compressors, they increase the dynamic range of an audio signal to make quiet sounds even quieter. If used with extreme settings and combined with reverb, they can create unusual sounds, such as the gated drum effect used in 1980s pop songs, a style popularized by the Phil Collins song \"In the Air Tonight\".\nNoise gate effects: Boss NS-2 Noise Suppressor.\nFilter.\nFilter effects alter the frequency content of an audio signal that passes through them by either boosting or weakening specific frequencies or frequency regions.\n\"Equalizer\": An equalizer is a set of linear filters that strengthen (\"boost\") or weaken (\"cut\") specific frequency regions. While basic home stereos often have equalizers for two bands, to adjust bass and treble, professional graphic equalizers offer much more targeted control over the audio frequency spectrum. Audio engineers use highly sophisticated equalizers to eliminate unwanted sounds, make an instrument or voice more prominent, and enhance particular aspects of an instrument's tone.\nEqualizer effects: Boss GE-7 Equalizer, MXR 10-band EQ Pedal.\n\"Talk box\": A talk box directs the sound from an electric guitar or synthesizer into the mouth of a performer using a tube, allowing the sound to be shaped into vowels and consonants with movements of the mouth. The modified sound is then picked up by a microphone. In this way, the guitarist is able create the effect that the guitar is talking. Some famous uses of the talkbox include Bon Jovi's \"Livin' on a Prayer\", Stevie Wonder's \"Black Man\", M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce's \"Kickstart My Heart\", Joe Walsh's \"Rocky Mountain Way\", Alice in Chains's \"Man in the box\" and Peter Frampton's \"Show Me the Way\".\nTalk boxes: Dunlop HT1 Heil Talk Box, Rocktron Banshee.\n\"Wah-wah\": A wah-wah pedal creates vowel-like sounds by altering the frequency spectrum produced by an instrument\u2014i.e., how loud it is at each separate frequency\u2014in what is known as a spectral glide or \"sweep\". The device is operated by a foot treadle that manipulates a potentiometer or other electronic control. Wah-wah pedals are often used by funk and rock guitarists.\nWah effects: Dunlop Cry Baby, Morley Power Wah, Vox.\n\"Auto-wah\" or, more generally, envelope filter effects: A filter effect that is controlled by the volume of the input signal. The most common filter type used for this effect pedal is the low-pass filter, although many designs include a toggle for band-pass or high-pass filters as well. Additionally, some designs can switch between a down filter mode and an up filter. This effect is commonly used in funk, reggae and jam band music.\nEnvelope filter effects: Musitronics Mu-Tron III, Electro-Harmonix Q-Tron Plus, DOD Envelope Filter 440.\nModulation.\nModulation, in general electronics, means the altering of one signal based on another. In audio effects, modulation is a control feature that varies the strength or other attribute of the effect over time to alter tonal properties. Some modulation effects modulate an instrument's audio signal with a signal generated by the effect called a carrier wave. Other modulation effects split an instrument's audio signal in two, altering one portion of the signal and mixing it with the unaltered portion.\n\"Chorus\": Chorus pedals mimic the effect choirs and string orchestras produce naturally, by mixing similar sounds with slight differences in timbre and pitch. A chorus effect splits the audio signal and adds a slight delay and frequency variations or \"vibrato\" to one version while leaving the rest unaltered. A well-known usage of chorus is the lead guitar in \"Come As You Are\" by Nirvana.\nChorus effects: Boss CE-1 Chorus Ensemble, Electro-Harmonix Small Clone, TC Electronic Stereo Chorus.\n\"Flanger\": A flanger creates a \"whooshing\", \"jet plane\" or \"spaceship\" sound, simulating a studio effect that was first produced by recording a track on two synchronized tape decks and periodically slowing one tape by pressing the edge of its reel (the \"flange\"). When the two tapes' audio signals are later mixed, a comb filter effect can be heard. Flanger units add a variably delayed version of the audio signal to the original or signal, creating a comb filter or Doppler effect. Some famous uses of flanger effects include \"Walking on the Moon\" by The Police, the intro to \"Ain't Talkin' 'Bout Love\" by Van Halen, and \"Barracuda\" by Heart.\nFlanger effects: Electro-Harmonix Electric Mistress, MXR Flanger, Boss BF-3 Flanger.\n\"Phaser\": A phaser or phase shifter creates a slight rippling effect\u2014amplifying some aspects of the tone while diminishing others\u2014by splitting an audio signal in two and altering the phase of one portion. Three well-known examples of phaser are the two-handed tapping part on the Van Halen instrumental \"Eruption\" and the keyboard parts on Billy Joel's \"Just the Way You Are\" and Paul Simon's \"Slip Slidin' Away\".\nPhase shift effects: Uni-Vibe, Electro-Harmonix Small Stone, MXR Phase 90.\n\"Ring modulator\": A ring modulator produces a resonant, metallic sound by frequency mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave generated by the device's internal oscillator. The original sound wave is suppressed and replaced by a \"ring\" of inharmonic higher and lower pitches or sidebands. A notable use of ring modulation is the guitar in the Black Sabbath song \"Paranoid\".\nRing modulator effects: Moogerfooger MF-102 Ring Modulator.\n\"Tremolo\": A tremolo effect produces a variation in the volume of a signal. The tremolo effect should not be confused with the misleadingly-named tremolo bar, a device on a guitar bridge that creates a vibrato or pitch-bending effect. In electronic effects, a tremolo is produced by modulating an instrument's audio signal with a sub-audible carrier wave in such a way that generates amplitude variations in the sound wave. Tremolo effects are built-in effects in some vintage guitar amplifiers. The guitar intro in the Rolling Stones' \"Gimme Shelter\" features a tremolo effect.\nTremolo effects: Demeter TRM-1 Tremulator, Fender Tremolux.\n\"Slicer\": Combines a modulation sequence with a noise gate or envelope filter to create a percussive and rhythmic effect like a helicopter.\n\"Vibrato\": Vibrato effects produce slight, rapid variations in pitch, mimicking the fractional semitone variations produced naturally by opera singers and violinists when they are prolonging a single note. Vibrato effects often allow the performer to control the rate of the variation as well as the difference in pitch (\"depth\"). A vibrato with an extreme \"depth\" setting (e.g., half a semitone or more) will produce a dramatic, ululating sound. In transistorized effects, vibrato is produced by mixing an instrument's audio signal with a carrier wave in such a way that generates frequency variations in the sound wave. Guitarists often use the terms \"vibrato\" and \"tremolo\" misleadingly. A so-called \"vibrato unit\" in a guitar amplifier may actually produces tremolo, while a \"tremolo arm\" or \"whammy bar\" on a guitar produces vibrato.\nVibrato effects: Boss VB-2 Vibrato.\nPitch and frequency.\nA pitch shifter (also called an \"octaver\" for effects that shift pitch by an octave) raises or lowers (i.e. transposes) each note a performer plays by a pre-set interval. For example, a pitch shifter set to increase the pitch by a fourth will raise each note four diatonic intervals above the notes actually played. Simple, less expensive pitch shifters raise or lower the pitch by one or two octaves, while more sophisticated devices offer a range of interval alterations. A pitch shifter can be used by an electric guitarist to play notes that would normally only be available on an electric bass. As well, a bass player with a four string electric bass can use an octave pedal to obtain low notes that would normally only be obtainable with a five-string bass with a low B string.\nA harmonizer is a type of sophisticated pitch shifter that combines the altered pitch with the original pitch to create a two or three note harmony based on the original pitch. Some hamonizers are able to create chorus-like effects by modulating of small shifts in pitch.\nThe first mass-market digital pitch shifter was the DigiTech Whammy, introduced in 1989. It creates a \"strange and artificial\" sound, with distinctive \"wobbly\" artifacts. Its users include Jonny Greenwood and Ed O'Brien of Radiohead, Matt Bellamy of Muse, Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave, David Gilmour of Pink Floyd and Jack White of the White Stripes. \"Guitar World\" described the Whammy as one of the most iconic guitar pedals.\nTime-based.\nTime-based effects delay the sound signal, add reverb or echos, or enable musicians to record and play back loops.\n\"Delay/echo\": Delay/echo units produce an echo effect by adding a duplicate to the original signal at a slight time delay. The effect can either be a single echo (called a \"slap\" or \"slapback\"), or multiple echos. A well-known use of delay is the lead guitar in the U2 song \"Where the Streets Have No Name\", and also the opening riff of \"Welcome to the Jungle\" by Guns N' Roses.\nDelay effects: Boss DD-3 Digital Delay, MXR Carbon Copy, Electro-Harmonix Deluxe Memory Man, Line 6 DL4, Roland RE-201.\n\"Looper pedal\": A looper pedal or \"phrase looper\" allows a performer to record and later replay a phrase, riff or passage from a song. Loops can be created on the spot during a performance (live looping) or they can be pre-recorded. By using a looper pedal, a singer-guitarist in a one person band can play the backing chords to a song, loop them with the pedal, and then sing and do a guitar solo over the chords. Some units allow a performer to layer multiple loops, enabling the performer to create the effect of a full band. The first loop effects were created with reel-to-reel tape using a tape loop.\n\"Reverb\": Reverb units simulate the spacious sounds produced naturally in any acoustic space, from hall or room to a huge stone cathedral. This is done by creating a large number of echoes that gradually fade away in volume or \"decay\". One early technique for creating a reverb effect was to send an amplified signal of the music via a speaker to another room with reflective surfaces, such as a tile bathroom, and then record the natural reverberations that were produced. A plate reverb system uses an electromechanical transducer to create vibrations in a plate of metal. Spring reverb systems, which are often used in guitar amplifiers, use a transducer to create vibrations in a spring. Digital reverb effects use various signal processing algorithms to create the reverb effect, often by using multiple feedback delay circuits. Rockabilly and surf guitar are two genres that make heavy use of reverb.\nReverb effects: Electro-Harmonix Holy Grail, Fender Reverb Unit.\nFeedback and sustain.\nAudio feedback is an effect produced when amplified sound is picked up by a microphone or guitar pickup and played back through a guitar amplifier, initiating a feedback loop, which usually consists of high-pitched sound. Feedback that occurs from a vocal mic into a PA system is almost always avoided. However, in some styles of rock music, electric guitar players intentionally create feedback by playing their instrument directly in front of the speaker enclosure of a guitar amplifier set up with sufficient gain. The creative use of feedback effects was pioneered by guitarists such as Jimi Hendrix in the 1960s. This technique creates sustained, high-pitched overtones and unusual sounds not possible through regular playing techniques. Guitar feedback effects can be difficult to perform, because it is difficult to determine the sound volume and guitar position relative to a guitar amp's loudspeaker necessary for achieving the desired feedback sound. Guitar feedback effects are used in a number of rock genres, including psychedelic rock, heavy metal music and punk rock.\nEBow is a brand name of Heet Sound Products, of Los Angeles, California, for a small, handheld, battery-powered resonator. The Ebow was invented by Greg Heet, as a way to make a note on an electric guitar string resonate continuously, creating an effect that sounds similar to cello or violin. The resonator uses a pickup feedback circuit, including a sensor coil, driver coil, and amplifier, to induce forced string resonance. The Ebow is monophonic, so it drives only one string at a time.\nOther handheld and mounted guitar and bass resonators produced in Germany under the SRG brand were on the market since the early 1990s through 2016. These were available in both monophonic (one string at a time) and polyphonic (multiple strings at a time) models, and included multiple onboard trigger switch effects, such as HPF (high pass filter) for enhancing harmonics and producing feedback effects, and LPF (low pass filter), producing a bass boost with a cello sound on heavy gauge strings. Later EBow models, such as the plus Ebow, contain a mode slide switch on the back, which allows the player to either produce just sustain or overtone feedback in addition to sustain. Pedals such as the Boss DF-2 and FB-2 use an internally generated signal matched to the pitch of the guitar that can be sustained indefinitely by depressing the pedal. Many compressor pedals are often also marketed as \"sustainer pedals\". As a note is sustained, it loses energy and volume due to diminishing vibration in the string. The compressor pedal boosts its electrical signal to the specified dynamic range, prolonging the duration of the note. This, combined with heavy distortion and the close proximity of the guitar and the speaker cabinet, can lead to infinite sustain at higher volumes.\nOther effects.\n\"Envelope follower\": An envelope follower activates an effect once a designated volume is reached. One effect that uses an envelope follower is the \"auto-wah\", which produces a \"wah\" effect depending on how loud or soft the notes are being played.\n\"Guitar amplifier modeling\": Amplifier modeling is a digital effect that replicates the sound of various amplifiers, most often vintage tube amplifiers and famous brands of speaker cabinets (e.g., the Ampeg SVT 8x10\" bass cabinet). Sophisticated modeling effects can simulate different types of speaker cabinets (e.g., the sound of an 8x10\" cabinet) and miking techniques. A rotary speaker simulator mimics the doppler and chorus effect sound of a vintage Leslie speaker system by replicating its volume and pitch modulations, overdrive capacity and phase shifts.\n\"Pitch correction/vocal effects\": Pitch correction effects use signal-processing algorithms to re-tune faulty intonation in a vocalist's performance or create unusual vocoder-type vocal effects. One of the best known examples of this is Autotune, a software program and effect unit which can be used to both correct pitch (it moves a pitch to the nearest semitone), and add vocal effects. Some stompbox-style vocal pedals contain multiple effects, such as reverb and pitch correction.\n\"Simulators\": Simulators enable electric guitars to mimic the sound of other instruments such as acoustic guitar, electric bass and sitar. Pick up simulators used on guitars with single-coil pick ups replicate the sound of guitars with humbucker pick ups, or vice versa. A de-fretter is a bass guitar effect that simulates the sound of a fretless bass. The effect uses an envelope-controlled filter and voltage-controlled amplifier to \"soften\" a note's attack both in volume and timbre.\n\"Bitcrusher filters\": Bitcrushers rely on conversion of the audio signal into a digital format (ADC) and the reduction of sound fidelity by utilising bit (and sometimes sample) rates low enough to cause significant colouration and filtering within the audible frequency range.\n\"Rotary speakers\" are specially constructed amplifier and loudspeakers used to create special audio effects by rotating the speakers or a sound-directing duct\nto introduce the Doppler effect and other sound reflections. The rotating speaker baffle creates a chorus-type effect. Named after its inventor, Donald Leslie, it is particularly associated with the Hammond organ but is used with a variety of instruments as well as vocals. The Hammond/Leslie combination has become an element in many genres of music. The Leslie Speaker and the Hammond Organ brands are currently owned by Suzuki Musical Instrument Corporation.\nThe \"Korg Kaoss Pad\" is a small touchpad MIDI controller, sampler, and effects processor for audio and musical instruments, made by Korg. The Kaoss Pad's touchpad can be used to control its internal effects engine, which can be applied to a line-in signal or to samples recorded from the line-in. Effects types include pitch shifting, distortion, filtering, wah-wah, tremolo, flanging, delay, reverberation, auto-panning, gating, phasing, and ring modulation.\nThe Kaoss Pad can also be used as a MIDI controller.\nBass effects.\nBass effects are electronic effects units that are designed for use with the low pitches created by an electric bass or for an upright bass used with a bass amp or PA system. Two examples of bass effects are fuzz bass and bass chorus. Some bass amplifiers have built-in effects, such as overdrive or chorus. Upright bassists in jazz, folk, blues and similar genres may use a bass preamplifier, a small electronic device that matches the impedance between the piezoelectric pickup and the amp or PA system. Bass preamps also allow for the gain of the signal to be boosted or cut. Some models also offer equalization controls, a compressor, and a DI box connection.\nBoutique pedals.\nBoutique pedals are designed by smaller, independent companies and are typically produced in limited quantities. Some may even be hand-made, with hand-soldered connections. These pedals are mainly distributed online or through mail-order, or sold in a few music stores. They are often more expensive than mass-produced pedals and offer higher-quality components, innovative designs, in-house-made knobs, and hand-painted artwork or etching. Some boutique companies focus on re-creating classic or vintage effects.\nSome boutique pedal manufacturers include: BJFE, Pete Cornish, Emlyn Crowther, Death By Audio, Robert Keeley, Roger Linn, Roger Mayer, Strymon, T-Rex Engineering, ToadWorks, and Z.Vex Effects.\nModification.\nThere is also a niche market for modifying or \"modding\" effects. Typically, vendors provide either custom modification services or sell new effects pedals they have already modified. The Ibanez Tube Screamer, Boss DS-1, Pro Co RAT and DigiTech Whammy are some of the most often-modified effects. Common modifications include value changes in capacitors or resistors, adding true-bypass so that the effect's circuitry is no longer in the signal path, substituting higher-quality components, replacing the unit's original operational amplifiers (op-amps), or adding functions to the device, such as allowing additional control of some factor or adding another output jack.\nOther pedals and rackmount units.\nNot all stompboxes and rackmounted electronic devices designed for musicians are effects. Strobe tuner and regular electronic tuner pedals indicate whether a guitar string is too sharp or flat. Stompbox-format tuner pedals route the electric signal for the instrument through the unit via a 1/4\" patch cable. These pedal-style tuners usually have an output so that the signal can be plugged into a guitar amp to produce sound. Rackmount power conditioner devices deliver a voltage of the proper level and characteristics to enable equipment to function properly (e.g., by providing transient impulse protection). A rackmounted wireless receiver unit is used to enable a guitarist or bassist to move around on stage without being connected to a cable. A footswitch pedal such as the \"A/B\" pedal routes a guitar signal to an amplifier or enables a performer to switch between two guitars, or between two amplifiers.\nGuitar amplifiers and electronic keyboards may have switch pedals for turning built-in reverb and distortion effects on and off; the pedals contain only a switch, with the circuitry for the effect being housed in the amplifier chassis. Some musicians who use rackmounted effects or laptops employ a MIDI controller pedalboard or armband remote controls to trigger sound samples, switch between different effects or control effect settings. A pedal keyboard uses pedals, but it is not an effect unit; it is a foot-operated keyboard in which the pedals are typically used to play basslines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10166", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10166", "title": "Enron", "text": "Defunct American energy company\nEnron Corporation was an American energy, commodities, and services company based in Houston, Texas. It was led by Kenneth Lay and developed in 1985 via a merger between Houston Natural Gas and InterNorth, both relatively small regional companies at the time of the merger. Before its bankruptcy on December 2, 2001, Enron employed approximately 20,600 staff and was a major electricity, natural gas, communications, and pulp and paper company, with claimed revenues of nearly $101\u00a0billion during 2000. \"Fortune\" named Enron \"America's Most Innovative Company\" for six consecutive years.\nAt the end of 2001, it was revealed that Enron's reported financial condition was sustained by an institutionalized, systematic, and creatively planned accounting fraud, known since as the Enron scandal. Enron became synonymous with willful, institutional fraud and systemic corruption. The scandal brought into question the accounting practices and activities of many corporations in the United States and was a factor in the enactment of the Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act of 2002. It affected the greater business world by causing, together with the even larger fraudulent bankruptcy of WorldCom, the dissolution of the Arthur Andersen accounting firm, which had been Enron and WorldCom's main auditor, and coconspirator in the fraud for years.\nEnron filed for bankruptcy in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York in late 2001 and selected Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges as its bankruptcy counsel. Enron emerged from bankruptcy in November 2004, under a court-approved plan of reorganization. A new board of directors changed its name to Enron Creditors Recovery Corp., and emphasized reorganizing and liquidating certain operations and assets of the pre-bankruptcy Enron. On September 7, 2006, Enron sold its last remaining subsidiary, Prisma Energy International, to Ashmore Energy International Ltd. (now AEI). It is the largest bankruptcy due specifically to fraud in United States history.\nHistory.\nPre-merger origins (1925\u20131985).\nInterNorth.\nOne of Enron's primary predecessors was InterNorth, which was formed in 1930, in Omaha, Nebraska, just a few months after Black Tuesday. The low cost of natural gas and the cheap supply of labor during the Great Depression helped to fuel the company's early beginnings, doubling in size by 1932. Over the next 50 years, Northern expanded even more as it acquired many energy companies. It was reorganized in 1979 as the main subsidiary of a holding company, InterNorth, a diversified energy and energy-related products firm. Although most of the acquisitions conducted were successful, some ended poorly. InterNorth competed with Cooper Industries unsuccessfully over a hostile takeover of Crouse-Hinds Company, an electrical products manufacturer. Cooper and InterNorth feuded in numerous suits during the takeover that were eventually settled after the transaction was completed. The subsidiary Northern Natural Gas operated the largest pipeline company in North America. By the 1980s, InterNorth became a major force for natural gas production, transmission, and marketing as well as for natural gas liquids, and was an innovator in the plastics industry. In 1983, InterNorth merged with the Belco Petroleum Company, a Fortune 500 oil exploration and development company founded by Arthur Belfer.\nHouston Natural Gas.\nThe Houston Natural Gas (HNG) corporation was initially formed from the Houston Oil Co. in 1925 to provide gas to customers in the Houston market through the building of gas pipelines. Under the leadership of CEO Robert Herring from 1967 to 1981, the company took advantage of the unregulated Texas natural gas market and the commodity surge in the early 1970s to become a dominant force in the energy industry. Toward the end of the 1970s, HNG's luck began to run out with rising gas prices forcing clients to switch to oil. In addition, with the passing of the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, the Texas market was less profitable and as a result, HNG's profits fell. After Herring died in 1981, M.D. Matthews briefly took over as CEO in a 3-year stint with initial success, but ultimately, a big dip in earnings led to his exit. In 1984, Kenneth Lay succeeded Matthews and inherited the troubled conglomerate.\nMerger.\nWith its conservative success, InterNorth became a target of corporate takeovers, the most prominent originating with Irwin Jacobs. InterNorth CEO Sam Segnar sought a friendly merger with HNG. In May 1985, Internorth acquired HNG for $2.3 billion, 40% higher than the current market price, and on July 16, 1985, the two entities voted to merge. The combined assets of the two companies created the second largest gas pipeline system in the US at that time. Internorth's north\u2013south pipelines that served Iowa and Minnesota complemented HNG's Florida and California east-west pipelines well.\nPost-merger rise (1985\u20131991).\nThe company was initially named HNG/InterNorth Inc., even though InterNorth was technically the parent. At the outset, Segnar was CEO but was soon fired by the board of directors to name Lay to the post. Lay moved its headquarters back to Houston and set out to find a new name, spending more than $100,000 in focus groups and consultants in the process. Lippincott &amp; Margulies, the advertising firm responsible for the InterNorth identity five years prior, suggested \"Enteron\". During a meeting with employees on February 14, 1986, Lay announced his interest in this name change, which would be held to a stockholder vote on April 10. Less than a month from this meeting, on March 7, 1986, a spokesman for HNG/InterNorth rescinded the planned Enteron proposal, as since its announcement the name had come under scrutiny for being the same as a medical term for the intestines. This same press release saw the introduction of the Enron name, which would be the new name voted on come April.\nEnron still had some lingering problems left over from its merger, however, the company had to pay Jacobs, who was still a threat, over $350 million and reorganize the company. Lay sold off any parts of the company that he believed didn't belong in the long-term future of Enron. Lay consolidated all the gas pipeline efforts under the Enron Gas Pipeline Operating Company. In addition, it ramped up its electric power and natural gas efforts. In 1988 and 1989, the company added power plants and cogeneration units to its portfolio. In 1989, Jeffrey Skilling, then a consultant at McKinsey &amp; Company, came up with the idea to link natural gas to consumers in more ways, effectively turning natural gas into a commodity. Enron adopted the idea and called it the \"Gas Bank\". The division's success prompted Skilling to join Enron as the head of the Gas Bank in 1991. Another major development inside Enron was a pivot to overseas operations with a $56 million loan in 1989 from the Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) for a power plant in Argentina.\n1991\u20132000.\nThroughout the 1990s, Enron made a few changes to its business plan that greatly improved the perceived profitability of the company. First, Enron invested heavily in overseas assets, specifically energy. Another major shift was the gradual transition of focus from a producer of energy to a company that acted more like an investment firm and sometimes a hedge fund, making profits off the margins of the products it traded. These products were traded through the Gas Bank concept, now called the Enron Finance Corp. and headed by Skilling.\nOperations as a trading firm.\nWith the success of the Gas Bank trading natural gas, Skilling looked to expand the horizons of his division, Enron Capital &amp; Trade. Skilling hired Andrew Fastow in 1990 to help.\nEntrance into the retail energy market.\nStarting in 1994 under the Energy Policy Act of 1992, Congress allowed states to deregulate their electricity utilities, allowing them to be opened for competition. California was one such state to do so. Enron, seeing an opportunity with rising prices, was eager to jump into the market. In 1997, Enron acquired Portland General Electric (PGE). Although an Oregon utility, it had the potential to begin serving the massive California market since PGE was a regulated utility. The new Enron division, Enron Energy, ramped up its efforts by offering discounts to potential customers in California starting in 1998. Enron Energy also began to sell natural gas to customers in Ohio and wind power in Iowa. However, the company ended its retail endeavor in 1999 as it was revealed it was costing upwards of $100 million a year.\nData management.\nAs fiber optic technology progressed in the 1990s, multiple companies, including Enron, attempted to make money by \"keeping the continuing network costs low\", which was done by owning their own network. In 1997, FTV Communications LLC, a limited liability company formed by Enron subsidiary FirstPoint Communications, Inc., constructed a fiber optic network between Portland and Las Vegas. In 1998, Enron constructed a building in a rundown area of Las Vegas near E Sahara, right over the \"backbone\" of fiber optic cables providing service to technology companies nationwide. The location had the ability to send \"the entire Library of Congress anywhere in the world within minutes\" and could stream \"video to the whole state of California\". The location was also more protected from natural disasters than areas such as Los Angeles or the East Coast. According to \"Wall Street Daily\", \"Enron had a secret\", it \"wanted to trade bandwidth like it traded oil, gas, electricity, etc. It launched a secret plan to build an enormous amount of fiber optic transmission capacity in Las Vegas\u00a0... it was all part of Enron's plan to essentially own the internet.\" Enron sought to have all US internet service providers rely on their Nevada facility to supply bandwidth, which Enron would sell in a fashion similar to other commodities.\nIn January 2000, Kenneth Lay and Jeffrey Skilling announced to analysts that they were going to open trading for their own \"high-speed fiber-optic networks that form the backbone for Internet traffic\". Investors quickly bought Enron stock following the announcement \"as they did with most things Internet-related at the time\", with stock prices rising from $40 per share in January 2000 to $70 per share in March, peaking at $90 in the summer of 2000. Enron executives obtained windfall gains from the rising stock prices, with a total of $924 million of stocks sold by high-level Enron employees between 2000 and 2001. The head of Enron Broadband Services, Kenneth Rice, sold 1 million shares himself, earning about $70 million in returns. As prices of existing fiber optic cables plummeted due to the vast oversupply of the system, with only 5% of the 40 million miles being active wires, Enron purchased the inactive \"dark fibers\", expecting to buy them at low cost and then make a profit as the need for more usage by internet providers increased, with Enron expecting to lease its acquired dark fibers in 20-year contracts to providers. However, Enron's accounting would use estimates to determine how much their dark fiber would be worth when \"lit\" and apply those estimates to their current income, adding exaggerated revenue to their accounts since transactions were not yet made and it was not known if the cables would ever be active. Enron's trading with other energy companies within the broadband market was its attempt to lure large telecommunications companies, such as Verizon Communications, into its broadband scheme to create its own new market.\nBy the second quarter of 2001, Enron Broadband Services was reporting losses. On March 12, 2001, a proposed 20-year deal between Enron and Blockbuster Inc. to stream movies on demand over Enron's connections was canceled, with Enron shares dropping from $80 per share in mid-February 2001 to below $60 the week after the deal was killed. The branch of the company that Jeffrey Skilling \"said would eventually add $40 billion to Enron's stock value\" added only about $408 million in revenue for Enron in 2001, with the company's broadband arm closed shortly after its meager second-quarter earnings report in July 2001.\nFollowing the bankruptcy of Enron, telecommunications holdings were sold for \"pennies on the dollar\". In 2002, Rob Roy of Switch Communications purchased Enron's Nevada facility in an auction attended only by Roy. Enron's \"fiber plans were so secretive that few people even knew about the auction.\" The facility was sold for only $930,000. Following the sale, Switch expanded to control \"the biggest data center in the world\".\nOverseas expansion.\nEnron, seeing stability after the merger, began to look overseas for new possible energy opportunities in 1991. Enron's first such opportunity was a natural gas power plant utilizing cogeneration that the company built near Middlesbrough, UK. The power plant was so large it could produce up to 3% of the United Kingdom's electricity demand with a capacity of over 1,875 megawatts. Seeing the success in England, the company developed and diversified its assets worldwide under the name of Enron International (EI), headed by former HNG executive Rebecca Mark. By 1994, EI's portfolio included assets in The Philippines, Australia, Guatemala, Germany, France, India, Argentina, the Caribbean, China, England, Colombia, Turkey, Bolivia, Brazil, Indonesia, Norway, Poland, and Japan. The division was producing a large share of earnings for Enron, contributing 25% of earnings in 1996. Mark and EI believed the water industry was the next market to be deregulated by authorities. Seeing the potential, they searched for ways to enter the market, similar to PGE.\nDuring this period of growth, Enron introduced a new corporate identity on January 14, 1997, and from that point adopted their distinctive tricolor E logo. This logo was one of the final projects of legendary graphic designer Paul Rand before his death in 1996, and debuted almost three months after his departure.\nIn 1998, Enron International acquired Wessex Water for $2.88 billion. Wessex Water became the core asset of a new company, Azurix, which expanded to other water companies. After Azurix's promising IPO in June 1999, Enron \"sucked out over $1 billion in cash while loading it up with debt\", according to Bethany McLean and Peter Elkind, authors of \"\". Additionally, British water regulators required Wessex to cut its rates by 12% starting in April 2000, and an upgrade was required of the utility's aging infrastructure, estimated at costing over a billion dollars. By the end of 2000 Azurix had an operating profit of less than $100 million and was $2 billion in debt. In August 2000, after Azurix stock took a plunge following its earnings report, Mark resigned from Azurix and Enron. Azurix assets, including Wessex, were eventually sold by Enron.\nMisleading financial accounts.\nIn 1990, Enron's chief operating officer Jeffrey Skilling hired Andrew Fastow, who was well acquainted with the burgeoning deregulated energy market that Skilling wanted to exploit. In 1993, Fastow began establishing numerous limited liability special-purpose entities, a common business practice in the energy industry. However, it also allowed Enron to transfer some of its liabilities off its books, allowing it to maintain a robust and generally increasing stock price and thus keep its critical investment-grade credit ratings.\nEnron was originally involved in transmitting and distributing electricity and natural gas throughout the US. The company developed, built, and operated power plants and pipelines while dealing with rules of law and other infrastructures worldwide. Enron owned a large network of natural gas pipelines, which stretched coast to coast and border to border including Northern Natural Gas, Florida Gas Transmission, Transwestern Pipeline Company, and a partnership in Northern Border Pipeline from Canada. The states of California, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island had already passed power deregulation laws by July 1996, the time of Enron's proposal to acquire Portland General Electric corporation. During 1998, Enron began operations in the water sector, creating the Azurix Corporation, which it part-floated on the New York Stock Exchange during June 1999. Azurix failed to become successful in the water utility market, and one of its major concessions, in Buenos Aires, was a large-scale money-loser.\nEnron grew wealthy due largely to marketing, promoting power, and having a high stock price. Enron was named \"America's Most Innovative Company\" by \"Fortune\" for six consecutive years, from 1996 to 2001. It was on the \"Fortune\"'s \"100 Best Companies to Work for in America\" list during 2000, and had offices that were stunning in their opulence. Enron was hailed by many, including labor and the workforce, as an overall great company, praised for its large long-term pensions, benefits for its workers, and extremely effective management until the exposure of its corporate fraud. The first analyst to question the company's success story was Daniel Scotto, an energy market expert at BNP Paribas, who issued a note in August 2001 entitled \"Enron: All stressed up and no place to go\" which encouraged investors to sell Enron stocks, although he only changed his recommendation on the stock from \"buy\" to \"neutral\".\nAs was later discovered, many of Enron's recorded assets and profits were inflated, wholly fraudulent, or nonexistent. One example was in 1999 when Enron promised to repay Merrill Lynch's investment with interest to show a profit on its books. Debts and losses were put into entities formed offshore that were not included in the company's financial statements; other sophisticated and arcane financial transactions between Enron and related companies were used to eliminate unprofitable entities from the company's books.\nThe company's most valuable asset and the largest source of honest income, the 1930s-era Northern Natural Gas company, was eventually purchased by a group of Omaha investors who relocated its headquarters to their city; it is now a unit of Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Energy. NNG was established as collateral for a $2.5\u00a0billion capital infusion by Dynegy Corporation when Dynegy was planning to buy Enron. When Dynegy examined Enron's financial records carefully, they repudiated the deal and dismissed their CEO, Chuck Watson. The new chairman and CEO, the late Daniel Dienstbier, had been president of NNG and an Enron executive at one time and was forced out by Ken Lay. Dienstbier was an acquaintance of Warren Buffett. NNG continues to be profitable now.\n2001 accounting scandals.\nIn 2001, after a series of revelations involving irregular accounting procedures perpetrated throughout the 1990s involving Enron and its auditor Arthur Andersen that bordered on fraud, Enron filed for the then largest Chapter 11 bankruptcy in history (since surpassed by those of Worldcom during 2002 and Lehman Brothers during 2008), resulting in $11 billion in shareholder losses.\nAs the scandal progressed, Enron share prices decreased from US$90 during the summer of 2000, to just pennies. Enron's demise occurred after the revelation that much of its profit and revenue were the result of deals with special-purpose entities (limited partnerships which it controlled). This maneuver allowed many of Enron's debts and losses to disappear from its financial statements.\nEnron filed for bankruptcy on December 2, 2001. In addition, the scandal caused the dissolution of Arthur Andersen, which at the time was one of the Big Five of the world's accounting firms. The company was found guilty of obstruction of justice in 2002 for destroying documents related to the Enron audit. Since the SEC is not allowed to accept audits from convicted felons, Andersen was forced to stop auditing public companies. Although the conviction was dismissed in 2005 by the Supreme Court, the damage to the Andersen name has prevented it from recovering or reviving itself as a viable business even on a limited scale.\nEnron also withdrew a naming-rights deal with the Houston Astros Major League Baseball club for its new stadium, which was known formerly as Enron Field (now Daikin Park).\nAccounting practices.\nEnron used a variety of deceptive and fraudulent tactics and accounting practices to cover its fraud in reporting Enron's financial information. Special-purpose entities were created to mask significant liabilities from Enron's financial statements. These entities made Enron seem more profitable than it was, and created a dangerous spiral in which, each quarter, corporate officers would have to perform more and more financial deception to create the illusion of billions of dollars in profit while the company was actually losing money. This practice increased their stock price to new levels, at which point the executives began to work on insider information and trade millions of dollars' worth of Enron stock. The executives and insiders at Enron knew about the offshore accounts that were hiding losses for the company; the investors, however, did not. Chief Financial Officer Andrew Fastow directed the team that created the off-books companies and manipulated the deals to provide himself, his family, and his friends with hundreds of millions of dollars in guaranteed revenue, at the expense of the corporation for which he worked and its stockholders.\nIn 1999, Enron initiated EnronOnline, an Internet-based trading operation, which was used by virtually every energy company in the United States. By promoting the company's aggressive investment strategy, Enron's president and chief operating officer Jeffrey Skilling helped make Enron the biggest wholesaler of gas and electricity, trading over $27\u00a0billion per quarter. The corporation's financial claims, however, had to be accepted at face value. Under Skilling, Enron adopted mark-to-market accounting, in which anticipated future profits from any deal were tabulated as if currently real. Thus, Enron could record gains from what over time might turn out to be losses, as the company's fiscal health became secondary to manipulating its stock price during the so-called Tech boom. But when a company's success is measured by undocumented financial statements, actual balance sheets are inconvenient. Indeed, Enron's unscrupulous actions were often gambles to keep the deception going and so increase the stock price. An advancing price meant a continued infusion of investor capital on which debt-ridden Enron in large part subsisted (much like a financial \"pyramid\" or \"Ponzi scheme\"). Attempting to maintain the illusion, Skilling verbally attacked Wall Street analyst Richard Grubman, who questioned Enron's unusual accounting practice during a recorded conference telephone call. When Grubman complained that Enron was the only company that could not release a balance sheet along with its earnings statements, Skilling replied, \"Well, thank you very much, we appreciate that\u00a0... asshole.\" Though the comment was met with dismay and astonishment by press, Wall Street analysts and public, it became an inside joke among many Enron employees, mocking Grubman for his perceived meddling rather than Skilling's offensiveness.\nPost-bankruptcy.\nEnron initially planned to retain its three domestic pipeline companies as well as most of its overseas assets. However, before emerging from bankruptcy, Enron sold its domestic pipeline companies as CrossCountry Energy for $2.45 billion and later sold other assets to Vulcan Capital Management.\nEnron sold its last business, Prisma Energy, during 2006, leaving Enron asset-less. During early 2007, its name was changed to Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation. Its goal was to repay the old Enron's remaining creditors and end Enron's affairs. In December 2008, it was announced that Enron's creditors would receive $7.2 billion from the company's liquidation (approximately 17 percent of the debts owed by the company). After Citigroup and JP Morgan Chase were sued for their role in abetting Enron's practices with loans, the two companies agreed to give billions of dollars to Enron's creditors. By May 2011, $21.8 billion had been distributed to the creditors, totaling 53 percent of Enron's debts at the time of bankruptcy. Enron Creditors Recovery Corporation was ultimately dissolved on November 28, 2016.\nAzurix, the former water utility part of the company, remains under Enron ownership, although it is currently asset-less. It is involved in several litigations against the government of Argentina claiming compensation relating to the negligence and corruption of the local governance during its management of the Buenos Aires water concession in 1999, which resulted in substantial amounts of debt (approx. $620\u00a0million) and the eventual collapse of the branch.\nSoon after emerging from bankruptcy in November 2004, Enron's new board of directors sued 11 financial institutions for helping Lay, Fastow, Skilling, and others hide Enron's true financial condition. The proceedings were dubbed the \"megaclaims litigation\". Among the defendants were Royal Bank of Scotland, Deutsche Bank and Citigroup. As of 2008[ [update]], Enron has settled with all of the institutions, ending with Citigroup. Enron was able to obtain nearly $7.2 billion to distribute to its creditors as a result of the megaclaims litigation. As of December 2009, some claim and process payments were still being distributed.\nEnron has been featured since its bankruptcy in popular culture, including in \"The Simpsons\" episodes \"That '90s Show\" (Homer buys Enron stock while Marge chooses to keep her own Microsoft shares) and \"Special Edna\", which features a scene of an Enron-themed amusement park ride. The 2007 film \"Bee Movie\" also featured a joke reference to a parody company of Enron called \"Honron\" (a play on the words honey and Enron). The 2003 documentary \"The Corporation\" made frequent references to Enron post-bankruptcy, calling the company a \"bad apple\".\nInsider trading scandal.\nPeak and decline of stock price.\nIn August 2000, Enron's stock price attained its greatest value, closing at $90 on the 23rd. At this time, Enron executives, who possessed inside information on the hidden losses, began to sell their stock. At the same time, the general public and Enron's investors were told to buy the stock. Executives told the investors that the stock would continue to increase until it attained possibly the $130 to $140 range, while secretly unloading their shares.\nAs executives sold their shares, the price began to decrease. Investors were told to continue buying stock or hold steady if they already owned Enron because the stock price would rebound shortly. Kenneth Lay's strategy for responding to Enron's continuing problems was his demeanor. As he did many times, Lay would issue a statement or make an appearance to calm investors and assure them that Enron was doing well. In March 2001 an article by Bethany McLean appeared in \"Fortune\" magazine noting that no one understood how the company made money and questioning whether Enron stock was overvalued.\nBy August 15, 2001, Enron's stock price had decreased to $42. Many of the investors still trusted Lay and believed that Enron would rule the market. They continued to buy or retain their stock as the equity value decreased. As October ended, the stock had decreased to $15. Many considered this a great opportunity to buy Enron stock because of what Lay had been telling them in the media.\nLay was accused of selling more than $70 million worth of stock at this time, which he used to repay cash advances on lines of credit. He sold another $29 million worth of stock in the open market. Also, Lay's wife, Linda, was accused of selling 500,000 shares of Enron stock totaling $1.2\u00a0million on November 28, 2001. The money earned from this sale did not go to the family but rather to charitable organizations, which had already received pledges of contributions from the foundation. Records show that Mrs. Lay made the sale order sometime between 10:00 and 10:20\u00a0am. News of Enron's problems, including the millions of dollars in losses they hid, became public about 10:30 that morning, and the stock price soon decreased to less than one dollar.\nFormer Enron executive Paula Rieker was charged with criminal insider trading and sentenced to two years' probation. Rieker obtained 18,380 Enron shares for $15.51 a share. She sold that stock for $49.77 a share in July 2001, a week before the public was told what she already knew about the $102\u00a0million loss. In 2002, after the tumultuous fall of Enron's external auditor, and management consultant, Andersen LLP, former Andersen Director, John M. Cunningham coined the phrase, \"We have all been Enroned.\"\nThe fallout resulted in both Lay and Skilling being convicted of conspiracy, fraud, and insider trading. Lay died before sentencing, Skilling got 24 years and 4 months and a $45 million penalty (later reduced). Fastow was sentenced to six years of jail time, and Lou Pai settled out of court for $31.5 million.\nCalifornia's deregulation and subsequent energy crisis.\nIn October 2000, Daniel Scotto, the most renowned utility analyst on Wall Street, suspended his ratings on all energy companies conducting business in California because of the possibility that the companies would not receive full and adequate compensation for the deferred energy accounts used as the basis for the California Deregulation Plan enacted during the late 1990s. Five months later, Pacific Gas &amp; Electric (PG&amp;E) was forced into bankruptcy. Republican Senator Phil Gramm, husband of Enron Board member Wendy Gramm and also the second-largest recipient of campaign contributions from Enron, succeeded in legislating California's energy commodity trading deregulation. Despite warnings from prominent consumer groups which stated that this law would give energy traders too much influence over energy commodity prices, the legislation was passed in December 2000.\nAs the periodical Public Citizen reported:Because of Enron's new, unregulated power auction, the company's \"Wholesale Services\" revenues quadrupled \u2013 from $12\u00a0billion in the first quarter of 2000 to $48.4\u00a0billion in the first quarter of 2001.After the passage of the deregulation law, California had a total of 38 Stage 3 rolling blackouts declared, until federal regulators intervened in June 2001. These blackouts occurred as a result of a poorly designed market system that was manipulated by traders and marketers, as well as from poor state management and regulatory oversight. Subsequently, Enron traders were revealed as intentionally encouraging the removal of power from the market during California's energy crisis by encouraging suppliers to shut down plants to perform unnecessary maintenance, as documented in recordings made at the time. These acts contributed to the need for rolling blackouts, which adversely affected many businesses dependent upon a reliable supply of electricity, and inconvenienced a large number of retail customers. This scattered supply increased the price, and Enron traders were thus able to sell power at premium prices, sometimes up to a factor of 20 times its normal peak value.\nThe callousness of the traders' attitude toward ratepayers was documented in an evidence tape of a conversation regarding the matter, and sarcastically referencing the confusion of retiree voters in Florida's Miami-Dade County in the November 2000, presidential election.\n\"They're fucking taking all the money back from you guys? All the money you guys stole from those poor grandmothers in California?\"\n\"Yeah, Grandma Millie man. But she's the one who couldn't figure out how to fucking vote on the butterfly ballot.\" (Laughing from both sides.)\n\"Yeah, now she wants her fucking money back for all the power you've charged right up, jammed right up her ass for fucking $250 a megawatt-hour.\"\nThe traders had been discussing the efforts of the Snohomish PUD in Northwestern Washington state to recover the massive overcharges that Enron had engineered. Morgan Stanley, which had taken Enron's place in the lawsuit, fought the release of the documents that the PUD had sought to make its case, but were being withheld by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.\nProducts.\nEnron traded in more than 30 different products, including oil and LNG transportation, broadband, principal investments, risk management for commodities, shipping / freight, streaming media, and water and wastewater. Products traded on EnronOnline in particular included petrochemicals, plastics, power, pulp and paper, steel, and weather risk management. Enron was also an extensive futures trader, including sugar, coffee, grains, hogs, and other meat futures. At the time of its bankruptcy filing in December 2001, Enron was structured into seven distinct business units.\nCapital and risk management services.\nProject development and management services.\nEnron manufactured gas valves, circuit breakers, thermostats, and electrical equipment in Venezuela using INSELA SA, a 50\u201350 joint venture with General Electric. Enron owned three paper and pulp products companies: Garden State Paper, a newsprint mill; as well as Papiers Stadacona and St. Aurelie Timberlands. Enron had a controlling stake in the Louisiana-based petroleum exploration and production company Mariner Energy.\nEnronOnline.\nEnron opened EnronOnline, an electronic trading platform for energy commodities, on November 29, 1999. Conceptualized by the company's European Gas Trading team, it was the first web-based transaction system that allowed buyers and sellers to buy, sell, and trade commodity products globally. It allowed users to do business only with Enron. The site allowed Enron to transact with participants in the global energy markets. The main commodities offered on EnronOnline were natural gas and electricity, although there were 500 other products including credit derivatives, bankruptcy swaps, pulp, gas, plastics, paper, steel, metals, freight, and TV commercial time. At its maximum, more than $6 billion worth of commodities were transacted using EnronOnline every day, but specialists questioned how Enron reported trades and calculated its profits, saying that the same fraudulent accounting that was rampant at Enron's other operations may have been used in trading.\nAfter Enron's bankruptcy in late 2001, EnronOnline was sold to the Swiss financial giant UBS. Within a year, UBS abandoned its efforts to relaunch the division and closed it in November 2002.\nEnron International.\nEnron International (EI) was Enron's wholesale asset development and asset management business. Its primary emphasis was developing and building natural gas power plants outside North America. Enron Engineering and Construction Company (EECC) was a wholly owned subsidiary of Enron International and built almost all of Enron International's power plants. Unlike other business units of Enron, Enron International had a strong cash flow at the bankruptcy filing. Enron International consisted of all of Enron's foreign power projects, including ones in Europe.\nThe company's Teesside plant was one of the largest gas-fired power stations in the world, built and operated by Enron from 1989, and produced 3 percent of the United Kingdom's energy needs. Enron owned half of the plant's equity, with the remaining 50 percent split between four regional electricity companies.\nManagement.\nRebecca Mark was the CEO of Enron International until she resigned to manage Enron's newly acquired water business, Azurix, in 1997. Mark had a major role in the development of the Dabhol project in India, Enron's largest international endeavor.\nProjects.\nEnron International constructed power plants and pipelines across the globe. Some are presently still operating, including the massive Teesside plant in England. Others, like a barge-mounted plant off Puerto Plata in the Dominican Republic, cost Enron money through lawsuits and investment losses. Puerto Plata was a barge-mounted power plant next to the hotel \"Hotelero del Atlantico\". When the plant was activated, winds blew soot from the plant onto the hotel guests' meals, blackening their food. The winds also blew garbage from nearby slums into the plant's water-intake system. For some time the only solution was to hire men who would row out and push the garbage away with their paddles. Through mid-2000 the company collected a paltry $3.5\u00a0million from a $95\u00a0million investment. Enron also had other investment projects in Europe, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Mexico, Jamaica, Venezuela, elsewhere in South America and across the Caribbean.\nIndia.\nAround 1992 Indian experts came to the United States to find energy investors to help with India's energy shortage problems. During December 1993, Enron finalized a 20-year power-purchase contract with the Maharashtra State Electricity Board. The contract allowed Enron to construct a massive 2,015 megawatt power plant on a remote volcanic bluff south of Mumbai through a two-phase project called Dabhol Power Station. Construction would be completed in two phases, and Enron would form the Dabhol Power Company to help manage the plant. The power project was the first step in a $20\u00a0billion scheme to help rebuild and stabilize India's power grid. Enron, GE (which was selling turbines to the project), and Bechtel (which was constructing the plant), each contributed 10% equity with the remaining 90% covered by the MSEB \nIn 1996, when India's Congress Party was no longer in power, the Indian government assessed the project as being excessively expensive, refused to pay for the plant, and stopped construction. The MSEB was required by contract to continue to pay Enron plant maintenance charges, even if no power was purchased from the plant. The MSEB determined that it could not afford to purchase the power (at Rs. 8 per unit kWh) charged by Enron. The plant operator was unable to find alternate customers for Dabhol power due to the absence of a free market in the regulated structure of utilities in India.\nBy 2000, the Dabhol plant was almost complete and Phase 1 had begun producing power. Enron as a whole, however, was heavily overextended, and in the summer of that year Mark and all the key executives at Enron International were asked to resign from Enron to reshape the company and get rid of asset businesses. Shortly thereafter a payment dispute with MSEB ensued, and Enron issued a stop-work order on the plant in June 2001. From 1996 until Enron's bankruptcy in 2001 the company tried to revive the project and revive interest in India's need for the power plant without success. By December 2001 the Enron scandal and bankruptcy cut short any opportunity to revive the construction and complete the plant. In 2005, an Indian government-run company, Ratnagiri Gas and Power, was set up to finish construction on the Dabhol facility and operate the plant.\nProject summer.\nDuring the summer of 2001, Enron attempted to sell several of Enron International's assets, many of which were not sold. The public and media believed it was unknown why Enron wanted to sell these assets, suspecting it was because Enron needed cash. Employees who worked with company assets were told in 2000 that Jeff Skilling believed that business assets were an outdated means of a company's worth, and instead he wanted to build a company based on \"intellectual assets\".\nEnron Global Exploration &amp; Production, Inc..\nEnron Global Exploration &amp; Production Inc. (EGEP) was an Enron subsidiary that was born from the split of domestic assets via EOG Resources (formerly Enron Oil and Gas EOG) and international assets via EGEP (formerly Enron Oil and Gas Int'l, Ltd EOGIL). \nAmong the EGEP assets were the Panna-Mukta and the South Tapti fields, discovered by the Indian state-owned Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), which operated the fields initially.\nDecember 1994, a joint venture began between ONGC (40%), Enron (30%) and Reliance (30%).\nMid-year of 2002, British Gas (BG) completed the acquisition of EGEP's 30% share of the Panna-Mukta and Tapti fields for $350 million, a few months before Enron filed bankruptcy.\nEnron Prize for Distinguished Public Service.\nDuring the mid-1990s, Enron established an endowment for the Enron Prize for Distinguished Public Service, awarded by Rice University's Baker Institute to \"recognize outstanding individuals for their contributions to public service\". Recipients were:\nGreenspan, because of his position as the Fed chairman, was not at liberty to accept the $10,000 honorarium, the $15,000 sculpture, nor the crystal trophy, but only accepted the \"honor\" of being named an Enron Prize recipient. The situation was further complicated because a few days earlier, Enron had filed paperwork admitting it had falsified financial statements for five years. Greenspan did not mention Enron a single time during his speech. At the ceremony, Ken Lay stated, \"I'm looking forward to our first woman recipient.\" The next morning, it was reported in the \"Houston Chronicle\" that no decision had been made on whether the name of the prize would be changed. 19 days after the prize was awarded to Greenspan, Enron declared bankruptcy.\nIn early 2002, Enron was awarded MIT's (in)famous Ig Nobel Prize for \"Most Creative Use of Imaginary Numbers\". The various former members of the Enron management team all refused to accept the award in person, although no reason was given at the time.\n\"Women of Enron\".\nIn 2002, the \"Playboy\" magazine featured a nude pictorial \"Women of Enron\", with ten former and contemporary Enron female employees. The women said they posed for the fun and to earn some money.\n2024 satirical reboot and meme coin.\nOn December 2, 2024, a new tweet was posted on the @Enron X account. The tweet had the caption \"We're back. Can we talk?\", along with a promotional video. Viewers also noticed that the website enron.com was also functional. The replies alleged a potential cryptocurrency scam, but others pointed to the new terms of service including a clause explicitly stating that the content on the website was parody protected under the First Amendment. Many pointed out that this was likely a joke, as the domain seemed to be registered by Peter McIndoe, a performance artist and founder of Birds Aren't Real. Additionally, the rights to the Enron name had been purchased at auction by The College Company for $275 in 2020. On December 9, it was announced that the CEO of Enron was Connor Gaydos, another cofounder of The College Company and Birds Aren't Real. It was also announced that Enron planned to hold a new \"Enron Power Summit\" on January 6, 2025. On December 12, the Twitter page @Pubity posted video of Gaydos being pied in the face. Many viewers quickly assumed the incident was staged, and it may have been a parody of an incident when Jeff Skilling was pied in the face by a California woman.\nOn January 6, 2025, Enron announced the Enron Egg, its first new product in 20 years. Gaydos claimed that the product was a micro nuclear reactor capable of powering a suburban home for 10 years using 20% enriched uranium in the form of uranium zirconium hydride. The announcement supposedly took place at the previously announced \"Enron Power Summit,\" but the \"Houston Chronicle\" was unable to confirm that such an event actually took place.\nOn February 4, 2025, Enron launched a crypto token named $ENRON on the Solana blockchain as part of its satire, at one point trading with a market capitalization of $700 million before the price fell at least 76% within 24 hours of launch.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10168", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10168", "title": "Eusebius of Alexandria", "text": "Byzantine writer\nEusebius of Alexandria () was a 6th-century Christian author to whom certain extant homilies are attributed.\nBiography.\nThere has been much dispute regarding the details of his life and the age in which he lived. Galland (Vet. Patr. Biblioth., VIII, 23) says: \"de Eusebio qui vulgo dicitur episcopus Alexandr\u00e6 incerta omnia\" (Concerning Eusebius, commonly called bishop of Alexandria there is nothing sure). His writings have been attributed to Eusebius of Emesa, Eusebius of C\u00e6sarea, and others. According to an old biography said to have been written by his notary, the monk John, and discovered by Cardinal Mai, he lived in the fifth century and led a monastic life near Alexandria. The fame of his virtues attracted the attention of Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, who visited him with his clergy, and in 444, when dying, had him elected his successor, and consecrated him bishop, though much against his will. Eusebius displayed great zeal in the exercise of his office and did much good by his preaching. Among those he converted was a certain Alexander, a man of senatorial rank. After having ruled his see for seven or, according to another account, for twenty years, he made Alexander his successor and retired to the desert, whence Cyril had summoned him and there died in the odor of sanctity.\nWhile Mai seems to have established the existence of a Eusebius of Alexandria who lived in the fifth century, it had been objected than neither the name of Eusebius or his successor Alexander, appears in the list of the occupants of that ancient see. Dioscurus is mentioned as the immediate successor of Cyril. Nor does the style of the homilies seem on the whole in keeping with the age of Cyril. It may be noted, however, that the biographer of Eusebius expressly states that the Cyril in question is the great opponent of Nestorius. Various solution of the difficulty have been proposed. Thilo thinks that the authorship of the homilies is to be assigned either to a certain monk \u2013 one of four brothers of the fifth century, or to a presbyter and court chaplain of Justinian I, who took an active part in the theological strifes of the sixth century. Mai suggests that after the death of Cyril, there were two bishops at Alexandria, Dioscurus, the Monophysite leader, and Eusebius, the head of the Catholic party. The homilies cover a variety of subjects, and the author is one of the earliest patristic witnesses to the doctrine regarding the descent of Christ into Hell. A list of homilies with the complete text is given by Mai. They may also be found in Migne, which was published with an introduction by Rand in \"Modern Philology\", II, 261.\nWorks.\nThe homilies attributed to Eusebius of Alexandria enjoyed some renown in the Eastern Church in the sixth and seventh centuries.\nThe discourses belong probably to the fifth or sixth century, and possibly originated in Alexandria. They deal with the life of Jesus of Nazareth and with questions of ecclesiastical life and practice. Their literary character is not quite clear; while most of them are adapted for public delivery, many are written in the style of ecclesiastical pronouncements.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10169", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10169", "title": "Eusebius of Angers", "text": "Bishop of Angers (died 1081)\nEusebius (Bruno) of Angers (died September 1, 1081) was bishop of Angers, France.\nHe first appears in the historical record as bishop of Angers at the synod of Rheims in 1049, and for a long time had been an adherent of Berengar's doctrine of the Lord's Supper. As such he was highly regarded by Berengar himself and by his opponents Theodwin of Li\u00e8ge, Durand of Troarne, and Humbert of Mourmoutiers. But when he recognized the strength of the opposition, he favored a compromise; at any rate he advised Berengar is 1054 to swear to the formula presented to him.\nNevertheless, Berengar considered him his friend many years later and requested him to silence a certain Galfrid Martini or to arrange a disputation. In his reply Eusebius not only regretted the whole controversy, but also stated that he would abide by the words of the Bible, according to which the bread and wine after the consecration become the body and blood of the Lord (see transubstantiation); if one asks how this can take place, the answer must be that it is not according to the order of nature but in accordance with the divine omnipotence; at any rate one must be careful not to give offense to the plain Christian. The epistle is a downright renunciation of Berengar in case he should still maintain his view.\nIn favor of the supposition that Eusebius changed his opinion from deference to the Count of Anjou, the decided opponent of Berengar and his doctrine, it can be adduced that he did not defend Berengar against the hostilities of the court, and that for a long time he sided with this violent prince. It is also possible that the fact impressed itself upon Eusebius that the religious consciousness of the time more and more opposed Berengar. Our knowledge, however, is too fragmentary to pass a very accurate sentence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10172", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10172", "title": "Eusebius", "text": "Greek Christian bishop and scholar who wrote in Latin (c. 260 \u2013 339)\nEusebius of Caesarea (c.\u2009AD 260/265\u00a0\u2013 30 May AD 339), also known as Eusebius Pamphilius, was a historian of Christianity, exegete, and Christian polemicist from the Roman province of Syria Palaestina. In about AD 314 he became the bishop of Caesarea Maritima.\nTogether with Pamphilus, Eusebius was a scholar of the biblical canon and is regarded as one of the most learned Christians during late antiquity. He wrote the \"Demonstrations of the Gospel\", \"Preparations for the Gospel\" and \"On Discrepancies between the Gospels\", studies of the biblical text. His work \"Onomasticon\" is an early geographical lexicon of places in the Holy Land mentioned in the Bible. As \"Father of Church History\" (not to be confused with the title of Church Father), he produced the \"Ecclesiastical History\", \"On the Life of Pamphilus\", the \"Chronicle\" and \"On the Martyrs\". He also produced a biographical work on Constantine the Great, the first Christian Roman emperor, who was \"Augustus\" between AD 306 and AD 337.\nSources.\nLittle is known about the life of Eusebius. His successor at the See of Caesarea, Acacius, wrote a \"Life of Eusebius\", a work that has since been lost. Eusebius's own surviving works probably only represent a small portion of his total output. Beyond notices in his extant writings, the major sources are the 5th-century ecclesiastical historians Socrates, Sozomen, and Theodoret, and the 4th-century Christian author Jerome. There are assorted notices of his activities in the writings of his contemporaries Athanasius, Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Alexander of Alexandria. Eusebius's pupil, Eusebius of Emesa, provides some incidental information.\nEarly life.\nMost scholars date the birth of Eusebius to some point between AD 260 and 265. He was most likely born in or around Caesarea Maritima. Nothing is known about his parents. He was baptized and instructed in the city, and lived in Syria Palaestina in 296, when Diocletian's army passed through the region (in the \"Life of Constantine\", Eusebius recalls seeing Constantine traveling with the army).\nEusebius was made presbyter by Agapius of Caesarea. Some, like theologian and ecclesiastical historian John Henry Newman, understand Eusebius's statement that he had heard Dorotheus of Tyre \"expound the Scriptures wisely in the Church\" to indicate that Eusebius was Dorotheus's pupil while the priest was resident in Antioch; others, like the scholar D. S. Wallace-Hadrill, deem the phrase too ambiguous to support the contention.\nThrough the activities of the theologian Origen (185/6\u2013254) and the school of his follower Pamphilus (later 3rd century \u2013 309), Caesarea became a center of Christian learning. Origen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information, or which churches were using which gospels, regarding the texts which became the New Testament. The information used to create the late-fourth-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the \"Ecclesiastical History\" [HE] of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen's list at HE 6:25. Eusebius got his information about what texts were accepted by the third-century churches throughout the known world, a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.\nOn his deathbed, Origen had made a bequest of his private library to the Christian community in the city. Together with the books of his patron Ambrosius, Origen's library (including the original manuscripts of his works) formed the core of the collection that Pamphilus established. Pamphilus also managed a school that was similar to (or perhaps a re-establishment of) that of Origen. He was compared to Demetrius of Phalerum\u2014as well as to another (evidently, learn\u00e8d) scholar by the name of \"Pisistratus\"\u2014for Pamphilus had gathered Bibles \"from all parts of the world\". Like his model Origen, Pamphilus maintained close contact with his students. Eusebius, in his history of the persecutions, alludes to the fact that many of the Caesarean martyrs lived together, presumably under Pamphilus.\nSoon after Pamphilus settled in Caesarea (c. 280s), he began teaching Eusebius, who was then somewhere between twenty and twenty-five. Because of his close relationship with his schoolmaster, Eusebius was sometimes called \"Eusebius Pamphili\": \"Eusebius, son of Pamphilus\". The name may also indicate that Eusebius was made Pamphilus' heir. Pamphilus gave Eusebius a strong admiration for the thought of Origen. Neither Pamphilus nor Eusebius knew Origen personally; Pamphilus probably picked up Origenist ideas during his studies under Pierius (nicknamed \"Origen Junior\") in Alexandria.\nEusebius's \"Preparation for the Gospel\" bears witness to the literary tastes of Origen: Eusebius quotes no comedy, tragedy, or lyric poetry, but makes reference to all the works of Plato and to an extensive range of later philosophic works, largely from Middle Platonists from Philo to the late 2nd century. Whatever its secular contents, the primary aim of Origen and Pamphilus's school was to promote sacred learning. The library's biblical and theological contents were more impressive: Origen's \"Hexapla\" and \"Tetrapla\"; a copy of the original Aramaic version of the Gospel of Matthew; and many of Origen's own writings. Marginal comments in extant manuscripts note that Pamphilus and his friends and pupils, including Eusebius, corrected and revised much of the biblical text in their library. Their efforts made the hexaplaric Septuagint text increasingly popular in Syria and Palestine. Soon after joining Pamphilus's school, Eusebius started helping his master expand the library's collections and broaden access to its resources. At about this time Eusebius compiled a \"Collection of Ancient Martyrdoms\", presumably for use as a general reference tool.\nIn the 290s, Eusebius began work on his most important work, the \"Ecclesiastical History\", a narrative history of the Church and Christian community from the Apostolic Age to Eusebius's own time. At about the same time, he worked on his \"Chronicle\", a universal calendar of events from the Creation to, again, Eusebius's own time. He completed the first editions of the \"Ecclesiastical History\" and \"Chronicle\" before 300.\nBishop of Caesarea.\nEusebius succeeded Agapius as Bishop of Caesarea soon after 313 and was called on by Arius who had been excommunicated by his bishop Alexander of Alexandria. An episcopal council in Caesarea pronounced Arius blameless. Eusebius enjoyed the favor of the Emperor Constantine. Because of this he was called upon to present the creed of his own church to the 318 attendees of the Council of Nicaea in 325. However, the anti-Arian creed from Palestine prevailed, becoming the basis for the Nicene Creed.\nThe theological views of Arius, that taught the subordination of the Son to the Father, continued to be controversial. Eustathius of Antioch strongly opposed the growing influence of Origen's theology as the root of Arianism. Eusebius, an admirer of Origen, was reproached by Eustathius for deviating from the Nicene faith. Eusebius prevailed and Eustathius was deposed at a synod in Antioch.\nHowever, Athanasius of Alexandria became a more powerful opponent and in 334 he was summoned before a synod in Caesarea (which he refused to attend). In the following year, he was again summoned before a synod in Tyre at which Eusebius of Caesarea presided. Athanasius, foreseeing the result, went to Constantinople to bring his cause before the Emperor. Constantine called the bishops to his court, among them Eusebius. Athanasius was condemned and exiled at the end of 335. Eusebius remained in the Emperor's favour throughout this time and more than once was exonerated with the explicit approval of the Emperor Constantine. After the Emperor's death (c.\u2009337), Eusebius wrote the \"Life of Constantine\", an important historical work because of eyewitness accounts and the use of primary sources.\nWorks.\nOf the extensive literary activity of Eusebius, a relatively large portion has been preserved. Although posterity suspected him of Arianism, Eusebius had made himself indispensable by his method of authorship; his comprehensive and careful excerpts from original sources saved his successors the painstaking labor of original research. Hence, much has been preserved, quoted by Eusebius, which otherwise would have been lost.\nThe literary productions of Eusebius reflect on the whole the course of his life. At first, he occupied himself with works on biblical criticism under the influence of Pamphilus and probably of Dorotheus of Tyre of the School of Antioch. Afterward, the persecutions under Diocletian and Galerius directed his attention to the martyrs of his own time and the past, and this led him to the history of the whole Church and finally to the history of the world, which, to him, was only a preparation for ecclesiastical history.\nThen followed the time of the Arian controversies, and dogmatic questions came into the foreground. Christianity at last found recognition by the State; and this brought new problems \u2013 apologies of a different sort had to be prepared. Lastly, Eusebius wrote eulogies in praise of Constantine. To all this activity must be added numerous writings of a miscellaneous nature, addresses, letters, and the like, and exegetical works that extended over the whole of his life and that include both commentaries and an important treatise on the location of biblical place names and the distances between these cities.\nBiblical text criticism.\nPamphilus and Eusebius occupied themselves with the textual criticism of the Septuagint text of the Old Testament and especially of the New Testament. An edition of the Septuagint seems to have been already prepared by Origen, which, according to Jerome, was revised and circulated by Eusebius and Pamphilus. For an easier survey of the material of the four Evangelists, Eusebius divided his edition of the New Testament into paragraphs and provided it with a synoptical table so that it might be easier to find the pericopes that belong together. These canon tables or \"Eusebian canons\" remained in use throughout the Middle Ages, and illuminated manuscript versions are important for the study of early medieval art, as they are the most elaborately decorated pages of many Gospel books. Eusebius detailed in \"Epistula ad Carpianum\" how to use his canons.\n\"Chronicle\".\nThe \"Chronicle\" ( (\"Pantodape historia\")) is divided into two parts. The first part, the \"Chronography\" ( (\"Chronographia\")), gives an epitome of universal history from the sources, arranged according to nations. The second part, the \"Canons\" ( (\"Chronikoi kanones\")), furnishes a synchronism of the historical material in parallel columns, the equivalent of a parallel timeline.\nThe work as a whole has been lost in the original Greek, but it may be reconstructed from later chronographists of the Byzantine school who made excerpts from the work, especially George Syncellus. The tables of the second part have been completely preserved in a Latin translation by Jerome, and both parts are still extant in an Armenian translation. The loss of the Greek originals has given the Armenian translation a special importance; thus, the first part of Eusebius's \"Chronicle\", of which only a few fragments exist in Greek, has been preserved entirely in Armenian, though with lacunae. The \"Chronicle\" as preserved extends to the year 325.\n\"Church History\".\nIn his \"Church History\" or \"Ecclesiastical History\", Eusebius wrote the second surviving history of the Christian Church as a chronologically ordered account, based on earlier sources, complete from the period of the Apostles to his own epoch. The time scheme correlated the history with the reigns of the Roman Emperors, and the scope was broad. Included were the bishops and other teachers of the Church, Christian relations with the Jews and those deemed heretical, and the Christian martyrs through 324. Although its accuracy and biases have been questioned, it remains an important source on the early church due to Eusebius's access to materials now lost.\n\"Life of Constantine\".\nEusebius's \"Life of Constantine\" (\"Vita Constantini\") is a eulogy or panegyric, and therefore its style and selection of facts are affected by its purpose, rendering it inadequate as a continuation of the \"Church History.\" As the historian Socrates Scholasticus said, at the opening of his history which was designed as a continuation of Eusebius, \"Also in writing the life of Constantine, this same author has but slightly treated of matters regarding Arius, being more intent on the rhetorical finish of his composition and the praises of the emperor than on an accurate statement of facts.\" The work was unfinished at Eusebius's death. Some scholars have questioned the Eusebian authorship of this work. \nConversion of Constantine according to Eusebius.\nWriting after Constantine had died, Eusebius claimed that the emperor himself had recounted to him that some time between the death of his father \u2013 the \"augustus\" Constantius \u2013 and his final battle against his rival Maxentius as \"augustus\" in the West, Constantine experienced a vision in which he and his soldiers beheld a Christian symbol, \"a cross-shaped trophy formed from light\", above the sun at midday. Attached to the symbol was the phrase \"by this conquer\" (), a phrase often rendered into Latin as \"in hoc signo vinces\". In a dream that night \"the Christ of God appeared to him with the sign which had appeared in the sky, and urged him to make himself a copy of the sign which had appeared in the sky, and to use this as a protection against the attacks of the enemy.\" Eusebius relates that this happened \"on a campaign he [Constantine] was conducting somewhere\". It is unclear from Eusebius's description whether the shields were marked with a Christian cross or with a \"chi-rho\", a staurogram, or another similar symbol.\nThe Latin text \"De mortibus persecutorum\" contains an early account of the 28 October 312 Battle of the Milvian Bridge written by Lactantius probably in 313, the year following the battle. Lactantius does not mention a vision in the sky but describes a revelatory dream on the eve of battle. Eusebius's work of that time, his \"Church History\", also makes no mention of the vision. The Arch of Constantine, constructed in AD 315, neither depicts a vision nor any Christian insignia in its depiction of the battle. In his posthumous biography of Constantine, Eusebius agrees with Lactantius that Constantine received instructions in a dream to apply a Christian symbol as a device to his soldiers' shields, but unlike Lactantius and subsequent Christian tradition, Eusebius does not date the events to October 312 and does not connect Constantine's vision and dream-vision with the Battle of the Milvian Bridge.\nMinor historical works.\nBefore he compiled his church history, Eusebius edited a collection of martyrdoms of the earlier period and a biography of Pamphilus. The martyrology has not survived as a whole, but it has been preserved almost completely in parts. It contained:\nOf the life of Pamphilus, only a fragment survives. A work on the martyrs of Palestine in the time of Diocletian was composed after 311; numerous fragments are scattered in legendaries which have yet to be collected. The life of Constantine was compiled after the death of the emperor and the election of his sons as Augusti (337). It is more a rhetorical eulogy on the emperor than a history but is of great value on account of numerous documents incorporated into it.\nApologetic and dogmatic works.\nTo the class of apologetic and dogmatic works belong:\nA number of writings, belonging in this category, have been entirely lost.\nExegetical and miscellaneous works.\nAll of the exegetical works of Eusebius have suffered damage in transmission. The majority of them are known to us only from long portions quoted in Byzantine catena-commentaries. However these portions are very extensive. Extant are:\nEusebius also wrote a work ', \"On the Differences of the Gospels\" (including solutions). This was written for the purpose of harmonizing the contradictions in the reports of the different Evangelists. This work was recently (2011) translated into the English language by David J. Miller and Adam C. McCollum and was published under the name \"Eusebius of Caesarea: Gospel Problems and Solutions\". The original work was also translated into Syriac, and lengthy quotations exist in a \"catena\" in that language, and also in Arabic catenas.\nEusebius also wrote treatises on the biblical past; these three treatises have been lost. They were:\nThe addresses and sermons of Eusebius are mostly lost, but some have been preserved, e.g., a sermon on the consecration of the church in Tyre and an address on the thirtieth anniversary of the reign of Constantine (336).\nMost of Eusebius's letters are lost. His letters to Carpianus and Flacillus exist complete. Fragments of a letter to the empress Constantia also exists.\nDoctrine.\nEusebius is fairly unusual in his preterist, or fulfilled, eschatological view. Saying \"the Holy Scriptures foretell that there will be unmistakable signs of the Coming of Christ. Now there were among the Hebrews three outstanding offices of dignity, which made the nation famous, firstly the kingship, secondly that of prophet, and lastly the high priesthood. The prophecies said that the abolition and complete destruction of all these three together would be the sign of the presence of the Christ. And that the proofs that the times had come, would lie in the ceasing of the Mosaic worship, the desolation of Jerusalem and its Temple, and the subjection of the whole Jewish race to its enemies. ...The holy oracles foretold that all these changes, which had not been made in the days of the prophets of old, would take place at the coming of the Christ, which I will presently shew to have been fulfilled as never before in accordance with the predictions\" (\"Demonstratio Evangelica\" VIII).\nFrom a dogmatic point of view, Eusebius is related in his views to Origen. Like Origen, he started from the fundamental thought of the absolute sovereignty (\"monarchia\") of God. God is the cause of all beings. But he is not merely a cause; in him everything good is included, from him all life originates, and he is the source of all virtue. God sent Christ into the world that it may partake of the blessings included in the essence of God. Eusebius expressly distinguishes the Son as distinct from Father as a ray is also distinct from its source the sun.\nEusebius held that men were sinners by their own free choice and not by the necessity of their natures. Eusebius said:\nThe Creator of all things has impressed a natural law upon the soul of every man, as an assistant and ally in his conduct, pointing out to him the right way by this law; but, by the free liberty with which he is endowed, making the choice of what is best worthy of praise and acceptance, he has acted rightly, not by force, but from his own free-will, when he had it in his power to act otherwise, As, again, making him who chooses what is worst, deserving of blame and punishment, because he has by his own motion neglected the natural law, and becoming the origin and fountain of wickedness, and misusing himself, not from any extraneous necessity, but from free will and judgment. The fault is in him who chooses, not in God. For God has not made nature or the substance of the soul bad; for he who is good can make nothing but what is good. Everything is good which is according to nature. Every rational soul has naturally a good free-will, formed for the choice of what is good. But when a man acts wrongly, nature is not to be blamed; for what is wrong, takes place not according to nature, but contrary to nature, it being the work of choice, and not of nature.\nA letter Eusebius is supposed to have written to Constantine's daughter Constantina, refusing to fulfill her request for images of Christ, was quoted in the decrees (now lost) of the Iconoclast Council of Hieria in 754, and later quoted in part in the rebuttal of the Hieria decrees in the Second Council of Nicaea of 787, now the only source from which some of the text is known. The authenticity or authorship of the letter remains uncertain.\nNicene Creed.\nIn the June 2002 issue of the \"Church History\" journal, Pier Franco Beatrice reports that Eusebius testified that the word \"homoousios\" (consubstantial) \"was inserted in the Nicene Creed solely by the personal order of Constantine.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;According to Eusebius of Caesarea, the word \"homoousios\" was inserted in the Nicene Creed solely by the personal order of Constantine. But this statement is highly problematic. It is very difficult to explain the seeming paradoxical fact that this word, along with the explanation given by Constantine, was accepted by the \"Arian\" Eusebius, whereas it has left no traces at all in the works of his opponents, the leaders of the anti-Arian party such as Alexander of Alexandria, Ossius of Cordova, Marcellus of Ancyra, and Eustathius of Antioch, who are usually considered Constantine's theological advisers and the strongest supporters of the council. Neither before nor during Constantine's time is there any evidence of a normal, well-established Christian use of the term \"homoousios\" in its strictly Trinitarian meaning. Having once excluded any relationship of the Nicene \"homoousios\" with the Christian tradition, it becomes legitimate to propose a new explanation, based on an analysis of two pagan documents which have so far never been taken into account. The main thesis of this paper is that \"homoousios\" came straight from Constantine's Hermetic background. As can be clearly seen in the \"Poimandres\", and even more clearly in an inscription mentioned exclusively in the \"Theosophia\", in the theological language of Egyptian paganism the word \"homoousios\" meant that the Nous-Father and the Logos-Son, who are two distinct beings, share the same perfection of the divine nature.\u2014\u200a\nHowever, the council evidently did not force the insertion of the word and instead adopted a text related to the confession of Jerusalem. The role of Constantine remained uncertain during the council.\nAssessment.\nAlternate views have suggested that Gibbon's dismissal of Eusebius is inappropriate:\nWhile many have shared Burckhardt's assessment, particularly with reference to the \"Life of Constantine\", others, while not pretending to extol his merits, have acknowledged the irreplaceable value of his works which may principally reside in the copious quotations that they contain from other sources, often lost.\nVeneration.\nThe earliest recorded feast day of Eusebius is found in the earliest known Syrian Martyrology dating to the year 411 translated by William Wright. The Martyrology lists his feast day as May 30. Eusebius continues to be venerated as a Saint by the modern-day Syrian Orthodox Church as well, with a feast day on February 29 according to the official calendar of Saints created by Corbishop Rajan Achen.\nEusebius was long venerated in the Roman Catholic Church. Bishop J. B. Lightfoot writes in his entry for St. Eusebius in Henry Wace's \"Dictionary of Christian Biography and Literature to the End of the Sixth Century AD, with an Account of Principal Sects and Heresies\" (1911) that \"in the Martyrologium Romanum itself he held his place for centuries\" and in \"Gallican service-books the historian is commemorated as a saint.\" However, Lightfoot notes that in \"the revision of this Martyrology under Gregory XIII his name was struck out, and Eusebius of Samosata was substituted, under the mistaken idea that Caesarea had been substituted for Samosata by a mistake.\" The Roman Catholic author Henri Valois includes in his translations on Eusebius's writings testimonies of ancient authors in favor and against Eusebius; in the former category he includes evidence of Eusebius in several martyrologies and being entitled \"Blessed\" dating back to Victorius of Aquitaine. Valois includes both Usuardus and Notker, who list his feast as June 21 in the Roman Martyrology, and a Gallican breviary is included for June 21 that reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA bone fragment relic of Eusebius within its original reliquary is on display at the Shrine of All Saints located within St. Martha's Catholic Church in Morton Grove, Illinois.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10173", "revid": "1264692478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10173", "title": "Empiricist", "text": ""}
{"id": "10174", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10174", "title": "Empiricism", "text": "Idea that knowledge comes only/mainly from sensory experience\nIn philosophy, empiricism is an epistemological view which holds that true knowledge or justification comes only or primarily from sensory experience and empirical evidence. It is one of several competing views within epistemology, along with rationalism and skepticism. Empiricists argue that empiricism is a more reliable method of finding the truth than purely using logical reasoning, because humans have cognitive biases and limitations which lead to errors of judgement. Empiricism emphasizes the central role of empirical evidence in the formation of ideas, rather than innate ideas or traditions. Empiricists may argue that traditions (or customs) arise due to relations of previous sensory experiences. \nHistorically, empiricism was associated with the \"blank slate\" concept (\"tabula rasa\"), according to which the human mind is \"blank\" at birth and develops its thoughts only through later experience. \nEmpiricism in the philosophy of science emphasizes evidence, especially as discovered in experiments. It is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on \"a priori\" reasoning, intuition, or revelation.\nEmpiricism, often used by natural scientists, believes that \"knowledge is based on experience\" and that \"knowledge is tentative and probabilistic, subject to continued revision and falsification\". Empirical research, including experiments and validated measurement tools, guides the scientific method.\nEtymology.\nThe English term \"empirical\" derives from the Ancient Greek word \u1f10\u03bc\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03af\u03b1, \"empeiria\", which is cognate with and translates to the Latin \"experientia\", from which the words \"experience\" and \"experiment\" are derived.\nBackground.\nA central concept in science and the scientific method is that conclusions must be \"empirically\" based on the evidence of the senses. Both natural and social sciences use working hypotheses that are testable by observation and experiment. The term \"semi-empirical\" is sometimes used to describe theoretical methods that make use of basic axioms, established scientific laws, and previous experimental results to engage in reasoned model building and theoretical inquiry.\nPhilosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one's sense-based experience. In epistemology (theory of knowledge) empiricism is typically contrasted with rationalism, which holds that knowledge may be derived from reason independently of the senses, and in the philosophy of mind it is often contrasted with innatism, which holds that some knowledge and ideas are already present in the mind at birth. However, many Enlightenment rationalists and empiricists still made concessions to each other. For example, the empiricist John Locke admitted that some knowledge (e.g. knowledge of God's existence) could be arrived at through intuition and reasoning alone. Similarly, Robert Boyle, a prominent advocate of the experimental method, held that we also have innate ideas. At the same time, the main continental rationalists (Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz) were also advocates of the empirical \"scientific method\".\nHistory.\nEarly empiricism.\nBetween 600 and 200 BCE, the Vaisheshika school of Hindu philosophy, founded by the ancient Indian philosopher Kanada, accepted perception and inference as the only two reliable sources of knowledge. This is enumerated in his work \"Vai\u015be\u1e63ika S\u016btra\". The Charvaka school held similar beliefs, asserting that perception is the only reliable source of knowledge while inference obtains knowledge with uncertainty.\nThe earliest Western proto-empiricists were the empiric school of ancient Greek medical practitioners, founded in 330 BCE. Its members rejected the doctrines of the dogmatic school, preferring to rely on the observation of \"phantasiai\" (i.e., phenomena, the appearances). The Empiric school was closely allied with the Pyrrhonist school of philosophy, which made the philosophical case for their proto-empiricism. \nThe notion of \"tabula rasa\" (\"clean slate\" or \"blank tablet\") connotes a view of the mind as an originally blank or empty recorder (Locke used the words \"white paper\") on which experience leaves marks. This denies that humans have innate ideas. The notion dates back to Aristotle, c.\u2009350 BC:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat the mind (\"nous\") thinks must be in it in the same sense as letters are on a tablet (\"grammateion\") which bears no actual writing (\"grammenon\"); this is just what happens in the case of the mind. (Aristotle, \"On the Soul\", 3.4.430a1).\nAristotle's explanation of how this was possible was not strictly empiricist in a modern sense, but rather based on his theory of potentiality and actuality, and experience of sense perceptions still requires the help of the active \"nous\". These notions contrasted with Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth (see Plato's \"Phaedo\" and \"Apology\", as well as others). Aristotle was considered to give a more important position to sense perception than Plato, and commentators in the Middle Ages summarized one of his positions as \"nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu\" (Latin for \"nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses\").\nThis idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school, from about 330 BCE. Stoic epistemology generally emphasizes that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it. The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as \"When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon.\"\nIslamic Golden Age and Pre-Renaissance (5th to 15th centuries CE).\nDuring the Middle Ages (from the 5th to the 15th century CE) Aristotle's theory of \"tabula rasa\" was developed by Islamic philosophers starting with Al Farabi (c.\u2009872\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009951 CE), developing into an elaborate theory by Avicenna (c.\u2009 980 \u2013 1037 CE) and demonstrated as a thought experiment by Ibn Tufail. For Avicenna (Ibn Sina), for example, the \"tabula rasa\" is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education, and knowledge is attained through \"empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts\" developed through a \"syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts\". The intellect itself develops from a material intellect (\"al-'aql al-hayulani\"), which is a potentiality \"that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect (\"al-'aql al-fa'il\"), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge\". So the immaterial \"active intellect\", separate from any individual person, is still essential for understanding to occur.\nIn the 12th century CE, the Andalusian Muslim philosopher and novelist Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (known as \"Abubacer\" or \"Ebu Tophail\" in the West) included the theory of \"tabula rasa\" as a thought experiment in his Arabic philosophical novel, \"Hayy ibn Yaqdhan\" in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child \"from a \"tabula rasa\" to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society\" on a desert island, through experience alone. The Latin translation of his philosophical novel, entitled \"Philosophus Autodidactus\", published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke's formulation of \"tabula rasa\" in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\".\nA similar Islamic theological novel, \"Theologus Autodidactus\", was written by the Arab theologian and physician Ibn al-Nafis in the 13th century. It also dealt with the theme of empiricism through the story of a feral child on a desert island, but departed from its predecessor by depicting the development of the protagonist's mind through contact with society rather than in isolation from society.\nDuring the 13th century Thomas Aquinas adopted into scholasticism the Aristotelian position that the senses are essential to the mind. Bonaventure (1221\u20131274), one of Aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents, offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the Platonic idea of the mind.\nRenaissance Italy.\nIn the late renaissance various writers began to question the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition in a more fundamental way. In political and historical writing Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing. Machiavelli in particular was scornful of writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals and demanded that people should study the \"effectual truth\" instead. Their contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci (1452\u20131519) said, \"If you find from your own experience that something is a fact and it contradicts what some authority has written down, then you must abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings.\"\nSignificantly, an empirical metaphysical system was developed by the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio which had an enormous impact on the development of later Italian thinkers, including Telesio's students Antonio Persio and , his contemporaries Thomas Campanella and Giordano Bruno, and later British philosophers such as Francis Bacon, who regarded Telesio as \"the first of the moderns\". Telesio's influence can also be seen on the French philosophers Ren\u00e9 Descartes and Pierre Gassendi.\nThe decidedly anti-Aristotelian and anti-clerical music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520 \u2013 1591), father of Galileo and the inventor of monody, made use of the method in successfully solving musical problems, firstly, of tuning such as the relationship of pitch to string tension and mass in stringed instruments, and to volume of air in wind instruments; and secondly to composition, by his various suggestions to composers in his \"Dialogo della musica antica e moderna\" (Florence, 1581). The Italian word he used for \"experiment\" was \"esperimento\". It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo, his eldest son (cf. Coelho, ed. \"Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei\"), arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history. Vincenzo, through his tuning research, found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of 'Pythagoras' hammers' (the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals, not the actual numbers, as believed), and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities, a radically empirical attitude developed, passed on to Galileo, which regarded \"experience and demonstration\" as the \"sine qua non\" of valid rational enquiry.\nBritish empiricism.\nBritish empiricism, a retrospective characterization, emerged during the 17th century as an approach to early modern philosophy and modern science. Although both integral to this overarching transition, Francis Bacon, in England, first advocated for empiricism in 1620, whereas Ren\u00e9 Descartes, in France, laid the main groundwork upholding rationalism around 1640. (Bacon's natural philosophy was influenced by Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio and by Swiss physician Paracelsus.) Contributing later in the 17th century, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza are retrospectively identified likewise as an empiricist and a rationalist, respectively. In the Enlightenment of the late 17th century, John Locke in England, and in the 18th century, both George Berkeley in Ireland and David Hume in Scotland, all became leading exponents of empiricism, hence the dominance of empiricism in British philosophy. The distinction between rationalism and empiricism was not formally made until Immanuel Kant, in Germany, around 1780, who sought to merge the two views.\nIn response to the early-to-mid-17th-century \"continental rationalism\", John Locke (1632\u20131704) proposed in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1689) a very influential view wherein the \"only\" knowledge humans can have is \"a posteriori\", i.e., based upon experience. Locke is famously attributed with holding the proposition that the human mind is a \"tabula rasa\", a \"blank tablet\", in Locke's words \"white paper\", on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written. \nThere are two sources of our ideas: sensation and reflection. In both cases, a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas. The former are unanalysable, and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities. Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is. Without specific primary qualities, an object would not be what it is. For example, an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure. If an apple were structured differently, it would cease to be an apple. Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities. For example, an apple can be perceived in various colours, sizes, and textures but it is still identified as an apple. Therefore, its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is, while its secondary qualities define its attributes. Complex ideas combine simple ones, and divide into substances, modes, and relations. According to Locke, our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other, which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes.\nA generation later, the Irish Anglican bishop George Berkeley (1685\u20131753) determined that Locke's view immediately opened a door that would lead to eventual atheism. In response to Locke, he put forth in his \"Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge\" (1710) an important challenge to empiricism in which things \"only\" exist either as a \"result\" of their being perceived, or by virtue of the fact that they are an entity doing the perceiving. (For Berkeley, God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it.) In his text \"Alciphron\", Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God. Berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism.\nScottish philosopher David Hume (1711\u20131776) responded to Berkeley's criticisms of Locke, as well as other differences between early modern philosophers, and moved empiricism to a new level of skepticism. Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience, but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers. He wrote for example, \"Locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable. On this view, we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow, because neither of these can be demonstrated. But to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations, proofs, and probabilities\u2014by \u2018proofs\u2019 meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition.\" And,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I believe the most general and most popular explication of this matter, is to say [See Mr. Locke, chapter of power.], that finding from experience, that there are several new productions in matter, such as the motions and variations of body, and concluding that there must somewhere be a power capable of producing them, we arrive at last by this reasoning at the idea of power and efficacy. But to be convinced that this explication is more popular than philosophical, we need but reflect on two very obvious principles. First, That reason alone can never give rise to any original idea, and secondly, that reason, as distinguished from experience, can never make us conclude, that a cause or productive quality is absolutely requisite to every beginning of existence. Both these considerations have been sufficiently explained: and therefore shall not at present be any farther insisted on.\u2014\u200a\nHume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: \"relations of ideas\" and \"matters of fact\" (see also Kant's analytic-synthetic distinction). Mathematical and logical propositions (e.g. \"that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides\") are examples of the first, while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world (e.g. \"the sun rises in the East\") are examples of the second. All of people's \"ideas\", in turn, are derived from their \"impressions\". For Hume, an \"impression\" corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation. To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an \"idea\". Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations.\nHume maintained that no knowledge, even the most basic beliefs about the natural world, can be conclusively established by reason. Rather, he maintained, our beliefs are more a result of accumulated \"habits\", developed in response to accumulated sense experiences. Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method\u2014that of the problem of induction. Hume argued that it requires inductive reasoning to arrive at the premises for the principle of inductive reasoning, and therefore the justification for inductive reasoning is a circular argument. Among Hume's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past. Thus, as a simple instance posed by Hume, we cannot know with certainty by inductive reasoning that the sun will continue to rise in the East, but instead come to expect it to do so because it has repeatedly done so in the past.\nHume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable. According to Hume these beliefs were to be accepted nonetheless because of their profound basis in instinct and custom. Hume's lasting legacy, however, was the doubt that his skeptical arguments cast on the legitimacy of inductive reasoning, allowing many skeptics who followed to cast similar doubt.\nPhenomenalism.\nMost of Hume's followers have disagreed with his conclusion that belief in an external world is \"rationally\" unjustifiable, contending that Hume's own principles implicitly contained the rational justification for such a belief, that is, beyond being content to let the issue rest on human instinct, custom and habit. According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism, anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley, a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences.\nPhenomenalism is the view that physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events. Ultimately, only mental objects, properties, events, exist\u2014hence the closely related term subjective idealism. By the phenomenalistic line of thinking, to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences. This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations, for example, are a part. As John Stuart Mill put it in the mid-19th century, matter is the \"permanent possibility of sensation\".\nMill's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect: in maintaining that induction is necessary for \"all\" meaningful knowledge including mathematics. As summarized by D.W. Hamlin:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Mill] claimed that mathematical truths were merely very highly confirmed generalizations from experience; mathematical inference, generally conceived as deductive [and \"a priori\"] in nature, Mill set down as founded on induction. Thus, in Mill's philosophy there was no real place for knowledge based on relations of ideas. In his view logical and mathematical necessity is psychological; we are merely unable to conceive any other possibilities than those that logical and mathematical propositions assert. This is perhaps the most extreme version of empiricism known, but it has not found many defenders.\nMill's empiricism thus held that knowledge of any kind is not from direct experience but an inductive inference from direct experience. The problems other philosophers have had with Mill's position center around the following issues: Firstly, Mill's formulation encounters difficulty when it describes what direct experience is by differentiating only between actual and possible sensations. This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such \"groups of permanent possibilities of sensation\" might exist in the first place. Berkeley put God in that gap; the phenomenalists, including Mill, essentially left the question unanswered. \nIn the end, lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of \"reality\" that goes beyond mere \"possibilities of sensation\", such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism. Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved, how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands, etc., remain unanswered, and perhaps unanswerable in these terms. Secondly, Mill's formulation leaves open the unsettling possibility that the \"gap-filling entities are purely possibilities and not actualities at all\". Thirdly, Mill's position, by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference, misapprehends mathematics. It fails to fully consider the structure and method of mathematical science, the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures which do not, either today or at the time Mill wrote, fall under the agreed meaning of induction.\nThe phenomenalist phase of post-Humean empiricism ended by the 1940s, for by that time it had become obvious that statements about physical things could not be translated into statements about actual and possible sense data. If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement, the former must be at least deducible from the latter. But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement. The translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation. \nThere is, however, no \"finite\" set of statements that are couched in purely sensory terms and can express the satisfaction of the condition of the presence of a normal observer. According to phenomenalism, to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer, the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal. But, of course, the doctor himself must be a normal observer. If we are to specify this doctor's normality in sensory terms, we must make reference to a second doctor who, when inspecting the sense organs of the first doctor, would himself have to have the sense data a normal observer has when inspecting the sense organs of a subject who is a normal observer. And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer, we must refer to a third doctor, and so on (also see the third man).\nLogical empiricism.\nLogical empiricism (also \"logical positivism\" or \"neopositivism\") was an early 20th-century attempt to synthesize the essential ideas of British empiricism (e.g. a strong emphasis on sensory experience as the basis for knowledge) with certain insights from mathematical logic that had been developed by Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein. Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath, Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle, along with A. J. Ayer, Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach.\nThe neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods, insights and discoveries of the sciences. They saw in the logical symbolism elaborated by Frege (1848\u20131925) and Bertrand Russell (1872\u20131970) a powerful instrument that could rationally reconstruct all scientific discourse into an ideal, logically perfect, language that would be free of the ambiguities and deformations of natural language. This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions. By combining Frege's thesis that all mathematical truths are logical with the early Wittgenstein's idea that all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies, they arrived at a twofold classification of all propositions: the \"analytic\" (\"a priori\") and the \"synthetic\" (\"a posteriori\"). On this basis, they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not: the so-called \"verification principle\". Any sentence that is not purely logical, or is unverifiable, is devoid of meaning. As a result, most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems came to be considered pseudoproblems.\nIn the extreme empiricism of the neopositivists\u2014at least before the 1930s\u2014any genuinely synthetic assertion must be reducible to an ultimate assertion (or set of ultimate assertions) that expresses direct observations or perceptions. In later years, Carnap and Neurath abandoned this sort of \"phenomenalism\" in favor of a rational reconstruction of knowledge into the language of an objective spatio-temporal physics. That is, instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data, such sentences were to be translated into so-called \"protocol sentences\", for example, \"\"X\" at location \"Y\" and at time \"T\" observes such and such\". The central theses of logical positivism (verificationism, the analytic\u2013synthetic distinction, reductionism, etc.) came under sharp attack after World War II by thinkers such as Nelson Goodman, W. V. Quine, Hilary Putnam, Karl Popper, and Richard Rorty. By the late 1960s, it had become evident to most philosophers that the movement had pretty much run its course, though its influence is still significant among contemporary analytic philosophers such as Michael Dummett and other anti-realists.\nPragmatism.\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, several forms of pragmatic philosophy arose. The ideas of pragmatism, in its various forms, developed mainly from discussions between Charles Sanders Peirce and William James when both men were at Harvard in the 1870s. James popularized the term \"pragmatism\", giving Peirce full credit for its patrimony, but Peirce later demurred from the tangents that the movement was taking, and redubbed what he regarded as the original idea with the name of \"pragmaticism\". Along with its \"pragmatic theory of truth\", this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical (experience-based) and rational (concept-based) thinking.\nCharles Peirce (1839\u20131914) was highly influential in laying the groundwork for today's empirical scientific method. Although Peirce severely criticized many elements of Descartes' peculiar brand of rationalism, he did not reject rationalism outright. Indeed, he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism, most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation. In later years he even emphasized the concept-driven side of the then ongoing debate between strict empiricism and strict rationalism, in part to counterbalance the excesses to which some of his cohorts had taken pragmatism under the \"data-driven\" strict-empiricist view.\nAmong Peirce's major contributions was to place inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning in a complementary rather than competitive mode, the latter of which had been the primary trend among the educated since David Hume wrote a century before. To this, Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning. The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today. Peirce's approach \"presupposes that (1) the objects of knowledge are real things, (2) the characters (properties) of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them, and (3) everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them. According to Peirce's doctrine of fallibilism, the conclusions of science are always tentative. The rationality of the scientific method does not depend on the certainty of its conclusions, but on its self-corrective character: by continued application of the method science can detect and correct its own mistakes, and thus eventually lead to the discovery of truth\".\nIn his Harvard \"Lectures on Pragmatism\" (1903), Peirce enumerated what he called the \"three cotary propositions of pragmatism\" (L: \"cos, cotis\" whetstone), saying that they \"put the edge on the maxim of pragmatism\". First among these, he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above, but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street. That is, it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses. Hence, if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses, and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference, its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique\u2014in a word, incorrigible. This in no way conflicts with the fallibility and revisability of scientific concepts, since it is only the immediate percept in its unique individuality or \"thisness\"\u2014what the Scholastics called its \"haecceity\"\u2014that stands beyond control and correction. Scientific concepts, on the other hand, are general in nature, and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them. This notion of perception as abduction has received periodic revivals in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research, most recently for instance with the work of Irvin Rock on \"indirect perception\".\nAround the beginning of the 20th century, William James (1842\u20131910) coined the term \"radical empiricism\" to describe an offshoot of his form of pragmatism, which he argued could be dealt with separately from his pragmatism\u2014though in fact the two concepts are intertwined in James's published lectures. James maintained that the empirically observed \"directly apprehended universe needs ... no extraneous trans-empirical connective support\", by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural phenomena. James' \"radical empiricism\" is thus \"not\" radical in the context of the term \"empiricism\", but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term \"empirical\". His method of argument in arriving at this view, however, still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today.\nJohn Dewey (1859\u20131952) modified James' pragmatism to form a theory known as instrumentalism. The role of sense experience in Dewey's theory is crucial, in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated. Dewey's basic thought, in accordance with empiricism, was that reality is determined by past experience. Therefore, humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience. The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically, and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation, in physical sciences as in ethics. Thus, ideas in Dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known \"a posteriori\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10175", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10175", "title": "Estampie", "text": "Medieval dance and musical form\nThe estampie (, Occitan and , ) is a medieval dance and musical form which was a popular instrumental and vocal form in the 13th and 14th centuries. The name was also applied to poetry.\nMusical form.\nThe estampie is similar in form to the lai, consisting of a succession of repeated notes. According to Johannes de Grocheio, there were both vocal and instrumental estampies (for which he used the Latin calque \"stantipes\"), which differed somewhat in form.\nGrocheio calls the sections in both the French vocal and instrumental estampie \"puncta\" (singular \"punctus\"), Each \"puncta\" has a pair of lines that repeat the same melody, in the form:\n\"aa, bb, cc, etc.\".\nThe two statements of the melody in each punctus differ only in their endings, described as \"apertum\" (\"open\") and \"clausum\" (\"closed\") by Grocheio, who believed that six \"puncta\" were standard for the stantipes (his term for the estampie), though he was aware of stantipes with seven \"puncta\". The structure can therefore be diagrammed as:\n\"a+x, a+y; b+w, b+z; etc.\".\nIn an instrumental estampie, the open and closed endings of the puncta are the same each time, so that the end of the \"punctum\" serves as the refrain, in the form:\n\"a+x, a+y; b+x, b+y, c+x, c+y, etc.\"\nAccording to Ian Pittaway, there is also the compound estampie where puncta following the first punctus begin by adding new material, then repeat one or more sections of material from preceding puncta before the open and closed endings. There is no exact form aside from the fact that new material comes first.\nAn example of the form of compound estampie is found in \"Tre Fontane\", and English estampie:\nabcd+x abcd+y ebcd+x ebcd+y fcd+x fcd+y gd+x gd+y\nDue to the variety of ways how estampies have been written, there are some examples of works classified as estampies that don\u2019t exactly follow the aforementioned forms or contain several types of formal structures. The manuscript Douce 139 functions as a compound estampie for the first 3 puncta, but this material is not repeated in any of the later sections, where it begins to be more linear such as the form a+x, a+y, b+x, b+y, etc. This manuscript contains several other errors, such as missing endings, or endings fully written out and not notated; it is unknown whether this a scribe error, or if the manuscript is unfinished.\nIn comparison to other dance forms, Grocheio considered the instrumental estampie \"complicated,\" with \"puncta\" of varying lengths This is in contrast to the more regular verse length of the ductia. There are also more \"puncta\" in an estampie than in a ductia. He further states that this difficulty captivates the attention of both the players and listeners because of these complications. According to Grocheio, the vocal estampie begins with a refrain, which is repeated at the end of each stanza, with text and melody independent of the stanza. However, surviving songs do not include a section labeled as a refrain, so some scholars suggest that a convention must have existed for choosing lines to use as a refrain. Like the instrumental form, the vocal dance was complicated enough to require concentration, which helps to distract young people from wicked thoughts.\nScholar Elizabeth Eva Leach wrote about a poetic form of estampie through the discussion of Douce 308. In a chapter titled \"The Estampies of Douce 308\" from Leach's book \"Music and Instruments of the Middle Ages\", there is a heavy discussion about how the poetic forms of estampies differ from both instrumental and vocal forms. These poetic estampies were devoid of musical notation making the form reliant on syllabic stress and enjambment to make it recognizable. \nHistory.\nThe estampie is the first known genre of medieval era dance music which continues to exist today. The earliest reported example of this musical form is the song \"Kalenda maya\", written by the troubadour Raimbaut de Vaqueiras (1180\u20131207), possibly to a preexisting melody. 14th century examples include \"estampies\" with subtitles such as \"Isabella\" and \"Tre fontane\". The \"estampie\" is also the earliest in compositional style that uses both vocal and instrumental music with each written in a different structure and it is the earliest example of dance evolving simultaneously with the complexity of music.\nInstrumentation.\nSources for individual songs do not generally indicate what instruments were used. However, according to Grocheio, the \"vielle\" was the supreme instrument of the period, and the \"stantipes\", together with the cantus coronatus and ductia, were the principal forms played on \"vielles\" before the wealthy in their celebration. While evidence of estampies being performed on instruments beyond non-bowed strings is rare, it does exist. There is existing evidence of estampies being performed on keyboard instruments, including the organ dating back to a letter written in 1388 by King John I of Aragon. The letter requests for an organ player named John to bring his book of estampies to be performed for him. Though the estampie is generally monophonic, one account provides an example of a performance of the \"Kalenda Maya\" being performed by two instrumentalists, with one playing the melody and the other adding an ornamental upper harmony, suggesting that the estampie form had room for improvisation. There are also two-voice compositions in the form of an estampie, such as the two for keyboard in the Robertsbridge Fragment. The French estampie was performed in a lively triple meter, a primary division of three beats to the bar.\nDance.\nAlthough there is some opposition, the popular consensus is that the estampie was a form of dance. Scholars such as Peggy Dixon and Belinda Belinda Quirey have theorized that estampie is the first recorded instance of a \u201ccouples dance\u201d. In line with certain etymological interpretations, many draw a connection to the stamping of feet as being characteristic of the dance. \nEtymology.\nThere is contention surrounding the exact etymology of the word \u201cestampie\u201d. According to the \"OED\", the name comes from the Proven\u00e7al \"estampida\", feminine of \"estampit\", the past participle of \"estampir\" \"to resound\". According to Ian Pittaway, the name was given by Grocheio from the Latin, \u201cStantipes\u201d or \u201cStantipedes\u201d, meaning \u201cstanding/stationary feet\u201d. However, according to Curt Sachs, the word stems from the vulgar Latin, \u201cStante\u201d or \u201cStantiae\u201d, translated as \u201cdelay\u201d perhaps in relation to the repetitive nature of the musical form.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10176", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10176", "title": "Experimental cancer treatment", "text": "Experimental cancer treatments are mainstream medical therapies intended to treat cancer by improving on, supplementing or replacing conventional methods (surgery, chemotherapy, radiation, and immunotherapy). However, researchers are still trying to determine whether these treatments are safe and effective treatments. Experimental cancer treatments are normally available only to people who participate in formal research programs, which are called \"clinical trials\". Occasionally, a seriously ill person may be able to access an experimental drug through an expanded access program. Some of the treatments have regulatory approval for treating other conditions. Health insurance and publicly funded health care programs normally refuse to pay for experimental cancer treatments.\nThe entries listed below vary between theoretical therapies to unproven controversial therapies. Many of these treatments are alleged to help against only specific forms of cancer. It is not a list of treatments widely available at hospitals.\nStudying cancer treatments.\nThe twin goals of research are to determine whether the treatment actually works (called efficacy) and whether it is sufficiently safe. Regulatory processes attempt to balance the potential benefits with the potential harms, so that people given the treatment are more likely to benefit from it than to be harmed by it.\nMedical research for cancer begins much like research for any disease. In organized studies of new treatments for cancer, the pre-clinical development of drugs, devices, and techniques begins in laboratories, either with isolated cells or in small animals, most commonly rats or mice. In other cases, the proposed treatment for cancer is already in use for some other medical condition, in which case more is known about its safety and potential efficacy.\nClinical trials are the study of treatments in humans. The first-in-human tests of a potential treatment are called Phase I studies. Early clinical trials typically enroll a very small number of patients, and the purpose is to identify major safety issues and the \"maximum tolerated dose\", which is the highest dose that does not produce serious or fatal adverse effects. The dose given in these trials may be far too small to produce any useful effect. In most research, these early trials may involve healthy people, but cancer studies normally enroll only people with relatively severe forms of the disease in this stage of testing. On average, 95% of the participants in these early trials receive no benefit, but all are exposed to the risk of adverse effects. Most participants show signs of optimism bias (the irrational belief that they will beat the odds).\nLater studies, called Phase II and Phase III studies, enroll more people, and the goal is to determine whether the treatment actually works. Phase III studies are frequently randomized controlled trials, with the experimental treatment being compared to the current best available treatment rather than to a placebo. In some cases, the Phase III trial provides the best available treatment to all participants, in addition to some of the patients receiving the experimental treatment.\nBacterial treatments.\nChemotherapeutic drugs have a hard time penetrating tumors to kill them at their core because these cells may lack a good blood supply. Researchers have been using anaerobic bacteria, such as \"Clostridium novyi\", to consume the interior of oxygen-poor tumours. These should then die when they come in contact with the tumor's oxygenated sides, meaning they would be harmless to the rest of the body. A major problem has been that bacteria do not consume all parts of the malignant tissue. However, combining the therapy with chemotherapeutic treatments can help to solve this problem.\nAnother strategy is to use anaerobic bacteria that have been transformed with an enzyme that can convert a non-toxic prodrug into a toxic drug. With the proliferation of the bacteria in the necrotic and hypoxic areas of the tumor, the enzyme is expressed solely in the tumor. Thus, a systemically applied prodrug is metabolised to the toxic drug only in the tumor. This has been demonstrated to be effective with the nonpathogenic anaerobe \"Clostridium sporogenes\".\nDrug therapies.\nHAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells).\nHAMLET (human alpha-lactalbumin made lethal to tumor cells) is a molecular complex derived from human breast milk that kills tumor cells by a process resembling programmed cell death (apoptosis). As of 2008[ [update]], it had been tested in humans with skin papillomas and bladder cancer.\np53 activation therapy.\nSeveral drug therapies are being developed based on p53, the tumour suppressor gene that protects the cell in response to damage and stress. It is analogous to deciding what to do with a damaged car: p53 brings everything to a halt, and then decides whether to fix the cell or, if the cell is beyond repair, to destroy the cell. This protective function of p53 is disabled in most cancer cells, allowing them to multiply without check. Restoration of p53 activity in tumours (where possible) has been shown to inhibit tumour growth and can even shrink the tumour.\nAs p53 protein levels are usually kept low, one could block its degradation and allow large amounts of p53 to accumulate, thus stimulating p53 activity and its antitumour effects. Drugs that utilize this mechanism include nutlin and MI-219, which are both in phase I clinical trials. As of 2009[ [update]], there are also other drugs that are still in the preclinical stage of testing, such as RITA and MITA.\nBI811283.\nBI811283 is a small molecule inhibitor of the aurora B kinase protein being developed by Boehringer Ingelheim for use as an anti-cancer agent. As of 2010[ [update]], BI 811283 is currently in the early stages of clinical development and is undergoing first-in-human trials in patients with solid tumors and Acute Myeloid Leukaemia.\nItraconazole.\nItraconazole, sometimes abbreviated ITZ, is an antifungal medication used to treat a number of fungal infections. Recent research works suggest itraconazole (ITZ) could also be used in the treatment of cancer by inhibiting the hedgehog pathway in a similar way to Sonidegib.\nSelective androgen receptor modulators.\nThe majority of breast cancers are androgen receptor (AR) positive and SARMs may help treat these cancers, although promising results have only been obtained with cancers that are both estrogen receptor (ER) positive and AR positive. Anabolic androgenic steroids (AAS) were historically used successfully to treat AR positive breast cancer, but were phased out after the development of anti-estrogen therapies, due to androgenic side effects and concerns about aromatization to estrogen. SARMs have some of the same therapeutic effects as AAS, but fewer side effects, and they cannot be aromatized. Although a trial on AR positive triple negative breast cancer was ended early due to lack of efficacy, ostarine showed benefits in some patients with ER+, AR+ metastatic breast cancer in a phase II study. In patients with more than 40 percent AR positivity as determined by immunohistochemistry, the clinical benefit rate (CBR) was 80 percent and the objective response rate (ORR) was 48 percent\u2014which was considered promising given that the patients had advanced disease and had been heavily pretreated. In 2022, the FDA granted fast track designation to ostarine for AR+, ER+, HER2- metastatic breast cancer. SARMs have also shown antitumor effects in prostate cancer.\nGene therapy.\nIntroduction of tumor suppressor genes into rapidly dividing cells has been thought to slow down or arrest tumor growth. Adenoviruses are a commonly utilized vector for this purpose. Much research has focused on the use of adenoviruses that cannot reproduce, or reproduce only to a limited extent, within the patient to ensure safety via the avoidance of cytolytic destruction of noncancerous cells infected with the vector. However, new studies focus on adenoviruses that can be permitted to reproduce, and destroy cancerous cells in the process, since the adenoviruses' ability to infect normal cells is substantially impaired, potentially resulting in a far more effective treatment.\nAnother use of gene therapy is the introduction of enzymes into these cells that make them susceptible to particular chemotherapy agents; studies with introducing thymidine kinase in gliomas, making them susceptible to aciclovir, are in their experimental stage.\nEpigenetic options.\nEpigenetics is the study of heritable changes in gene activity that are not caused by changes in the DNA sequence, often a result of environmental or dietary damage to the histone receptors within the cell. Current research has shown that epigenetic pharmaceuticals could be a putative replacement or adjuvant therapy for currently accepted treatment methods such as radiation and chemotherapy, or could enhance the effects of these current treatments. It has been shown that the epigenetic control of the proto-onco regions and the tumor suppressor sequences by conformational changes in histones directly affects the formation and progression of cancer. Epigenetics also has the factor of reversibility, a characteristic that other cancer treatments do not offer.\nSome investigators, like Randy Jirtle, PhD, of Duke University Medical Center, think epigenetics may ultimately turn out to have a greater role in disease than genetics.\nTelomerase deactivation therapy.\nBecause most malignant cells rely on the activity of the protein telomerase for their immortality, it has been proposed that a drug that inactivates telomerase might be effective against a broad spectrum of malignancies. At the same time, most healthy tissues in the body express little if any telomerase, and would function normally in its absence. Currently, inositol hexaphosphate, which is available over-the-counter, is undergoing testing in cancer research due to its telomerase-inhibiting abilities.\nA number of research groups have experimented with the use of telomerase inhibitors in animal models, and as of 2005 and 2006 phase I and II human clinical trials are underway. Geron Corporation is currently conducting two clinical trials involving telomerase inhibitors. One uses a vaccine (GRNVAC1) and the other uses a lipidated oligonucleotide (GRN163L).\nRadiation therapies.\nPhotodynamic therapy.\nPhotodynamic therapy (PDT) is generally a non-invasive treatment using a combination of light and a photosensitive drug, such as 5-ALA, Foscan, Metvix, padeliporfin (Tookad, WST09, WST11), Photofrin, or Visudyne. The drug is triggered by light of a specific wavelength.\nHyperthermiatic therapy.\nLocalized and whole-body application of heat has been proposed as a technique for the treatment of malignant tumours. Intense heating will cause denaturation and coagulation of cellular proteins, rapidly killing cells within a tumour.\nMore prolonged moderate heating to temperatures just a few degrees above normal (39.5\u00a0\u00b0C) can cause more subtle changes. A mild heat treatment combined with other stresses can cause cell death by apoptosis. There are many biochemical consequences to the heat shock response within the cell, including slowed cell division and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation therapy. The purpose of overheating the tumor cells is to create a lack of oxygen so that the heated cells become overacidified, which leads to a lack of nutrients in the tumor. This in turn disrupts the metabolism of the cells so that cell death (apoptosis) can set in. In certain cases chemotherapy or radiation that has previously not had any effect can be made effective. Hyperthermia alters the cell walls by means of so-called heat shock proteins. The cancer cells then react very much more effectively to the cytostatics and radiation. If hyperthermia is used conscientiously it has no serious side effects.\nThere are many techniques by which heat may be delivered. Some of the most common involve the use of focused ultrasound (FUS or HIFU), microwave heating, induction heating, magnetic hyperthermia, and direct application of heat through the use of heated saline pumped through catheters. Experiments with carbon nanotubes that selectively bind to cancer cells have been performed. Lasers are then used that pass harmlessly through the body, but heat the nanotubes, causing the death of the cancer cells. Similar results have also been achieved with other types of nanoparticles, including gold-coated nanoshells and nanorods that exhibit certain degrees of 'tunability' of the absorption properties of the nanoparticles to the wavelength of light for irradiation. The success of this approach to cancer treatment rests on the existence of an 'optical window' in which biological tissue (i.e., healthy cells) are completely transparent at the wavelength of the laser light, while nanoparticles are highly absorbing at the same wavelength. Such a 'window' exists in the so-called near-infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. In this way, the laser light can pass through the system without harming healthy tissue, and only diseased cells, where the nanoparticles reside, get hot and are killed.\nMagnetic Hyperthermia makes use of magnetic nanoparticles, which can be injected into tumours and then generate heat when subjected to an alternating magnetic field.\nOne of the challenges in thermal therapy is delivering the appropriate amount of heat to the correct part of the patient's body. A great deal of current research focuses on precisely positioning heat delivery devices (catheters, microwave, and ultrasound applicators, etc.) using ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging, as well as of developing new types of nanoparticles that make them particularly efficient absorbers while offering little or no concerns about toxicity to the circulation system. Clinicians also hope to use advanced imaging techniques to monitor heat treatments in real time\u2014heat-induced changes in tissue are sometimes perceptible using these imaging instruments. In magnetic hyperthermia or magnetic fluid hyperthermia method, it will be easier to control temperature distribution by controlling the velocity of ferrofluid injection and size of magnetic nanoparticles.\nNoninvasive cancer heat treatment.\nHeat treatment involves using radio waves to heat up tiny metals that are implanted in cancerous tissue. Gold nanoparticles or carbon nanotubes are the most likely candidate. Promising preclinical trials have been conducted, although clinical trials may not be held for another few years.\nAnother method that is entirely non-invasive referred to as Tumor Treating Fields has already reached clinical trial stage in many countries. The concept applies an electric field through a tumour region using electrodes external to the body. Successful trials have shown the process effectiveness to be greater than chemotherapy and there are no side-effects and only negligible time spent away from normal daily activities. This treatment is still in very early development stages for many types of cancer.\nHigh-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) is still in investigatory phases in many places around the world. In China it has CFDA approval and over 180 treatment centres have been established in China, Hong Kong, and Korea. HIFU has been successfully used to treat cancer to destroy tumours of the bone, brain, breast, liver, pancreas, rectum, kidney, testes, and prostate. Several thousand patients have been treated with various types of tumours. HIFU has CE approval for palliative care for bone metastasis. Experimentally, palliative care has been provided for cases of advanced pancreatic cancer. High-energy therapeutic ultrasound could increase higher-density anti-cancer drug load and nanomedicines to target tumor sites by 20x fold higher than traditional target cancer therapy.\nCold atmospheric plasma treatment.\nCold atmospheric plasma or CAP for has been proposed for the treatment of solid tumors.\nElectromagnetic treatments.\nTumor Treating Fields is a novel FDA-approved cancer treatment therapy that uses alternating electric field to disturb the rapid cell division exhibited by cancer cells.\nComplementary and alternative treatments.\nComplementary and alternative medicine (CAM) treatments are the diverse group of medical and healthcare systems, practices, and products that are not part of conventional medicine and have not been proven to be effective. \"Complementary medicine\" usually refers to methods and substances used along with conventional medicine, while \"alternative medicine\" refers to compounds used instead of conventional medicine. CAM use is common among people with cancer.\nMost complementary and alternative medicines for cancer have not been rigorously studied or tested. Some alternative treatments that have been proven ineffective continue to be marketed and promoted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10178", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10178", "title": "Ethyne", "text": ""}
{"id": "10179", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10179", "title": "Euskara", "text": ""}
{"id": "10181", "revid": "39680754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10181", "title": "Emission", "text": "Emission may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10183", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10183", "title": "Environmental movement in the United States", "text": "Environmental issues in the United States include the following subject areas: climate change, energy production and consumption, species conservation, the spread of invasive species, deforestation, mining, nuclear incidents, pesticide use, pollution, waste management, and population growth. While many diverse attempts of utilizing policy change to mitigate different climate crises have taken place over the years, still society is faced with environmental challenges. The United States is one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gases globally, both in total emissions and on a per capita basis.[2] As a major economic and political power, U.S. climate policy has a large influence on what measures and efforts are put forth concerning environmental regulations at the national level, leveraging their influence through diplomatic measures. Organized environmental movement in the US\nThe organized environmental movements go beyond standalone efforts, but instead include a variety of activists that make it possible. Many of these activist are represented by a wide range of non-governmental organizations or NGOs that have a common goal in mind of addressing environmental issues in the United States. Yet despite their non government afflictions, these groups still manage to operate at the local, national, and international scales, expanding where their operations and missions function. Environmental NGOs are not limited in their political views, but instead encompass a multifaceted level of perspectives that drives the way NGOS are able to abruptly influence the environmental policy of the United States and other governments with all of their wealth in knowledge and perspectives on environmental concerns, ultimately contributing to what we know as the environmental movement.\nThe environmental movement today consists of both large national groups and also many smaller local groups with local concerns. Some resemble the old U.S. conservation movement \u2013 whose modern expression is The Nature Conservancy, Audubon Society and National Geographic Society \u2013 American organizations with a worldwide influence. Increasingly that movement is organized around addressing climate change in the United States alongside interrelated issues like climate justice and broader environmental justice issues.\nScope of the movement.\nAs public awareness and the environmental sciences have improved in recent years, environmental issues have broadened to include key concepts such as \"sustainability\" and also new emerging concerns such as ozone depletion, global warming, acid rain, land use and biogenetic pollution.\nEnvironmental movements often interact or are linked with other social movements, e.g. for peace, human rights, and animal rights; and against nuclear weapons and/or nuclear power, endemic diseases, poverty, hunger, etc.\nSome US colleges are now going green by signing the \"President's Climate Commitment,\" a document that a college President can sign to enable said colleges to practice environmentalism by switching to solar power, etc.\nHistory.\nNative Americans are frequently categorized as \"the original environmentalists\", however this assertion is frequently challenged for being overly simplistic. Early European settlers came to the United States brought from Europe the concept of the commons. In the colonial era, access to natural resources was allocated by individual towns, and disputes over fisheries or land use were resolved at the local level. Changing technologies, however, strained traditional ways of resolving disputes of resource use, and local governments had limited control over powerful special interests. For example, the damming of rivers for mills cut off upriver towns from fisheries; logging and clearing of forest in watersheds harmed local fisheries downstream. In New England, many farmers became uneasy as they noticed clearing of the forest changed stream flows and a decrease in bird population which helped control insects and other pests. These concerns become widely known with the publication of \"Man and Nature\" (1864) by George Perkins Marsh. The environmental impact method of analysis is generally the main mode for determining what issues the environmental movement is involved in. This model is used to determine how to proceed in situations that are detrimental to the environment by choosing the way that is least damaging and has the fewest lasting implications.\nConservation movement.\nConservation first became a national issue during the progressive era's conservation movement (1890s - 1920s). The early national conservation movement shifted emphasis to scientific management which favored larger enterprises and control began to shift from local governments to the states and the federal government.(Judd) Some writers credit sportsmen, hunters and fishermen with the increasing influence of the conservation movement. In the 1870s sportsman magazines such as \"American Sportsmen\", \"Forest and Stream\", and \"Field and Stream\" are seen as leading to the growth of the conservation movement.(Reiger) This conservation movement also urged the establishment of state and national parks and forests, wildlife refuges, and national monuments intended to preserve noteworthy natural features.\nConservation groups focus primarily on an issue that's origins are rooted in general expansion. As industrialization became more prominent as well as the increasing trend towards urbanization the conservative environmental movement began. Contrary to popular belief conservation groups are not against expansion in general, instead, they are concerned with efficiency with resources and land development.\nProgressive era.\nTheodore Roosevelt and his close ally George Bird Grinnell, were motivated by the wanton waste that was taking place at the hand of market hunting. This practice resulted in placing a large number of North American game species on the edge of extinction. Roosevelt recognized that the laissez-faire approach of the U.S. Government was too wasteful and inefficient. In any case, they noted, most of the natural resources in the western states were already owned by the federal government. The best course of action, they argued, was a long-term plan devised by national experts to maximize the long-term economic benefits of natural resources. To accomplish the mission, Roosevelt and Grinnell formed the Boone and Crockett Club in 1887. The club was made up of the best minds and influential men of the day. The Boone and Crockett Club's contingency of conservationists, scientists, politicians, and intellectuals became Roosevelt's closest advisers during his march to preserve wildlife and habitat across North America. As president, Theodore Roosevelt became a prominent conservationist, putting the issue high on the national agenda. He worked with all the major figures of the movement, especially his chief advisor on the matter, Gifford Pinchot. Roosevelt was deeply committed to conserving natural resources and is considered to be the nation's first conservation President. He encouraged the Newlands Reclamation Act of 1902 to promote federal construction of dams to irrigate small farms and placed under federal protection. Roosevelt set aside more Federal land for national parks and nature preserves than all of his predecessors combined.\nRoosevelt established the United States Forest Service, signed into law the creation of five National Parks, and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act, under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments. He also established the first 51 Bird Reserves, four Game Preserves, and 150 National Forests, including Shoshone National Forest, the nation's first. The area of the United States that he placed under public protection totals approximately .\nGifford Pinchot had been appointed by McKinley as chief of Division of Forestry in the Department of Agriculture. In 1905, his department gained control of the national forest reserves. Pinchot promoted private use (for a fee) under federal supervision. In 1907, Roosevelt designated of new national forests just minutes before a deadline.\nIn May 1908, Roosevelt sponsored the Conference of Governors held in the White House, with a focus on natural resources and their most efficient use. Roosevelt delivered the opening address: \"Conservation as a National Duty.\"\nIn 1903 Roosevelt toured the Yosemite Valley with John Muir, who had a very different view of conservation and tried to minimize commercial use of water resources and forests. Working through the Sierra Club he founded, Muir succeeded in 1905 in having Congress transfer the Mariposa Grove and Yosemite Valley to the National Park Service. While Muir wanted nature preserved for the sake of pure beauty, Roosevelt subscribed to Pinchot's formulation, \"to make the forest produce the largest amount of whatever crop or service will be most useful, and keep on producing it for generation after generation of men and trees.\" Muir and the Sierra Club vehemently opposed the damming of the Hetch Hetchy Valley in Yosemite in order to provide water to the city of San Francisco. Roosevelt and Pinchot supported the dam, as did President Woodrow Wilson. The Hetch Hetchy dam was finished in 1923 and is still in operation, but the Sierra Club still wants to tear it down.\nOther influential conservationists of the Progressive Era included George Bird Grinnell (a prominent sportsman who founded the Boone and Crockett Club), the Izaak Walton League and John Muir, the founder of the Sierra Club in 1892. Conservationists organized the National Parks Conservation Association, the Audubon Society, and other groups that still remain active.\nNew Deal.\nFranklin Delano Roosevelt (1933\u201345), like his cousin Theodore Roosevelt, was an ardent conservationist. He used numerous programs of the departments of Agriculture and Interior to end wasteful land-use, mitigate the effects of the Dust Bowl, and efficiently develop natural resources in the West. One of the most popular of all New Deal programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps (1933\u20131943), which sent two million poor young men to work in rural and wilderness areas, primarily on conservation projects.\nPost-1945.\nAfter World War II increasing encroachment on wilderness land evoked the continued resistance of conservationists, who succeeded in blocking a number of projects in the 1950s and 1960s, including the proposed Bridge Canyon Dam that would have backed up the waters of the Colorado River into the Grand Canyon National Park.\nThe Inter-American Conference on the Conservation of Renewable Natural Resources met in 1948 as a collection of nearly 200 scientists from all over the Americans forming the trusteeship principle that:\n\"No generation can exclusively own the renewable resources by which it lives. We hold the commonwealth in trust for prosperity, and to lessen or destroy it is to commit treason against the future\"\nBeginning of the modern movement.\nDuring the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, several events occurred which raised the public awareness of harm to the environment caused by man. In 1954, the 23 man crew of the Japanese fishing vessel \"Lucky Dragon\" was exposed to radioactive fallout from a hydrogen bomb test at Bikini Atoll. By 1969, the public reaction to an ecologically catastrophic oil spill from an offshore well in California's Santa Barbara Channel, Barry Commoner's protest against nuclear testing, along with Rachel Carson's 1962 book \"Silent Spring\", and Paul R. Ehrlich's \"The Population Bomb\" (1968) all added anxiety about the environment. Pictures of Earth from space emphasized that the earth was small and fragile.\nAs the public became more aware of environmental issues, concern about air pollution, water pollution, solid waste disposal, dwindling energy resources, radiation, pesticide poisoning (particularly use of DDT as described in Carson's influential \"Silent Spring\"), noise pollution, and other environmental problems engaged a broadening number of sympathizers. That public support for environmental concerns was widespread became clear in the Earth Day demonstrations of 1970.\nSeveral books after the middle of the 20th century contributed to the rise of American environmentalism (as distinct from the longer-established conservation movement), especially among college and university students and the more literate public. One was the publication of the first textbook on ecology, \"Fundamentals of Ecology,\" by Eugene Odum and Howard Odum, in 1953. Another was the appearance of the Carson's 1962 best-seller \"Silent Spring.\" Her book brought about a whole new interpretation of pesticides by exposing their harmful effects in nature. From this book, many began referring to Carson as the \"mother of the environmental movement\". Another influential development was a 1965 lawsuit, \"Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission,\" opposing the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain in New York (state), which is said to have given birth to modern United States environmental law. The wide popularity of \"The Whole Earth Catalogs\", starting in 1968, was quite influential among the younger, hands-on, activist generation of the 1960s and 1970s. Recently, in addition to opposing environmental degradation and protecting wilderness, an increased focus on coexisting with natural biodiversity has appeared, a strain that is apparent in the movement for sustainable agriculture and in the concept of Reconciliation Ecology.\nDuring his time as U.S President, Lyndon Johnson would sign over 300 environment protection measures into law. This was credited as forming the legal basis of the modern environmental movement.\nWilderness preservation.\nIn the modern wilderness preservation movement, important philosophical roles are played by the writings of John Muir who had been activist in the late 19th and early 20th century. Along with Muir perhaps most influential in the modern movement is Henry David Thoreau who published Walden in 1854. Also important was forester and ecologist Aldo Leopold, one of the founders of the Wilderness Society in 1935, who wrote a classic of nature observation and ethical philosophy, \"A Sand County Almanac\", (1949).\nThere is also a growing movement of campers and other people who enjoy outdoor recreation activities to help preserve the environment while spending time in the wilderness.\nAnti-nuclear movement.\nThe anti-nuclear movement in the United States consists of more than 80 anti-nuclear groups that have acted to oppose nuclear power or nuclear weapons, or both, in the United States. These groups include the Abalone Alliance, Clamshell Alliance, Institute for Energy and Environmental Research, Nuclear Information and Resource Service, and Physicians for Social Responsibility. The anti-nuclear movement has delayed construction or halted commitments to build some new nuclear plants, and has pressured the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to enforce and strengthen the safety regulations for nuclear power plants.\nAnti-nuclear protests reached a peak in the 1970s and 1980s and grew out of the environmental movement. Campaigns which captured national public attention involved the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant, Seabrook Station Nuclear Power Plant, Diablo Canyon Power Plant, Shoreham Nuclear Power Plant, and Three Mile Island. On June 12, 1982, one million people demonstrated in New York City's Central Park against nuclear weapons and for an end to the Cold War arms race. It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history. International Day of Nuclear Disarmament protests were held on June 20, 1983, at 50 sites across the United States.\nThere were many Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps at the Nevada Test Site during the 1980s and 1990s.\nMore recent campaigning by anti-nuclear groups has related to several nuclear power plants including the Enrico Fermi Nuclear Power Plant, Indian Point Energy Center, Oyster Creek Nuclear Generating Station, Pilgrim Nuclear Generating Station, Salem Nuclear Power Plant, and Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant. There have also been campaigns relating to the Y-12 Nuclear Weapons Plant, the Idaho National Laboratory, proposed Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository, the Hanford Site, the Nevada Test Site, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, and transportation of nuclear waste from the Los Alamos National Laboratory.\nSome scientists and engineers have expressed reservations about nuclear power, including: Barry Commoner, S. David Freeman, John Gofman, Arnold Gundersen, Mark Z. Jacobson, Amory Lovins, Arjun Makhijani, Gregory Minor, Joseph Romm and Benjamin K. Sovacool. Scientists who have opposed nuclear weapons include Linus Pauling and Eugene Rabinowitch.\nAntitoxics groups.\nAntitoxics groups are a subgroup that is affiliated with the Environmental Movement in the United States, that is primarily concerned with the effects that cities and their by-products have on humans. This aspect of the movement is a self-proclaimed \"movement of housewives\". Concern around the issues of groundwater contamination and air pollution rose in the early 1980s and individuals involved in antitoxics groups claim that they are concerned for the health of their families.\nA prominent case can be seen in the Love Canal Homeowner's association (LCHA); in this case, a housing development was built on a site that had been used for toxic dumping by the Hooker Chemical Company. As a result of this dumping, the residents had symptoms of skin irritation, Lois Gibbs, a resident of the development, started a grassroots campaign for reparations. Eventual success led to the government having to purchase homes that were sold in the development.\nFederal legislation in the 1970s.\nPrior to the 1970s the protection of basic air and water supplies was a matter mainly left to each state. During the 1970s, the primary responsibility for clean air and water shifted to the federal government. Growing concerns, both environmental and economic, from cities and towns as well as sportsman and other local groups, and senators such as Maine's Edmund S. Muskie, led to the passage of extensive legislation, notably the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. Other legislation included the 1970 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), which established the Council on Environmental Quality; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972; the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976), the Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1977, which became known as the Clean Water Act, and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act, commonly known as the Superfund Act (1980). These laws regulated public drinking water systems, toxic substances, pesticides, and ocean dumping; and protected wildlife, wilderness, and wild and scenic rivers. Moreover, the new laws provide for pollution research, standard setting, contaminated site cleanup, monitoring, and enforcement.\nThe creation of these laws led to a major shift in the environmental movement. Groups such as the Sierra Club shifted focus from local issues to becoming a lobby in Washington and new groups, for example, the Natural Resources Defense Council and Environmental Defense, arose to influence politics as well. (Larson)\nRenewed focus on local action.\nIn the 1980s, President Ronald Reagan sought to curtail the scope of environmental protection taking steps such as appointing James G. Watt. The major environmental groups responded with mass mailings which led to increased membership and donations.\nWhen industry groups lobbied to weaken regulation and a backlash against environmental regulations, the so-called wise use movement gained importance and influence.(Larson)\nAttacks on environmental activists.\nIn the early 1990s, multiple environmental activists in the United States became targets of arson attacks. In 1991, Greenpeace toxics researcher Pat Costner\u2019s Arkansas home was set on fire, and Maine anti-logging activist Michael Vernon narrowly escaped a similar attack. In October 1993, Leroy Jackson, a Native American environmentalist, was found dead in his van in New Mexico shortly before he was scheduled to testify in Washington, D.C., against the clearcutting of old-growth trees on Navajo land.\n\"Post-environmentalism\".\nIn 2004, with the environmental movement seemingly stalled, some environmentalists started questioning whether \"environmentalism\" was even a useful political framework. According to a controversial essay titled \"The Death of Environmentalism\" (Michael Shellenberger and Ted Nordhaus, 2004) American environmentalism has been remarkably successful in protecting the air, water, and large stretches of wilderness in North America and Europe, but these environmentalists have stagnated as a vital force for cultural and political change.\nShellenberger and Nordhaus wrote, \"Today environmentalism is just another special interest. Evidence for this can be found in its concepts, its proposals, and its reasoning. What stands out is how arbitrary environmental leaders are about what gets counted and what doesn't as 'environmental.' Most of the movement's leading thinkers, funders, and advocates do not question their most basic assumptions about who we are, what we stand for, and what it is that we should be doing.\" Their essay was followed by a speech in San Francisco called \"Is Environmentalism Dead?\" by former Sierra Club President, Adam Werbach, who argued for the evolution of environmentalism into a more expansive, relevant and powerful progressive politics. Werbach endorsed building an environmental movement that is more relevant to average Americans and controversially chose to lead Wal-Mart's effort to take sustainability mainstream.\nThese \"post-environmental movement\" thinkers argue that the ecological crises the human species faces in the 21st century are qualitatively different from the problems the environmental movement was created to address in the 1960s and 1970s. They argue that climate change and habitat destruction are global and more complex, therefore demanding far deeper transformations of the economy, the culture and political life. The consequence of environmentalism's outdated and arbitrary definition, they argue, is a political irrelevancy.\nThese \"politically neutral\" groups tend to avoid global conflicts and view the settlement of inter-human conflict as separate from regard for nature \u2013 in direct contradiction to the ecology movement and peace movement which have increasingly close links: while Green Parties, Greenpeace, and groups like the ACTivist Magazine regard ecology, biodiversity, and an end to non-human extinction as an absolute basis for peace, the local groups may not, and see a high degree of global competition and conflict as justifiable if it lets them preserve their own local uniqueness. However, such groups tend not to \"burn out\" and to sustain for long periods, even generations, protecting the same local treasures.\nLocal groups increasingly find that they benefit from collaboration, e.g. on consensus decision-making methods, or making simultaneous policy, or relying on common legal resources, or even sometimes a common glossary. However, the differences between the various groups that make up the modern environmental movement tend to outweigh such similarities, and they rarely co-operate directly except on a few major global questions. In a notable exception, over 1,000 local groups from around the country united for a single day of action as part of the Step It Up 2007 campaign for real solutions to global warming.\nGroups such as The Bioregional Revolution are calling on the need to bridge these differences, as the converging problems of the 21st century they claim compel the people to unite and to take decisive action. They promote bioregionalism, permaculture, and local economies as solutions to these problems, overpopulation, global warming, global epidemics, and water scarcity, but most notably to \"peak oil\" \u2013 the prediction that the country is likely to reach a maximum in global oil production which could spell drastic changes in many aspects of the residents' everyday lives.\nCriticisms.\nSome people are skeptical of the environmental movement and feel that it is more deeply rooted in politics than science. Although there have been serious debates about climate change and effects of some pesticides and herbicides that mimic animal sex steroids, science has shown that some of the claims of environmentalists have credence.\nNovelist Michael Crichton appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works on September 28, 2005, to address concerns and recommended the employment of double-blind experimentation in environmental research. Crichton suggested that because environmental issues are so political in nature, policymakers need neutral, conclusive data to base their decisions on, rather than conjecture and rhetoric, and double-blind experiments are the most efficient way to achieve that aim.\nA consistent theme acknowledged by both supporters and critics (though more commonly vocalized by critics) of the environmental movement is that we know very little about the Earth we live in. Most fields of environmental studies are relatively new, and therefore what research we have is limited and does not date far enough back for us to completely understand long-term environmental trends. This has led a number of environmentalists to support the use of the precautionary principle in policy-making, which ultimately asserts that we don't know how certain actions may affect the environment and because there is reason to believe they may cause more harm than good we should refrain from such actions.\nElitist.\nIn the December 1994 \"Wild Forest Review,\" Alexander Cockburn and Jeffrey St. Clair wrote \"The mainstream environmental movement was elitist, highly paid, detached from the people, indifferent to the working class, and a firm ally of big government...The environmental movement is now accurately perceived as just another well-financed and cynical special interest group, its rancid infrastructure supported by Democratic Party operatives and millions in grants from corporate foundations.\"\nMany environmental organizations lack diversity, including often white women as the main demographic. However, environmental problems are experienced differently by different social groups, including black versus white groups. For the middle class white population in the US, environmental issues have often included pollution, barriers to recreational activities, etc.. On the other hand, for people of color, environmental issues were often life or death including issues of \"smoke, soot, dust, . . . fumes gases, stench, and carbon monoxide.\" In the past environmental organizations have focused \"on preserving natural resources and endangered species instead of protecting people of color from hazardous waste sites being built in their communities\". When environmental organizations appoint people of color to positions of leadership, the focus will often shift more towards focus on these major, life-threatening issues. However, a significant 2014 State of Diversity in Environmental Organizations study found that the percentage of minorities working for environmental organizations has never exceeded 16% and less than 12% have achieved positions of leadership.\nWilderness myth.\nHistorians have criticized the modern environmental movement for having romantic idealizations of wilderness. William Cronon writes \"wilderness serves as the unexamined foundation on which so many of the quasi-religious values of modern environmentalism rest.\" Cronon claims that \"to the extent that we live in an urban-industrial civilization but at the same time pretend to ourselves that our real home is in the wilderness, to just that extent we give ourselves permission to evade responsibility for the lives we actually lead.\"\nSimilarly Michael Pollan has argued that the wilderness ethic leads people to dismiss areas whose wildness is less than absolute. In his book \"Second Nature,\" Pollan writes that \"once a landscape is no longer 'virgin' it is typically written off as fallen, lost to nature, irredeemable.\"\nDebates within the movement.\nWithin the environmental movement, an ideological debate has taken place between those with an ecocentric viewpoint and an anthropocentric viewpoint. The anthropocentric view has been seen as the conservationist approach to the environment with nature viewed, at least in part, as a resource to be used by man. In contrast to the conservationist approach the ecocentric view, associated with John Muir, Henry David Thoreau and William Wordsworth referred to as the preservationist movement. This approach sees nature in a more spiritual way. Many environmental historians consider the split between John Muir and Gifford Pinchot. During the preservation/conservation debate, the term preservationist becomes to be seen as a pejorative term.\nWhile the ecocentric view focused on biodiversity and wilderness protection the anthropocentric view focuses on urban pollution and social justice. Some environmental writers, for example, William Cronon have criticized the ecocentric view as have a dualist view as a man being separate from nature. Critics of the anthropocentric viewpoint contend that the environmental movement has been taken over by so-called leftist with an agenda beyond environmental protection.\nEnvironmentalism and politics.\nEnvironmentalists gained popularity in American politics after the creation or strengthening of numerous US environmental laws, including the Clean Air Act, Clean Water Act, and the formation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970. These successes were followed by the enactment of a series of laws regulating waste including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act; Toxic substances, (Toxic Substances Control Act); Pesticides (FIFRA: Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act); clean-up of polluted sites (Superfund); protection of endangered species (Endangered Species Act).\nFewer environmental laws have been passed in the last decade as corporations and other conservative interests have increased their influence over American politics. Corporate cooperation against environmental lobbyists has been organized by the Wise Use group. At the same time, many environmentalists have been turning toward other means of persuasion, such as working with business, community, and other partners to promote sustainable development. Since the 1970s, coalitions and interests groups have directed themselves along the democrat and republican party lines.\nMuch environmental activism is directed towards conservation as well as the prevention or elimination of pollution. However, conservation movements; ecology movements; peace movements; green parties; green- and eco-anarchists often subscribe to very different ideologies, while supporting the same goals as those who call themselves \"environmentalists\". To outsiders, these groups or factions can appear to be indistinguishable.\nAs human population and industrial activity continue to increase, environmentalists often find themselves in serious conflict with those who believe that human and industrial activities should not be overly regulated or restricted, such as some libertarians.\nEnvironmentalists often clash with others, particularly corporate interests, over issues of the management of natural resources, like in the case of the atmosphere as a \"carbon dump\", the focus of climate change, and global warming controversy. They usually seek to protect commonly owned or unowned resources for future generations.\nEnvironmental justice in the United States.\nEnvironmental justice (EJ) is a movement that began in the U.S. in the 1980s and aims to put a stop to environmental racism. (EJ) did not come into regular use until 1982 when Warren County, a predominantly African American community, became a site for toxic waste dumping. This sparked protests which eventually led to the arrest of 414 peaceful African American protestors. In 1987, the publication of the United Church of Christ (UCC) Commission for Racial Justice's report \"Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States\" offered the first clear description of environmental racism (ER). ER looks different in different communities, and each context requires distinct policies and actions. Closely related to ER, the environmental justice movement is also grassroots in practice and \"importantly, a movement, which means that it starts and lives with the people\".\nOften, low-income and minority communities are located close to highways, garbage dumps, and factories. Because of this, these individuals were exposed to high concentrations of pollution, which increased their health risks from environmental harms.The Environmental Justice movement seeks to link \"social\" and \"ecological\" environmental concerns, while at the same time keeping environmentalists conscious of the dynamics in their own movement, i.e. racism, sexism, homophobia, classicism, and other malaises of the dominant culture.\nIn 1991, the First National People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit drafted the 17 principles of environmental justice calling for an \"appreciation of our diverse cultural perspectives\" along with the \"ecological unity and the interdependence of all species, and the right to be free from ecological destruction\". Throughout the EJ movement there has been a focus on everyone being safe from environmental harms including pollution, hazardous wastes, land access, and also the ability of all to participate in decision-making. Over time, the main principle that has developed within the movement is \"We speak for ourselves\" meaning those within the community experiencing the environmental injustice should be the leaders of change.\nEnvironmental rights.\nMany environmental lawsuits turn on the question of who has standing; are the legal issues limited to property owners, or does the general public have a right to intervene? Christopher D. Stone's 1972 essay, \"Should trees have standing?\" seriously addressed the question of whether natural objects themselves should have legal rights, including the right to participate in lawsuits. Stone suggested that there was nothing absurd in this view, and noted that many entities now regarded as having legal rights were, in the past, regarded as \"things\" that were regarded as legally rightless; for example, aliens, children and women. His essay is sometimes regarded as an example of the fallacy of hypostatization.\nOne of the earliest lawsuits to establish that citizens may sue for environmental and aesthetic harms was Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission, decided in 1965 by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. The case helped halt the construction of a power plant on Storm King Mountain in New York State. See also United States environmental law and David Sive, an attorney who was involved in the case.\nConservation biology is an important and rapidly developing field. One way to avoid the stigma of an \"ism\" was to evolve early anti-nuclear groups into the more scientific Green Parties, sprout new NGOs such as Greenpeace and Earth Action, and devoted groups to protecting global biodiversity and preventing global warming and climate change. But in the process, much of the emotional appeal, and many of the original aesthetic goals were lost. Nonetheless, these groups have well-defined ethical and political views, backed by science.\nRadical environmentalism.\nWhile most environmentalists are often mainstream and peaceful, other groups are more radical in their approach. Adherents of radical environmentalism and ecological anarchism are involved in direct action campaigns to protect the environment. Some campaigns have employed controversial tactics including sabotage, blockades, and arson, while most use peaceful protests such as marches, tree sitting, and the like. There is substantial debate within the environmental movement as to the acceptability of these tactics, but almost all environmentalists condemn violent actions that can harm humans.\nClashes by police.\nIn 2023, for the first time in the history of the United States, the police killed an environmental activist during a protest. The protesters were camping in Atlanta's South River Forest, a natural area that the City of Atlanta and Police planned to raze in order to erect a police training facility to be called \"Cop City.\" Police attacked protesters on 18 January 2023. One protester, Tortuguita or, Manuel Esteban P\u00e1ez Ter\u00e1n was killed and seven more were arrested.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10184", "revid": "18998846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10184", "title": "Environmentalist", "text": ""}
{"id": "10185", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10185", "title": "Environmentalists", "text": ""}
{"id": "10186", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10186", "title": "Eastern Orthodox Church", "text": "Second-largest Christian church\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, officially the Orthodox Catholic Church, and also called the Greek Orthodox Church or simply the Orthodox Church, is one of the three major doctrinal and jurisdictional groups of Christianity. As of 2012, it has approximately 300 million adherents and is the third largest religious community in the world after Catholics and Sunni Muslims. The Eastern Orthodox Church operates as a communion of autocephalous churches, each governed by its bishops via local synods. The church has no central doctrinal or governmental authority analogous to the pope of the Catholic Church. Nevertheless, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople is recognised by them as \"primus inter pares\" ('first among equals'), a title held by the patriarch of Rome prior to 1054. As one of the oldest surviving religious institutions in the world, the Eastern Orthodox Church has played an especially prominent role in the history and culture of Eastern and Southeastern Europe. Since 2018, there has been an ongoing schism between Constantinople and Moscow, with the two not in full communion with each other.\nEastern Orthodox theology is based on the Scriptures and holy tradition, which incorporates the dogmatic decrees of the seven ecumenical councils, and the teaching of the Church Fathers. The church teaches that it is the one, holy, catholic and apostolic church established by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, and that its bishops are the successors of Christ's apostles. It maintains that it practises the original Christian faith, as passed down by holy tradition. Its patriarchates, descending from the pentarchy, and other autocephalous and autonomous churches, reflect a variety of hierarchical organisation. It recognises seven major sacraments (which are called holy mysteries), of which the Eucharist is the principal one, celebrated liturgically in synaxis. The church teaches that through consecration invoked by a priest, the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ. The Virgin Mary is venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as the \"Theotokos\", which means 'God-bearer', and she is honoured in devotions.\nThe churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Antioch\u2014except for some breaks of communion such as the Photian schism or the Acacian schism\u2014shared communion with the Church of Rome until the East\u2013West Schism in 1054. The 1054 schism was the culmination of mounting theological, political, and cultural disputes, particularly over the authority of the pope, between those churches. Before the Council of Ephesus in AD 431, the Church of the East also shared in this communion, as did the various Oriental Orthodox Churches before the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451, all separating primarily over differences in Christology.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is the primary religious confession in Russia, Ukraine, Romania, Greece, Belarus, Serbia, Bulgaria, Georgia, Moldova, North Macedonia, Cyprus, and Montenegro. Eastern Orthodox Christians are also one of the main religious groups in Estonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and Latvia as well as a significant group in Syria, Lebanon, and other countries in the Middle East. Roughly half of Eastern Orthodox Christians live in the post Eastern Bloc countries, mostly in Russia. The communities in the former Byzantine regions of North Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean are among the oldest Orthodox communities from the Middle East, which are decreasing due to forced migration driven by increased religious persecution. Eastern Orthodox communities outside Western Asia, Asia Minor, Caucasia and Eastern Europe, including those in North America, Western Europe, and Australia, have been formed through diaspora, conversions, and missionary activity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName and characteristics.\nDefinition.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is defined as the Eastern Christians which recognise the seven ecumenical councils and usually are in communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the Patriarchate of Alexandria, the Patriarchate of Antioch, and the Patriarchate of Jerusalem. The Eastern Orthodox churches \"are defined positively by their adherence to the dogmatic definitions of the seven [ecumenical] councils, by the strong sense of not being a sect or a denomination but simply continuing the Christian church, and, despite their varied origins, by adherence to the Byzantine rite\". Those churches are negatively defined by their rejection of papal immediate and universal supremacy.\nThe seven ecumenical councils recognised by the Eastern Orthodox churches are: Nicaea I, Constantinople I, Ephesus, Chalcedon, Constantinople II, Constantinople III, and Nicaea II. These churches consider the Quinisext Council as \"shar[ing] the ecumenical authority of Constantinople III.\" \"By an agreement that appears to be in place in the [Eastern] Orthodox world, possibly the council held in 879 to vindicate the Patriarch Photius will at some future date be recognized as the eighth [ecumenical] council\" by the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nWestern Rite Orthodoxy exists both outside and inside Eastern Orthodoxy. Within Eastern Orthodoxy, it is practised by a vicariate of the Antiochian Orthodox church. Although there are roughly 3,000 members worldwide, spread across about 50 scattered parishes, Western Rite Orthodoxy remains a very small minority within the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nName.\nIn keeping with the church's teaching on universality and with the Nicene Creed, Eastern Orthodox authorities such as Raphael of Brooklyn have insisted that the full name of the church has always included the term \"Catholic\", as in \"Holy Orthodox Catholic Apostolic Church\".\nThe official name of the Eastern Orthodox Church is the \"Orthodox Catholic Church\". It is the name by which the church refers to itself and which is issued in its liturgical or canonical texts. Eastern Orthodox theologians refer to the church as Catholic. This name and longer variants containing \"Catholic\" are also recognised and referenced in other books and publications by secular or non-Eastern Orthodox writers. The catechism of Philaret (Drozdov) of Moscow published in the 19th century is titled: \"The Longer Catechism of the Orthodox, Catholic, Eastern Church\" ().\nFrom ancient times through the first millennium, Greek was the most prevalent shared language in the demographic regions where the Byzantine Empire flourished, and Greek, being the language in which the New Testament was written, was the primary liturgical language of the church. For this reason, the eastern churches were sometimes identified as \"Greek\" (in contrast to the \"Roman\" or \"Latin\" church, which used a Latin translation of the Bible), even before the Great Schism of 1054. After 1054, \"Greek Orthodox\" or \"Greek Catholic\" marked a church as being in communion with Constantinople, much as \"Catholic\" did for communion with the Catholic Church.\nIn Hungarian, the church is still commonly called \"Eastern Greek\" (). This identification with Greek, however, became increasingly confusing with time. Missionaries brought Eastern Orthodoxy to many regions without ethnic Greeks, where the Greek language was not spoken. In addition, struggles between Rome and Constantinople to control parts of Southeastern Europe resulted in the conversion of some churches to the Catholic Church, which then also used \"Greek Catholic\" to indicate their continued use of the Byzantine rites. Today, only a minority of Eastern Orthodox adherents use Greek as the language of worship.\n\"Eastern\", then, indicates the geographical element in the church's origin and development, while \"Orthodox\" indicates the faith, as well as communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople. There are additional Christian churches in the east that are in communion with neither the Catholic Church nor the Eastern Orthodox Church, who tend to be distinguished by the category named \"Oriental Orthodox\". While the Eastern Orthodox Church continues officially to call itself \"Catholic\", for reasons of universality, the common title of \"Eastern Orthodox Church\" avoids casual confusion with the Catholic Church.\nOrthodoxy.\nThe first known use of the phrase \"the catholic Church\" (\"he katholike ekklesia\") occurred in a letter written c.\u2009AD\u00a0110 from one Greek church to another (Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans). The letter states: \"Wheresoever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be, even as where Jesus may be, there is the universal [katholike] Church.\" Thus, almost from the beginning, Christians referred to the Christian Church as the \"one, holy, catholic (from the Greek \u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03bf\u03bb\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae, 'according to the whole, universal') and apostolic Church\". The Eastern Orthodox Church claims that it is today the continuation and preservation of that same early church.\nA number of other Christian churches also make a similar claim: the Catholic Church, the Anglican Communion, the Church of the East, and the Oriental Orthodox. In the Eastern Orthodox view, the Church of the East and Oriental Orthodox left the Orthodox Church in the years following the Third Ecumenical Council of Ephesus (431) and the Fourth Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon (451), respectively, in their refusal to accept those councils' Christological definitions; conversely, the latter two churches hold the same view towards the Eastern Orthodox Church regarding each respective council. Similarly, the churches in Rome and Constantinople separated in an event known as the East\u2013West Schism, traditionally dated to the year 1054, although it was more a gradual process than a sudden break.\nTo all these churches, the claim to catholicity (universality, oneness with the ancient Church) is important for multiple doctrinal reasons that have more bearing internally in each church than in their relation to the others, now separated in faith. The meaning of holding to a faith that is true is the primary reason why anyone's statement of which church split off from which other has any significance at all; the issues go as deep as the schisms. The depth of this meaning in the Eastern Orthodox Church is registered first in its use of the word \"Orthodox\" itself, a union of Greek \"orthos\" (\"straight\", \"correct\", \"true\", \"right\") and \"doxa\" (\"common belief\", from the ancient verb \u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u03ad\u03c9-\u03b4\u03bf\u03ba\u1ff6 which is translated \"to believe\", \"to think\", \"to consider\", \"to imagine\", \"to assume\").\nThe dual meanings of \"doxa\", with \"glory\" or \"glorification\" (of God by the church and of the church by God), especially in worship, yield the pair \"correct belief\" and \"true worship\". Together, these express the core of a fundamental teaching about the inseparability of belief and worship and their role in drawing the church together with Christ. All Slavic Orthodox churches use the title \"Pravoslavie\" (Cyrillic: \u041f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043e\u0441\u043b\u0430\u0432\u0438\u0435), meaning \"correctness of glorification\", to denote what is in English \"Orthodoxy\", while the Georgians use the title \"Martlmadidebeli\" ().\nThe term \"Eastern Church\" (the geographic east in the East\u2013West Schism) has been used to distinguish it from western Christendom (the geographic West, which at first came to designate the Catholic communion, later also the various Protestant and Anglican branches). \"Eastern\" is used to indicate that the highest concentrations of the Eastern Orthodox Church presence remain in the eastern part of the Christian world, although it is growing worldwide. Orthodox Christians throughout the world use various ethnic or national jurisdictional titles, or more inclusively, the title \"Eastern Orthodox\", \"Orthodox Catholic\", or simply \"Orthodox\".\nWhat unites Orthodox Christians is the catholic faith as carried through holy tradition. That faith is expressed most fundamentally in scripture and worship, and the latter most essentially through baptism and in the Divine Liturgy.\nThe lines of even this test can blur, however, when differences that arise are not due to doctrine, but to recognition of jurisdiction. As the Eastern Orthodox Church has spread into the West and over the world, the church as a whole has yet to sort out all the inter-jurisdictional issues that have arisen in the expansion, leaving some areas of doubt about what is proper church governance. Moreover, as in the ancient church persecutions, the aftermath of persecutions of Christians in communist nations has complicated some issues of governance that have yet to be completely resolved.\nAll members of the Eastern Orthodox Church profess the same faith, regardless of race or nationality, jurisdiction or local custom, or century of birth. Holy tradition encompasses the understandings and means by which that unity of faith is transmitted across boundaries of time, geography, and culture. It is a continuity that exists only inasmuch as it lives within Christians themselves. It is not static, nor an observation of rules, but rather a sharing of observations that spring both from within and also in keeping with others, even others who lived lives long past. The church proclaims the Holy Spirit maintains the unity and consistency of holy tradition to preserve the integrity of the faith within the church, as given in the scriptural promises.\nOrthodoxy asserts that its shared beliefs, and its theology, exist within holy tradition and cannot be separated from it, and that their meaning is not expressed in mere words alone; that doctrine cannot be understood unless it is prayed; and that it must also be lived in order to be prayed, that without action, the prayer is idle, empty, and in vain, and therefore the theology of demons.\nCatholicity.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church considers itself to be both orthodox and catholic. The doctrine of the Catholicity of the Church, as derived from the Nicene Creed, is essential to Eastern Orthodox ecclesiology. The term \"Catholicity of the Church\" (Greek: ) is used in its original sense, as a designation for the universality of the Christian Church, centred around Christ. Therefore, the Eastern Orthodox notion of catholicity is not centred around any singular see, unlike the Catholic Church which has one earthly centre.\nDue to the influence of the Catholic Church in the West, where the English language itself developed, the words \"catholic\" and \"catholicity\" are sometimes used to refer to that church specifically. However, the more prominent dictionary sense given for general use is still the one shared by other languages, implying breadth and universality, reflecting comprehensive scope. In a Christian context, the Christian Church, as identified with the original church founded by Christ and his apostles, is said to be catholic (or universal) in regard to its union with Christ in faith.\nJust as Christ is indivisible, so are union with him and faith in him, whereby the Christian Church is \"universal\", unseparated, and comprehensive, including all who share that faith. Orthodox bishop Kallistos Ware has called that \"simple Christianity\". That is the sense of early and patristic usage wherein the church usually refers to itself as the \"Catholic Church\", whose faith is the \"Orthodox faith\". It is also the sense within the phrase \"one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church\", found in the Nicene Creed, and referred to in Orthodox worship, e.g. in the litany of the catechumens in the Divine Liturgy.\nWith the mutual excommunications of the East\u2013West Schism in 1054, the churches in Rome and Constantinople each viewed the other as having departed from the true church, leaving a smaller but still-catholic church in place. Each retained the \"Catholic\" part of its title, the \"\"Roman\" Catholic Church\" (or Catholic Church) on the one hand, and the \"\"Orthodox\" Catholic Church\" on the other, each of which was defined in terms of inter-communion with either Rome or Constantinople. While the Eastern Orthodox Church recognises what it shares in common with other churches, including the Catholic Church, it sees catholicity in terms of complete union in communion and faith, with the Church throughout all time, and the sharing remains incomplete when not shared fully.\nHistory.\nEarly Church.\nPaul and the Apostles travelled extensively throughout the Roman Empire, including Asia Minor, establishing churches in major communities, with the first churches appearing in Jerusalem and the Holy Land, then in Antioch, Ethiopia, Egypt, Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Thessalonica, Illyricum, and Byzantium, which centuries later would become prominent as the New Rome. Christianity encountered considerable resistance in the Roman Empire, mostly because its adherents refused to comply with the demands of the Roman state\u2014often even when their lives were threatened\u2014by offering sacrifices to the pagan gods. Despite persecution, skepticism, and initial social stigma, the Christian Church spread, particularly following the conversion of Emperor Constantine I in AD 312.\nBy the fourth century, Christianity was present in numerous regions well beyond the Levant. A number of influential schools of thought had arisen, particularly the Alexandrian and Antiochian philosophical approaches. Other groups, such as the Arians, had also managed to gain influence. However, their positions caused theological conflicts within the church, thus prompting the Emperor Constantine to call for a great ecumenical synod to define the church's position against the growing, often widely diverging, philosophical and theological interpretations of Christianity. He made it possible for this council to meet not only by providing a location but also by offering to pay for the transportation of all the existing bishops of the church. Most modern Christian churches regard this synod, commonly called the First Council of Nicaea or more generally the First Ecumenical Council, as of major importance.\nEcumenical councils.\nSeveral doctrinal disputes from the fourth century onwards led to the calling of ecumenical councils. In the Orthodox Church, an ecumenical council is the supreme authority that can be invoked to resolve contested issues of the faith. As such, these councils have been held to resolve the most important theological matters that came to be disputed within the Christian Church. Many lesser disagreements were resolved through local councils in the areas where they arose, before they grew significant enough to require an ecumenical council.\nThere are seven councils authoritatively recognised as ecumenical by the Eastern Orthodox Church:\nThere are also two other councils which are considered ecumenical by some Eastern Orthodox:\nOther major councils.\nIn addition to these councils, there have been a number of other significant councils meant to further define the Eastern Orthodox position. They are the Synods of Constantinople, in 1484, 1583, 1755, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Ia\u0219i in 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem in 1672. Another council convened in June 2016 to discuss many modern phenomena, other Christian confessions, Eastern Orthodoxy's relation with other religions and fasting disciplines.\nRoman/Byzantine Empire.\nConstantinople is generally considered to be the centre and the \"cradle of Orthodox Christian civilisation\". From the mid-5th century to the early 13th century, Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe. Eastern Christian culture reached its golden age during the high point of the Byzantine Empire and continued to flourish in Ukraine and Russia, after the fall of Constantinople. Numerous autocephalous churches were established in Europe: Greece, Georgia, Ukraine, as well as in Russia and Asia.\nIn the 530s the Church of the Holy Wisdom (Hagia Sophia) was built in Constantinople under Emperor Justinian I. Beginning with subsequent Byzantine architecture, Hagia Sophia became the paradigmatic Orthodox church form and its architectural style was emulated by Ottoman mosques a thousand years later. Being the episcopal see of the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople, it remained the world's largest cathedral for nearly a thousand years, until Seville Cathedral was completed in 1520. Hagia Sophia has been described as \"holding a unique position in the Christian world\", and architectural and cultural icon of Byzantine and Eastern Orthodox civilisation, and it is considered the epitome of Byzantine architecture and is said to have \"changed the history of architecture\".\nEarly schisms.\nThere are the \"Nestorian\" churches resulted from the reaction of the Council of Ephesus (431), which are the earliest surviving Eastern Christian churches that keep the faith of only the first two ecumenical councils, i.e., the First Council of Nicaea (325) and the First Council of Constantinople (381) as legitimate. \"Nestorian\" is an outsider's term for a tradition that predated the influence of Nestorius, the origin of which might lie in certain sections of the School of Antioch or via Nestorius' teachers Theodore of Mopsuestia or Diodore of Tarsus. The modern incarnation of the \"Nestorian Church\" is commonly referred to as \"the Assyrian Church\" or fully as the Assyrian Church of the East.\nThe church in Egypt (Patriarchate of Alexandria) split into two groups following the Council of Chalcedon (451), over a dispute about the relation between the divine and human natures of Jesus. Eventually this led to each group anathematising the other. Those that remained in communion with the other patriarchs (by accepting the Council of Chalcedon) are known today as the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, where the adjective \"Greek\" refers to their ties to the Greek-speaking culture of the Byzantine Empire.\nThose who disagreed with the findings of the Council of Chalcedon were the majority in Egypt. Today, they are known as the Coptic Orthodox Church, having maintained a separate patriarchate. The Coptic Orthodox Church is currently the largest Christian church in Egypt and the entire Middle East. Likewise, in the Levant and Mesopotamia, another schism occurred to the Patriarchate of Antioch, resulting in the establishment of two parallel patriarchates which endure today: the Syriac Orthodox Church of Antioch and the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch.\nThose who disagreed with the Council of Chalcedon are called \"Oriental Orthodox\" to distinguish them from the \"Eastern Orthodox\", who accepted the Council of Chalcedon. Oriental Orthodox are also sometimes referred to as \"non-Chalcedonians\" or \"anti-Chalcedonians\". The Oriental Orthodox Church denies that it is monophysite and prefers the term \"miaphysite\", to denote the \"united\" nature of Jesus (two natures united into one composite nature) consistent with Cyril's theology: \"The term union\u00a0... signifies the concurrence in one reality of those things which are understood to be united\" and \"the Word who is ineffably united with it in a manner beyond all description\" (Cyril of Alexandria, \"On the Unity of Christ\"). This is also defined in the Coptic liturgy, where it is mentioned \"He made it [his humanity] one with his divinity without mingling, without confusion and without alteration\", and \"His divinity parted not from his humanity for a single moment nor a twinkling of an eye.\" They do not accept the teachings of Eutyches, or Eutychianism. Both the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches formally believe themselves to be the continuation of the true church.\nConversion of the South and East Slavs.\nIn the ninth and tenth centuries, Christianity made great inroads into pagan Europe, including Bulgaria (864) and later Kievan Rus' (988). This work was made possible by Cyril and Methodius of Thessaloniki, two brothers chosen by Byzantine emperor Michael III to fulfil the request of Rastislav of Moravia for teachers who could minister to the Moravians in their own language. Cyril and Methodius began translating the divine liturgy, other liturgical texts, and the Gospels along with some other scriptural texts into local languages; with time, as these translations were copied by speakers of other dialects, the hybrid literary language Church Slavonic was created. Originally sent to convert the Slavs of Great Moravia, Cyril and Methodius were forced to compete with Frankish missionaries from the Roman diocese; their disciples were driven out of Great Moravia in AD 886 and emigrated to Bulgaria.\nAfter the Christianisation of Bulgaria in 864, the disciples of Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria, the most important being Clement of Ohrid and Naum of Preslav, were of great importance to the Orthodox faith in the First Bulgarian Empire. In a short time they managed to prepare and instruct the future Bulgarian clergy into the biblical texts and in AD 870 the Fourth Council of Constantinople granted the Bulgarians the oldest organised autocephalous Slavic Orthodox Church, which shortly thereafter became Patriarchate. The success of the conversion of the Bulgarians facilitated the conversion of the East Slavs. A major event in this effort was the development of the Cyrillic script in Bulgaria, at the Preslav Literary School in the ninth century; this script, along with the liturgical Old Church Slavonic, also called Old Bulgarian, was declared official in Bulgaria in 893.\nThe work of Cyril and Methodius and their disciples had a major impact on the Serbs as well. They accepted Christianity collectively along familial and tribal lines, a gradual process that occurred between the seventh and ninth centuries. In commemoration of their baptisms, each Serbian family or tribe began to celebrate an exclusively Serbian custom called Slava (patron saint) in a special way to honour the saint on whose day they received the sacrament of baptism. It is the most solemn day of the year for all Serbs of the Orthodox faith and has played a role of vital importance in the history of the Serbian people. Slava remains a celebration of the conversion of the Serbian people, which the church blessed and proclaimed a church institution.\nThe missionaries to the East and South Slavs had great success in part because they used the people's native language rather than Greek, the predominant language of the Byzantine Empire, or Latin, as the Roman priests did. Perhaps the greatest legacy of their efforts is the Russian Orthodox Church, which is the largest of the Orthodox churches.\nGreat Schism (1054).\nIn the 11th century, what was recognised as the Great Schism took place between Rome and Constantinople, which led to separation between the Church of the West, the Catholic Church, and the Eastern Byzantine churches, now the Orthodox. There were doctrinal issues like the filioque clause and the authority of the Pope involved in the split, but these were greatly exacerbated by political factors of both Church and state, and by cultural and linguistic differences between Latins and Greeks. Regarding papal supremacy, the Eastern half grew disillusioned with the Pope's centralisation of power, as well as his blatant attempts of excluding the Eastern half in regard to papal approvals. It had previously been the case that the emperor would have a say when a new Pope was elected, but towards the high Middle Ages, the Christians in Rome were slowly consolidating power and removing Byzantine influence. However, even before this exclusionary tendency from the West, well before 1054, the Eastern and Western halves of the Church were in perpetual conflict, particularly during the periods of Eastern iconoclasm and the Photian schism.\nThe final breach is often considered to have arisen after the capture and sacking of Constantinople by the Fourth Crusade in 1204; the final break with Rome occurred circa 1450. The sacking of Church of Holy Wisdom and establishment of the Latin Empire as a seeming attempt to supplant the Orthodox Byzantine Empire in 1204 is viewed with some rancour to the present day. In 2004, Pope John Paul II extended a formal apology for the sacking of Constantinople in 1204, which had also been strongly condemned by the Pope at the time, Innocent III; the apology was formally accepted by Patriarch Bartholomew of Constantinople. However, many items stolen during this time, such as holy relics and riches, are still held in various European cities, particularly Venice.\nReunion was attempted twice, at the 1274 Second Council of Lyon and the 1439 Council of Florence. The Council of Florence briefly reestablished communion between East and West, which lasted until after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. In each case, however, the councils were rejected by the Orthodox people as a whole, and the union of Florence also became very politically difficult after Constantinople came under Ottoman rule. However, in the time since, several local Orthodox Christian churches have renewed union with Rome, known as the Eastern Catholic Churches. Recent decades have seen a renewal of ecumenical spirit and dialogue between the Catholic and Orthodox churches.\nGreek Church under Ottoman rule.\nThe Byzantine Empire never fully recovered from the sack of Constantinople in 1204. Over the next two centuries, it entered a precipitous decline in both territory and influence. In 1453, a much-diminished Byzantine Empire fell to the Ottoman Empire, ending what was once the most powerful state in the Orthodox Christian world, if not in all Christendom. By this time Egypt, another major centre of Eastern Christianity, had been under Muslim control for some seven centuries; most Eastern Orthodox communities across southeastern Europe gradually came under Ottoman rule by the 16th century.\nUnder the Ottomans, the Greek Orthodox Church acquired substantial power as an autonomous \"millet\". The ecumenical patriarch was the religious and administrative ruler of the \"R\u00fbm\", an Ottoman administrative unit meaning \"Roman\", which encompassed all Orthodox subjects of the Empire regardless of ethnicity. While legally subordinate to Muslims and subject to various restrictions, the Orthodox community was generally tolerated until the rise of nationalist movements in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and left to govern its own internal affairs, both religiously and legally. Until the empire's dissolution in the early 20th century, Orthodox Christians would remain the largest non-Muslim minority, and at times among the wealthiest and most politically influential.\nDuring the period 1914\u20131923 in Asia Minor (Anatolia) the Greek genocide took place by the Ottomans. During the Greek genocide, many Orthodox Christians were persecuted and killed. The culmination of the martyrdom was the Asia Minor Catastrophe with the killing of a large number of Orthodox. Among them, 347 clergymen of the Smyrna region and Metropolitan of Smyrna Chrysostomos were tortured and killed. The period 1923\u20131924 was followed by the obligatory population exchange between Greece and Turkey.\nRussian Orthodox Church in the Russian Empire.\nBy the time most Orthodox communities came under Muslim rule in the mid-15th century, Orthodoxy was very strong in Russia, which had maintained close cultural and political ties with the Byzantine Empire; roughly two decades after the fall of Constantinople, Ivan III of Russia married Sophia Palaiologina, a niece of the last Byzantine Emperor Constantine XI, and styled himself Tsar (\"Caesar\") or \"imperator\". In 1547, his grandson Ivan IV, a devout Orthodox Christian, cemented the title as \"Tsar of All Rus\", establishing Russia's first centralised state with divinely appointed rulers. In 1589, the Patriarchate of Constantinople granted autocephalous status to Moscow, the capital of what was now the largest Orthodox Christian polity; the city thereafter referred to itself as the Third Rome \u2014the cultural and religious heir of Constantinople.\nUntil 1666, when Patriarch Nikon was deposed by the tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church had been independent of the State. In 1721, the first Russian Emperor, Peter I, abolished completely the patriarchate and effectively made the church a department of the government, ruled by a most holy synod composed of senior bishops and lay bureaucrats appointed by the Emperor himself. Over time, Imperial Russia would style itself a protector and patron of all Orthodox Christians, especially those within the Ottoman Empire.\nFor nearly 200 years, until the Bolsheviks' October Revolution of 1917, the Russian Orthodox Church remained, in effect, a governmental agency and an instrument of tsarist rule. It was used to varying degrees in imperial campaigns of Russification, and was even allowed to levy taxes on peasants. The church's close ties with the state came to a head under Nicholas I (1825\u20131855), who explicitly made Orthodoxy a core doctrine of imperial unity and legitimacy. The Orthodox faith became further tied to Russian identity and nationalism, while the church was further subordinated to the interests of the state. Consequently, Russian Orthodox Church, along with the imperial regime to which it belonged, came to be presented as an enemy of the people by the Bolsheviks and other Russian revolutionaries.\nEastern Orthodox churches under Communist rule.\nAfter the October Revolution of 1917, part of the clergy of the Russian Orthodox Church fled abroad to escape Bolshevik persecutions, founding an independent church in exile, which reunified with its Russian counterpart in 2007. Others formed the present-day Orthodox Church in America, and the American Orthodox Catholic Church (the latter whose bishops were considered \"episcopi vagantes\", yet also accepted back into mainstream Orthodoxy). Some actions against Orthodox priests and believers along with execution included torture, being sent to prison camps, labour camps or mental hospitals. In the first five years after the Bolshevik revolution, 28 bishops and 1,200 priests were executed.\nAfter Nazi Germany's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941, Joseph Stalin revived the Russian Orthodox Church to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. By 1957 about 22,000 Russian Orthodox churches had become active. However, in 1959, Nikita Khrushchev initiated his own campaign against the Russian Orthodox Church and forced the closure of about 12,000 churches. It is estimated that 50,000 clergy had been executed between the revolution and the end of the Khrushchev era. Members of the church hierarchy were jailed or forced out, their places taken by docile clergy, many of whom had ties with the KGB. By 1985 fewer than 7,000 churches remained active.\nAlbania was the only state to have declared itself officially fully atheist. In some other Communist states such as Romania, the Romanian Orthodox Church as an organisation enjoyed relative freedom and even prospered, albeit under strict secret police control. That, however, did not rule out demolishing churches and monasteries as part of broader systematisation (urban planning), and state persecution of individual believers. As an example of the latter, Romania stands out as a country which ran a specialised institution where many Orthodox (along with people of other faiths) were subjected to psychological punishment or torture and mind control experimentation in order to force them give up their religious convictions. However, this was only supported by one faction within the regime, and lasted only three years. The Communist authorities closed down the prison in 1952, and punished many of those responsible for abuses (twenty of them were sentenced to death).\nPost-communism to 21st century.\nSince the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and the subsequent Fall of Communist governments across the Orthodox world, there has been marked growth in Christian Orthodoxy, particularly in Russia. According to the Pew Research Religion &amp; Public Life Project, between 1991 and 2008, the share of Russian adults identifying as Orthodox Christian rose from 31 per cent to 72 per cent, based on analysis of three waves of data (1991, 1998 and 2008) from the International Social Survey Programme (ISSP), a collaborative effort involving social scientists in about 50 countries.\nPew research conducted in 2017 found a doubling in the global Orthodox population since the early 20th century, with the greatest resurgence in Russia. In the former Soviet Union\u2014where the largest Orthodox communities live\u2014self-identified Orthodox Christians generally report low levels of observance and piety: In Russia, only 6% of Orthodox Christian adults reported attending church at least weekly, 15% say religion is \"very important\" in their lives, and 18% say they pray daily; other former Soviet republics display similarly low levels of religious observance.\nMoscow\u2013Constantinople schisms.\n1996.\nSince 1923, the Orthodox Church of Estonia separated from the Russian Orthodox Church due to the imprisonment of Patriarch Tikhon of Moscow, and the church in the Republic of Estonia falling out of communication with the Russian Church. They petitioned to be placed under direct control of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, operating as an autonomous church. In 1944 the Soviet Union annexed Estonia and outlawed the Orthodox Church of Estonia, forcefully bringing their churches back under the control of the Moscow Patriarch. However, the church's Primate, Metropolitan Aleksander, fled to Sweden with 21 clergymen and 8,000 followers and established a synod there operating there throughout the Cold War.\nIn 1993, the synod of the Orthodox Church of Estonia in Exile was re-registered and on 20 February 1996, Bartholomew I of Constantinople restored the church's position as subordinate to Constantinople, not Moscow. Patriarch Alexy II of Moscow, who had been born in Estonia, rejected this loss of territory, and severed ties with Patriarch Bartholomew on February 23, removing his name from the diptychs. The two sides would then negotiate in Z\u00fcrich, and a settlement was reached on 16 May 1996. In it, the ethnically Estonian population of Estonia would be under the jurisdiction of the Estonian Apostolic Orthodox Church, while the ethnically Russian population of Estonia would be under the jurisdiction of the Estonian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate. After signing the document the Russian Church restored communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate.\n2018.\nSince the Baptism of Rus' in 867 the Orthodox church in Ukraine was led by the Metropolitan of Kiev and all Rus' who was subordinate to the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople and was largely governed by the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth since the territory was conquered in the Galicia\u2013Volhynia Wars, ending in 1392. Poland-Lithuania lost the territory to Russia as part of the peace deal of the Great Northern War in 1654. In 1686 Dionysius IV of Constantinople transferred the territory to the Patriarch of Moscow and all Rus'. In 1924, Orthodox churches in Ukraine besides the Metropolitan of Kyiv were placed under the jurisdiction of the Polish Orthodox Church by the Ecumenical Patriarch as an autonomous church, however, the Russian Church never agreed to nor recognised this transfer, mostly due to Patriarch Tikhon of Moscow and most of the Russian Church's leaders being imprisoned by Soviet officials. The Soviet Union, initially, had a policy of repression against the Orthodox Church, regardless of its denomination. However, after the start of the Nazi Invasion of the Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin transformed the Russian Church into a propaganda tool to intensify patriotic support for the war effort. Following Soviet victory in the war, various autonomous and Independent Orthodox churches around eastern Europe were forcefully integrated or reintegrated into the Russian Church, including the church in Ukraine. Many of the church's leaders at this time were installed and closely monitored by the NKVD to ensure the church's support for the Soviet Union.\nThis situation led to the rise of rival, anti-Russian and anti-Soviet churches within Ukraine, including the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC), founded in 1917 which declared itself the restored autonomous church that existed prior to 1686 but had been eradicated within Soviet Ukraine by the 1930s. The church was largely supported by Ukrainian \u00e9migr\u00e9s and diaspora, and was restored as a legally recognised church by the Ukrainian government in 1991. In 1992, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church \u2013 Kyiv Patriarchate (UOC-KP) came into existence, being founded by members of the Russian Church defrocked for insubordination, alongside support with the Ukrainian \u00e9migr\u00e9 community. The church submitted a request for Ukrainian autocephaly at its founding synod in Kyiv in 1992. These churches were competing with the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (UOC-MP), the Russian Church in Ukraine.\nOn 11 October 2018, the Holy Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople revoked the Russian Church's letter of issue, allowing them to ordain the Metropolitan of Kyiv, re-established a stauropegion in Kyiv, and lifted the Russian Church's excommunication of members of the UAOC and the UOC-KP. In response, on 15 October, the Holy Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church severed all ties with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople and barred all members of the Russian Church from receiving communion or sacraments from any churches with ties to the Ecumenical Patriarchate. On 15 December 2018, the UAOC and UOC-KP voted to merge in the Unification council of the Eastern Orthodox churches of Ukraine, forming the restored Orthodox Church of Ukraine, with Epiphanius I of Ukraine, of the UOC-KP, becoming the first primate of the unified church. On 5 January 2019, Bartholomew I signed the official tomos that granted autocephaly to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine.\nIn addition to severing ties with the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the Russian Church has also severed communion with Archbishop Ieronymos II of Athens primate of the Church of Greece, Patriarch Theodore II of Alexandria, and Archbishop Chrysostomos II of Cyprus. In response to the severing of ties with the Ecumenical Patriarchate, the Archdiocese of Russian Orthodox Churches in Western Europe (AROCWE), voted to dissolve itself, although the vote failed, it resulted in a split in AROCWE, with several churches leaving to form the \"Vicariate of Russian Tradition of the Metropolis of France\", while John (Renneteau), head of the AROCWE, personally joined the Russian Church. Additionally, during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the UOC-MP severed all ties with the Russian Church.\nOrganisation and leadership.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is a fellowship of autocephalous (; \"self-headed\") churches, with the ecumenical patriarch of Constantinople recognised as having \"primus inter pares\" status. The patriarch of Constantinople has the honour of primacy, but his title is only \"first among equals\" and he has no real authority over churches other than the Constantinopolitan church. Rather, his role is limited to defined prerogatives interpreted by the ecumenical patriarch. At times, though, the office of the ecumenical patriarch has been accused of Constantinopolitan or Eastern papism.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church considers Jesus Christ to be the head of the Church and the Church to be his body. It is believed that Church authority and the grace of God is directly passed down to Orthodox bishops and other clergy through the laying on of hands\u2014a practice started by the New Testament apostles\u2014and that this unbroken historical link is an essential element of the true church (; ; ) The Eastern Orthodox Church asserts that apostolic succession requires apostolic faith, and bishops without apostolic faith, who are in heresy, forfeit their claim to apostolic succession. Orthodox churches differentiate themselves from other Christian churches by practising \"ritual and liturgy... rich in mystery and symbolism,\" similar to their views on the sacraments.\nThe Eastern Orthodox communion is organised into several regional churches, which are either autocephalous or lower-ranking autonomous (\"self-governing\") church bodies unified in theology and worship. These include the fourteen autocephalous churches of the Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, Georgia, Cyprus, Bulgaria, Serbia, Russia, Greece, Poland, Romania, Albania, and the Czech Republic and Slovakia, which were officially invited to the Pan-Orthodox Council of 2016; the Orthodox Church in America formed in 1970; the autocephalous Orthodox Church of Ukraine created in 2019; the Macedonian Orthodox Church \u2013 Ohrid Archbishopric, granted autocephaly by the Serbian Orthodox Church in 2022; and a number of autonomous churches. Each church has a ruling bishop and a holy synod to administer its jurisdiction and lead the Eastern Orthodox Church in the preservation and teaching of the apostolic and patristic traditions and church practices.\nEach bishop has a territory (see) over which he governs. His main duty is to make sure the traditions and practices of the Eastern Orthodox Church are preserved. Bishops are equal in authority and cannot interfere in the jurisdiction of another bishop. Administratively, these bishops and their territories are organised into various autocephalous groups or synods of bishops who gather together at least twice each year to discuss the state of affairs within their respective sees. While bishops and their autocephalous synods have the ability to administer guidance in individual cases, their actions do not usually set precedents that affect the entire Eastern Orthodox Church. Bishops are almost always chosen from the monastic ranks and must remain unmarried.\nChurch councils.\nThe ecumenical councils followed a democratic form, with each bishop having one vote. Though present and allowed to speak before the council, members of the Imperial Roman/Byzantine court, abbots, priests, deacons, monks and laymen were not allowed to vote. The primary goal of these great synods was to verify and confirm the fundamental beliefs of the Great Christian Church as truth, and to remove as heresy any false teachings that would threaten the Christian Church. The pope of Rome at that time held the position of \"primus inter pares\" (\"first among equals\") and, while he was not present at any of the councils, he continued to hold this title until the East\u2013West Schism of 1054.\nOther councils have helped to define the Eastern Orthodox position, specifically the Quinisext Council, the Synods of Constantinople, 879\u2013880, 1341, 1347, 1351, 1583, 1819, and 1872, the Synod of Ia\u0219i, 1642, and the Pan-Orthodox Synod of Jerusalem, 1672; the Pan-Orthodox Council, held in Greece in 2016, was the only such Eastern Orthodox council in modern times.\nAccording to Eastern Orthodox teaching the position of \"first among equals\" gives no additional power or authority to the bishop that holds it, but rather that this person sits as organisational head of a council of equals (like a president).\nOne of the decisions made by the First Council of Constantinople (the second ecumenical council, meeting in 381) and supported by later such councils was that the Patriarch of Constantinople should be given equal honour to the Pope of Rome since Constantinople was considered to be the \"New Rome\". According to the third canon of the second ecumenical council: \"Because [Constantinople] is new Rome, the bishop of Constantinople is to enjoy the privileges of honor after the bishop of Rome\".\nThe 28th canon of the fourth ecumenical council clarified this point by stating: \"For the Fathers rightly granted privileges to the throne of Old Rome because it was the royal city. And the One Hundred and Fifty most religious Bishops (i.e. the second ecumenical council in 381) actuated by the same consideration, gave equal privileges to the most holy throne of New Rome, justly judging that the city which is honoured with the Sovereignty and the Senate, and enjoys equal privileges with the old imperial Rome, should in ecclesiastical matters also be magnified as she is.\"\nBecause of the schism, the Eastern Orthodox no longer recognise the primacy of the pope of Rome. The patriarch of Constantinople therefore, like the Pope before him, now enjoys the title of \"first among equals\".\nAdherents.\nThe most reliable estimates currently available number Eastern Orthodox adherents at around 300 million, making Eastern Orthodoxy the second largest Christian communion in the world after the Catholic Church.\nAccording to the 2015 Yearbook of International Religious Demography, as of 2010, the Eastern Orthodox population was 4% of the global population, declining from 7.1% in 1910. The study also found a decrease in proportional terms, with Eastern Orthodox Christians making up 12.2% of the world's total Christian population in 2015 compared to 20.4% a century earlier. A 2017 report by the Pew Research Center reached similar figures, noting that Eastern Orthodoxy has seen slower growth and less geographic spread than Catholicism and Protestantism, which were driven by colonialism and missionary activity across the world.\nOver two-thirds of all Eastern Orthodox members are concentrated in Southeast Europe, Eastern Europe and Russia, with significant minorities in Central Asia and the Levant. However, Eastern Orthodoxy has become more globalised over the last century, seeing greater growth in Western Europe, the Americas, and parts of Africa; churches are present in the major cities of most countries. Adherents constitute the largest single religious community in Russia\u2014which is home to roughly half the world's Eastern Orthodox Christians\u2014and are the majority in Ukraine, Romania, Belarus, Greece, Serbia, Bulgaria, Moldova, Georgia, North Macedonia, Cyprus, and Montenegro; communities also dominate the disputed territories of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria. Significant Eastern Orthodox minorities exist in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Latvia, Estonia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Syria, and many other countries.\nEastern Orthodox Christianity is the fastest growing religion in certain Western countries, primarily through labour migration from Eastern Europe, and to a lesser degree conversion. Ireland saw a doubling of its Eastern Orthodox population between 2006 and 2011. Spain and Germany have the largest communities in Western Europe, at roughly 1.5 million each, followed by Italy with around 900,000 and France with between 500,000 and 700,000.\nIn the Americas, four countries have over 100,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians: Canada, Mexico, Brazil, and the United States; all but the latter had fewer than 20,000 at the turn of the 20th century. The U.S. has seen its community more than quadruple since 1910, from 460,000 to 1.8 million as of 2017; consequently, the number of Eastern Orthodox parishes has been growing, with a 16% increase between 2000 and 2010.\nTurkey, which for centuries once had one of the largest Eastern Orthodox communities, saw its overall Christian population fall from roughly one-fifth in 1914 to 2.5% in 1927. This was predominantly due to the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, which saw most Christian territories become independent nations. The remaining Christian population was reduced further by large-scale genocides against the Armenian, Greek, Assyrian communities; subsequent population exchanges between Greece and Turkey and Bulgaria and Turkey; and associated emigration of Christians to foreign countries (mostly in Europe and the Americas). Today, only 0.2% of Turkey's population represent various Christian denominations (320,000).\nTheology.\nTrinity.\nEastern Orthodox Christians believe in the Trinity, three distinct, divine persons (\"hypostases\"), without overlap or modality among them, who each have the same divine essence (\"ousia\", Greek: \u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1)\u2014uncreated, immaterial, and eternal. These three persons are typically distinguished by their relation to each other. The Father is eternal and not begotten and does not proceed from any, the Son is eternal and begotten of the Father, and the Holy Spirit is eternal and proceeds from the Father. Orthodox doctrine regarding the Trinity is summarised in the Nicene Creed.\nEastern Orthodox Christians believe in a monotheistic conception of God (God is only one), which is both transcendent (wholly independent of, and removed from, the material universe) and immanent (involved in the material universe).\nIn discussing God's relationship to his creation, Eastern Orthodox theology distinguishes between God's eternal essence, which is totally transcendent, and his \"uncreated energies\", which is how he reaches humanity. The God who is transcendent and the God who touches mankind are one and the same. That is, these energies are not something that proceed from God or that God produces, but rather they are God himself: distinct, yet inseparable from God's inner being. This view is often called Palamism.\nIn understanding the Trinity as \"one God in three persons\", \"three persons\" is not to be emphasised more than \"one God\", and vice versa. While the three persons are distinct, they are united in one divine essence, and their oneness is expressed in community and action so completely that they cannot be considered separately. For example, their salvation of mankind is an activity engaged in common: \"Christ became man by the good will of the Father and by the cooperation of the Holy Spirit. Christ sends the Holy Spirit who proceeds from the Father, and the Holy Spirit forms Christ in our hearts, and thus God the Father is glorified.\" Their \"communion of essence\" is \"indivisible\". Trinitarian terminology\u2014essence, hypostasis, etc.\u2014are used \"philosophically\", \"to answer the ideas of the heretics\", and \"to place the terms where they separate error and truth.\" The words do what they can do, but the nature of the Trinity in its fullness is believed to remain beyond man's comprehension and expression, a holy mystery that can only be experienced.\nSin, salvation, and the incarnation.\nWhen Eastern Orthodox Christians refer to fallen nature they are not saying that human nature has become evil in itself. Human nature is still formed in the image of God; humans are still God's creation, and God has never created anything evil, but fallen nature remains open to evil intents and actions. It is sometimes said among Eastern Orthodox that humans are \"inclined to sin\"; that is, people find some sinful things attractive. It is the nature of temptation to make sinful things seem the more attractive, and it is the fallen nature of humans that seeks or succumbs to the attraction. Orthodox Christians reject the Augustinian position that the descendants of Adam and Eve are actually guilty of the original sin of their ancestors.\nSince the fall of man, then, it has been mankind's dilemma that no human can restore his nature to union with God's grace; it was necessary for God to effect another change in human nature. Eastern Orthodox Christians believe that Christ Jesus was both God and Man absolutely and completely, having two natures indivisibly: eternally begotten of the Father in his divinity, he was born in his humanity of a woman, Mary, by her consent, through descent of the Holy Spirit. He lived on earth, in time and history, as a man. As a man he also died, and went to the place of the dead, which is Hades. But being God, neither death nor Hades could contain him, and he rose to life again, in his humanity, by the power of the Holy Spirit, thus destroying the power of Hades and of death itself.\nThrough Christ's destruction of Hades' power to hold humanity hostage, he made the path to salvation effective for all the righteous who had died from the beginning of time\u2014saving many, including Adam and Eve, who are remembered in the church as saints.\nResurrection of Christ.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church understands the death and resurrection of Jesus to be real historical events, as described in the gospels of the New Testament.\nChristian life.\nChurch teaching is that Eastern Orthodox Christians, through baptism, enter a new life of salvation through repentance whose purpose is to share in the life of God through the work of the Holy Spirit. The Eastern Orthodox Christian life is a spiritual pilgrimage in which each person, through the imitation of Christ and \"hesychasm\", cultivates the practice of unceasing prayer. Each life occurs within the life of the church as a member of the body of Christ. It is then through the fire of God's love in the action of the Holy Spirit that each member becomes more holy, more wholly unified with Christ, starting in this life and continuing in the next. The church teaches that everyone, being born in God's image, is called to theosis, fulfilment of the image in likeness to God. God the creator, having divinity by nature, offers each person participation in divinity by cooperatively accepting His gift of grace.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, in understanding itself to be the Body of Christ, and similarly in understanding the Christian life to lead to the unification in Christ of all members of his body, views the church as embracing all Christ's members, those now living on earth, and also all those through the ages who have passed on to the heavenly life. \"In general,\" Eastern Orthodox Christianity sees the Church \"as a purely mystical body, the understanding of which cannot be attained through the development of a rational or natural theology.\"\nThe church includes the Christian saints from all times, and also judges, prophets and righteous Jews of the first covenant, Adam and Eve, even the angels and heavenly hosts. In Eastern Orthodox services, the earthly members together with the heavenly members worship God as one community in Christ, in a union that transcends time and space and joins heaven to earth. This unity of the church is sometimes called the \"communion of the saints\".\nEastern Orthodox Order of Saint Benedict.\nThe Order of Saint Benedict is an affiliation of monastics of the Eastern Orthodox Church who strive to live according to the Rule of St Benedict. The equivalent monastic order in the Catholic Church is known as the Order of Saint Benedict, abbreviated as OSB.\nWithin the United States, the Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of North America has at least one Benedictine monastery.\nSeveral Benedictine monastic houses, \"sketes\" and hermitages fit within the Russian Orthodox Church outside of Russia, all of which are \"stavropegial\" directly under the Metropolitan. An oblate programme exists for Orthodox laity Saint Benedict Russian Orthodox Church in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.\nVirgin Mary and other saints.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church believes death and the separation of body and soul to be unnatural\u2014a result of the Fall of Man. They also hold that the congregation of the church comprises both the living and the dead. All persons currently in heaven are considered to be saints, whether their names are known or not. There are, however, those saints of distinction whom God has revealed as particularly good examples. When a saint is revealed and ultimately recognised by a large portion of the church a service of official recognition (glorification) is celebrated.\nThis does not \"make\" the person a saint; it merely recognises the fact and announces it to the rest of the church. A day is prescribed for the saint's celebration, hymns composed and icons created. Numerous saints are celebrated on each day of the year. They are venerated (shown great respect and love) but not worshipped, for worship is due God alone (this view is also held by the Oriental Orthodox and Catholic churches). In showing the saints this love and requesting their prayers, the Eastern Orthodox manifest their belief that the saints thus assist in the process of salvation for others.\nPre-eminent among the saints is the Virgin Mary (commonly referred to as \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\": \"Mother of God\"). In Eastern Orthodox theology, the Mother of God is the fulfilment of the Old Testament archetypes revealed in the Ark of the Covenant (because she carried the New Covenant in the person of Christ) and the burning bush that appeared before Moses (symbolising the Mother of God's carrying of God without being consumed).\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that Christ, from the moment of his conception, was both fully God and fully human. Mary is thus called the \"Theotokos\" or \"Bogoroditsa\" as an affirmation of the divinity of the one to whom she gave birth. It is also believed that her virginity was not compromised in conceiving God-incarnate, that she was not harmed and that she remained forever a virgin. Scriptural references to \"brothers\" of Christ are interpreted as kin, given that the word \"brother\" was used in multiple ways, as was the term \"father\". Due to her unique place in salvation history, Mary is honoured above all other saints and especially venerated for the great work that God accomplished through her.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church regards the bodies of all saints as holy, made such by participation in the holy mysteries, especially the communion of Christ's holy body and blood, and by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit within the church. Indeed, that persons and physical things can be made holy is a cornerstone of the doctrine of the Incarnation, made manifest also directly by God in Old Testament times through his dwelling in the Ark of the Covenant. Thus, physical items connected with saints are also regarded as holy, through their participation in the earthly works of those saints. According to church teaching and tradition, God himself bears witness to this holiness of saints' relics through the many miracles connected with them that have been reported throughout history since biblical times, often including healing from disease and injury.\nEschatology.\nOrthodox Christians believe that when a person dies the soul is temporarily separated from the body. Though it may linger for a short period on Earth, it is ultimately escorted either to paradise (Abraham's bosom) or the darkness of Hades, following the Temporary Judgment. Orthodox do not accept the doctrine of Purgatory, which is held by Catholicism. The soul's experience of either of these states is only a \"foretaste\"\u2014being experienced only by the soul\u2014until the Final Judgment, when the soul and body will be reunited.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that the state of the soul in Hades can be affected by the love and prayers of the righteous up until the Last Judgment. For this reason the Church offers a special prayer for the dead on the third day, ninth day, fortieth day, and the one-year anniversary after the death of an Orthodox Christian. There are also several days throughout the year that are set aside for general commemoration of the departed, sometimes including nonbelievers. These days usually fall on a Saturday, since it was on a Saturday that Christ lay in the Tomb.\nThe Eastern Orthodox believe that after the Final Judgment:\nBible.\nThe official Bible of the Eastern Orthodox Church contains the Septuagint text of the Old Testament, with the Book of Daniel given in the translation by Theodotion. The Patriarchal Text is used for the New Testament. Orthodox Christians hold that the Bible is a verbal icon of Christ, as proclaimed by the 7th ecumenical council. They refer to the Bible as holy scripture, meaning writings containing the foundational truths of the Christian faith as revealed by Christ and the Holy Spirit to its divinely inspired human authors. Holy scripture forms the primary and authoritative written witness of holy tradition and is essential as the basis for all Orthodox teaching and belief.\nOnce established as holy scripture, there has never been any question that the Eastern Orthodox Church holds the full list of books to be venerable and beneficial for reading and study, even though it informally holds some books in higher esteem than others, the four gospels highest of all. Of the subgroups significant enough to be named, the \"Anagignoskomena\" (\u1f00\u03bd\u03b1\u03b3\u03b9\u03b3\u03bd\u03c9\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03b1, \"things that are read\") comprises ten of the Old Testament books rejected in the Protestant canon, but deemed by the Eastern Orthodox worthy to be read in worship services, even though they carry a lesser esteem than the 39 books of the Hebrew canon. The lowest tier contains the remaining books not accepted by either Protestants or Catholics, among them, Psalm 151. Though it is a psalm, and is in the book of psalms, it is not classified as being within the Psalter (the first 150 psalms).\nIn a very strict sense, it is not entirely orthodox to call the holy scripture the \"Word of God\". That is a title the Eastern Orthodox Church reserves for Christ, as supported in the scriptures themselves, most explicitly in the first chapter of the Gospel of John. God's Word is not hollow, like human words. \"God said, 'let there be light'; and there was light.\"\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church does not subscribe to the Protestant doctrine of \"sola scriptura\". The church has defined what Scripture is; it also interprets what its meaning is. Christ promised: \"When He, the Spirit of truth, has come, He will guide you into all truth\".\nScriptures are understood to contain historical fact, poetry, idiom, metaphor, simile, moral fable, parable, prophecy and wisdom literature, and each bears its own consideration in its interpretation. While divinely inspired, the text still consists of words in human languages, arranged in humanly recognisable forms. The Eastern Orthodox Church does not oppose honest critical and historical study of the Bible.\nLiturgy.\nChurch calendar.\nLesser cycles also run in tandem with the annual ones. A weekly cycle of days prescribes a specific focus for each day in addition to others that may be observed.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Each day of the Weekly Cycle is dedicated to certain special memorials. Sunday is dedicated to Christ's Resurrection; Monday honours the holy bodiless powers (angels, archangels, etc.); Tuesday is dedicated to the prophets and especially the greatest of the prophets, John the Forerunner and Baptist of the Lord; Wednesday is consecrated to the Cross and recalls Judas' betrayal; Thursday honours the holy apostles and hierarchs, especially Nicholas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia; Friday is also consecrated to the Cross and recalls the day of the Crucifixion; Saturday is dedicated to All Saints, especially the Mother of God, and to the memory of all those who have departed this life in the hope of resurrection and eternal life.\nChurch services.\nThe main service offered in the Church is the Divine Liturgy. Most parishes offer this service on Sunday mornings and on major feast days, though it can be offered almost any day of the year. Additional services include Orthros and Vespers; prayer services in the morning and evening, respectively. The celebration of the feasts are distinguished according to their various degrees of solemnity. The great feasts are celebrated with an All Night Vigil. Lesser feasts will have a vigil according to the feast's custom.\nChurch service books are used in divine services, like the Gospel, the Epistle, and the Psalter. These books, often called \"divine service books\", were composed in accordance with the scriptures and traditions of the Church Fathers and teachers of the Orthodox Church. During fasting, in the middle of the week Holy Communion is given at all church services, without removing the characteristics of Orthodox Lent.\nChanting.\nChanting is not considered \"music\" by Orthodox Christians, but rather sacred melody and prayer, in Orthodox Theology. An Orthodox Divine Service is chanted in their entirely by the clergy, the choir, and the congregation from the start of the service to the end. Early Christian forms of chanting began with ancient Judaic traditions of chanting the Psalms, which priests have now declared with the hymns in the Book of Psalms. As the Church grew, so did persecution, and many new forms of hymns began to appear.\nLiturgies contain the reading and chanting of prayers, headed by a bishop or priest. Many various forms of liturgies include different forms of chanting services (for example, the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great has chanting of longer duration and the priest privately reads his prayers at the alter). For the composition of religious chant, the Octoechos, an eight-tone (mode) system, analogous to the Gregorian modes in the West, and to other ancient Christian musical systems, is used. Byzantine music is microtonal.\nByzantine chants are associated with the Eastern Roman Empire's period (AD 330 to 1453) and developed form Jewish and Syrian traditions in the early-Christian Church. This continued to evolve throughout the 16th century. However, many mistake it for Greek Christianity in the east, but is unrelated to the ancient Greek period.\nNorthern Slavs, however, have used simpler tonal systems evolved through the sundry local types of Znamenny chant; today Western music, often with four-part harmony, and the \"tones\" are simply sets of melodies. Russian liturgical chants (including some Ukrainian and Balkan churches) evolved from the Kievan Rus people in AD 988. Byzantine melodies adapted to the patterns of the Old Church Slavonic language. In the 14th century, Russian elements began to be used in the church. By the 16th century, Russian chants had many links to the Byzantine style.\nThere are numerous versions and styles that are traditional and acceptable and these vary a great deal between cultures.\nTraditions.\nArt and architecture.\nThe Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity on New York City's Upper East Side is the largest Orthodox Christian church in the Western Hemisphere.\nIcons and symbols.\nIcons.\nAspects of the iconography borrow from the pre-Christian Roman and Hellenistic art. Henry Chadwick wrote, \"In this instinct there was a measure of truth. The representations of Christ as the Almighty Lord on his judgment throne owed something to pictures of Zeus. Portraits of the Mother of God were not wholly independent of a pagan past of venerated mother-goddesses. In the popular mind the saints had come to fill a role that had been played by heroes and deities.\"\nIcons can be found adorning the walls of churches and often cover the inside structure completely. Most Eastern Orthodox homes have an area set aside for family prayer, usually an eastern facing wall, where are hung many icons. Icons have been part of Orthodox Christianity since the beginning of the church.\nIconostasis.\nAn \"iconostasis\", also called the \"templon\", is a wall of icons and religious paintings, separating the nave from the sanctuary in a church. \"Iconostasis\" also refers to a portable icon stand that can be placed anywhere within a church. The modern iconostasis evolved from the Byzantine templon in the 11th century. The evolution of the iconostasis probably owes a great deal to 14th-century Hesychast mysticism and the wood-carving genius of the Russian Orthodox Church.\nThe first ceiling-high, five-leveled Russian iconostasis was designed by Andrey Rublyov in the cathedral of the Dormition in Vladimir in 1408.\nCross.\nOn the Russian Orthodox cross, the small top crossbar represents the sign that Pontius Pilate nailed above Christ's head. It often is inscribed with an acronym, \"INRI\", for \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews\" or \"INBI\", Koine Greek: \u1f38\u03b7\u03c3\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c2 \u1f41 \u039d\u03b1\u03b6\u03c9\u03c1\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f41 \u03b2\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03bb\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2 \u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd \u1f38\u03bf\u03c5\u03b4\u03b1\u03af\u03c9\u03bd for \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews\".\nOther crosses associated with the Eastern Orthodox Church are the more traditional single-bar crosses, budded designs, the Greek cross, the Latin cross, the Jerusalem cross (cross patt\u00e9e), Celtic crosses, and others. A common symbolism of the slanted foot stool is the foot-rest points up, toward Heaven, on Christ's right hand-side, and downward, to Hades, on Christ's left. \"Between two thieves Thy Cross did prove to be a balance of righteousness: wherefore one of them was dragged down to Hades by the weight of his blasphemy \"[the balance points downward]\", whereas the other was lightened of his transgressions unto the comprehension of theology \"[the balance points upward]\". O Christ God, glory to Thee.\"\nLocal customs.\nLocality is also expressed in regional terms of churchly jurisdiction, which is often also drawn along national lines. Many Orthodox churches adopt a national title (e.g. Albanian Orthodox, Bulgarian Orthodox, Antiochian Orthodox, Georgian Orthodox, Greek Orthodox, Romanian Orthodox, Russian Orthodox, Serbian Orthodox, Ukrainian Orthodox, etc.) and this title can identify which language is used in services, which bishops preside, and which of the typica is followed by specific congregations. In the Middle East, Orthodox Christians are usually referred to as \"Rum\" (\"Roman\") Orthodox, because of their historical connection with the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.\nHoly mysteries (sacraments).\nThe Byzantine Rite is used for the administration of the \"Holy mysteries\" or seven sacraments in Eastern Orthodox Christianity; among these are Holy Communion (the most direct connection), baptism, Chrismation, confession, unction, matrimony, and ordination, as well as blessings, exorcisms, and other occasions.\nWhile the Catholic Church numbers seven sacraments, and many Protestant groups list two (baptism and the Eucharist) or even none, the Eastern Orthodox do not limit the number. However, for the sake of convenience, catechisms of the Eastern Orthodox Church will often speak of the \"seven great mysteries\". The term \"sacrament\" also properly applies to other sacred actions such as monastic tonsure or the blessing of holy water, and involves fasting, almsgiving, or an act as simple as lighting a candle, burning incense, praying or asking God's blessing on food.\nBaptism.\nBaptism is the mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one; the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. Through baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming a member of the Eastern Orthodox Church. During the service, water is blessed. The catechumen is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the \"old man\" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection.\nProperly, the mystery of baptism is administered by bishops and priests; however, in emergencies any Eastern Orthodox Christian can baptise.\nChrismation.\nChrismation (sometimes called confirmation) is the mystery by which a baptised person is granted the gift of the Holy Spirit through anointing with Holy Chrism. It is normally given immediately after baptism as part of the same service, but is also used to receive lapsed members of the Eastern Orthodox Church. As baptism is a person's participation in the death and resurrection of Christ, so Chrismation is a person's participation in the coming of the Holy Spirit at Pentecost.\nA baptised and chrismated Eastern Orthodox Christian is a full member of the church and may receive the Eucharist regardless of age.\nThe creation of Chrism may be accomplished by any bishop at any time, but usually is done only once a year, often when a synod of bishops convenes for its annual meeting. Some autocephalous churches get their chrism from others. Anointing with it substitutes for the laying-on of hands described in the New Testament, even when an instrument such as a brush is used.\nHoly Communion (Eucharist).\nHoly Communion is given only to baptised and chrismated Eastern Orthodox Christians who have prepared by fasting, prayer and confession. The priest will administer the gifts with a spoon, called a \"cochlear\", directly into the recipient's mouth from the chalice. From baptism young infants and children are carried to the chalice to receive holy communion.\nMarriage.\nFrom the Eastern Orthodox perspective, marriage is one of the holy mysteries or sacraments. As well as in many other Christian traditions, for example in Catholicism, it serves to unite a woman and a man in eternal union and love before God, with the purpose of following Christ and his Gospel and raising up a faithful, holy family through their holy union. The church understands marriage to be the union of one man and one woman, and certain Orthodox leaders have spoken out strongly in opposition to the civil institution of same-sex marriage.\nJesus said that \"when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven\" (Mk 12:25). For the Orthodox Christian this passage should not be understood to imply that Christian marriage will not remain a reality in the Kingdom, but points to the fact that relations will not be \"fleshy\", but \"spiritual\". Love between wife and husband, as an icon of relationship between Christ and church, is eternal.\nThe church does recognise that there are rare occasions when it is better that couples do separate, but there is no official recognition of civil divorces. For the Eastern Orthodox, to say that marriage is indissoluble means that it should not be broken, the violation of such a union, perceived as holy, being an offence resulting from either adultery or the prolonged absence of one of the partners. Thus, permitting remarriage is an act of compassion of the church towards sinful man.\nHoly orders.\nWidowed priests and deacons may not remarry and it is common for such members of the clergy to retire to a monastery (see clerical celibacy). This is also true of widowed wives of clergy, who do not remarry and become nuns when their children are grown. Only men are allowed to receive holy orders, although deaconesses had both liturgical and pastoral functions within the church.\nIn 2016, the Holy Synod of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria voted to reinstate the female diaconate; in the following year, it ordained six sub-deaconesses in the Democratic Republic of Congo. In 2024 the Patriarchate ordained its first female deacon, Angelic Molen, in Zimbabwe, making her the first female deacon in the Eastern Orthodox Church. This move was met with criticism from other autocephalous Orthodox church leaders, such as the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America's Metropolitan Saba Esber, and Archpriest John Whiteford of the ROCOR, who criticized the move as being politically motivated and did not accurately reflect the historical use of deaconesses in the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nInterfaith relations.\nRelations with other Christians.\nIn 1920, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, published an encyclical \"addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations\". This gesture was instrumental in the foundation of the World Council of Churches (WCC); as such, almost all Eastern Orthodox churches are members of the WCC and \"Orthodox ecclesiastics and theologians serve on its committees\". Kallistos Ware, a British metropolitan bishop of the Orthodox Church, has stated that ecumenism \"is important for Orthodoxy: it has helped to force the various Orthodox churches out of their comparative isolation, making them meet one another and enter into a living contact with non-Orthodox Christians.\"\nHilarion Alfeyev, then the Metropolitan of Volokolamsk and head of external relations for the Moscow Patriarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church, stated that Orthodox and Evangelical Protestant Christians share the same positions on \"such issues as abortion, the family, and marriage\" and desire \"vigorous grassroots engagement\" between the two Christian communions on such issues.\nIn that regard, the differences between the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox communions have not been improved in any relevant way. Dogmatic and liturgical polarities have been significant, even and especially in recent times. A pertinent point of contention between the monarchically papal, administratively centralised Catholic Church and the decentralised confederation of Orthodox churches is the theological significance of the Virgin Mary. During his visit to Georgia in October 2016, Pope Francis was snubbed by most Orthodox Christians as he led mass before a practically empty Mikheil Meskhi Stadium in Tbilisi.\nThe Oriental Orthodox Churches are not in communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church, despite their similar names. Slow dialogue towards restoring communion between the two churches began in the mid-20th century, and, notably, in the 19th century, when the Greek Patriarch in Egypt had to absent himself from the country for a long period of time; he left his church under the guidance of the Coptic Pope Cyril IV of Alexandria.\nIn 2019, the Primate of the OCU Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine Epiphanius stated that \"theoretically\" the Orthodox Church of Ukraine and the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church could in the future unite into a united church around the Kyiv throne. In 2019, the Primate of the UGCC, Major Archbishop of Kyiv-Galicia Sviatoslav, stated that every effort should be made to restore the original unity of the Kyivan Church in its Orthodox and Catholic branches, saying that the restoration of Eucharistic communion between Rome and Constantinople is not a utopia.\nNotwithstanding certain overtures by both Catholic and Eastern Orthodox leaders, the majority of Orthodox Christians, as well as Catholics, are not in favour of communion between their churches, with only a median of 35 per cent and 38 per cent, respectively, claiming support.\nRelations with Islam.\nIn 2007, Metropolitan Alfeyev expressed the possibility of peaceful coexistence between Islam and Christianity in Russia, as the two religions have never had religious wars in Russia.\nConstituencies.\nThe various autocephalous and autonomous synods of the Eastern Orthodox Church are distinct in terms of administration and local culture, but for the most part exist in full communion with one another. However, there have been varying instances in the history of the Eastern Orthodox Church where communion has been broken between member churches for short periods, particularly over autocephaly issues or disagreements over ecumenism with other Christian denominations. In addition, some schismatic churches not in any communion exist, with all three groups identifying as Eastern Orthodox.\nAnother group of non-mainstream Eastern Orthodox Christians are referred True Orthodoxy or Old Calendarists; they are those who, without authority from their parent churches, have continued to use the old Julian calendar, and split from their parent church.\nThe Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) has united in 2007 with the Moscow Patriarchate; these two churches had separated from each other in the 1920s due to the subjection of the latter to the hostile Soviet regime.\nAnother group, called the Old Believers, separated in 1666 from the official Russian Orthodox Church as a protest against church rite reforms introduced by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow.\nMain communion.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church is a communion of 15 autocephalous\u2014that is, administratively completely independent\u2014regional churches, plus the Orthodox Church in America and two Ukrainian Orthodox Churches. The Orthodox Church in America is recognised as autocephalous only by the Russian, Bulgarian, Georgian, Polish and Czech-Slovak churches. In December 2018, representatives of two unrecognised Ukrainian Orthodox churches, along with two metropolitans of the recognised, but self-declared autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate, proclaimed the formation of the unified Orthodox Church of Ukraine. On 5 January 2019, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine received its \"tomos\" of autocephaly (decree which defines the conditions of a church's independence) from the Ecumenical Patriarchate and thus received a place in the diptych.\nEach church has defined geographical boundaries of its jurisdiction and is ruled by its council of bishops or synod presided by a senior bishop\u2013its primate (or first hierarch). The primate may carry the honorary title of patriarch, metropolitan (in the Slavic tradition) or archbishop (in the Greek tradition).\nEach regional church consists of constituent eparchies (or dioceses) ruled by a bishop. Some churches have given an eparchy or group of eparchies varying degrees of autonomy (self-government). Such autonomous churches maintain varying levels of dependence on their mother church, usually defined in a \"tomos\" or other document of autonomy.\nBelow is a list of the 15 autocephalous Orthodox churches forming the main body of Orthodox Christianity, all of which are titled equal to each other, but the Ecumenical Patriarchate is titled the \"first among equals\". Based on the definitions, the list is in the order of precedence and alphabetical order where necessary, with some of their constituent autonomous churches and exarchates listed as well. The liturgical title of the primate is in italics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWithin the main body of Eastern Orthodoxy there are unresolved internal issues as to the autonomous or autocephalous status or legitimacy of the following Orthodox churches, particularly between those stemming from the Russian Orthodox or Constantinopolitan churches:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTraditionalist groups.\nTrue Orthodox.\nTrue Orthodoxy has been separated from the mainstream communion over issues of ecumenism and calendar reform since the 1920s. The movement rejects the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Moscow Patriarchate, and all churches which are in communion with them, accusing them of heresy and placing themselves under bishops who do the same thing. They adhere to the use of the Julian calendar, claiming that the calendar reform in the 1920s is in contradiction with the ecumenical councils. There is no official communion of True Orthodox; and they often are local groups and are limited to a specific bishop or locality.\nOld calendarists.\nOld Calendarists are traditionalist groups of Eastern Orthodox Christians that separated from mainstream Eastern Orthodox churches because some of the latter adopted the revised Julian calendar while Old Calendarists remained committed to the Julian calendar.\"\" Old Calendarists are not in communion with any mainstream Eastern Orthodox churches. \"Old Calendarists\" is another name for the True Orthodox movement in Romania, Bulgaria, Greece and Cyprus. In 1999, it was estimated that \"[t]here are probably over one million Old Calendarists in Romania, somewhat fewer in Greece, and considerably fewer in Bulgaria, Cyprus, and the Eastern Orthodox diaspora.\"\nOld Believers.\nOld Believers are groups which do not accept the liturgical reforms which were carried out within the Russian Orthodox Church by Patriarch Nikon of Moscow in the 17th century. Although all of the groups of Old Believers emerged as a result of opposition to the Nikonian reforms, they do not constitute a single monolithic body. Despite their emphasis on invariable adherence to the pre-Nikonian traditions, the Old Believers feature a great diversity of groups which profess different interpretations of church tradition and they are often not in communion with each other (some groups even practise re-baptism before admitting a member of another group into their midst).\nChurches not in communion with other churches.\nChurches existing with irregular or unresolved canonical status are entities that have carried out episcopal consecrations outside of the norms of canon law, or whose bishops have been excommunicated by one of the mainstream autocephalous churches. These include nationalist and other schismatic bodies such as the Abkhazian Orthodox Church and American Orthodox Catholic Church.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10188", "revid": "15195259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10188", "title": "Eastern Orthodox", "text": ""}
{"id": "10189", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10189", "title": "Exobiology", "text": ""}
{"id": "10190", "revid": "1291054371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10190", "title": "Eusebius of Nicomedia", "text": "Arian bishop (died 341)\nEusebius of Nicomedia (; ; died 341) was an Arian priest who baptised Constantine the Great on his deathbed in 337. A fifth-century legend evolved that Pope Sylvester I was the one to baptise Constantine, but this is dismissed by scholars as a forgery \"to amend the historical memory of the Arian baptism that the emperor received at the end of his life, and instead to attribute an unequivocally orthodox baptism to him\". He was a bishop of Berytus (modern-day Beirut) in Phoenicia. He was later made the bishop of Nicomedia, where the Imperial court resided. He lived finally in Constantinople from 338 up to his death.\nInfluence in the Imperial family and the Imperial court.\nDistantly related to the imperial family of Constantine the Great, he owed his progression from a less significant Levantine bishopric to the most important episcopal see to his influence at court and the great power he wielded in the church was derived from that source. In fact, during his time in the imperial court, the Eastern court and the major positions in the Eastern Church were held by Arians or Arian sympathizers. With the exception of a short period of eclipse, he enjoyed the confidence both of Constantine and Constantius II. He also served as the tutor of the later Roman emperor Julian, and it was he who might have baptised Constantine the Great on 22 May 337 owing to his familial relationship with the emperor. Also during his time in the imperial court, Arianism became more popular with the royal family. It can be logically surmised that Eusebius had a huge hand in the acceptance of Arianism in the Constantinian household. The Arian influence grew so strong during his tenure in the imperial court that it was not until the end of the Constantinian dynasty and the appointment of Theodosius I that Arianism lost its influence in the empire.\nIt was of particular interest that Eusebius was nearly persecuted because of his close relationship to the Emperor Licinius while serving as bishop of Nicomedia during Licinius' reign.\nRelationship with Arius.\nLike Arius, he was a pupil of Lucian of Antioch, and it is probable that he held the same views as Arius from the very beginning; he was also one of Arius' most fervent supporters and encourager. It was also because of this relationship that he was the first person whom Arius contacted after the latter was excommunicated from Alexandria by Alexander I of Alexandria in 321. Apparently, Arius and Eusebius were close enough and Eusebius powerful enough that Arius was able to put his theology down in writing. He afterward modified his ideas somewhat, or perhaps he only yielded to the pressure of circumstances; but he was, if not the teacher, at all events the leader and organizer of the Arian council.\nAt the First Council of Nicaea in 325, he signed the Confession, but only after a long and desperate opposition in which he was said to \"subscribe with hand only, not heart\" according to ancient sources. It was a huge blow to the Arian party since it was surmised that the participants in the First Council of Nicaea were evenly split between non-Arians and Arians. His defense of Arius angered the emperor, and a few months after the council he was sent into exile due to his continual contacts with Arius and his followers. After the lapse of three years, he succeeded in regaining the imperial favor by convincing Constantine that Arius and his views do not conflict with the proclaimed Nicene Creed. After his return in 329, he brought the whole machinery of the state government into action in order to impose his views upon the Church.\nPolitical and religious career.\nIn complement to his theological interests, Eusebius was a skilled politician. Upon his return, he regained the lost ground resulting from the First Council of Nicaea, established alliances with other groups such as the Melitians and expelled many opponents.\nHe was described by modern historians as an \"ambitious intriguer\" and a \"consummate political player\". He was also described by ancient sources as a high-handed person who was also aggressive in his dealings; he also used his allies to spy on his opponents.\nHe was able to dislodge and exile three key opponents who espoused the First Council of Nicaea: Eustathius of Antioch in 330, Athanasius of Alexandria in 335 and Marcellus of Ancyra in 336. This was no small feat since Athanasius was regarded as a \"man of God\" by Constantine, and both Eustathius and Athanasius held top positions in the church.\nAnother major feat was his appointment as the Patriarch of Constantinople by expelling Paul I of Constantinople; Paul I would eventually return as Patriarch after Eusebius's death.\nEven outside the empire, Eusebius had great influence. He brought Ulfilas into the Arian priesthood and sent the latter to convert the heathen Goths.\nEusebius baptised Constantine the Great in his villa in Nicomedia, on 22 May 337 just before the death of the Emperor.\nDeath and aftermath.\nHe died at the height of his power in the year 341.\nHe was so influential that even after his death, Constantius II heeded his and Eudoxus of Constantinople's advice to attempt to convert the Roman Empire to Arianism by creating Arian Councils and official Arian Doctrines.\nIt was because of Eusebius that \"On the whole, Constantine and his successors made life pretty miserable for Church leaders committed to the Nicene decision and its Trinitarian formula\".\nEusebius of Nicomedia is not to be confused with his contemporary Eusebius of Caesarea, the author of well-known early books of Church history.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCorrespondence of Eusebius of Nicomedia:"}
{"id": "10191", "revid": "46856397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10191", "title": "Edo", "text": "Edo (), also romanized as Jedo, Yedo or Yeddo, is the former name of Tokyo.\nFar beyond being just the seat of government, Edo matured into an unparalleled early\u2011modern metropolis under the Tokugawa shogunate. By the early 18th century, its population is believed to have exceeded 1\u202fmillion \u2014 making it, by many estimates, the largest city in the world at the time. \nThe city's dramatic growth was the result of deliberate statecraft: reclaimed land from Edo Bay, meticulously planned streets, vast samurai estates, and a well\u2011engineered system of waterways. These elements supported a thriving society of samurai, townspeople (ch\u014dnin), and artisans, and enabled a dynamic economy, a rich urban culture, and sophisticated public order.\nAfter the Meiji Restoration in 1868, the city was renamed Tokyo (\"Eastern Capital\"), and the emperor relocated from Kyoto. The Edo period (1603\u20111868) left a legacy of urban brilliance whose echoes shaped modern Tokyo.\nHistory.\nBefore Tokugawa.\nBefore the 10th century, there is no mention of Edo in historical records, but for a few settlements in the area. That name for the area first appears in the Azuma Kagami chronicles, which have probably been used since the second half of the Heian period. Edo's development started in the late 11th century with a branch of the called the coming from the banks of the then-Iruma River, present-day upstream of the Arakawa river. A descendant of the head of the Chichibu clan settled in the area and took the name , likely based on the name used for the place, and founded the Edo clan. Shigetsugu built a fortified residence, probably around the edge of the Musashino Terrace, that would become Edo castle. Shigetsugu's son, , took the Taira's side against Minamoto no Yoritomo in 1180 but eventually surrendered to Minamoto and became a gokenin for the Kamakura shogunate. At the fall of the shogunate in the 14th century, the Edo clan took the side of the Southern Court, and its influence declined during the Muromachi period.\nIn 1456, a vassal of the \u014cgigayatsu branch of the Uesugi clan started to build a castle on the former fortified residence of the Edo clan and took the name \u014cta D\u014dkan. D\u014dkan lived in the castle until his assassination in 1486. Under D\u014dkan, with good water connections to Kamakura, Odawara and other parts of Kanto and the country, Edo expanded as a \"j\u014dkamachi\", with the castle bordering a cove (now Hibiya Park) opening into Edo Bay, and the town developing along the Hirakawa River running into the cove, and on , the stretch of land on the eastern side of the cove (now roughly where Tokyo Station is). Some priests and scholars fleeing Kyoto after the \u014cnin War came to Edo during that period.\nAfter the death of D\u014dkan, the castle became one of strongholds of the Uesugi clan, which fell to the Later H\u014dj\u014d clan at the battle of Takanawahara in 1524, during the expansion of their rule over the Kant\u014d area. \nWhen the H\u014dj\u014d clan was finally defeated by Toyotomi Hideyoshi in 1590, the Kanto area was given to rule to Toyotomi's senior officer Tokugawa Ieyasu, who took his residence in Edo.\nIeyasu's initial urban vision and the transformation of an unformed settlement (1590\u20131603).\nWhen Tokugawa Ieyasu first entered Edo in 1590, the area was not yet a town or city in any meaningful sense. What existed was a small fortified residence\u2014commonly called \u201cEdo Castle\u201d (Edo-j\u014d)\u2014consisting of only a handful of (small) buildings standing on the edge of the Musashino Plateau. To the east of the residence stretched nothing but wetlands, tidal inlets, marshes, and patches of undeveloped wasteland. There was no urban district, no planned streets, and no concentrated population.\nRecognizing the strategic potential of the site, Ieyasu immediately initiated surveys of the surrounding topography, focusing on the plateau, the Hibiya inlet\uff08\u65e5\u6bd4\u8c37\u5165\u308a\u6c5f\uff09, and the low-lying marshland east of the \"castle\". These surveys formed the basis of his first deliberate urban plan. Under his direction, early engineering works began: preliminary modification of the Hibiya inlet, initial attempts to redirect the Hirakawa River, and the earliest stages of constructing outer moats and functional canals.\nAlthough large-scale land reclamation and restructuring would accelerate only after Ieyasu's victory at the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600, the fundamental \"conceptual blueprint\" for transforming Edo from an undeveloped landscape into a governable urban center was already established during this period. This development was not spontaneous or natural\u2014Edo's growth began as an intentional political and military project shaped directly by Ieyasu's vision and administrative control.\nTokugawa shogunate.\nTokugawa Ieyasu emerged as the paramount warlord of the Sengoku period following his victory at the Battle of Sekigahara in October 1600. He formally founded the Tokugawa shogunate in 1603 and established his headquarters at Edo Castle. Edo became the center of political power and the \"de facto\" capital of Japan, although the historic capital of Kyoto remained the \"de jure\" capital as the seat of the emperor. Edo grew from a fishing village in Musashi Province in 1457 into the largest metropolis in the world, with an estimated population of 1 million by 1721.\nAfter the shogunate was firmly established and especially after 1615, the Tokugawa regime undertook massive expansion works under \"Tenka-Bushin\" () : \nThe city expanded primarily eastward into reclaimed land, forming the basis of \"Shitamachi\" (\u4e0b\u753a), where townspeople (ch\u014dnin, \u753a\u4eba) lived and worked.\nLarge-scale construction after 1600 was undertaken through shogunate-imposed public works known as \"Tenka-bushin\" (\u5929\u4e0b\u666e\u8acb), which were financed and carried out by the daimy\u014ds and their retainers. Although commonly described as \u201cpublic works\u201d, these projects were in fact compulsory obligations: the shogunate issued the plans, and the daimy\u014d were required to allocate enormous funds and mobilize their retainer bands or hired laborers to execute them. This system enabled\nthe Tokugawa regime to reshape Edo's topography on a massive scale, transforming wetlands and coastal shallows into new urban districts.\nThese early projects laid the conceptual and physical groundwork for Edo's later transformation into a major political and urban center.\nUnder Tokugawa Hidetada, Edo's urban planning was expanded and systematized. Key developments during his tenure included:\nHidetada's efforts consolidated Edo's status as the shogunate's administrative center and improved the city's livability, particularly for samurai and townspeople alike.\nTokugawa Iemitsu oversaw the most ambitious infrastructural developments to date, with large-scale urban engineering projects and water supply systems. Notable accomplishments included:\nThese projects under Iemitsu not only ensured reliable water supply and sanitation but also transformed Edo's topography into a structured, resilient urban landscape capable of supporting a rapidly growing population. By mid-17th century, Edo had become one of the largest and most systematically planned cities in the world, setting the stage for its peak population and urban complexity in the 18th century.\nUrbanism.\nVery quickly after its inception, the shogunate undertook major works in Edo that drastically changed the topography of the area, notably under the nationwide program of major civil works involving the now pacified \"daimy\u014d\" workforce. The Hibiya cove facing the castle was soon filled after the arrival of Ieyasu, the Hirakawa river was diverted, and several protective moats and logistical canals were dug (including the Kanda river), to limit the risks of flooding. Landfill works on the bay began, with several areas reclaimed during the duration of the shogunate (notably the Tsukiji area). East of the city and of the Sumida River, a massive network of canals was dug.\nFresh water was a major issue, as direct wells would provide brackish water because of the location of the city over an estuary. The few fresh water ponds of the city were put to use, and a network of canals and underground wooden pipes bringing freshwater from the western side of the city and the Tama River was built. Some of this infrastructure was used until the 20th century.\nGeneral layout of the city.\nThe city was laid out as a castle town around Edo Castle, which was positioned at the tip of the Musashino terrace. The area in the immediate proximity of the castle consisted of samurai and \"daimy\u014d\" residences, whose families lived in Edo as part of the \"sankin-k\u014dtai\" system; the \"daimy\u014d\" made journeys in alternating years to Edo and used the residences for their entourages. The location of each residence was carefully attributed depending on their position as \"tozama\", \"shinpan\" or \"fudai\". It was this extensive organization of the city for the samurai class which defined the character of Edo, particularly in contrast to the two major cities of Kyoto and Osaka, neither of which were ruled by a \"daimy\u014d\" or had a significant samurai population. Kyoto's character was defined by the Imperial Court, the court nobles, its Buddhist temples and its history; Osaka was the country's commercial center, dominated by the \"ch\u014dnin\" or the merchant class. On the contrary, the samurai and \"daimy\u014d\" residences occupied up to 70% of the area of Edo. On the east and northeast sides of the castle lived the including in a much more densely populated area than the samurai class area, organized in a series of gated communities called \"machi\" (\u753a, \"town\" or \"village\"). This area, Shitamachi (\u4e0b\u753a, \"lower town\" or \"lower towns\"), was the center of urban and merchant culture. Shomin also lived along the main roads leading in and out of the city. The Sumida River, then called the Great River (\u5927\u5ddd, \"\u014ckawa\"), ran on the eastern side of the city. The shogunate's official rice-storage warehouses and other official buildings were located here.\nThe marked the center of the city's commercial center and the starting point of the gokaid\u014d (thus making it the de facto \"center of the country\"). Fishermen, craftsmen and other producers and retailers operated here. Shippers managed ships known as \"tarubune\" to and from Osaka and other cities, bringing goods into the city or transferring them from sea routes to river barges or land routes.\nThe northeastern corner of the city was considered dangerous in the traditional \"onmy\u014dd\u014d\" cosmology and was protected from evil by a number of temples including Sens\u014d-ji and Kan'ei-ji, one of the two tutelary Bodaiji temples of the Tokugawa. A path and a canal, a short distance north of Sens\u014d-ji, extended west from the Sumida riverbank leading along the northern edge of the city to the Yoshiwara pleasure district. Previously located near Ningy\u014dch\u014d, the district was rebuilt in this more remote location after the great fire of Meireki. Danzaemon, the hereditary position head of \"eta,\" or outcasts, who performed \"unclean\" works in the city resided nearby.\nTemples and shrines occupied roughly 15% of the surface of the city, equivalent to the living areas of the townspeople, with however an average of one-tenth of its population. Temples and shrines were spread out over the city. Besides the large concentration in the northeast side to protect the city, the second Bodaiji of the Tokugawa, Z\u014dj\u014d-ji occupied a large area south of the castle.\nHousing.\nMilitary caste.\nThe samurai and \"daimy\u014ds\" residential estates varied dramatically in size depending on their status. Some daimy\u014ds could have several of those residences in Edo. The , was the main residence while the lord was in Edo and was used for official duties. It was not necessarily the largest of his residences, but the most convenient to commute to the castle. The upper residence also acted as the representative embassy of the domain in Edo, connecting the shogunate and the clan. The shogunate did not exercise its investigative powers inside the precincts of the residential estate of the upper residence, which could also act as a refuge. The estate of the upper residence was attributed by the shogunate according to the status of the clan and its relation with the Shogun. The , a bit further from the castle, could house the heir of the lord, his servants from his fief when he was in Edo for the sankin-kotai alternate residency, or be a hiding residence if needed. The , if there was any, was on the outskirts of town, more of a pleasure retreat with gardens. The lower residence could also be used as a retreat for the lord if a fire had devastated the city. Some of the powerful \"daimy\u014ds\" residences occupied vast grounds of several dozens of hectares. Maintenance and operations of those residential estates could be extremely expensive. Samurai in service of a specific clan would normally live in the residence of their lord.\nThe samurais, in direct service of the Shogun, would have their own residences, usually located behind the castle on the Western side in the Banch\u014d area.\nTownspeople.\nEdo was a city with three main social groups: samurai (samurai, \u6b66\u58eb), monks (\"s\u014dryo\", \u50e7\u4fb6), and townspeople (\"ch\u014dnin\", \u753a\u4eba). Among the townspeople, roughly 70% were commoners (shomin, \u5eb6\u6c11), making up about half of the total population of Edo. These commoners lived in modest wooden housing called \"nagaya\" () or \"ura-nagaya\"\uff08\u88cf\u9577\u5c4b\uff09, which were typically long, single-story row houses, often built along narrow back streets. The commoners who lived in these backstreet nagaya were mostly artisans, craftsmen, laborers, small shop workers, and other lower-income members of the city. Many worked as woodworkers, carpenters, potters, tailors, metalworkers, or food vendors, providing essential goods and services to the community. The larger and more affluent townspeople lived in spacious residences with shops facing the main streets.\nThe backstreets, or \"roji\" (), were not merely narrow alleys for passage. They often widened behind their narrow entrances, forming communal spaces similar to s. These roji served as multifunctional areas where children could play safely under the watchful eyes of their mothers. Women gathered around shared water basins to wash vegetables or laundry, and at the same time, exchanged gossip and news, observing their children at play. This intimate spatial arrangement fostered strong neighborhood ties and created a sense of community.\nEach \"nagaya\" (\u9577\u5c4b) or \"roji\" (\u8def\u5730) had a wooden gate called \"roji-kido\" (\u8def\u5730\u6728\u6238) or \"nagaya-kido\" (\u9577\u5c4b\u6728\u6238) that could be locked at night. These gates were generally closed around 6 PM (kure-mutsu, \u66ae\u516d\u3064) and reopened around 6 AM (ake-mutsu, \u660e\u516d\u3064). \u3000The keys were held by the nagaya owner or trusted neighbors, helping to prevent late-night intrusions. This system gave residents a sense of safety and helped prevent nighttime crime among the common people, playing a crucial role in maintaining overall public order in Edo.\nIn contrast to the compact and communal nagaya in the backstreets, more affluent townspeople operated shops along the main streets, known as \"omote-dana\" (\u8868\u5e97). These shopkeepers, or \"ooya\" (\u5927\u5bb6, landlords/householders), maintained larger, often two-story buildings, where the first floor was used for business and the second floor for their living quarters. Their prominent placement along the main streets signified both wealth and social status, distinguishing them clearly from the commoners in the backstreets.\nGovernment and administration.\nEdo's municipal government was under the responsibility of the \"r\u014dj\u016b\", the senior officials who oversaw the entire \"bakufu\" \u2013 the government of the Tokugawa shogunate. The administrative definition of Edo was called .\nThe \"Kanj\u014d-bugy\u014d\" (finance commissioners) were responsible for the financial matters of the shogunate, whereas the \"Jisha-Bugy\u014d\" handled matters related to shrines and temples. The were \"samurai\" (at the very beginning of the shogunate daimy\u014ds, later hatamoto) officials appointed to keep the order in the city, with the word designating both the heading magistrate, the magistrature and its organization. They were in charge of Edo's day-to-day administration, combining the role of police, judge and fire brigade. There were two offices, the South Machi-Bugy\u014d and the North Machi-Bugy\u014d, which had the same geographical jurisdiction in spite of their name but rotated roles on a monthly basis. Despite their extensive responsibilities, the teams of the Machi-Bugy\u014d were rather small, with 2 offices of 125 people each. The Machi-Bugy\u014d did not have jurisdiction over the samurai residential areas, which remained under the shogunate direct rule. The geographical jurisdiction of the Machi-Bugy\u014d did not exactly coincide with the Gofunai, creating some complexity on the handling on the matters of the city. The Machi-bugy\u014d oversaw the numerous Machi where shonin lived through representatives called . Each Machi had a Machi leader called , who reported to a who himself was in charge of several Machis.\nTransportation.\nWater transportation.\nWater transport served as the logistical backbone of Edo. Bulk cargo, such as rice, timber, charcoal, salt, and other necessities, was carried primarily by boat, since Edo was built on low\u2011lying terrain with numerous rivers and canals. Studies of urban hydrology estimate that Edo's combined network of rivers, canals, and moats extended for roughly 160\u2013200 kilometers, although the exact figure varies depending on definitional criteria.\nA key artery in this network was the \"Onagigawa\" (Onagi River\u3001), an artificial canal ordered by Tokugawa\u202fIeyasu soon after his arrival in Edo, to secure a salt supply route from Gy\u014dtoku to the city. The Onagigawa connected to the Kanda River (\u795e\u7530\u5ddd) and the Nihonbashi River (\u65e5\u672c\u6a4b\u5ddd), forming part of a broader waterway system that linked Edo Castle, peripheral districts, and Edo Bay (present-day Tokyo Bay). Historical studies of Edo logistics note that such canals were deliberately constructed to support large\u2011scale inland shipping. \nLanding points (\u201ckashi\u201d, ) along these waterways functioned as commercial hubs, each specialized in particular cargo\u2014rice wharves, timber wharves, salt wharves, and so on.\nOverland roads.\nFrom Nihonbashi (\u65e5\u672c\u6a4b) in Edo, Tokugawa Ieyasu established the \"Gokaid\u014d\" (\u4e94\u8857\u9053, \u201cFive Highways\u201d), which radiated out to other provinces, forming the centralized road network of the shogunate. These routes served not only for political and military movement (such as sankin-k\u014dtai), but also for commercial and civilian travel.\nWithin Edo, most people travelled on foot. Officials or wealthy individuals used kago (\u99d5\u7c60) (palanquins), while samurai sometimes rode on horseback. The road infrastructure\u2014including bridges, pathways, and post\u2011stations\u2014was designed to accommodate both foot and horse traffic, integrating profoundly with the waterborne transport system.\nEconomy.\nDuring the Edo period, the city of Edo functioned as a vast economic center. Its economy was sustained by a complex system of consumption, supply, trade, rental, and resource circulation, shaped by both high-status samurai and townspeople (ch\u014dnin, \u753a\u4eba).\nConsumption and demand.\nMany \"daimy\u014d\" (\u5927\u540d) and their retainers, under the \"sankin-k\u014dtai\" (\u53c2\u52e4\u4ea4\u4ee3) obligation, kept residences in Edo, which stimulated constant demand for goods \u2014 luxury items, building materials, household furnishings, and food. Their spending power helped drive the city's markets for both everyday and high-quality commodities. \nIn parallel, the townspeople (ch\u014dnin, \u753a\u4eba) \u2014 merchants and artisans \u2014 formed a large, economically active class. Among them, lower-income households made frequent use of rental services to access daily goods without owning them outright. \nFood supply and distribution.\nBecause Edo was densely urbanized with little arable land inside the city, many vegetables, fruits, and other farm products were supplied by the surrounding rural villages. Produce from the nearby lowland areas was delivered daily by boat via Edo's network of canals and waterways. In contrast, produce from the Musashino Plateau (\u6b66\u8535\u91ce\u53f0\u5730) was brought into the city overland, carried by farmers on foot or transported by handcarts along gently descending roads leading toward Edo.\nFish and seafood from Edo Bay (modern Tokyo Bay) were landed daily at the \"Nihonbashi fish quay\" (\u65e5\u672c\u6a4b\u9b5a\u6cb3\u5cb8). There wholesalers bought from fishers and then distributed to other dealers or retailers. \nRetail sales included itinerant vendors known as \"bote-furi\" (\u68d2\u624b\u632f\u308a), who carried fish in baskets on a balancing pole (\"tenbin-b\u014d\") and walked through neighborhoods selling directly. \nContemporary sources suggest that the daily transaction value of the Nihonbashi fish market reached 100 ry\u014d (\u4e21) per day, which would be roughly \u00a510,000,000 in modern equivalent \nSalt supply.\nSalt was a staple commodity for Edo households, used not only in cooking but also in food preservation. Production primarily came from coastal salt fields using \"iri-hama\" salt production techniques(\u5165\u6d5c\u5f0f). \nLarge volumes of salt from the Seto Inland Sea region and other coastal areas were transported to Edo via sea routes (coastal shipping). \nIn Edo, salt wholesalers (\"shio-donya\", \u5869\u554f\u5c4b) distributed salt to both merchant households and commoners, helping ensure stable supply for urban consumption. \nTimber and building materials.\nThe need for timber in Edo was immense: virtually all buildings were built of wood, and frequent fires meant constant demand for reconstruction.\nMuch of the timber came from remote forest regions. Notably, the \"Kiso\" (, present-day Nagano Prefecture) region was a major supplier: under the so-called \"Kiso-style log transport method\" (\u6728\u66fd\u5f0f\u4f10\u6728\u904b\u6750\u6cd5), felled logs were floated down the Kiso River on rafts and subsequently shipped by river and by sea to Edo. High-grade woods such as \"Japanese cypress\" (\"hinoki\", ) from \"Kiso\" (\u6728\u66fd) or \"Kishu\" (, present-day Wakayama Prefecture) were especially prized and used in samurai residences, temples, and official architecture. \nIn Edo, specialist timber wholesalers (\u6750\u6728\u554f\u5c4b) near Nihonbashi, Kanda, and other riverfront locales sold wood to carpenters, builders, and affluent clients. \nA key center for timber trade and storage was \"Kiba\" (), established in the Fukagawa area along the Sumida River. \nThe Kiba district was also advantageous because its waterways allowed for \"water storage\" (floating logs in fresh or brackish water), preserving timber during transport and stockpiling. \nFuel.\nCharcoal (\"sumi\", ) was the dominant fuel for cooking and heating in Edo. It was produced from wood and plant residues in managed coppice forests around Edo, for instance in the \"Tama\" / \"\u014cme\" region, which supplied both wood and charcoal. \nWood offcuts and residual timber were often burned, and the resultant \"ash\" was collected by itinerant ash buyer (\"hai-gai\", \u7070\u8cb7\u3044). This ash was then sold as fertilizer or used in dyeing processes, such as in \"indigo dyeing\" (\"aizome\", ), where the alkaline ash-water (\"haijiru\", \u7070\u6c41) played a key role. \nIn short, charcoal production, wood reuse, and ash recycling formed a biomass-based energy and material cycle.\nTextiles, Clothes, and Clothing Shops.\nTextiles \u2014 including silk, hemp, and cotton \u2014 played a central role in Edo's economy. These fabrics were produced in regional weaving centers and transported into Edo via coastal and inland water transport. \nRefined garments such as silk kimono were sold in \"gofuku-sh\u014d\" (\u5449\u670d\u5546), i.e., high-end cloth shops targeting samurai and wealthy merchants. Meanwhile, the commons (\u5eb6\u6c11) acquired more modest clothing through local cloth shops or seamstresses. Some may have made their own garments, but many utilized tailors or seamstresses in longhouse communities to sew, repair, or remake clothes.\nRental culture.\nA distinctive feature of Edo's urban economy was its robust rental system, centered on shops called \"sonry\u014d-ya\" (\u640d\u6599\u5c4b), from \"sonry\u014d\" meaning \u201cwear-and-tear compensation\u201d (i.e., depreciation). \nItems commonly rented included cooking pots, pans, ceramics, futon, ceremonial dress, and travel gear. \nThe business model often included a deposit-like system: when the item was returned undamaged, part of the payment would be refunded. \nHigh demand for rentals was driven by the frequent risk of fire in the city, which discouraged accumulation of many personal possessions. Lower-income townspeople in particular relied heavily on rental-shops (\"sonry\u014d-ya\") to furnish their daily lives with minimal capital outlay. \nResource circulation and recycling.\nEdo's economy was notable for how thoroughly it reused and recycled materials, forming a highly developed circular economy.\nPolicing and firefighting.\nPolicing.\nIn Edo, law enforcement was administered by the \"machi\u2011bugy\u014d\" (town magistrates), a hybrid judicial\u2011administrative institution rather than a modern police force. These magistrates presided over both criminal justice and municipal governance, supported by samurai assistants and local collaborators. There were two \"machi\u2011bugy\u014d\" offices in Edo \u2014 the North and South magistrates \u2014 which alternated in managing civic order, investigations, and other legal matters. \nEach magistrate office employed a small number of \"yoriki\" (), higher\u2011ranking samurai who served as inspectors and administrators, and \"d\u014dshin\" (), lower-ranked samurai who conducted patrols, guarded prisons, and carried out investigations. According to historical sources, each bugy\u014d office typically had around \"25 yoriki\" and about \"120 d\u014dshin\", making a total police-administrative staff of about 50 yoriki and 240 d\u014dshin for the city. \nBecause the formal samurai contingent was limited, the \"machi-bugy\u014d\" system also made use of auxiliary assistants known as \"okappiki\" (), drawn from trusted townspeople by \"yoriki\" or \"d\u014dshin\". These men, often familiar with the underworld, aided in intelligence gathering, surveillance, and the apprehension of criminals. \nThough not formal government officials, some okappiki were entrusted with a \"jitte\" ()\u2014a policing symbol\u2014when participating in arrests. Their tasks included registering and profiling suspects (\"nins\u014dgaki\"), collecting tip\u2011offs, aiding in investigations, and even direct involvement in arrests.\nBelow the okappiki were the \"shita-ppiki\" (\u4e0b\u3063\u5f15), lower-level helpers who worked under them. They acted as informants, carried out street-level inquiries, and supported okappiki operations. Compensation for both groups was largely informal: okappiki and their subordinates did not receive fixed salaries, but were rewarded by d\u014dshin or yoriki, or shared in bounty payments when cases were resolved. \nThrough this layered enforcement network \u2014 magistrates, samurai, and civilian auxiliaries \u2014 Edo managed to maintain public security even though its formal law-enforcement arm was limited in size relative to the city's population.\nFirefighting.\nFire was a perpetual and serious threat in Edo, famously captured in the saying \u201c\"fire and quarrel are Edo's flowers\".\u201d The Great Fire of Meireki in 1657, which devastated a large portion of the city, prompted the formal establishment of firefighting mechanisms. \nBy the mid\u2011Edo period, fire suppression was organized through \"three main types\" of brigades, hikeshi () :\nIn this three\u2011tiered system \u2014 daimy\u014d, samurai, and townspeople \u2014 Edo combined centralized command with community-based response, creating a resilient fire\u2011fighting network suited to the city's wooden architecture and dense urban fabric.\nFire.\nEdo was repeatedly devastated by fires, the Great Fire of Meireki in 1657 being the most disastrous, with an estimated 100,000 victims and a vast portion of the city completely burnt. The population of Edo was around 300,000, and the impact of the fire was tremendous. The fire destroyed the central keep of Edo Castle, which was never rebuilt, and it influenced the urban planning afterwards to make the city more resilient, with many empty areas to break spreading fires, and wider streets. Reconstruction efforts expanded the city east of the Sumida River, and some \"daimy\u014d\" residences were relocated to give more space to the city, especially in the immediate vicinity of the shogun's residence, creating a large green space beside the castle, now the Fukiage gardens of the Imperial Palace. During the Edo period, there were about 100 major fires, mostly begun by accident and often quickly escalating and spreading through neighborhoods of wooden \"nagaya\" that were heated with charcoal fires.\n1868.\nIn 1868, the Tokugawa shogunate was overthrown in the Meiji Restoration by supporters of Emperor Meiji and his Imperial Court in Kyoto, ending Edo's status as the \"de facto\" capital of Japan. However, the new Meiji government soon renamed Edo to \"T\u014dky\u014d\" (\u6771\u4eac, \"Eastern Capital\") and the city became the formal capital of Japan when the emperor moved his residence to the city.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10192", "revid": "6702527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10192", "title": "Explosive", "text": "Substance that can explode\nAn explosive (or explosive material) is a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that can produce an explosion if released suddenly, usually accompanied by the production of light, heat, sound, and pressure. An explosive charge is a measured quantity of explosive material. The material may either be composed solely of one ingredient or be a mixture containing at least two substances.\nThe potential energy stored in an explosive material may, for example, be:\nExplosive materials may be categorized by the speed at which they expand. Materials that detonate, in which the front of the chemical reaction moves through the material faster than the speed of sound, are called \u201chigh explosives.\u201d In contrast, materials that deflagrate, where the front of the reaction moves slower than the speed of sound, are known as \u201clow explosives.\u201d Explosives may also be categorized by their sensitivity. Sensitive materials that can be initiated by a relatively small amount of heat or pressure are primary explosives, and materials that are relatively insensitive are secondary or tertiary explosives.\nA wide variety of chemicals can explode; only some are manufactured specifically for the purpose of being used as explosives. The remainders are too dangerous, sensitive, toxic, expensive, unstable, or prone to decomposition or degradation over short time spans.\nIn contrast, some materials are merely combustible or flammable if they burn without exploding. The distinction, however, is not always clear. Certain materials\u2014dusts, powders, gases, or volatile organic liquids\u2014may simply be combustible or flammable under ordinary conditions but become explosive in specific situations or forms, such as dispersed airborne clouds, or confinement or sudden release.\nHistory.\nEarly thermal weapons, such as Greek fire, have existed since ancient times. The history of chemical explosives is closely intertwined with the history of gunpowder. While searching for an elixir of eternal life, Taoist alchemists in China created the earliest form of gunpowder from coal, saltpeter, and sulfur. Gunpowder was the first form of chemical explosives, first seeing use in warfare in 1161. Early forms of explosives in warfare included bamboo firecrackers, which were explosives fired from bamboo or bronze tubes.\nThe first explosive stronger than black powder to see widespread use was nitroglycerin, developed in 1847. Since nitroglycerin is a liquid and highly unstable, it was replaced by nitrocellulose and trinitrotoluene (TNT) in 1863, smokeless powder and dynamite in 1867, and gelignite. World War I saw the adoption of TNT in artillery shells, while World War II saw extensive use of new explosives &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nIn modern weapons, these have largely been replaced by more powerful explosives such as C-4 and pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN), which are waterproof and malleable, though they may catch fire due to reactions with metals.\nClassification.\nBy energy source.\nChemical.\nAn explosion is a type of spontaneous chemical reaction that, once initiated, is driven by both a large exothermic change and a large positive entropy change in going from reactants to products, thereby constituting a thermodynamically favorable process that propagates very rapidly. Thus, explosives are substances that contain a large amount of energy stored in chemical bonds. The energetic stability of the gaseous products, and hence their generation, comes from the formation of strongly bonded species like carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen gas, which contain strong double and triple bonds having bond strengths of nearly 1 MJ/mole. Consequently, most commercial explosives are organic compounds containing \u2013NO2, \u2013ONO2, and \u2013NHNO2 groups that, when detonated, release gases like the aforementioned (e.g., nitroglycerin, TNT, octogen (HMX), PETN, nitrocellulose).\nTraditional explosives mechanics are based on the shock-sensitive rapid oxidation of carbon and hydrogen to carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and water in the form of steam. Nitrates typically provide the required oxygen to burn the carbon and hydrogen fuel. A sensitizer such as powdered aluminum may be added to an explosive to increase the energy of the detonation. Once detonated, the nitrogen portion of the explosive formulation emerges as nitrogen gas and toxic nitric oxides.\nThe chemical decomposition of an explosive may take years, days, hours, or a fraction of a second. The slower processes of decomposition take place in storage and are of interest only from a stability standpoint. Of more interest are the other two rapid forms besides decomposition: deflagration and detonation.\nExotic.\nIn addition to chemical and nuclear explosives, there are a number of more exotic explosive materials.\nBy sensitivity.\nPrimary.\nA primary explosive is an explosive that is extremely sensitive to stimuli such as impact, friction, heat, static electricity, or electromagnetic radiation. Some primary explosives are also known as contact explosives. A relatively small amount of energy is required for initiation. As a very general rule, primary explosives are considered to be those compounds that are more sensitive than PETN. As a practical measure, primary explosives are sufficiently sensitive that they can be reliably initiated with a blow from a hammer; however, PETN can also usually be initiated in this manner, so this is only a very broad guideline. Additionally, several compounds, such as nitrogen triiodide, are so sensitive that they cannot even be handled without detonating. Nitrogen triiodide is so sensitive that it can be reliably detonated by exposure to alpha radiation. \nPrimary explosives are often used in detonators or to trigger larger charges of less sensitive secondary explosives. Primary explosives are commonly used in blasting caps and percussion caps to translate a physical shock signal. In other situations, different signals, such as electrical or physical shock, or, in the case of laser detonation systems, light, are used to initiate an action, i.e., an explosion. A small quantity, typically milligrams, is sufficient to initiate a larger charge of explosive that is usually safer to handle.\nExamples of primary high explosives are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSecondary.\nA secondary explosive is less sensitive than a primary explosive and requires substantially more energy to be initiated. Because they are less sensitive, they are usable in a wider variety of applications and are safer to handle and store. Secondary explosives are used in larger quantities in an explosive train and are usually initiated by a smaller quantity of a primary explosive.\nExamples of secondary explosives include TNT and hexogen (RDX).\nTertiary.\nTertiary explosives, also called blasting agents, are so insensitive to shock that they cannot be reliably detonated by practical quantities of primary explosives, and instead require an intermediate explosive booster of secondary explosives. These are often used for safety and the, typically, lower costs of material and handling. The largest consumers are large-scale mining and construction operations.\nMost tertiaries include a fuel and an oxidizer. ANFO can be a tertiary explosive if its reaction rate is slow.\nBy velocity.\nAn explosive is classified as a low or high explosive according to its rate of combustion: low explosives deflagrate (burn rapidly), while high explosives detonate. While these definitions are distinct, the problem of precisely measuring rapid decomposition makes practical classification of explosives difficult. For a reaction to be classified as a detonation as opposed to just a deflagration, the propagation of the reaction shockwave through the material being tested must be faster than the speed of sound through that material. The speed of sound through a liquid or solid material is usually orders of magnitude faster than the speed of sound through air or other gases.\nLow.\nLow explosives (or low-order explosives) are explosive materials that deflagrate, meaning that the explosion is propagated by a flame front that proceeds through the material at a subsonic speed.\nIn deflagration, the decomposition of explosive material is propagated by a flame front at subsonic speeds within the substance (which is usually still higher than 340\u00a0m/s or in most liquid or solid materials), in contrast to a shock wave in detonation, which travels at supersonic speed. Under normal conditions, low explosives undergo deflagration at rates that vary from a few centimetres per second to approximately . It is possible for them to deflagrate more quickly, producing an effect similar to a detonation. This can happen under higher pressure (such as when gunpowder deflagrates inside the confined space of a bullet casing, accelerating the bullet to well beyond the speed of sound) or temperature.\nA low explosive is usually a mixture of a combustible substance and an oxidant that decomposes rapidly; however, they burn more slowly than a high explosive, which has an extremely fast burn rate.\nLow explosives are normally employed as propellants. Included in this group are petroleum products such as propane and gasoline, gunpowder (including smokeless powder), and light pyrotechnics such as flares and fireworks, but they can replace high explosives in certain applications, including gas pressure blasting.\nHigh.\nHigh explosives (HE, or high-order explosives) are explosive materials that detonate, meaning that the explosion is propagated by an explosive shock front that passes through the material at supersonic speed. High explosives detonate with an explosive velocity of about . For instance, TNT has a detonation (burn) rate of approximately 6.9\u00a0km/s (22,600 feet per second), detonating cord of 6.7\u00a0km/s (22,000 feet per second), and C-4 about 8.0\u00a0km/s (26,000 feet per second).\nHigh explosives tend to have the oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen contained in one organic molecule, and less sensitive explosives like ANFO are combinations of fuel (carbon and hydrogen fuel oil) and oxidizer (ammonium nitrate).\nHigh explosives are normally employed in mining, demolition, and military applications.\nHigh explosives can be divided into two explosive classes differentiated by sensitivity: primary explosives and secondary explosives. Although tertiary explosives (such as ANFO at 3,200\u00a0m/s) can technically meet the explosive velocity definition, they are not considered high explosives in regulatory contexts.\nCountless high-explosive compounds are chemically possible, but commercially and militarily important ones have included NG, TNT, TNP, TNX, RDX, HMX, PETN, TATP, TATB, and HNS.\nBy physical form.\nExplosives are often characterized by the physical form that the explosives are produced or used in. These use forms are commonly categorized as:\nShipping label classifications.\nShipping labels and tags may include both United Nations and national markings.\nUnited Nations markings include numbered Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) codes and alphabetic Compatibility Group codes. Though the two are related, they are separate and distinct. Any Compatibility Group designator can be assigned to any Hazard Class and Division. An example of this hybrid marking would be a consumer firework, which is labeled as 1.4G or 1.4S.\nExamples of national markings would include United States Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) codes.\nUnited Nations (UN) GHS Hazard Class and Division.\nThe UN GHS Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) is a numeric designator within a hazard class indicating the character, predominance of associated hazards, and potential for causing personnel casualties and property damage. It is an internationally accepted system that communicates, using the minimum amount of markings, the primary hazard associated with a substance.\nListed below are the Divisions for Class 1 (Explosives):\nTo see an entire UNO table, browse Paragraphs 3\u20138 and 3\u20139 of NAVSEA OP 5, Vol. 1, Chapter 3.\nClass 1 Compatibility Group.\nCompatibility Group codes are used to indicate storage compatibility for HC/D Class 1 (explosive) materials. Letters are used to designate 13 compatibility groups as follows.\nProperties.\nTo determine the suitability of an explosive substance for a particular use, its physical properties must first be known. The usefulness of an explosive can only be appreciated when the properties and the factors affecting them are fully understood. Some of the more important characteristics are listed below:\nSensitivity.\nSensitivity refers to the ease with which an explosive can be ignited or detonated, i.e., the amount and intensity of shock, friction, or heat that is required. When the term sensitivity is used, care must be taken to clarify what kind of sensitivity is under discussion. The relative sensitivity of a given explosive to impact may vary greatly from its sensitivity to friction or heat. Some test methods used to determine sensitivity relate to:\nSpecific explosives (usually but not always highly sensitive on one or more of the three above axes) may be idiosyncratically sensitive to such factors as pressure drop, acceleration, the presence of sharp edges or rough surfaces, incompatible materials, or even\u200a\u2014\u200ain rare cases\u200a\u2014\u200anuclear or electromagnetic radiation. These factors present special hazards that may rule out any practical utility.\nSensitivity is an important consideration in selecting an explosive for a particular purpose. The explosive in an armor-piercing projectile must be relatively insensitive, or the shock of impact would cause it to detonate before it penetrated to the point desired. The explosive lenses around nuclear charges are also designed to be highly insensitive to minimize the risk of accidental detonation.\nSensitivity to initiation.\nThe index of the capacity of an explosive to be initiated into detonation in a sustained manner. It is defined by the power of the detonator, which is certain to prime the explosive to a sustained and continuous detonation. Reference is made to the Sellier-Bellot scale that consists of a series of 10 detonators, from n.\u200a1 to n.\u200a10, each of which corresponds to an increasing charge weight. In practice, most of the explosives on the market today are sensitive to an n.\u200a8 detonator, where the charge corresponds to 2\u00a0grams of mercury fulminate.\nVelocity of detonation.\nThe velocity with which the reaction process propagates in the mass of the explosive. Most commercial mining explosives have detonation velocities ranging from 1,800\u00a0m/s to 8,000\u00a0m/s. Today, the velocity of detonation can be measured with accuracy. Together with density, it is an important element influencing the yield of the energy transmitted through both atmospheric overpressure and ground acceleration. By definition, a \"low explosive\", such as black powder or smokeless gunpowder, has a burn rate of 171\u2013631\u00a0m/s. In contrast, a \"high explosive\", whether a primary, such as detonating cord, or a secondary, such as TNT or C-4, has a significantly higher burn rate of about 6900\u20138092\u00a0m/s.\nStability.\nStability is the ability of an explosive to be stored without deterioration.\nThe following factors affect the stability of an explosive:\nPower, performance, and strength.\nThe term power or performance as applied to an explosive, refers to its ability to do work. In practice it is defined as the explosive's ability to accomplish what is intended in the way of energy delivery (i.e., fragment projection, air blast, high-velocity jet, underwater shock and bubble energy, etc.). Explosive power or performance is evaluated by a tailored series of tests to assess the material for its intended use. Of the tests listed below, cylinder expansion and air-blast tests are common to most testing programs, and the others support specific applications.\nThe RBE may be defined as \"K\"\"x\" 3\nRBE = \"K\"\"s\"\nwhere \"K\" = the bubble expansion period for an experimental (\"x\") or a standard (\"s\") charge.\nBrisance.\nIn addition to strength, explosives display a second characteristic, which is their shattering effect, or brisance (from the French meaning \"to break\"). Brisance is important in determining the effectiveness of an explosion in fragmenting shells, bomb casings, and grenades. The rapidity with which an explosive reaches its peak pressure (power) is a measure of its brisance. Brisance values are primarily employed in France and Russia.\nThe sand crush test is commonly employed to determine the relative brisance in comparison to TNT. No test is capable of directly comparing the explosive properties of two or more compounds; it is important to examine the data from several such tests (sand crush, trauzl, and so forth) in order to gauge relative brisance. True values for comparison require field experiments.\nDensity.\nDensity of loading refers to the mass of an explosive per unit volume. Several methods of loading are available, including pellet loading, cast loading, and press loading, the choice being determined by the characteristics of the explosive. Dependent upon the method employed, an average density of the loaded charge can be obtained that is within 80\u201399% of the theoretical maximum density of the explosive. High load density can reduce sensitivity by making the mass more resistant to internal friction. However, if density is increased to the extent that individual crystals are crushed, the explosive may become more sensitive. Increased load density also permits the use of more explosives, thereby increasing the power of the warhead. It is possible to compress an explosive beyond a point of sensitivity, known also as \"dead-pressing\", in which the material is no longer capable of being reliably initiated, if at all.\nVolatility.\nVolatility is the readiness with which a substance vaporizes. Excessive volatility often results in the development of pressure within rounds of ammunition and separation of mixtures into their constituents. Volatility affects the chemical composition of the explosive such that a marked reduction in stability may occur, which results in an increase in the danger of handling.\nHygroscopicity and water resistance.\nThe introduction of water into an explosive is highly undesirable since it reduces the sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation of the explosive. Hygroscopicity is a measure of a material's moisture-absorbing tendencies. Moisture affects explosives adversely by acting as an inert material that absorbs heat when vaporized and by acting as a solvent medium that can cause undesired chemical reactions. Sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation are reduced by inert materials that reduce the continuity of the explosive mass. When the moisture content evaporates during detonation, cooling occurs, which reduces the temperature of the reaction. Stability is also affected by the presence of moisture since moisture promotes decomposition of the explosive and, in addition, causes corrosion of the explosive's metal container.\nExplosives considerably differ from one another as to their behavior in the presence of water. Gelatin dynamites containing nitroglycerine have a degree of water resistance. Explosives based on ammonium nitrate have little or no water resistance as ammonium nitrate is highly soluble in water and is hygroscopic.\nToxicity.\nMany explosives are toxic to some extent. Manufacturing inputs can also be organic compounds or hazardous materials that require special handling due to risks (such as carcinogens). The decomposition products, residual solids, or gases of some explosives can be toxic, whereas others are harmless, such as carbon dioxide and water.\nExamples of harmful by-products are:\n\"Green explosives\" seek to reduce environmental and health impacts. An example of such is the lead-free primary explosive copper(I) 5-nitrotetrazolate, an alternative to lead azide.\nExplosive train.\nExplosive material may be incorporated in the explosive train of a device or system. An example is a pyrotechnic lead igniting a booster, which causes the main charge to detonate.\nVolume of products of explosion.\nThe most widely used explosives are condensed liquids or solids converted to gaseous products by explosive chemical reactions and the energy released by those reactions. The gaseous products of complete reaction are typically carbon dioxide, steam, and nitrogen. Gaseous volumes computed by the ideal gas law tend to be too large at high pressures characteristic of explosions. Ultimate volume expansion may be estimated at three orders of magnitude, or one liter per gram of explosive. Explosives with an oxygen deficit will generate soot or gases like carbon monoxide and hydrogen, which may react with surrounding materials such as atmospheric oxygen. Attempts to obtain more precise volume estimates must consider the possibility of such side reactions, condensation of steam, and aqueous solubility of gases like carbon dioxide.\nOxygen balance (OB% or \"\u03a9\").\nOxygen balance is an expression that is used to indicate the degree to which an explosive can be oxidized. If an explosive molecule contains enough oxygen to convert all of its carbon to carbon dioxide, all of its hydrogen to water, and all of its metal to metal oxide with no excess, the molecule has a zero oxygen balance. The molecule has a positive oxygen balance if it contains more oxygen than is needed and a negative oxygen balance if it contains less oxygen than is needed. The sensitivity, strength, and brisance of an explosive are all somewhat dependent upon oxygen balance and tend to approach their maxima as oxygen balance approaches zero.\nChemical composition.\nA chemical explosive may consist of either a chemically pure compound, such as nitroglycerin, or a mixture of a fuel and an oxidizer, such as black powder or grain dust and air.\nPure compounds.\nSome chemical compounds are unstable in that, when shocked, they react, possibly to the point of detonation. Each molecule of the compound dissociates into two or more new molecules (generally gases) with the release of energy.\nThe above compositions may describe most of the explosive material, but a practical explosive will often include small percentages of other substances. For example, dynamite is a mixture of highly sensitive nitroglycerin with sawdust, powdered silica, or, most commonly, diatomaceous earth, which act as stabilizers. Plastics and polymers may be added to bind powders of explosive compounds; waxes may be incorporated to make them safer to handle; aluminium powder may be introduced to increase total energy and blast effects. Explosive compounds are also often \"alloyed\": HMX or RDX powders may be mixed (typically by melt-casting) with TNT to form Octol or Cyclotol.\nOxidized fuel.\nAn oxidizer is a pure substance (molecule) that in a chemical reaction can contribute some atoms of one or more oxidizing elements, in which the fuel component of the explosive burns. On the simplest level, the oxidizer may itself be an oxidizing element, such as gaseous or liquid oxygen.\nAvailability and cost.\nThe availability and cost of explosives are determined by the availability of the raw materials and the cost, complexity, and safety of the manufacturing operations.\nActivation.\nThere are a number of more exotic methods of causing explosions. Examples include abruptly heating a substance to a plasma state with a high-intensity laser or electric arc. Laser- and arc-heating are used in laser detonators, exploding-bridgewire detonators, and exploding foil initiators, where a shock wave and then detonation in conventional chemical explosive material is created by laser or electric arc heating. Laser and electric energy are not currently used in practice to generate most of the required energy but only to initiate reactions.\nRegulation.\nThe legality of possessing or using explosives varies by jurisdiction. Various countries around the world have enacted explosives laws and require licenses to manufacture, distribute, store, use, or possess explosives or ingredients.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the civil and commercial use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet explosieven voor civiel gebruik\" (explosives for civil use Act), in accordance with EU directive nr. 93/15/EEG (Dutch). The illegal use of explosives is covered under the \"Wet Wapens en Munitie\" (Weapons and Munition Act) (Dutch).\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe new Explosives Regulations 2014 (ER 2014) came into force on 1 October 2014 and defines \"explosive\" as:\nbut it does not include an explosive substance produced as part of a manufacturing process which thereafter reprocesses it in order to produce a substance or preparation which is not an explosive substance\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Anyone who wishes to acquire and or keep relevant explosives needs to contact their local police explosives liaison officer. All explosives are relevant explosives apart from those listed under Schedule 2 of Explosives Regulations 2014.\" [\"sic\"]\nUnited States.\nDuring World War I, numerous laws were created to regulate war-related industries and increase security within the United States. In 1917, the 65th United States Congress created many laws, including the \"Espionage Act of 1917\" and the \"Explosives Act of 1917\".\nThe \"Explosives Act of 1917\" (session 1, chapter 83, 40\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://) was signed on 6 October 1917 and went into effect on 16 November 1917. The legal summary is \"An Act to prohibit the manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession in time of war of explosives, providing regulations for the safe manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession of the same, and for other purposes\". This was the first federal regulation of licensing explosives purchases. The act was deactivated after World War I ended.\nAfter the United States entered World War II, the Explosives Act of 1917 was reactivated. In 1947, the act was deactivated by President Truman.\nThe \"Organized Crime Control Act of 1970\" (Pub. L.\u00a0) transferred many explosives regulations to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) of the Department of Treasury. The bill became effective in 1971.\nCurrently, regulations are governed by Title 18 of the United States Code and Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nListed in alphabetical order:"}
{"id": "10193", "revid": "50667460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10193", "title": "Enter the Dragon", "text": "1973 film by Robert Clouse\nEnter the Dragon () is a 1973 martial arts film directed by Robert Clouse and written by Michael Allin. The film stars Bruce Lee, John Saxon, Ahna Capri, Bob Wall, Shih Kien, and Jim Kelly. \"Enter the Dragon\" was Bruce Lee's final completed film appearance before his death on 20 July 1973 at the age of 32. An American-Hong Kong co-production, the film was premiered in Los Angeles on 19 August 1973, one month after Lee's death.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was estimated to have grossed over $ worldwide (equivalent to an estimated $ adjusted for inflation as of 2022[ [update]]) against a budget of $850,000. It is the most successful martial arts film ever and is widely regarded as one of the greatest martial arts films of all time. In 2004, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Among the first films to combine martial arts action with spy film elements and the emerging blaxploitation genre, its success led to a series of similar productions combining the martial arts and blaxploitation genres. The film's themes have generated scholarly debate about the changes taking place within post-colonial Asian societies following the end of World War II.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" is also considered one of the most influential action films of all time, with its success contributing to mainstream worldwide interest in the martial arts as well as inspiring numerous fictional works, including action films, television shows, action games, comic books, manga, and anime.\nPlot.\nLee, a martial artist and instructor from Shaolin temple, Hong Kong, is approached by British intelligence agent Braithwaite, who asks for his help in an undercover mission to investigate suspected crime lord Han, who was one of the students in Shaolin temple. Lee is persuaded to attend a high-profile martial arts tournament on Han's private island to gather evidence that will prove Han's involvement in drug trafficking and prostitution.\nSince Han's island is only partly in their jurisdiction, they are unable to conduct any formal investigations. Han does not allow firearms on the island to prevent assassination attempts and raids from international authorities. He runs a martial arts school as cover for his illegal operations and holds the tournament to recruit martial artists to expand his illegal business. Lee agrees to help Braithwaite, believing his efforts will also redeem the honor of the Shaolin temple that was tarnished by Han. Shortly before his departure, Lee also learns that Han's bodyguard O'Hara is responsible for the death of his sister Su Lin.\nLee arrives on Han's island and receives a warm reception. Joining him are other competitors, including Roper, an American playboy and gambler, who is indebted and on the run from the mob, and Williams, an African-American activist, who is on the run after defending himself against two racist police officers in Los Angeles. Roper and Williams are former Karate brothers and fellow Vietnam veterans, who also have a betting scam going: one will underperform until the other can get a bet on the outcome at good odds. Roper and Williams win their first fights easily.\nThe rules of Han's tournament are simple: competitors compete in one-on-one matches against each other, the opponent, who gets knocked to the ground loses each round. Any weapons are strictly prohibited in the fighting arena. At the end of the first day, the competitors are all offered girls of their choice by Han's assistant Tania. Williams chooses several women, while Roper cunningly chooses Tania as a mutual attraction grows between them. Lee chooses a girl, which he saw in Han's entourage, who is Mei Ling, a covert agent whom Braithwaite had placed on the island to gather intelligence. However, Mei Ling has been unable to escape Han's strict observation never to leave their rooms.\nThat night, Lee begins to stealthily search and infiltrate the island for evidence and finds a secret entrance to an underground compound base where drugs are being manufactured and tested on unwitting prisoners. Lee runs into Han's guards, but manages to take them down and flee before they can identify him. Lee is seen by Williams, who is outside for some fresh air and practice, despite strict rules against being outside after night. The next morning, Han warns the competitors about wandering out of their rooms at night. Han punishes his guards for their inability to fulfill their duties by leaving them to be killed by Bolo, Han's musclebound enforcer and chief bodyguard. After the execution, the competition resumes as Lee is called to his first match, which is against O'Hara.\nDuring the fight, Han warns O'Hara to step down as Lee keeps outclassing him in a humiliating fashion, even ignoring Han's commands to stand down after being fairly beaten. Lee kills O'Hara with a double stomp after he tries to attack him from behind with a pair of half-shattered glass bottles, thus avenging Su Lin's death. An embarrassed Han abruptly ends the day's competition after stating that O'Hara's treachery has disgraced them. Later, Han summons Williams in his office and accuses him of attacking the guards the previous night. Williams denies this and wants to leave the island, so Han brutally beats him to death with his iron prosthetic left hand.\nHan takes Roper on a tour of his underground base and invites him to be his representative for his illegal operations in the United States. Han also implicitly threatens to imprison Roper with other martial artists who joined Han's tournaments in the past. Roper reluctantly accepts after Han drops the brutalized corpse of Williams into a pit of acid, hinting that Roper will face the same fate if he refuses to cooperate. The same night, Lee infiltrates the underground base again to gather sufficient evidence to warrant Han's arrest and manages to send a message to Braithwaite. After a prolonged battle with Han's guards, Lee is eventually lured into a door trap to get imprisoned and captured.\nThe next morning, Han commands Roper to fight Lee, but Roper refuses and Han has him fight Bolo. Roper manages to overpower and beat Bolo after a gruelling battle. Han orders all his men to kill Lee and Roper. Despite facing insurmountable odds, the island's prisoners, released by Mei Ling, and the other invited martial artists aid Lee and Roper in defeating Han's guards. Amid the chaos, Han attempts to fight his way out to escape, only to have Lee pursue and corner him in his museum, where Han retrieves a bladed-talon replacement for his hand to prepare for a brutal fight. Han retreats into a room full of mirrors, which proves disorientating for Lee until Lee remembers his lessons at the Shaolin Temple and smashes all the mirrors to spoil Han's illusions. Lee kicks Han, who gets impaled on his own spear that was halfway harpooned through a wall.\nLee returns to Roper and they exchange a weary thumbs-up as the military finally arrives to take control of the island.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nDue to the success of his earlier films, Warner Bros. began helping Bruce Lee with the film in 1972. They brought in producers Fred Weintraub and Paul Heller. The film was produced on a tight production budget of $850,000. Fighting sequences were staged by Bruce Lee.\nThe screenplay title was originally named \"Blood and Steel\". Heller produced a treatment inspired by the comic strip \"Terry and the Pirates\" and hired screenwriter Michael Allin to develop it into a screenplay. Allin conceived of the film as an homage to James Bond. The story features heroic protagonists who are Asian, White, and Black, as the producers wanted a film that would appeal to the widest possible international audience. \nPre-production.\nLee and Allin did not get along, and Weintraub told Lee that he would fire Allin but did not actually do so. Lee perceived the film as a cheap B-movie that would serve as a transitional film to introduce his talents and style to Hollywood. Lee's role was originally conceived as a straightforward Chinese version of James Bond. Lee rejected this because of Bond's status as a symbol of British imperialism and convinced the producers to re-conceive of his character as a Shaolin monk. Lee insisted on re-titling the film \"Enter the Dragon\", to considerable resistance from the studio.\nThe scene in which Lee states that his style is \"Fighting Without Fighting\" is based upon a famous anecdote involving the 16th century samurai Tsukahara Bokuden.\nAll of the actors were hired at low wages. Rod Taylor was first choice for playing the down-on-his-luck martial artist Roper. Director Robert Clouse had already worked with Taylor in the 1970 film \"Darker than Amber\". However, Taylor was dropped after Bruce Lee deemed him to be too tall for the role. John Saxon, who was a black belt in Judo and Shotokan Karate (he studied under grandmaster Hidetaka Nishiyama for three years), became the preferred choice. During contractual negotiations, Saxon's agent told the film's producers that if they wanted him they would have to change the plot so that the character of Williams is killed instead of Roper. They agreed and the script was changed. In a six decade career, the character would become one of Saxon's best known roles.\nRockne Tarkington was originally cast in the role of Williams. However, he unexpectedly dropped out days before the production was about to begin in Hong Kong. Producer Fred Weintraub knew that karate world champion Jim Kelly had a training dojo in Crenshaw, Los Angeles, so he hastily arranged a meeting. Weintraub was immediately impressed, and Kelly was cast in the film. The success of Kelly's appearance launched his career as a star: after \"Enter the Dragon\", he signed a three-film deal with Warner Bros and went on to make several martial arts-themed blaxploitation films in the 1970s.\nFilming.\nJackie Chan has uncredited roles as various guards during the fights with Lee. However, Yuen Wah was Lee's main stunt double for the film, responsible for the gymnastics stunts such as the cartwheels and jumping back flip in the opening fight.\nSammo Hung also has an uncredited role in the opening fight scene against Lee at the start of the film.\nLee originally wanted to cast Chuck Norris as Han's bodyguard, Oharra; Bob Wall was the second choice. A rumour surrounding the making of \"Enter The Dragon\" claims that Wall did not like Bruce Lee and that their fight scenes were not choreographed. However, Wall has denied this, stating he and Lee were good friends. In one of their fight scenes, Lee injured his hand on a shattered bottle held by Wall, which angered Lee.\nThe production hired prostitutes to play Han's harem. The visibility of their roles led the actresses to demand higher wages, which then led the stuntmen to consider striking, because they were paid less.\nThe film was shot on location in Hong Kong. In keeping with local film-making practices, scenes were filmed without sound: dialogue and sound effects were added or dubbed in during post-production. Bruce Lee, after he had been goaded or challenged, fought several real fights with the film's extras and some set intruders during filming. The scenes on Han's Island were filmed at a residence known as Palm Villa near the coastal town of Stanley. The villa is now demolished and the area heavily redeveloped around Tai Tam Bay where the martial artists were filmed coming ashore.\nSoundtrack.\nArgentinian musician Lalo Schifrin composed the film's musical score. While Schifrin was widely known at the time for his jazz scores, he also incorporated funk and traditional film score elements into the film's soundtrack. He composed the score by sampling sounds from China, Korea, and Japan. The soundtrack has sold over 500,000 copies, earning a gold record.\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\nStudio executives were impressed by the quality of the film and the earlier surprise success of \"Five Fingers of Death\", which demonstrated a market for kung fu films. \"Enter the Dragon\" was heavily advertised in the United States before its release. The budget for advertising was over US$. It was unlike any promotional campaign that had been seen before, and was extremely comprehensive. To advertise the film, the studio offered free Karate classes, produced thousands of illustrated flip books, comic books, posters, photographs, and organised dozens of news releases, interviews, and public appearances for the stars. \"Esquire\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"Time\", and \"Newsweek\" all wrote stories on the film.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was one of the most successful films of 1973. Upon release in Hong Kong, the film grossed HK$, which was huge business for the time, but less than Lee's previous 1972 films \"Fist of Fury\" and \"The Way of the Dragon\".\nIn North America, the film was receiving offers of US$ from American distributors by April 1973 for the distribution rights, several months before release. Upon its limited release in August 1973 in four theatres in New York, the film entered the weekly box office charts at number 17 with a gross of $ in 3 days. Upon its expansion the following week, it topped the charts for two weeks. Over the next four weeks, it remained in the top 10 while competing with other kung fu films, including \"Lady Kung Fu\", \"The Shanghai Killers\" and \"Deadly China Doll\" which held the top spot for one week each.\nIn October, \"Enter the Dragon\" regained the top spot in its eighth week. It sold 14.1 million tickets and grossed $ from its initial US release, making it the year's fourth highest-grossing film in the market. It was repeatedly re-released throughout the 1970s, with each re-release entering the top five in the box office charts. The film's US gross had increased to $ by 1982, and more than $ (equivalent to $ million adjusted for inflation) by 1998.\nIn Europe, the film initially monopolised several London West End cinemas for five weeks, before becoming a sellout success across Britain and the rest of Europe. In England, it grossed over $2.5 million. In Spain, it was the seventh top-grossing film of 1973, selling 2,462,489 tickets. In France, it was one of the top five highest-grossing films of 1974 (above two other Lee films, \"The Way of the Dragon\" at number 8 and \"Fist of Fury\" at number 12), with 4,444,582 ticket sales. In Germany, it was one of the top 10 highest-grossing films of 1974, with 1.7 million ticket sales. In Greece, the film earned $ in its first year of release.\nIn Japan, it was the second highest-grossing film of 1974 with distributor rental earnings of \u00a5. It was the highest-grossing film of all time in the Philippines. In South Korea, the film sold 229,681 tickets in the capital city of Seoul. In India, the movie was released in 1975 and opened to full houses; in one Bombay theatre, New Excelsior, it had a packed 32-week run. The film was also a success in Iran, where there was a theatre which played it daily up until the 1979 Iranian Revolution.\nAgainst a tight budget of $850,000, the film grossed US$ upon its initial 1973 worldwide release, making it one of the world's highest-grossing films of all time up until then. The film went on to have multiple re-releases around the world over the next several decades, significantly increasing its worldwide gross. The film went on to gross over $ internationally by 1981, making it the highest-grossing martial arts film of all time. It was reportedly still among the top 50 all-time highest-grossing films in 1990.\nBy 1998, it had grossed more than $ worldwide. As of 2001[ [update]], it has grossed an estimated total of over $ worldwide, having earned more than 400 times its original budget. The film's cost-to-profit ratio makes it one of the most commercially successful and profitable films of all time. Adjusted for inflation, the film's worldwide gross is estimated to be the equivalent of around $ as of 2022[ [update]].\nHome media.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has remained one of the most popular martial arts films since its premiere and has been released numerous times worldwide on multiple home video formats. For almost three decades, many theatrical and home video versions were censored for violence, especially in the West. In the UK alone, at least four different versions have been released. Since 2001, the film has been released uncut in the UK and most other territories. Most DVDs and Blu-rays come with a wide range of extra features in the form of documentaries, interviews, etc. In 2013, a second, remastered HD transfer appeared on Blu-ray, billed as the \"40th Anniversary Edition\".\nIn 2020, new 2K digital restorations of the theatrical cut and special edition were included as part of the \"Bruce Lee: His Greatest Hits\" box set by The Criterion Collection (under licensed from Warner Bros. Home Entertainment through the physical home media joint venture in US and Canada named Studio Distribution Services and Fortune Star Media Limited), which featured all of Lee's films, as well as \"Game of Death II\".\nReception.\nUpon release, the film was initially received mixed reviews from several critics, including a favourable review from \"Variety\" magazine. The film eventually went on to be well received by most critics, and it is widely regarded as one of the best films of 1973. Critics have referred to \"Enter the Dragon\" as \"a low-rent James Bond thriller\", a \"remake of \"Dr. No\"\" with elements of Fu Manchu. J.C. Ma\u00e7ek III of PopMatters wrote, \"Of course the real showcase here is the obvious star here, Bruce Lee, whose performance as an actor and a fighter are the most enhanced by the perfect sound and video transfer. While Kelly was a famous martial artist and a surprisingly good actor and Saxon was a famous actor and a surprisingly good martial artist, Lee proves to be a master of both fields.\"\nMany acclaimed newspapers and magazines reviewed the film. \"Variety\" described it as \"rich in the atmosphere\", the music score as \"a strong asset\" and the photography as \"interesting\". \"The New York Times\" gave the film a rave review: \"The picture is expertly made and well-meshed; it moves like lightning and brims with color. It is also the most savagely murderous and numbing hand-hacker (not a gun in it) you will ever see anywhere.\"\nThe film holds an 88% approval rating on the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes based on 78 reviews, with an average rating of 7.80/10. The site's critical consensus reads, \"Badass to the max, \"Enter the Dragon\" is the ultimate kung-fu movie and fitting (if untimely) Bruce Lee swan song.\" On Metacritic, it has a weighted average score of 83 out of 100 based on reviews from 16 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". In 2004, the film was deemed \"culturally significant\" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was selected as the best martial arts film of all time, in a 2013 poll of \"The Guardian\" and \"The Observer\" critics. The film also ranks No. 474 on \"Empire\" magazine's 2008 list of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\".\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has been parodied and referenced in places such as the 1976 film \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\", the satirical publication \"The Onion\", the Japanese game-show \"Takeshi's Castle\", and the 1977 John Landis comedy anthology film \"The Kentucky Fried Movie\" (in its lengthy \"A Fistful of Yen\" sequence, basically a comedic, note for note remake of \"Dragon\") and also in the film \"Balls of Fury\". It was also parodied on television in \"That '70s Show\" during the episode \"Jackie Moves On\" with regular character Fez taking on the Bruce Lee role. Several clips from the film are comically used during the theatre scene in \"The Last Dragon\". Lee's martial arts films were broadly lampooned in the recurring \"Almost Live!\" sketch \"Mind Your Manners with\" \"Billy Quan\". Ram Gopal Varma directed the martial-arts film \"\" after being heavily inspired by the film.\nIn August 2007, the now-defunct Warner Independent Pictures announced that television producer Kurt Sutter would be remaking the film as a noir-style thriller entitled \"Awaken the Dragon\" with Korean singer-actor Rain. It was announced in September 2014 that Spike Lee would work on the remake. In March 2015, Brett Ratner revealed that he wanted to make the remake. In July 2018, David Leitch was in early talks to direct the remake. As of 2024, there are no further updates on this project.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" has been cited as one of the most influential action films of all time. Sascha Matuszak of \"Vice\" called it the most influential kung fu film and said it \"is referenced in all manner of media, the plot line and characters continue to influence storytellers today and the impact was particularly felt in the revolutionizing way the film portrayed African-Americans, Asians and traditional martial arts.\" Joel Stice of \"Uproxx\" called it \"arguably the most influential kung fu movie of all time.\" Kuan-Hsing Chen and Beng Huat Chua cited its fight scenes as influential as well as its \"hybrid form and its mode of address\" which pitches \"an elemental story of good against evil in such a spectacle-saturated way.\" Quentin Tarantino cited \"Enter the Dragon\" as a formative influence on his career.\nAccording to Scott Mendelson of \"Forbes\", \"Enter the Dragon\" contains spy film elements similar to the \"James Bond\" film series. \"Enter the Dragon\" was the most successful action-spy film to not be part of the \"James Bond\" film series; \"Enter the Dragon\" had an initial global box office comparable to the \"James Bond\" films of that era, and a lifetime gross surpassing every \"James Bond\" film up until \"GoldenEye\". Mendelson argues that, had Bruce Lee lived after \"Enter the Dragon\" was released, the film had the potential to launch an action-spy film franchise starring Bruce Lee that could have rivalled the success of the \"James Bond\" franchise.\nThe film had an impact on MMA. In the opening fight sequence, where Lee fights Sammo Hung, Lee demonstrated elements of what would later become known as MMA. Both fighters wore what would later become common MMA clothing items, including kempo gloves and small shorts, and the fight ends with Lee utilising an armbar (then used in judo and jiu-jitsu) to submit Hung. According to UFC Hall of Fame fighter Urijah Faber, \"that was the moment\" that MMA was born.\nThe \"Dragon Ball\" manga and anime franchise, debuted in 1984, was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", which \"Dragon Ball\" creator Akira Toriyama was a fan of. The title \"Dragon Ball\" was also inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\" and the piercing eyes of Goku's Super Saiyan transformation was based on Bruce Lee's paralysing glare.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" inspired early beat 'em up brawler games. It was cited by game designer Yoshihisa Kishimoto as a key inspiration behind Techn\u014ds Japan's brawler \"Nekketsu K\u014dha Kunio-kun\", released as \"Renegade\" in the West. Its spiritual successor \"Double Dragon\" also drew inspiration from \"Enter the Dragon\", with the game's title being a homage to the film. \"Double Dragon\" also features two enemies named Roper and Williams, a reference to the two characters Roper and Williams from \"Enter the Dragon\". The sequel \"\" includes opponents named Bolo and Oharra.\n\"Enter the Dragon\" was the foundation for fighting games. The film's tournament plot inspired numerous fighting games, such as the \"Tekken\" series, for example. The \"Street Fighter\" video game franchise, debuted in 1987, was inspired by \"Enter the Dragon\", with the gameplay centered around an international fighting tournament, and each character having a unique combination of ethnicity, nationality and fighting style. \"Street Fighter\" went on to set the template for all fighting games that followed. The little-known 1985 Nintendo arcade game \"Arm Wrestling\" contains voice leftovers from the film, as well as their original counterparts. The popular fighting game \"Mortal Kombat\" borrows multiple plot elements from \"Enter the Dragon\" as does its movie adaptation.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10201", "revid": "27553511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10201", "title": "Exothermic process", "text": "Thermodynamic process that releases energy to its surroundings\nIn thermodynamics, an exothermic process (from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'outward' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'thermal') is a thermodynamic process or reaction that releases energy from the system to its surroundings, usually in the form of heat, but also in a form of light (e.g. a spark, flame, or flash), electricity (e.g. a battery), or sound (e.g. explosion heard when burning hydrogen). The term \"exothermic\" was first coined by 19th-century French chemist Marcellin Berthelot.\nThe opposite of an exothermic process is an endothermic process, one that absorbs energy, usually in the form of heat. The concept is frequently applied in the physical sciences to chemical reactions where chemical bond energy is converted to thermal energy (heat).\nTwo types of chemical reactions.\nExothermic and endothermic describe two types of chemical reactions or systems found in nature, as follows:\nExothermic.\nAn exothermic reaction occurs when heat is released to the surroundings. According to the IUPAC, an exothermic reaction is \"a reaction for which the overall standard enthalpy change \u0394\"H\"\u00b0 is negative\". Some examples of exothermic process are fuel combustion, condensation and nuclear fission, which is used in nuclear power plants to release large amounts of energy.\nEndothermic.\nIn an endothermic reaction or system, energy is taken from the surroundings in the course of the reaction, usually driven by a favorable entropy increase in the system. An example of an endothermic reaction is a first aid cold pack, in which the reaction of two chemicals, or dissolving of one in another, requires calories from the surroundings, and the reaction cools the pouch and surroundings by absorbing heat from them.\nPhotosynthesis, the process that allows plants to convert carbon dioxide and water to sugar and oxygen, is an endothermic process: plants absorb radiant energy from the sun and use it in an endothermic, otherwise non-spontaneous process. The chemical energy stored can be freed by the inverse (spontaneous) process: combustion of sugar, which gives carbon dioxide, water and heat (radiant energy).\nEnergy release.\nExothermic refers to a transformation in which a closed system releases energy (heat) to the surroundings, expressed by\nformula_1\nWhen the transformation occurs at constant pressure and without exchange of electrical energy, heat Q is equal to the enthalpy change, i.e.\nformula_2\nWhile at constant volume, according to the first law of thermodynamics it equals internal energy (U) change, i.e.\nformula_3\nIn an adiabatic system (i.e. a system that does not exchange heat with the surroundings), an otherwise exothermic process results in an increase in temperature of the system.\nIn exothermic chemical reactions, the heat that is released by the reaction takes the form of electromagnetic energy or kinetic energy of molecules. The transition of electrons from one quantum energy level to another causes light to be released. This light is equivalent in energy to some of the stabilization energy of the energy for the chemical reaction, i.e. the bond energy. This light that is released can be absorbed by other molecules in solution to give rise to molecular translations and rotations, which gives rise to the classical understanding of heat. In an exothermic reaction, the activation energy (energy needed to start the reaction) is less than the energy that is subsequently released, so there is a net release of energy.\nExamples.\nSome examples of exothermic processes are:\nImplications for chemical reactions.\nChemical exothermic reactions are generally more spontaneous than their counterparts, endothermic reactions.\nIn a thermochemical reaction that is exothermic, the heat may be listed among the products of the reaction.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10204", "revid": "50691265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10204", "title": "Elihu Yale", "text": "British colonial administrator and namesake of Yale College\nElihu Yale (5 April 1649 \u2013 8 July 1721) was a British-American colonial administrator.\nBorn in Boston, Massachusetts, Yale lived in America only as a child, and spent the rest of his life in England, Wales, and India.\nHe became a clerk for the East India Company at Fort St. George, later Madras, and eventually rose to the Presidency of the settlement. He was later removed from the post under charges of corruption for self-dealing, and required to pay a fine.\nIn 1699, he returned to Britain with a considerable fortune, around \u00a3200,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023), mostly made by selling diamonds, and spent his time and wealth in philanthropy and art collecting.\nHe was the primary benefactor of Yale College, now Yale University, which was named in his honor, following a donation of books, portraits, and textiles at the request of Rev. Cotton Mather, a Harvard University graduate. He had no male heir, and no descendants of his have survived past his grandchildren.\nIn the 21st century, Yale's connections to slavery in India began to be more closely explored, a process assisted by the digitalisation and online publication of the East India Company's records. In 2020, Peter Salovey, president of Yale University, launched the Yale and Slavery Research Project to explore the university's historical links with slavery and colonialism, including Elihu Yale's role.\nEarly life.\nYale was born in Boston, Massachusetts, to David Yale (1613\u20131690), a wealthy Boston merchant and attorney to Robert Rich, 2nd Earl of Warwick, and Ursula Knight; he was the grandson of Ann Yale (born Lloyd), daughter of Bishop George Lloyd. After the death of her first husband, Thomas Yale Sr. (1587\u20131619), son of Chancellor David Yale, Anne Yale married Theophilus Eaton, ambassador to Denmark. Eaton was the co-founder of two of the Thirteen British Colonies, which are represented on the Flag of the United States, mainly through the Massachusetts Bay Colony and the New Haven Colony, and was the brother of Nathaniel Eaton, Harvard's first Headmaster and President designate, at the founding of Harvard in 1636.\nHis son, Samuel Eaton, the uncle of Elihu, was also involved in the foundation of Harvard, being one of the seven founder members of the Harvard Corporation, the governing board and charter that incorporated the college in 1650. It was they, along with Elihu's uncle and aunt, Thomas Yale Jr., and Anne Yale Jr., who brought the reconstituted Eaton/Yale family to America, while other members of the family stayed in England. Their estates in Wales were Plas-yn-Yale and Plas Grono, and Elihu's brother was London merchant Thomas Yale, later ambassador to the King of Siam for the East India Company.\nElihu's father, David Yale, would later come from London to New Haven Colony with his stepfather, Theophilus Eaton, in 1639. He moved to Boston in 1641 and met and married Elihu Yale's mother, Ursula, in 1643. In 1652, at the age of three, Elihu Yale left New England, as David Yale took his family back to London. While documentation of this period is sparse, a letter suggests that David Yale remained a successful merchant and settled his family in the Hanseatic merchant district \"Steelyard Court\". In 1662, at the age of thirteen, Elihu Yale entered the private school of William Dugard, but Dugard died a few months after Elihu Yale enrolled. Yale likely lived through the Great Plague of London and the Great Fire of London.\nEast India Company.\nIn 1670, Yale joined the British East India Company, starting as a clerk at East India House in London. Among the board was the Earl of Berkeley, Sir Samuel Barnardiston, Vice-Admiral John Robinson, and Chairman Sir Andrew Riccard. Yale's uncle, Connecticut Gov. Edward Hopkins, was also one of the shareholders. It is possible that Yale had business training in his father's merchant counting house beforehand. He then sailed to India in December 1671 on one of the East Indiamen, on a voyage that would take six months, with the eminent dangers of pirates, storms and diseases.\nHe landed in Madras on 23 June 1672, at Fort St. George, where Portuguese, English and Hindu lived. He then learned the rules of Gov. William Langhorne, some of which being the interdiction to start a duel, to desert the fort, or to blaspheme, and met with Father Ephrem de Nevers. At the time, the East India Company was already exporting to Europe spices, pepper, precious stones, Chinese porcelains, Japanese screens, and cotton cloth. In 1674, Yale was sent to negotiate the potential establishment of a new factory, and by February, was allowed to deal in private trade, which included pearls, diamonds, rubies, sapphires, neckcloths, cloves and nutmegs. By 1677, Gov. Langhorne was accused of corruption by competitors within the Company. The directors were always suspicious, and with huge fortune being made six months away from London, they easily mistrust their employees.\nHe was then replaced by Gov. Streynsham Master, the son-in-law of Richard Legh of Lyme Hall. In April 1678, Yale was promoted to the rank of Factor, doubling his salary. In June arrived the Welsh chaplain John Evans, future Bishop of Meath, who would become a lifelong friend. In 1679, Yale's duties now involved receiving and invoicing textiles worth about 100,000 pagodas, consisting of neckcloths, chintz, and longcloth of various grades. With the death of Joseph Hynmers, second-in-command, Yale was made Assistant to the Warehouse Keeper, and started courting his widow. They married at St. Mary's Church, the oldest Anglican Church in India, on 4 November 1680, with Sir Henry Oxenden, Governor of Bombay, as brideman. With his wife's capital, Yale learned the trade and became a specialist in diamonds and precious stones.\nMadras Council.\nIn January 1681, he was promoted to the office of Provisional Customer. In the same year, Gov. Streynsham Master was replaced by William Gyfford, and Yale was sent as a diplomat to meet the VOC Governor of Pulicat. Despite Master's loyalty, the directors once again believed the charges of bad management, fueled by enemies, who brought complaints after complaints to the board in London. According to Madras historian Arthur Pringle, the official records are full of invented circumstantial charges of injustice and fraud. Yale was then promoted to the office of Mintmaster, and was given a seat on the council, occupying the fifth position on a board of six, as the directors were \"pleased with Elihu's behavior and ability\". In 1682, he was sent to Porto Novo on the Coromandel Coast to find investment opportunities for the sale of longcloth. During his mission, a great storm struck the coast, and 14,000 persons died. He made assessments of harbor facilities and fortifications, and was welcomed with coconuts as gifts of diplomacy.\nYale then negotiated with Sikandar Shah, the Sultan of Bijapur, and obtained permission for the gold trade in his territory. In 1683, as a member of Gov. Gyfford's council, he became a cofounder of the Madras Bank, the oldest in India. On 12 February, the second-in-command was dismissed for his \"language that was too independent and not sufficiently subservient in his letters\". The Councilmen rose in rank, with Yale becoming Warehouse Keeper. When Gov. Gyfford was sent to inspect factories in the Bay of Bengal, Yale became acting governor for a few months, and procured three elephants from King Narai of Siam, to be sent to the Sultan of Gingee as war elephants. In peace time, they were used with a Howdah as status symbols, while at war, they were the prototypes of the modern tank. Yale then obtained a house and garden at St. Thomas Mount for the sickly and their convalesce. Thereafter, he received 3 princes from Sumatra, Indonesia, bringing a letter from Sultanah Inayat Syah, Queen of Acheen, resulting in a trade agreement. About this time, King Charles II of England died, with James II ascending to the throne. The change was well welcomed by the company, as the chairman, Sir Josiah Child, had spent a fortune on James's ascension. Yale then organized the official ceremony at Fort St. George, with Gov. Gyfford resuming his office, and received the ambassadors of Persia and Siam.\nPresidency of Madras.\nIn July 1687, Yale was appointed President of Madras and Governor of Fort St. George, replacing William Gyfford. A difficulty of the office was to deal with the native rulers through firmans, as Madras was surrounded by the Mughal Empire, with rulers always asking for bribes. When their demands were refused, they would seize the food supplies, half starving the company's servants with a blockade. In terms of size, Madras consisted of about 300,000 people, or around 6% of England's population at the time. Yale had previously been popular with both the Europeans and native Indians, and reverted to the former practice of living and dining in the Fort House with merchants, writers and factors.\nWith Yale's nomination, Sir Josiah Child hoped that Madras would be less critical of London. As the East India Company's headquarters were thousands of miles away, the board implemented policies that were not well adapted to the conditions in Madras. Letters took 6 months to be received, sometimes over a year, making communications difficult. One of these policies was the creation of a new tax upon Madras inhabitants that Yale had now to carry out, which caused a local rebellion. During this time, they accused him of not cutting expenses down, such as keeping a Bengal tiger at the fort, among other things. Those who were taxed the most were the owners of the 128 houses within the fort, which half belonged to the Portuguese merchants. The company's chairman sent a letter to Yale, writing that \"your elaborate arguments to persuade us not to impose a moderate duty upon the Portuguese and other inhabitants of our city of Madras, whom we do protect and exceedingly encourage in their several vocations, have no weight at all with us\".\nYale had received similar letters during the Great Famine under Gov. Gyfford, where they had refused to collect taxes, with the directors replying that \"you are still fencing against our creating revenue at the Fort, with slight, insignificant arguments, wherein the worst is that you should have so mean an opinion of us, as to think such sophistical reasons will make any impressions on our judgment\". The directors also gave the order to close the Garden House, which was used for those who were resting outside the city, having a place to eat. Yale didn't follow this order and kept Gov. Gyfford there as his health was fragile. During August 1687, Yale is then recorded corresponding with the Ambassador of Shah Suleiman of Persia, regarding his arrival with a Koran to try to convert the Siamese king to Mohammedanism, which the latter refused. Being bankrupt after his failed mission, Yale loaned him money, which was never repaid.\nAnglo-Siamese War.\nFor many years, merchants of Madras and Siam were trading partners in the Andaman Sea, trading in rhinoceros horns, elephant tusks, copper and other commodities. Yale's brother, Thomas Yale, became ambassador to King Narai of Siam, and during this time, Elihu would entertain at his house the French ambassador and musketeer, Count Claude de Forbin, drinking to the health of the royal families of England and France. But around August 1687, disputes regarding Siam's strategic importance emerged among European powers, and Gov. Yale was charged by King Narai's agents regarding the sale of jewels, which they estimated having overpaid by 25%. The man behind the charges was a Greek named Constantine Phaulkon, who wanted to lower English's influence over King Narai, and get him closer to Louis XIV of France through Chevalier de Chaumont.\nThis trading dispute started the Anglo-Siamese War, with Yale acting on behalf of King James II of England, which resulted in number of casualties for the company, as cities were now being robbed by Siameses. Some English merchants at Siam sided with the enemy, and became involved in acts of piracy, which had Yale send warships in retaliation against Englishmen who changed sides. No peace treaty was ever signed, but the war against the Company will eventually stop around 1688. In London, the directors investigated the accusations of the Siameses on Yale and cleared his name, declaring that \"you can not be ignorant that Phaulkon himself in the King of Siam's name, began the war... upon a pretense that Mr. Yale injured the King of Siam in a bargain\". Phaulkon's alliance with France would later cost him his life, being assassinated by the Siameses nobles during the Siamese revolution of 1688. On 11 August 1687, Yale approved the recall of several Englishmen to Madras detained by Prussian Wolf Henrik von Kalnein, governor of Tranquebar under the Danish East India Co..\nSiege of Golconda.\nAbout a month later, on 22 September 1687, Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb conquered the nearby Kingdom of Golconda, defeating Sultan Abul Shah at the Siege of Golconda, ending the Qutb Shahi dynasty. Aurangzeb was a member of Tamerlane's dynasty, and his parents, founders of the Taj Mahal, were direct descendants of Genghis Khan. As Yale expected the Mughal's revenge for the Anglo-Mughal War started by the directors in Bengal, he prepared for war and raised a Portuguese militia, but as the Mughal had thousands of war elephants, he and the council had no choice but to pay him 50,000 pagodas to keep the Company's activities in Madras. Gov. Yale was now under the overlordship of the Islamic Mughal Empire. He sent diplomats to pay Emperor Aurangzeb, one of which was his friend Daniel Chardin, diamond merchant and brother of Sir Jean Chardin, Yale's partner in England. He also sent letters to Mughal general Mahabat Khan, and complied with the ceremonies of prince Muhammad Bakhs and prime minister Asad Khan. The situation was delicate as the Dutch and Louis XIV at Versailles were also trying to get the Mughal in their favor, and the directors would hold Yale responsible if anything went wrong, including failing to keep the Golconda diamonds trade from the Kollur Mines.\nAt the time, India was the world producer of diamonds, with Golconda producing 60% of its total output. Most of Yale's private fortune will be obtained from this trade with the Moghul, who received royalties, while Yale used his expertise and capital to hold on these stones until they were faceted and polished in Amsterdam, on their way to London. The process took on average 3 years before getting a return on investment, and Yale had 50 trained men to protect the goods from robbers during transportation. By 1688, Sir Josiah Child, the Company's largest shareholder, retired with a fortune of about \u00a3200,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023), and married his daughter to the son of the 1st Duke of Beaufort at Badminton House. During the same year, Yale welcomed the Armenian merchants to establish themselves at Fort St. George following their persecution in Europe. In July, he sent diplomats for the arrival of Dutch Gov. Johannes Camphuys, and on 29 September 1688, he inaugurated the Madras Corporation, where Nathaniel Higginson was elected its first mayor, with Amsterdam merchant Jacques de Paiva and others, elected on its board. Initially founded to restrain Yale's powers as governor, it became the oldest corporation in India, and the second oldest municipal body in the world after the City of London. Paiva's widow, Hieronima, would become Yale's mistress and bear him a son named Charles.\nAnglo-Dutch relations.\nFollowing the English Revolution of 1688, William of Orange, a Dutch, ascended to the throne of England, replacing James II, which was a fatal blow for Sir Josiah Child who had bet on the wrong side. The past wars between the Dutch and English merchants in Madras were now settled, and both started to form alliances through marriage. From then on, the directors' letters to Yale changed in tone. Sir Langhorne started complimenting him on his private trade in diamonds, as they now saw it as a way to expand the company to new markets without having to bear the risks themselves. Yale tried to build routes at Mindanao, the second largest island of the Philippines, getting from them Clove and Ironwood. He was then put on a secret committee with Sir John Child, governor of Bombay, and Nathaniel Higginson, mayor of Madras, to plan the establishment of a new fort near the South Seas, to engage in trade with China. On 17 March 1689, Yale received the arrival of Commander Job Charnock, with his staff and four companies of soldiers. He arrived from a failed mission that consisted of blocking and seizing the ships of Mughal Aurangzeb, who had attacked the company's ships in the Bay of Bengal, and taken control of Chittagong during the Anglo-Mughal War.\nCharnock stayed in Madras for a few months under Gov. Yale's protection, which caused dissensions in the council for fear of the Mughal's revenge. The Council eventually outvoted Yale, and Charnock was forced to leave, where he would found the city of Calcutta. In July, 1690, news of the war between William of Orange and Louis XIV of France arrived in Madras, and Yale prepared Fort St. George once more for war. On 15 August, the French sent seven warships to attack the Madras roads, along with one fireship. The fort was protected by a garrison of 700 soldiers under Gov. Yale, with the help of a Dutch fleet. Combat lasted a few hours, and the French were repulsed by the fort's guns, after which they didn't return. Yale then negotiated the release of Englishmen, dealing with Moghul general Shaista Khan, along with Daniel Chardin, who was sent to the King of Kandy. In 1690, Yale's brother negotiated with Rama Raja, the Chhatrapati of the Marathas, for the acquisition of a fort at Devanampatnam on behalf of the company, which was sold for 40,000 pagodas. They renamed the place Fort St. David in honor of a Welsh saint. On 28 December, they supplied ammunition to general Zulfiqar Khan, son of Grand Vizier Asad Khan, from which they obtained the firman for the territories of Vizagapatam, Gingee and Golconda. During this year, Yale was also instrumental to the development of the Government General Hospital for Madras soldiers.\nSlavery.\nRecords of the period indicate a flourishing slave trade in Madras. After English merchants began to kidnap young children and deport them to distant parts of the world, the administration of Fort St George stepped in and introduced laws to curb the practice. On 2 February 1688, Elihu Yale decreed that slaves should be examined by the judges of the choultry before being transported. Transportation of young children, in particular, was made unlawful. During his tenure as President of Madras, Yale ordered a minimum of 10 slaves sent on every ship going to Europe, and on a month in 1687, Fort St George exported at least 665 slaves. In his judicial capacity he also on several occasions sentenced so-called \"black criminals\" to whipping and enslavement. Evidence as to whether Yale personally owned slaves, or participated directly in their sale is inconclusive; the historian Steven Pincus suggests that he did not, while, in a 2016 article in the \"Journal of Global History\", Elizabeth Kuebler-Wolf stated that he enslaved one or two people as household servants, citing explorer Hiram Bingham's 1939 book \"Elihu Yale\". Historian Joseph Yannielli writes that although Yale \"probably did not own any of these people \u2013 the majority were held as the property of the East India Company \u2013 he certainly profited both directly and indirectly from their sale\", while the Sterling Professor David W. Blight suggests that Yale's personal ownership is \"not a key question [...] some portion of [his] considerable fortune derived from his myriad entanglements with the purchase and sale of human beings\" through his \"key leadership role in the business of human trafficking\".\nThe Groom.\nGov. Yale's story of having hanged his groom for taking his favorite horse on a day is a false story that was propagated by privateer Alexander Hamilton. The events were as follow: In August 1689, two soldiers of Fort St. George stole guns, horses, and other items, and left Madras as fugitives with a group of five confederates to join the enemy's army during war time. One was named George Isaac, and the other was named Charles Cross, the latter being not only a soldier but also one of the grooms of the fort's stables. They were captured by the Polligars on their way to the Mughal and surrendered to Madras on condition of showing them mercy, which was initially agreed, but once arrived, Gov. Yale and the Council decided to have them sentenced for treason and desertion. One was executed before the stables, the other was shot in front of the fort's gate. Thirty-eight years later, Capt. Hamilton wrote about the event in his memoirs, from a \"weal and treacherous memory\". As a past employee who became a Privateer, he never forgave the taxes the Company forced upon him during his private travels, and his depiction of the time, always critical of his past employer, are not considered faithful about the period.\nElihu Yale v. East India Co..\nThe later years of Yale's governance was marked by serious conflicts between his Presidency and the council, coming from Thomas Gray, Sir Josiah Child's servant, and lawyer William Fraser, a man known for his violent temper. They accused Yale of trying to get military power into his own hands. In 1691, Yale then received several Indian merchants and citizens who came to complain about Fraser's behaviour as new Mayor of Madras. Fraser had imprisoned four of their friends for refusing to sign an arbitration proceeding, and were stuck without food adapted to their religion. Yale ordered the marshal to temporarily release them to their private homes, and reversed other sentences made by the Mayor's Court. Yale wrote in his letter that \"he would have been unfaithful to his trust had he permitted an innocent man to starve to death in prison\". On 1 October 1692, letters arrived from London with accusations against Yale, making Nathaniel Higginson the new President of Madras. According to Madras historian Fanny Penny, the accusations were the same as with past governors, being the \"old story of private trade, jealousy on the part of his fellow-merchants, and suspicion and distrust at home as his wealth accumulated\".\nBy then, Yale's fortune was at \u00a3205,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023), which was the same as the Company's former chairman and largest shareholder, Sir Josiah Child. On 23 November, Sir John Goldsborough and judge John Dolben arrived in Madras for Yale's investigation. The Councillors took the law into their own hands, and had the Yale brothers imprisoned, and fearing of being poisoned, Yale wrote a letter to be delivered to the King of England by his brother, who will leave Madras on 20 February 1694. The investigators then inspected the fortifications around Black Town, the Indian natives's neighborhood. Yale had built the walls with the company's fund to protect the town against invasions of the Mughal Emperor, but having not followed the directors's order to tax the natives for it, he was fined 3484 pagodas with interest by the Company. Goldsborough then sent a group of musketeers to Mrs. Nicks's house, Yale's friend, to investigate fraud charges regarding cloths, where she would be fined for her husband's mistakes. Not having enough money to pay the taxes to bring her children home to England, she would be forced to sail without them. For Yale's trial, William Fraser was first put on the court, but Yale had him temporarily displaced after Fraser had imprisoned a Portuguese merchant for four years upon suspicion alone. By July, Sir John Goldsborough concluded his investigation, and left the countercharges to Fraser, not finding any evidence that Yale had defrauded the East India Company. His fines were based for the most part on technicalities, where he had not followed orders or made errors of judgment.\nThe case reaches London.\nTen months later, while still in prison, Yale's brother arrived in London in 1695, and appealed directly to the King's Privy Council on 14 February at Kensington Palace, contesting the accusations. The Privy Council ordered a reply from the East India Company but were not impressed by their statements against Yale's activities, therefore they ordered, on behalf of the king, to stop all the company's ships that were ready to sail for Fort St. George in India. Yale's case was given to Sir Thomas Rawlinson, and was attended by the King of England, William of Orange, Prince George of Denmark, Archbishop Thomas Tenison and the principal ministers. They ordered that the Attorney General examine the charter granted to the whole Company, and to examine their powers in matters of judicature. Their investigation was brought to Parliament, where they discovered briberies made by Sir Josiah Child and Sir Thomas Cook to Tory members. Thereafter, the King of England, William of Orange, ordered on 15 March 1695, the liberation of Elihu Yale, so that he could come back to England whenever he chose, with the additional order of giving him the Great Cabin in the Company ship of his choosing when he would be ready to sail home. When the letter reached Madras ten months later on 8 January 1696, Yale was immediately offered a ship for Britain, but having already served the company for over 20 years, he decided to stay as Fraser was still on his case.\nFraser then suggested to Sir Josiah Child that Yale had poisoned four members of the Council over the years. Fraser's case relied on statements made by two Indian natives that were not sworn, where they said that they had heard someone, who is now dead, say that somebody else, who has now left Madras, that two of Yale's enemies were still alive, and that they would be dead soon. Based on native gossips, the directors dismissed the case. Thereafter, president Higginson was told by his servant of seven years that Fraser had threatened him twice, to which he replied that he had beaten him because he didn't like his Salams. Fraser was then charged and banned from the council. With Fraser removed, Yale stayed at Fort St. George for some years, and over time, cleared his name of all scandal and developed his diamond business. Gov. Thomas Pitt, who would find the Pitt Diamond, became Yale's partner, as the Company had now removed all restrictions on private trade. In 1699, after a 30 years career in India, Yale decided to sail home, and was granted the usual privilege of past governors to bring back five tons of goods, which he filled with diamonds, rubies, sapphires, Chinawares, Persian carpets, nutmegs, and other items. He decided to have Gov Pitt's ship as his vessel, and brought back with him the children of Mrs. Nicks. Over time, the old accusations against the company's officers enriching themselves at their expense appeared less frequently, as the directors learned that their employees could grow wealthy while advancing their commercial interests.\nReturn to Britain.\nYale arrived in Britain in 1699 with a fortune that amounted to \u00a3200,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023), mostly made from his diamond business in the Golconda mines and Kollur mines in Southern India. In relation to GDP, his fortune amounted to 1/4 % of UK's GDP at the time, which translates to nearly 6 billion British pounds in 2021 money. Famous diamonds extracted from these mines over time have included the Orlov Diamond, belonging to Catherine the Great, the Hope Diamond, belonging to Louis XIV, the Wittelsbach-Graff Diamond, belonging to the Habsburgs, among others. Yale acquired rough stones from the Mughal Emperors of Golconda in exchange for a royalty, and were sent to Fort St. George, India, under the protection of 50 trained men. Thereafter, Yale would send the diamonds to Amsterdam to be faceted and polished, until ready to be shipped to London. The process took on average 3 years and needed large amounts of capital to endure setbacks, such as wars and political instability.\nDuring the War of the Spanish Succession, shipments would get stolen by pirates on their way to Europe, and once there, the Europeans princes and nobility would lack the funds to acquire them, forcing some merchants into bankruptcy. Demand followed the Coronations of monarchs, royal court events, war victories and other ceremonies. It became the most important branch of private trade of East India employees between Madras and London. Along with Sir Jean Chardin and Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, Yale became one of the largest European diamond traders in the world, as nearly all diamonds came from India during that period. Chardin, the past jewel merchant of the Shah of Persia, was also one his partners. He kept doing business with his friends Gov. Thomas Pitt, grandfather of prime minister William Pitt, and Sir Charles Cotterell, during the era where London became the international trading centre of diamonds, dislodging Portugal and the Netherlands. This new class of merchants who made their fortune in the East Indies would become known as the Nabobs in Britain.\nLondon life.\nDuring the Georgian era under King George I, Yale and other merchants would meet at London coffee houses as centres of social life. He kept his title of governor, and after the failures of his bankers, he opened a bank account in the newly created Bank of England, with deposits at C. Hoare &amp; Co of Sir Richard Hoare, now the oldest bank in Britain. He lived most of his remaining years at the Plas Grono estate in Wales, next to Erddig Hall, inherited from the line of his great-grandfather, Chancellor David Yale, and at his London house in Queen Square. His neighbors included the Duke of Powis at Powis House, Lord Chancellor Bathurst, Queen Anne and her son Prince William, and artists Charles Burney and Jonathan Richardson. In London society, Yale was associated with Sir Charles Cotterell, Master of the Ceremonies. He was then elected in December 1717 a Fellow of the Royal Society under Sir Isaac Newton. His candidature was introduced by Sir Hans Sloan, founder of the British Museum and compeer of Voltaire and Benjamin Franklin. In the same year, Yale was asked by Newton to deal with the donations of Dr. Thomas Paget, and later received a new map of the Netherlands dedicated to him by John Senex, royal geographer of Queen Anne.\nThereafter, his American godson David Yale entered Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge. Yale leased Latimer House from his son-in-law, Lord James Cavendish, son of the 1st Duke of Devonshire, to accommodate his daughter Ursula. He was elected High Sheriff of Denbighshire in Wales, gave money to Wrexham Church, and built a family gallery. He then became a member of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, and met there the Bishop of London, John Robinson, and the Lt. Gov. of New England, Francis Nicholson. From Nicholson's influence, and with Jeremiah Dummer as intermediary, Yale would answer a donation request for Connecticut College through Harvard graduate Cotton Mather. While his initial plan was to bestow a charity at Oxford, he sent them books, along with Sir Isaac Newton. He also sent a newly painted portrait of King George I by artist Sir Godfrey Kneller, principal painter of the king at the time, and the institution changed its name to Yale College. The total sum gifted was about the same as John Harvard's to Harvard College. The painting is now at Yale University Gallery, while about 214 of the books are at Yale Library. Yale's will included donations to the poor of Wrexham in Wales, to Christ's Hospital in London, St Bartholomew's Hospital, St Thomas' Hospital, various workhouse and poorhouses, and to Connecticut College, later known as Yale.\nMarriage and children.\nIn 1680 Yale married Catherine Elford, widow of Joseph Hynmers, second-in-command of Fort St George, India as Deputy Governor for the East India Company. Her father was wealthy Levant merchant Walter Elford, son of Turkey merchant Walter Sr., the step-nephew of Admiral Sir Francis Drake of Buckland Abbey, the explorer, and the half-brother of Sir Francis Drake, the MP.\nWalter Elford Sr. was among the pioneers of the English Coffee Houses on Exchange Alley, next to the Royal Exchange, owning the Great Coffee House (Turk's Head) until the Great Fire of London, and was featured in Samuel Pepys's diaries. Catherine Elford's maternal grandfather was merchant Richard Chambers, Alderman and Sheriff of the City of London, family of Sir Amyas Bampfylde of Poltimore House and Barrington Court.\nTheir wedding took place at St Mary's Church, at Fort St George, where Yale was a vestryman and treasurer. The marriage was the first registered at the church. They had 4 children together. David Yale died young in 1687. Katherine Yale (died 1715), married Dudley North of Glenham Hall, a cousin of Lord North, the prime minister who later lost the American War of Independence. Their daughter would marry Nicholas Herbert, son of Thomas Herbert, 8th Earl of Pembroke, and lived at Wilton House and Highclere Castle.\nAnne Yale (died 1734) married Lord James Cavendish of Chatsworth House, son of the 1st Duke of Devonshire of Hardwick Hall, and Lady Mary Butler, the Duke of Ormond's daughter at Kilkenny Castle. Lord Cavendish was also a nephew of Earl John Cecil of Burghley House, and a grandson of Countess Elizabeth Cecil of Hatfield House.\nUrsula Yale, who never married, died in 1721 at Latimer House, a house rented by Yale from his son-in-law - who is buried in the church on the estate. In 1687, after the death of Jacques de Paiva, a Portuguese Jewish diamond merchant and mines owner, Yale formed a relationship with his widow Hieronima de Paiva and brought her to live with him, causing a scandal within Madras's colonial society. They had a son who died, along with his mother, in South Africa.\nDeath.\nYale died on 8 July 1721 in London. No descendants of his have survived past his great-grandchildren. His body was buried in the churchyard of the parish church of St Giles' Church, Wrexham, Wales. His tomb bears an inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Boston, Massachusetts, a tablet to Yale was erected in 1927 at Scollay Square, near the site of Yale's birth. Yale president Arthur Twining Hadley penned the inscription, which reads: \"On Pemberton Hill, 255 Feet North of This Spot, Was Born on April Fifth 1649 Elihu Yale, Governor of Madras, Whose Permanent Memorial in His Native Land is the College That Bears His Name.\"\nAt his death, with no proper will, his heirs-at-law inherited the Plas Grono estate and sold it to Sir George Wynne.\nYale University.\nIn 1718, Cotton Mather contacted Yale and asked for his help. Mather represented a small institution of learning that had been founded in 1701 in Old Saybrook, Connecticut, as the Collegiate School of Connecticut, which needed money for a new building. In 1717, Isaac Newton gave the college a copy of his book \"Principia\", on Newton's laws of motion and Newton's law of universal gravitation, and in 1718, Yale sent Mather 417 books, a portrait of King George I of Britain, and nine bales of goods. These last were sold by the school for \u00a3800. In gratitude, officials named the new building Yale; eventually the entire institution became Yale College.\nYale was also a vestryman and treasurer of St Mary's Church at Fort St George. On 6 October 1968, the 250th anniversary of the naming of Yale College for Yale, the classmates of Chester Bowles, then the American ambassador to India and a graduate of Yale (1924), donated money for lasting improvements to the church and erected a plaque to commemorate the occasion. In 1970, a portrait of him, later renamed \"Elihu Yale with Members of his Family and an Enslaved Child\", was donated to the Yale Center for British Art from Chatsworth House. A portrait, painted during the 18th century, was also given to Yale University by U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower.\nOn 5 April 1999, Yale University recognised the 350th anniversary of Yale's birthday. An article that year in \"American Heritage\" magazine by John Steele Gordon described Yale as the \"most overrated philanthropist\" in American history, arguing that the college that became Yale University was successful largely because of the generosity of a man named Jeremiah Dummer, but that the trustees of the school did not want it known by the name \"Dummer College\". Of Yale's donation to the college, totalling just under \u00a31,162, Gordon suggested that \"never has so much immortality been purchased for so paltry a [...] sum.\"\nIn her article for \"The Atlantic\" about Skull and Bones, a secret society at Yale University, Alexandra Robbins alleges that Yale's headstone was stolen years ago from its proper setting in Wrexham. She further alleges that the tombstone is now displayed in a glass case in a room with purple walls.\n21st century re-appraisal.\nIn the 21st century Yale University's historic associations with the slave trade have been re-evaluated. In 2017, the university determined to rename Calhoun College, which honoured the white supremacist and pro-slavery leader John C. Calhoun. In respect of Elihu Yale, the process was assisted by the availability online of the relevant East India Company records. In 2020 Yale's president, Peter Salovey, launched the \"Yale and Slavery Research Project\" to explore the university's links with slavery and colonialism, including Elihu Yale's central role. The project was led by David W. Blight, director of the Gilder Lehrman Center for the Study of Slavery, Resistance, and Abolition, and published its findings in 2024. Blight identified \"Yale's key leadership role in the business of human trafficking\" and confirmed that part of Yale's fortune unquestionably derived from \"the purchase and sale of human beings [...] much of his growing wealth derived from the lucrative trade in cloth, silks, precious jewels, and other commodities, yet this commerce was inseparable from the slave trade\". In his foreword to the report, Salovey wrote of the importance of the study as providing a \"deeper, more honest understanding of who we are\" and of helping in \"coming to terms with injustices of the past and in confronting current wrongs\".\nA linked re-evaluation considered the artworks donated by, and related to, Elihu Yale, in particular, the painting \"Elihu Yale with Members of his Family and an Enslaved Child\". The picture, which shows Yale and his relations being served by a collared African child, was donated to the Yale Center for British Art in 1970 and regularly displayed at the university. In 2020 the artist Titus Kaphar produced a version of the painting, entitled \"Enough About You\", in which the main sitters are distorted beyond recognition and the image of the uncollared boy is set within a gold frame.\nThe Yale collection.\nYale arrived in England with Indian artworks, and used his new wealth to build a large European art collection of 10,000 items, including 7,000 paintings, which would become, after his death, the first art auction in Britain. During this era, the English country houses started to include goods from India and China, brought over the continent by the East India Company. As about 75% of all Indian exports were long-lasting and colorful textiles, it gave rise to the 1700\u20131750 Western fashion period, which included the use of tapestries. A new desire for collecting emerged among the English aristocracy under the Duke of Marlborough at Blenheim Palace, and the Duke of Devonshire at Chatsworth House. Yale followed their lead and became a famous collector in London, with artists visiting him at his Queen Square home to secure patronage, one of which would be Vanderbank, who worked at Kensington Palace and Castle Howard.\nMany of Yale's paintings came from Dutch Golden Age's artists, the most famous being Rembrandt, Bruegel, Van Dyck, Rubens, D\u00fcrer, Van de Velde, Teniers, Lely, Kneller and Rosa. Yale's collection was stored in four London houses, in addition to several coach houses and stables. Through the influence of the Royal Society under Isaac Newton, he collected instruments built on new science from dealers like George Willdey. He obtained the Leibniz\u2013Clarke correspondence and acquired books from Bernard de Montfaucon, one of the modern founders of archaeology at the time. With a rising middle class in search of status symbols, he acquired watches and clocks from Thomas Tompion, father of English clockmaking, along with works of engineer Henry Winstanley. When Queen Anne commissioned Nicolas Dorigny to produce large prints at Hampton Court, Yale and the Duke of Devonshire acquired several of them. He acquired one of the Jewels of Mary, Queen of Scots, along with works of Medici painter Adriaen van der Werff.\nOther paintings included those of philosopher Thomas Hobbes, astronomer Pierre Gassendi, Sir John Wynn, and Jacques Courtois, previously patroned by Mattias de' Medici. At Yale's death, his collection launched the auction concept in Britain, spacing the sales at a few months' intervals to not overload the art market. His European paintings were the largest group ever sold in England. Catalogues were available at various coffee houses such as Garraways. Van der Werff's painting was acquired by the Earl of Derby, while a bidding war ensued for Queen Mary's ring between the Earl of Oxford and the Earl of Pembroke. Yale's granddaughter married the latter's son, Nicholas Herbert, who lived at Wilton House and Highclere Castle. Inigo Jones's designs were acquired by the 2nd Duke of Devonshire, and are still at Chatsworth House. It is thought that some of Yale's missing paintings are now at the Hermitage Museum in Russia, dating back from Catherine the Great's acquisition of the Walpole collection at Houghton Hall. Numerous works would later be acquired by Yale University, while others went to Madryn Castle, seat of Deputy William Corbet Yale of the Yales of Plas yn Yale.\nAncestry and coats of arms.\nElihu's ancestry, as a member of the Yale family, originated from the Lordship of Yale in North Wales. The Yale name was adopted from the maternal line, while the coat of arms, later adopted by Yale College, came from the paternal line. The Yales derived from the 6th century prince of Powys, Brochwel Ysgithrog, and from the 4th century king Cunedda. Following the division of the Kingdom of Powys during the 12th century, a new principality will emerge named Northern Powys, which will be kept by Elihu's ancestors, the princes of Powys Fadog, Lords of Yale, with their seat at Castle Dinas Bran as members of the House of Mathrafal. They will submit to Edward Longshanks during the 13th century, with prince Gruffudd Fychan losing the lordship of Yale to the Earl of Surrey, William Wallace's rival at Sterling Bridge.\nAbout a century later, his descendant Owain Glyndwr, a cousin of the Tudors, would lose the War of Independence against Henry V, becoming the last Welsh Prince of Wales in 1415. Known by Shakespeare as Owen Glendower, he became the granduncle of baron Elissau ap Gruffudd, founder of the House of Yale in 1480, which Elihu belonged to. Elissau's mother, Lowry ap Tudor, was Glyndwr's niece, while his father, Griffith ap Einion, was a member of the House of Fitzgerald. Elissau would become co-heir of Glyndwr's claims through his mother, including those of Mathrafal (Powys Fadog), which featured the Lordship of Bromfield and Yale. From his marriage to an heiress within the lordship, he received the estate of Allt Llwyn Dragon, which he renamed Plas yn Yale (Yale Manor). The name would then be adopted by his grandson, Chancellor Thomas Yale (b. 1525), and by Elihu's great-grandfather, Chancellor David Yale, Thomas's nephew.\nWhile the Yale name was adopted from baron Elissau's maternal line, the Yale arms would be inherited from his father, a member of the Fitzgeralds of Corsygedol, from the line of Osborne Fitzgerald, initially a Desmond. This line was founded by the marriage of a Welsh princess named Nesta, daughter of Rhys ap Tudor, with Norman lord Gerald de Windsor, son of the first governor of Windsor Castle for William the Conqueror. Two branches will form over time, the Yales of Plas yn Yale, who stayed in Britain, and the Yales of Plas Grono, who went to America in 1637. As Elihu was heir of the Plas Gronos in 1689, his arms would be those later used for Yale College, as well as for the Yale schools of Public Health, Environment and Medicine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "10207", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10207", "title": "\u00c9mile Baudot", "text": "French telegraph engineer and inventor\nJean-Maurice-\u00c9mile Baudot (; 11 September 1845 \u2013 28 March 1903), French telegraph engineer and inventor of the first means of digital communication Baudot code, was one of the pioneers of telecommunications. He invented a multiplexed printing telegraph system that used his code and allowed multiple transmissions over a single line. The baud unit was named after him.\nEarly life.\nBaudot was born in Magneux, Haute-Marne, France, the son of farmer Pierre \u00c9mile Baudot, who later became the mayor of Magneux. His only formal education was at his local primary school, after which he carried out agricultural work on his father's farm before joining the French Post &amp; Telegraph Administration as an apprentice operator in 1869.\nThe telegraph service trained him in the Morse telegraph and also sent him on a four-month course of instruction on the Hughes printing telegraph system, which was later to inspire his own system.\nAfter serving briefly during the Franco-Prussian War, he returned to civilian duties in Paris in 1872.\nTelegraphy.\nThe Telegraph Service encouraged Baudot to develop\u2014on his own time\u2014a system for time-multiplexing several telegraph messages using Hughes teleprinters. He realised that with most printing telegraphs of the period the line is idle for most of the time, apart from the brief intervals when a character is transmitted. Baudot devised one of the first applications of time-division multiplexing in telegraphy. Using synchronized clockwork-powered switches at the transmitting and receiving ends, he was able to transmit five messages simultaneously; the system was officially adopted by the French Post &amp; Telegraph Administration five years later.\nBaudot invented his telegraph code in 1870 and patented it in 1874. It was a 5-bit code, with equal on and off intervals, which allowed telegraph transmission of the Roman alphabet, punctuation and control signals. By 1874 or 1875 (various sources give both dates) he had also perfected the electromechanical hardware to transmit his code. His inventions were based on the printing mechanism from Hughes' instrument, a distributor invented by Bernard Meyer in 1871, and the five-unit code devised by Carl Friedrich Gauss and Wilhelm Weber. Baudot combined these, together with original ideas of his own, to produce a complete multiplex system.\nBaudot system.\nOn 17 June 1874 Baudot patented his first printing telegraph (Patent no. 103,898 \"Syst\u00e8me de t\u00e9l\u00e9graphie rapide\"), in which the signals were translated automatically into typographic characters. Baudot's hardware had three main parts: the keyboard, the distributor, and a paper tape.\nEach operator - there were as many as four - was allocated a single sector. The keyboard had just five piano type keys, operated with two fingers of the left hand and three fingers of the right hand. The five unit code was designed to be easy to remember. Once the keys had been pressed they were locked down until the contacts again passed over the sector connected to that particular keyboard, when the keyboard was unlocked ready for the next character to be entered, with an audible click (known as the \"cadence signal\") to warn the operator. Operators had to maintain a steady rhythm, and the usual speed of operation was 30 words per minute.\nThe receiver was also connected to the distributor. The signals from the telegraph line were temporarily stored on a set of five electromagnets, before being decoded to print the corresponding character on paper tape.\nAccurate operation of this system depended on the distributor at the transmitting end keeping in synchronization with the one at the receiving end and operators only sending characters when the contacts passed over their allocated sector. This could be achieved at a speed of 30 wpm by strictly observing the \"cadence\" of rhythm of the system when the distributor gave the operator the use of the line.\nFirst use.\nThe Baudot system was accepted by the French Telegraph Administration in 1875, with the first online tests of his system occurring between Paris and Bordeaux on 12 November 1877. At the end of 1877, the Paris-Rome line, which was about , began operating a duplex Baudot.\nThe Baudot apparatus was shown at the Paris Exposition Universelle (1878) and won him the Exposition's gold medal, as well as bringing his system to worldwide notice.\nLater career.\nAfter the first success of his system, Baudot was promoted to Controller in 1880, and was named Inspector-Engineer in 1882.\nIn July 1887 he conducted successful tests on the Atlantic telegraph cable between Weston-super-Mare and Waterville, Nova Scotia operated by the Commercial Company, with a double Baudot installed in duplex, the Baudot transmitters and receivers substituted for the recorder.\nOn 8 August 1890 he established communications between Paris, Vannes, and Lorient over a single wire. On 3 January 1894 he installed a triplex apparatus on the telegraph between Paris and Bordeaux that had previously been operating with some difficulty on the Hughes telegraph system. On 27 April 1894 he established communications between the Paris stock exchange and the Milan stock exchange, again over a single wire, using his new invention, the retransmitter.\nIn 1897 the Baudot system was improved by switching to punched tape, which was prepared offline like the Morse tape used with the Wheatstone and Creed systems. A tape reader, controlled by the Baudot distributor, then replaced the manual keyboard. The tape had five rows of holes for the code, with a sixth row of smaller holes for transporting the tape through the reader mechanism. Baudot's code was later standardised as International Telegraph Alphabet Number One.\nBaudot received little help from the French Telegraph Administration for his system, and often had to fund his own research, even having to sell the gold medal awarded by the 1878 Exposition Universelle in 1880.\nThe Baudot telegraph system was employed progressively in France, and then was adopted in other countries, Italy being the first to introduce it, in its inland service, in 1887. The Netherlands followed in 1895, Switzerland in 1896, and Austria and Brazil in 1897. The British Post Office adopted it for a simplex circuit between London and Paris during 1897, then used it for more general purposes from 1898. In 1900 it was adopted by Germany, by Russia in 1904, the British West Indies in 1905, Spain in 1906, Belgium in 1909, Argentina in 1912, and Romania in 1913.\nFinal years.\nBaudot married Marie Josephine Adelaide Langrognet on 15 January 1890. She died only three months later, on 9 April 1890.\nSoon after starting work with the telegraph service, Baudot began to suffer physical discomfort and was frequently absent from work for this reason, for as long as a month on one occasion. His condition affected him for the rest of his life, until he died on 28 March 1903, at Sceaux, Hauts-de-Seine, near Paris, at the age of 57.\nMimault patent suit.\nIn 1874, French telegraph operator Louis Victor Mimault patented a telegraph system using five separate lines to transmit. After his patent was rejected by the Telegraph Administration, Mimault modified his device to incorporate features from the Meyer telegraph and obtained a new patent which was also rejected. In the meantime, Baudot had patented his prototype telegraph a few weeks earlier.\nMimault claimed priority of invention over Baudot and brought a patent suit against him in 1877. The Tribunal Civil de la Seine, which reviewed testimony from three experts unconnected with the Telegraph Administration, found in favor of Mimault and accorded him priority of invention of the Baudot code and ruled that Baudot's patents were simply improvements of Mimault's. Neither inventor was satisfied with this judgment, which was eventually rescinded with Mimault being ordered to pay all legal costs.\nMimault became unnerved because of the decision, and after an incident where he shot at and wounded two students of the \u00c9cole Polytechnique (charges for which were dropped), he demanded a special act to prolong the duration of his patents, 100,000 Francs, and election to the L\u00e9gion d'honneur. A commission directed by Jules Raynaud (head of telegraph research) rejected his demands. Upon hearing the decision, Mimault shot and killed Raynaud, and was sentenced to 10 years of forced labour and 20 years of exile.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10210", "revid": "6263999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10210", "title": "Emotion theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "10211", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10211", "title": "Economic security", "text": "Socioeconomic and personal finance concept\nEconomic security or financial security is the condition of having stable income or other resources to support a standard of living now and in the foreseeable future. It includes:\nWithout such security, people may experience its opposite: economic insecurity and resulting economic anxiety.\nFinancial security more often refers to individual and family money management and savings. Economic security tends to include the broader effect of a society's production levels and monetary support for non-working citizens.\nComponents of individual economic security.\nIn the United States, children's economic security is indicated by the income level and employment security of their families or organizations. Economic security of people over 50 years old is based on Social Security benefits, pensions and savings, earnings and employment, and health insurance coverage.\nArizona.\nIn 1972, the state legislature of Arizona formed a Department of Economic Security with a mission to promote \"the safety, well-being, and self sufficiency of children, adults, and families\". This department combines state government activities previously managed by the Employment Security Commission, the State Department of Public Welfare, the Division of Vocational Rehabilitation, the State Office of Economic Opportunity, the Apprenticeship Council, and the State Office of Manpower Planning. The State Department of Mental Retardation (renamed the Division of Developmental Disabilities, House Bill 2213) joined the Department in 1974 . The purpose in creating the Department was to provide an integration of direct services to people in such a way as to reduce duplication of administrative efforts, services and expenditures. Family Connections became a part of the Department in January 2007.\nMinnesota.\nThe Minnesota Department of Economic Security was formed in 1977 from the departments of Employment Services and Vocational Rehabilitation, the Governor's Manpower Office, and the Economic Opportunity Office, which administered anti-poverty programs. In 1985, State Services for the Blind was included in this department. In 2003, the Minnesota Department of Economic Security and Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic Development were merged to form The Minnesota Department of Employment and Economic Development.\nNational economic security.\nIn the context of domestic politics and international relations, national economic security is the ability of a country to follow its choice of policies to develop the national economy in the manner desired. Historically, conquest of nations have made conquerors rich through plunder, access to new resources and enlarged trade through controlling of the economies of conquered nations. Today's complex system of international trade is characterized by multi-national agreements and mutual inter-dependence. Availability of natural resources and capacity for production and distribution are essential under this system, leading many experts to consider economic security to be as important a part of national security as military policy.\nEconomic security has been proposed as a key determinant of international relations, particularly in the geopolitics of petroleum in American foreign policy after 1973 oil crisis and September 11, 2001.\nIn Canada, threats to the country's overall economic security are considered economic espionage, which is \"illegal, clandestine or coercive activity by a foreign government in order to gain unauthorized access to economic intelligence, such as proprietary information or technology, for economic advantage.\"\nIn January 2021, the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) issued Strategic Action Plan to Counter the Threat Posed by China.\nIn October 2021 in Japan, prime minister Fumio Kishida created the first-ever ministerial post for economic security.\nAnd in April 2022, Japan's National Diet passed an economic security bill aimed at guarding technology and reinforcing critical supply chains, while also imposing tighter oversight of Japanese firms working in sensitive sectors or critical infrastructure.\nMeasures in the legislation, which is primarily aimed at warding off risks from China, will be implemented over two years once it is enacted, according to the bill.\nIn March 2023, Japan and Germany agreed to strengthen cooperation on economic security in the aftermath of tensions over global supply chains and the economic impact of Russian invasion of Ukraine. In the first high-ministerial government consultations held between the two countries, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz reached out to Tokyo to seek to reduce Germany's dependence on China for imports of raw materials.\nOn April 4, 2023, a G7 Trade Ministers' Meeting via video conference was held to discuss on enhancing economic security, and a G7 Trade Ministers' Statement was issued on the day.\nAlso in April 2023, Japan's Public Security Intelligence Agency (PSIA) launched a division dedicated to economic security. The agency also plans to set up such dedicated units in its regional bureaus nationwide to step up efforts to prevent cutting-edge technology and data from being leaked out of the country.\nOn 20 May 2023 on occasion of the G7 Hiroshima summit, economic security was discussed for the first time as the G7 agenda, and \"G7 Leaders' Statement on Economic Resilience and Economic Security\" was issued based on the discussion.\nOn 20 June 2023, the European Commission and the High Representative proposed a Joint Communication on a European Economic Security Strategy which will be discussed by EU leaders at their meeting.\nOther.\nIt is widely believed that there is a tradeoff between economic security and economic opportunity.\nSee also.\nIndividual economic security\nNational economic security\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10212", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10212", "title": "Evers, Charles", "text": ""}
{"id": "10213", "revid": "42734538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10213", "title": "EDGE (telecommunication)", "text": "Digital mobile phone technology\n \nEnhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE), also known as 2.75G and under various other names, is a 2G digital mobile phone technology for packet switched data transmission. It is a subset of General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) on the GSM network and improves upon it offering speeds close to 3G technology, hence the name 2.75G. EDGE is standardized by the 3GPP as part of the GSM family and as an upgrade to GPRS.\nEDGE was deployed on GSM networks beginning in 2003 \u2013 initially by Cingular (now AT&amp;T) in the United States. It could be readily deployed on existing GSM and GPRS cellular equipment, making it an easier upgrade for cellular companies compared to the UMTS 3G technology that required significant changes. Through the introduction of sophisticated methods of coding and transmitting data, EDGE delivers higher bit-rates per radio channel, resulting in a threefold increase in capacity and performance compared with an ordinary GSM/GPRS connection - originally a max speed of 384 kbit/s. Later, Evolved EDGE was developed as an enhanced standard providing even more reduced latency and more than double performance, with a peak bit-rate of up to 1\u00a0Mbit/s.\nName and definition.\nEnhanced Data rates for GSM Evolution is the common full name of the EDGE standard. Other names include: Enhanced GPRS (EGPRS), IMT Single Carrier (IMT-SC), and Enhanced Data rates for Global Evolution.\nAlthough described as \"2.75G\" by the 3GPP body, EDGE is part of International Telecommunication Union (ITU)'s 3G definition. It is also recognized as part of the International Mobile Telecommunications - 2000 (IMT-2000) standard for 3G.\nTechnology.\nEDGE/EGPRS is implemented as a bolt-on enhancement for 2.5G GSM/GPRS networks, making it easier for existing GSM carriers to upgrade to it. EDGE is a superset to GPRS and can function on any network with GPRS deployed on it, provided the carrier implements the necessary upgrade. EDGE requires no hardware or software changes to be made in GSM core networks. EDGE-compatible transceiver units must be installed and the base station subsystem needs to be upgraded to support EDGE. If the operator already has this in place, which is often the case today, the network can be upgraded to EDGE by activating an optional software feature. Today EDGE is supported by all major chip vendors for both GSM and WCDMA/HSPA.\nTransmission techniques.\nIn addition to Gaussian minimum-shift keying (GMSK), EDGE uses higher-order PSK/8 phase-shift keying (8PSK) for the upper five of its nine modulation and coding schemes. EDGE produces a 3-bit word for every change in carrier phase. This effectively triples the gross data rate offered by GSM. EDGE, like GPRS, uses a rate adaptation algorithm that adapts the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) according to the quality of the radio channel, and thus the bit rate and robustness of data transmission. It introduces a new technology not found in GPRS, incremental redundancy, which, instead of retransmitting disturbed packets, sends more redundancy information to be combined in the receiver. This increases the probability of correct decoding.\nEDGE can carry a bandwidth up to 236\u00a0kbit/s (with end-to-end latency of less than 150\u00a0ms) for 4 timeslots (theoretical maximum is 473.6\u00a0kbit/s for 8 timeslots) in packet mode. This means it can handle four times as much traffic as standard GPRS. EDGE meets the International Telecommunication Union's requirement for a 3G network, and has been accepted by the ITU as part of the IMT-2000 family of 3G standards. It also enhances the circuit data mode called HSCSD, increasing the data rate of this service.\nEDGE modulation and coding scheme (MCS).\nThe channel encoding process in GPRS as well as EGPRS/EDGE consists of two steps: first, a cyclic code is used to add parity bits, which are also referred to as the Block Check Sequence, followed by coding with a possibly punctured convolutional code. In GPRS, the Coding Schemes CS-1 to CS-4 specify the number of parity bits generated by the cyclic code and the puncturing rate of the convolutional code. In GPRS Coding Schemes CS-1 through CS-3, the convolutional code is of rate 1/2, i.e. each input bit is converted into two coded bits. In Coding Schemes CS-2 and CS-3, the output of the convolutional code is punctured to achieve the desired code rate. In GPRS Coding Scheme CS-4, no convolutional coding is applied.\nIn EGPRS/EDGE, the modulation and coding schemes MCS-1 to MCS-9 take the place of the coding schemes of GPRS, and additionally specify which modulation scheme is used, GMSK or 8PSK. MCS-1 through MCS-4 use GMSK and have performance similar (but not equal) to GPRS, while MCS-5 through MCS-9 use 8PSK. In all EGPRS modulation and coding schemes, a convolutional code of rate 1/3 is used, and puncturing is used to achieve the desired code rate. In contrast to GPRS, the Radio Link Control (RLC) and medium access control (MAC) headers and the payload data are coded separately in EGPRS. The headers are coded more robustly than the data.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDeployment.\nThe first EDGE network was deployed by Cingular (now AT&amp;T) in the United States on June 30, 2003, initially covering Indianapolis. T-Mobile US deployed their EDGE network in September 2005. In Canada, Rogers Wireless deployed their EDGE network in 2004. In Malaysia, DiGi launched EDGE beginning in May 2004 initially only in the Klang Valley.\nIn Europe, TeliaSonera in Finland rolled out EDGE in April 2004. Orange began trialling EDGE in France in April 2005 before a consumer rollout later that year. Bouygues Telecom completed its national deployment of EDGE in the country in 2005, strategically focusing on EDGE which is cheaper to deploy compared to 3G networks. Telfort was the first network in the Netherlands to roll out EDGE having done so by May 2005. Orange launched the UK's first EDGE network in February 2006.\nThe Global Mobile Suppliers Association reported in 2008 that EDGE networks have been launched in 147 countries around the world.\nEvolved EDGE.\nEvolved EDGE, also called EDGE Evolution and 2.875G, is a bolt-on extension to the GSM mobile telephony standard, which improves on EDGE in a number of ways. Latencies are reduced by lowering the Transmission Time Interval by half (from 20 ms to 10 ms). Bit rates are increased up to 1\u00a0Mbit/s peak bandwidth and latencies down to 80 ms using dual carrier, higher symbol rate and higher-order modulation (32QAM and 16QAM instead of 8PSK), and turbo codes to improve error correction. This results in real world downlink speeds of up to 600\u00a0kbit/s. Further the signal quality is improved using dual antennas improving average bit-rates and spectrum efficiency.\nThe main intention of increasing the existing EDGE throughput is that many operators would like to upgrade their existing infrastructure rather than invest on new network infrastructure. Mobile operators have invested billions in GSM networks, many of which are already capable of supporting EDGE data speeds up to 236.8\u00a0kbit/s. With a software upgrade and a new device compliant with Evolved EDGE (like an Evolved EDGE smartphone) for the user, these data rates can be boosted to speeds approaching 1\u00a0Mbit/s (i.e. 98.6\u00a0kbit/s per timeslot for 32QAM). Many service providers may not invest in a completely new technology like 3G networks.\nConsiderable research and development happened throughout the world for this new technology. A successful trial by Nokia Siemens and \"one of China's leading operators\" was achieved in a live environment. However, Evolved EDGE was introduced much later than its predecessor, EDGE, coinciding with the widespread adoption of 3G technologies such as HSPA and just before the emergence of 4G networks. This timing significantly limited its relevance and practical application, as operators prioritized investment in more advanced wireless technologies like UMTS and LTE.\nMoreover, these newer technologies also targeted network coverage layers on low frequencies, further diminishing the potential advantages of Evolved EDGE. Coupled with the upcoming phase-out and shutdown of 2G mobile networks, it became very unlikely that Evolved EDGE would ever see deployment on live networks. As of 2016, no commercial networks supported the Evolved EDGE standard (3GPP Rel-7).\nTechnology.\nReduced Latency.\nWith Evolved EDGE come three major features designed to reduce latency over the air interface.\nIn EDGE, a single RLC data block (ranging from 23 to 148 bytes of data) is transmitted over four frames, using a single time slot. On average, this requires 20 ms for one way transmission. Under the RTTI scheme, one data block is transmitted over two frames in two timeslots, reducing the latency of the air interface to 10 ms.\nIn addition, Reduced Latency also implies support of Piggy-backed ACK/NACK (PAN), in which a bitmap of blocks not received is included in normal data blocks. Using the PAN field, the receiver may report missing data blocks immediately, rather than waiting to send a dedicated PAN message.\nA final enhancement is RLC-non persistent mode. With EDGE, the RLC interface could operate in either acknowledged mode, or unacknowledged mode. In unacknowledged mode, there is no retransmission of missing data blocks, so a single corrupt block would cause an entire upper-layer IP packet to be lost. With non-persistent mode, an RLC data block may be retransmitted if it is less than a certain age. Once this time expires, it is considered lost, and subsequent data blocks may then be forwarded to upper layers.\nHigher modulation schemes.\nBoth uplink and downlink throughput is improved by using 16 or 32 QAM (quadrature amplitude modulation), along with turbo codes and higher symbol rates.\nEnhanced CSD.\nA lesser-known version of the EDGE standard is Enhanced Circuit Switched Data (ECSD), which is circuit switched.\nCompact-EDGE.\nA variant, so called Compact-EDGE, was developed for use in a portion of Digital AMPS network spectrum. \nNetworks.\nThe Global mobile Suppliers Association (GSA) states that, as of May 2013, there were 604 GSM/EDGE networks in 213 countries, from a total of 606 mobile network operator commitments in 213 countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10214", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10214", "title": "EDGE", "text": ""}
{"id": "10216", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10216", "title": "Eth", "text": "Letter of the Latin alphabet; used in Icelandic, Faroese, and Old English\nEth ( , uppercase: \u27e8\u00d0\u27e9, lowercase: \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9; also spelled edh or e\u00f0), known as (\"that\") in Old English, is a letter used in Old English, Middle English, Icelandic, Faroese (in which it is called ), and Elfdalian alphabets.\nIt was also used in Scandinavia during the Middle Ages, but was subsequently replaced with \u27e8dh\u27e9, and later \u27e8d\u27e9.\nIt is often transliterated as \u27e8d\u27e9.\nThe lowercase version has been adopted to represent a voiced dental fricative (IPA: ) in the International Phonetic Alphabet.\nFaroese.\nIn Faroese, \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 is not assigned to any particular phoneme and appears mostly for etymological reasons, but it indicates most glides. When \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 appears before \u27e8r\u27e9, it is in a few words pronounced . In the Faroese alphabet, \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 follows \u27e8d\u27e9.\nKhmer.\n\u27e8\u00d0\u27e9 is sometimes used in Khmer romanization to represent \"\".\nIcelandic.\nIn Icelandic, \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9, called \"e\u00f0\", represents an alveolar non-sibilant fricative, voiced intervocalically and word-finally, and voiceless otherwise, which form one phoneme, . Generally, is represented by thorn \u27e8\u00de\u27e9 at the beginning of words and by \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 elsewhere. The \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 in the name of the letter is devoiced in the nominative and accusative cases: . In the Icelandic alphabet, \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 follows \u27e8d\u27e9.\nNorwegian.\nIn Olav Jakobsen H\u00f8yem's version of based on , \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 was always silent, and was introduced for etymological reasons.\nOld English.\nIn Old English, \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 (called \"\" (\"that\")) was used interchangeably with \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 to represent the Old English dental fricative phoneme or its allophone , which exist in modern English as the voiceless and voiced dental fricatives both now spelled \u27e8th\u27e9.\nUnlike the runic letter \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9, \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 is a modified Roman letter. Neither \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 nor \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 was found in the earliest records of Old English. A study of Mercian royal diplomas found that \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 began to emerge in the early 8th century, with \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9 becoming strongly preferred by the 780s. Another source indicates that the letter is \"derived from Irish writing\".\nUnder the reign of King Alfred the Great, \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 grew greatly in popularity and started to overtake \u27e8\u00f0\u27e9, and did so completely by the Middle English period. \u27e8\u00fe\u27e9 in turn went obsolete by the Early Modern English period, mostly due to the rise of the printing press, and was replaced by the digraph \u27e8th\u27e9.\nWelsh.\n\u27e8\u00d0\u27e9 has also been used by some in written Welsh to represent , which is normally represented as \u27e8dd\u27e9.\nComputer encoding.\nUpper and lower case forms of eth have Unicode encodings:\nThese Unicode codepoints were inherited from ISO/IEC 8859-1 (\"ISO Latin-1\") encoding.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10217", "revid": "1951353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10217", "title": "Eth, Nord", "text": "Eth () is a commune in the Nord department in northern France.\nIt is about east-southeast of Valenciennes. Residents are called Ethois (feminine plural Ethoises).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10221", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10221", "title": "Euphrates", "text": "River in Turkey, Iraq, and Syria\nThe Euphrates ( ; see below) is the longest and one of the most historically important rivers of West Asia. Together with the Tigris, it is one of the two defining rivers of Mesopotamia (lit.\u2009'the land between the rivers'). Originating in Turkey, the Euphrates flows through Syria and Iraq to join the Tigris in the Shatt al-Arab in Iraq, which empties into the Persian Gulf.\nThe Euphrates is the fifteenth-longest river in Asia and the longest in West Asia, at about , with a drainage area of that covers six countries.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Euphrates\" derives from the Greek \"Euphr\u00e1t\u0113s\" (), adapted from , itself from . The Elamite name is ultimately derived from cuneiform \ud808\udf13\ud808\udd12\ud808\ude63; read as \"Buranun\" in Sumerian and \"Purattu\" in Akkadian; many cuneiform signs have a Sumerian pronunciation and an Akkadian pronunciation, taken from a Sumerian word and an Akkadian word that mean the same. The Akkadian \"Purattu\" has been perpetuated in Semitic languages (cf. \"al-Fur\u0101t\"; \"P\u01ddr\u0101\u1e6f\", \"P\u01ddr\u0101\u1e6f\") and in other nearby languages of the time (cf. Hurrian \"Puranti\", Sabarian \"Uruttu\"). The Elamite, Akkadian, and possibly Sumerian forms are suggested to be from an unrecorded substrate language. Tamaz V. Gamkrelidze and Vyacheslav Ivanov suggest the proto-Sumerian \"*burudu\" \"copper\" (Sumerian \"urudu\") as an origin, with an explanation that Euphrates was the river by which copper ore was transported in rafts, since Mesopotamia was the center of copper metallurgy during the period.\nThe Euphrates is called \"Yeprat\" in Armenian (), \"Perat\" in modern Hebrew (), in Turkish and in Kurdish. The Mandaic name is (), and is often mentioned as (pronounced ) in Mandaean scriptures such as the \"Ginza Rabba\". In Mandaean scriptures, the Euphrates is considered to be the earthly manifestation of the heavenly yardna or flowing river (similar to the Yazidi concept of Lalish being the earthly manifestation of its heavenly counterpart, or the \u2018Sacred House\u2019 Kaaba in Mecca being the earthly manifestation of the heavenly Al-Bayt Al-Mamur).\nThe earliest references to the Euphrates come from cuneiform texts found in Shuruppak and pre-Sargonic Nippur in southern Iraq and date to the mid-3rd millennium BCE. In these texts, written in Sumerian, the Euphrates is called \"Buranuna\" (logographic: UD.KIB.NUN). The name could also be written KIB.NUN.(NA) or dKIB.NUN, with the prefix \"d\" indicating that the river was a divinity. In Sumerian, the name of the city of Sippar in modern-day Iraq was also written UD.KIB.NUN, indicating a historically strong relationship between the city and the river.\nCourse.\nThe Euphrates is the longest river of West Asia. It emerges from the confluence of the Kara Su or Western Euphrates () and the Murat Su or Eastern Euphrates () upstream from the town of Keban in southeastern Turkey. Daoudy and Frenken put the length of the Euphrates from the source of the Murat River to the confluence with the Tigris at , of which is in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. The same figures are given by Isaev and Mikhailova. The length of the Shatt al-Arab, which connects the Euphrates and the Tigris with the Persian Gulf, is given by various sources as .\nBoth the Kara Su and the Murat Su rise northwest from Lake Van at elevations of and amsl, respectively. At the location of the Keban Dam, the two rivers, now combined into the Euphrates, have dropped to an elevation of amsl. From Keban to the Syrian\u2013Turkish border, the river drops another over a distance of less than . Once the Euphrates enters the Upper Mesopotamian plains, its grade drops significantly; within Syria the river falls while over the last stretch between H\u012bt and the Shatt al-Arab the river drops only .\nDischarge.\nThe Euphrates receives most of its water in the form of rainfall and melting snow, resulting in peak volumes during the months April through May. Discharge in these two months accounts for 36 percent of the total annual discharge of the Euphrates, or even 60\u201370 percent according to one source, while low runoff occurs in summer and autumn. The average natural annual flow of the Euphrates has been determined from early- and mid-twentieth century records as at Keban, at H\u012bt and at Hindiya. However, these averages mask the high inter-annual variability in discharge; at Birecik, just north of the Syro\u2013Turkish border, annual discharges have been measured that ranged from a low volume of in 1961 to a high of in 1963.\nThe discharge regime of the Euphrates has changed dramatically since the construction of the first dams in the 1970s. Data on Euphrates discharge collected after 1990 show the impact of the construction of the numerous dams in the Euphrates and of the increased withdrawal of water for irrigation. Average discharge at H\u012bt after 1990 has dropped to per second ( per year). The seasonal variability has equally changed. The pre-1990 peak volume recorded at H\u012bt was per second, while after 1990 it is only per second. The minimum volume at H\u012bt remained relatively unchanged, rising from per second before 1990 to per second afterward.\nTributaries.\nIn Syria, three rivers add their water to the Euphrates; the Sajur, the Balikh and the Khabur. These rivers rise in the foothills of the Taurus Mountains along the Syro\u2013Turkish border and add comparatively little water to the Euphrates. The Sajur is the smallest of these tributaries; emerging from two streams near Gaziantep and draining the plain around Manbij before emptying into the reservoir of the Tishrin Dam. The Balikh receives most of its water from a karstic spring near 'Ayn al-'Arus and flows due south until it reaches the Euphrates at the city of Raqqa. In terms of length, drainage basin and discharge, the Khabur is the largest of these three. Its main karstic springs are located around Ra's al-'Ayn, from where the Khabur flows southeast past Al-Hasakah, where the river turns south and drains into the Euphrates near Busayrah. Once the Euphrates enters Iraq, there are no more natural tributaries to the Euphrates, although canals connecting the Euphrates basin with the Tigris basin exist.\nDrainage basin.\nThe drainage basins of the Kara Su and the Murat River cover an area of and , respectively. Estimates of the area of the Euphrates drainage basin vary widely; from a low to a high . Recent estimates put the basin area at , and . The greater part of the Euphrates basin is located in Turkey, Syria, and Iraq. According to both Daoudy and Frenken, Turkey's share is 28 percent, Syria's is 17 percent and that of Iraq is 40 percent. Isaev and Mikhailova estimate the percentages of the drainage basin lying within Turkey, Syria and Iraq at 33, 20 and 47 percent respectively. Some sources estimate that approximately 15 percent of the drainage basin is located within Saudi Arabia, while a small part falls inside the borders of Kuwait. Finally, some sources also include Jordan in the drainage basin of the Euphrates; a small part of the eastern desert () drains toward the east rather than to the west.\nClimate change.\nIn 2021, the Iraqi Ministry of Water Resources reported that the Euphrates river could dry out by 2040 due to climate change and droughts.\nNatural history.\nThe Euphrates flows through a number of distinct vegetation zones. Although millennia-long human occupation in most parts of the Euphrates basin has significantly degraded the landscape, patches of original vegetation remain. The steady drop in annual rainfall from the sources of the Euphrates toward the Persian Gulf is a strong determinant for the vegetation that can be supported. In its upper reaches the Euphrates flows through the mountains of Southeast Turkey and their southern foothills which support a xeric woodland. Plant species in the moister parts of this zone include various oaks, pistachio trees, and \"Rosaceae\" (rose/plum family). The drier parts of the xeric woodland zone supports less dense oak forest and \"Rosaceae\". Here can also be found the wild variants of many cereals, including einkorn wheat, emmer, oat and rye.\nSouth of this zone lies a zone of mixed woodland-steppe vegetation. Between Raqqa and the Syro\u2013Iraqi border the Euphrates flows through a steppe landscape. This steppe is characterised by white wormwood (\"Artemisia herba-alba\") and Amaranthaceae. Throughout history, this zone has been heavily overgrazed due to the practicing of sheep and goat pastoralism by its inhabitants. Southeast of the border between Syria and Iraq starts true desert. This zone supports either no vegetation at all or small pockets of \"Chenopodiaceae\" or \"Poa sinaica\". Although today nothing of it survives due to human interference, research suggests that the Euphrates Valley would have supported a riverine forest. Species characteristic of this type of forest include the Oriental plane, the Euphrates poplar, the tamarisk, the ash and various wetland plants.\nAmong the fish species in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates basin, the family of the Cyprinidae are the most common, with 34 species out of 52 in total. Among the Cyprinids, the mangar has good recreational fishing qualities, leading the British to nickname it the \"Tigris salmon.\" The Euphrates softshell turtle is an endangered soft-shelled turtle that is limited to the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system.\nThe Neo-Assyrian palace reliefs from the 1st millennium BCE depict lion and bull hunts in fertile landscapes. Sixteenth to nineteenth century European travellers in the Syrian Euphrates basin reported on an abundance of animals living in the area, many of which have become rare or even extinct. Species like gazelle, onager and the now-extinct Arabian ostrich lived in the steppe bordering the Euphrates valley, while the valley itself was home to the wild boar. Carnivorous species include the wolf, the golden jackal, the red fox, the leopard and the lion. The Syrian brown bear can be found in the mountains of Southeast Turkey. The presence of Eurasian beaver has been attested in the bone assemblage of the prehistoric site of Tell Abu Hureyra in Syria, but the beaver has never been sighted in historical times.\nRiver.\nThe Hindiya Barrage on the Iraqi Euphrates, based on plans by British civil engineer William Willcocks and finished in 1913, was the first modern water diversion structure built in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system. The Hindiya Barrage was followed in the 1950s by the Ramadi Barrage and the nearby Abu Dibbis Regulator, which serve to regulate the flow regime of the Euphrates and to discharge excess flood water into the depression that is now Lake Habbaniyah. Iraq's largest dam on the Euphrates is the Haditha Dam; a earth-fill dam creating Lake Qadisiyah. Syria and Turkey built their first dams in the Euphrates in the 1970s. The Tabqa Dam in Syria was completed in 1973 while Turkey finished the Keban Dam, a prelude to the immense Southeastern Anatolia Project, in 1974. Since then, Syria has built two more dams in the Euphrates, the Freedom Dam and the Tishrin Dam, and plans to build a fourth dam \u2013 the Halabiye Dam \u2013 between Raqqa and Deir ez-Zor. The Tabqa Dam is Syria's largest dam and its reservoir (Lake Assad) is an important source of irrigation and drinking water. It was planned that should be irrigated from Lake Assad, but in 2000 only had been realized. Syria also built three smaller dams on the Khabur and its tributaries.\nWith the implementation of the Southeastern Anatolia Project (\"\", or \"GAP\") in the 1970s, Turkey launched an ambitious plan to harness the waters of the Tigris and the Euphrates for irrigation and hydroelectricity production and provide an economic stimulus to its southeastern provinces. GAP affects a total area of and approximately 7\u00a0million people; representing about 10 percent of Turkey's total surface area and population, respectively. When completed, GAP will consist of 22 dams \u2013 including the Keban Dam \u2013 and 19 power plants and provide irrigation water to of agricultural land, which is about 20 percent of the irrigable land in Turkey. C. of this irrigated land is located in the Euphrates basin. By far the largest dam in GAP is the Atat\u00fcrk Dam, located c. northwest of \u015eanl\u0131urfa. This dam was completed in 1992; thereby creating a reservoir that is the third-largest lake in Turkey. With a maximum capacity of , the Atat\u00fcrk Dam reservoir is large enough to hold the entire annual discharge of the Euphrates. Completion of GAP was scheduled for 2010 but has been delayed because the World Bank has withheld funding due to the lack of an official agreement on water sharing between Turkey and the downstream states on the Euphrates and the Tigris.\nApart from barrages and dams, Iraq has also created an intricate network of canals connecting the Euphrates with Lake Habbaniyah, Lake Tharthar, and Abu Dibbis reservoir; all of which can be used to store excess floodwater. Via the Shatt al-Hayy, the Euphrates is connected with the Tigris. The largest canal in this network is the Main Outfall Drain or so-called \"Third River;\" constructed between 1953 and 1992. This canal is intended to drain the area between the Euphrates and the Tigris south of Baghdad to prevent soil salinization from irrigation. It also allows large freight barges to navigate up to Baghdad.\nEnvironmental and social effects.\nThe construction of the dams and irrigation schemes on the Euphrates has had a significant impact on the environment and society of each riparian country. The dams constructed as part of GAP \u2013 in both the Euphrates and the Tigris basins \u2013 have affected 382 villages and almost 200,000 people have been resettled elsewhere. The largest number of people was displaced by the building of the Atat\u00fcrk Dam, which alone affected 55,300 people. A survey among those who were displaced showed that the majority were unhappy with their new situation and that the compensation they had received was considered insufficient. The flooding of Lake Assad led to the forced displacement of c. 4,000 families, who were resettled in other parts of northern Syria as part of a now abandoned plan to create an \"Arab belt\" along the borders with Turkey and Iraq.\nApart from the changes in the discharge regime of the river, the numerous dams and irrigation projects have also had other effects on the environment. The creation of reservoirs with large surfaces in countries with high average temperatures has led to increased evaporation; thereby reducing the total amount of water that is available for human use. Annual evaporation from reservoirs has been estimated at in Turkey, in Syria and in Iraq. Water quality in the Iraqi Euphrates is low because irrigation water tapped in Turkey and Syria flows back into the river, together with dissolved fertilizer chemicals used on the fields. The salinity of Euphrates water in Iraq has increased as a result of upstream dam construction, leading to lower suitability as drinking water. The many dams and irrigation schemes, and the associated large-scale water abstraction, have also had a detrimental effect on the ecologically already fragile Mesopotamian Marshes and on freshwater fish habitats in Iraq.\nThe inundation of large parts of the Euphrates valley, especially in Turkey and Syria, has led to the flooding of many archaeological sites and other places of cultural significance. Although concerted efforts have been made to record or save as much of the endangered cultural heritage as possible, many sites are probably lost forever. The combined GAP projects on the Turkish Euphrates have led to major international efforts to document the archaeological and cultural heritage of the endangered parts of the valley. Especially the flooding of Zeugma with its unique Roman mosaics by the reservoir of the Birecik Dam has generated much controversy in both the Turkish and international press. The construction of the Tabqa Dam in Syria led to a large international campaign coordinated by UNESCO to document the heritage that would disappear under the waters of Lake Assad. Archaeologists from numerous countries excavated sites ranging in date from the Natufian to the Abbasid period, and two minarets were dismantled and rebuilt outside the flood zone. Important sites that have been flooded or affected by the rising waters of Lake Assad include Mureybet, Emar and Abu Hureyra. A similar international effort was made when the Tishrin Dam was constructed, which led, among others, to the flooding of the important Pre-Pottery Neolithic B site of Jerf el Ahmar. An archaeological survey and rescue excavations were also carried out in the area flooded by Lake Qadisiya in Iraq. Parts of the flooded area have recently become accessible again due to the drying up of the lake, resulting not only in new possibilities for archaeologists to do more research, but also providing opportunities for looting, which has been rampant elsewhere in Iraq in the wake of the 2003 invasion.\nReligion.\nIn Islamic tradition, a hadith of Muhammad states that the Last Hour will not occur until the Euphrates River uncovers a mountain of gold, over which people will fight. Ninety-nine out of every one hundred individuals engaged in this conflict will perish. This event is considered one of the minor signs of the approaching Day of Judgment.\nIn the Christian Bible, the Euphrates River is mentioned in Revelation 16:12: the Euphrates drying up is part of a series of events that foretell the Second Coming. The river Phrath mentioned in Genesis 2:14 is also identified as the Euphrates.\nHistory.\nPalaeolithic to Chalcolithic periods.\nThe early occupation of the Euphrates basin was limited to its upper reaches; that is, the area that is popularly known as the Fertile Crescent. Acheulean stone artifacts have been found in the Sajur basin and in the El Kowm oasis in the central Syrian steppe; the latter together with remains of \"Homo erectus\" that were dated to 450,000 years old. In the Taurus Mountains and the upper part of the Syrian Euphrates valley, early permanent villages such as Abu Hureyra \u2013 at first occupied by hunter-gatherers but later by some of the earliest farmers, Jerf el Ahmar, Mureybet and Neval\u0131 \u00c7ori became established from the eleventh millennium BCE onward. In the absence of irrigation, these early farming communities were limited to areas where rainfed agriculture was possible, that is, the upper parts of the Syrian Euphrates as well as Turkey. Late Neolithic villages, characterized by the introduction of pottery in the early 7th millennium BCE, are known throughout this area. Occupation of lower Mesopotamia started in the 6th millennium and is generally associated with the introduction of irrigation, as rainfall in this area is insufficient for dry agriculture. Evidence for irrigation has been found at several sites dating to this period, including Tell es-Sawwan. During the 5th millennium BCE, or late Ubaid period, northeastern Syria was dotted by small villages, although some of them grew to a size of over . In Iraq, sites like Eridu and Ur were already occupied during the Ubaid period. Clay boat models found at Tell Mashnaqa along the Khabur indicate that riverine transport was already practiced during this period. The Uruk period, roughly coinciding with the 4th millennium BCE, saw the emergence of truly urban settlements across Mesopotamia. Cities like Tell Brak and Uruk grew to over in size and displayed monumental architecture. The spread of southern Mesopotamian pottery, architecture and sealings far into Turkey and Iran has generally been interpreted as the material reflection of a widespread trade system aimed at providing the Mesopotamian cities with raw materials. Habuba Kabira on the Syrian Euphrates is a prominent example of a settlement that is interpreted as an Uruk colony.\nAncient history.\nDuring the Jemdet Nasr (3600\u20133100 BCE) and Early Dynastic periods (3100\u20132350 BCE), southern Mesopotamia experienced a growth in the number and size of settlements, suggesting strong population growth. These settlements, including Sumero-Akkadian sites like Sippar, Uruk, Adab and Kish, were organized in competing city-states. Many of these cities were located along canals of the Euphrates and the Tigris that have since dried up, but that can still be identified from remote sensing imagery. A similar development took place in Upper Mesopotamia, Subartu and Assyria, although only from the mid 3rd millennium and on a smaller scale than in Lower Mesopotamia. Sites like Ebla, Mari and Tell Leilan grew to prominence for the first time during this period.\nLarge parts of the Euphrates basin were for the first time united under a single ruler during the Akkadian Empire (2335\u20132154 BC) and Ur III empires, which controlled \u2013 either directly or indirectly through vassals \u2013 large parts of modern-day Iraq and northeastern Syria. Following their collapse, the Old Assyrian Empire (1975\u20131750 BCE) and Mari asserted their power over northeast Syria and northern Mesopotamia, while southern Mesopotamia was controlled by city-states like Isin, Kish and Larsa before their territories were absorbed by the newly emerged state of Babylonia under Hammurabi in the early to mid 18th century BCE.\nIn the second half of the 2nd millennium BCE, the Euphrates basin was divided between Kassite Babylon in the south and Mitanni, Assyria and the Hittite Empire in the north, with the Middle Assyrian Empire (1365\u20131020 BC) eventually eclipsing the Hittites, Mitanni and Kassite Babylonians. Following the end of the Middle Assyrian Empire in the late 11th century BCE, struggles broke out between Babylonia and Assyria over the control of the Iraqi Euphrates basin. The Neo-Assyrian Empire (935\u2013605 BC) eventually emerged victorious out of this conflict and also succeeded in gaining control of the northern Euphrates basin in the first half of the 1st millennium BCE.\nIn the centuries to come, control of the wider Euphrates basin shifted from the Neo-Assyrian Empire (which collapsed between 612 and 599 BC) to the short lived Median Empire (612\u2013546 BC) and equally brief Neo-Babylonian Empire (612\u2013539 BC) in the last years of the 7th century BC, and eventually to the Achaemenid Empire (539\u2013333 BC). The Achaemenid Empire was in turn overrun by Alexander the Great, who defeated the last king Darius III and died in Babylon in 323 BCE.\nSubsequent to this, the region came under the control of the Seleucid Empire (312\u2013150 BC), Parthian Empire (150\u2013226 AD) (during which several Neo-Assyrian states such as Adiabene came to rule certain regions of the Euphrates), and was fought over by the Roman Empire, its succeeding Byzantine Empire and the Sassanid Empire (226\u2013638 AD), until the Islamic conquest of the mid 7th century AD. The Battle of Karbala took place near the banks of this river in 680 AD.\nIn the north, the river served as a border between Greater Armenia (331 BC\u2013428 AD) and Lesser Armenia (the latter became a Roman province in the 1st century BC).\nModern era.\nAfter World War I, the borders in Southwest Asia were redrawn in the Treaty of Lausanne (1923), when the Ottoman Empire was partitioned. Clause 109 of the treaty stipulated that the three riparian states of the Euphrates (at that time Turkey, France for its Syrian mandate and the United Kingdom for its mandate of Iraq) had to reach a mutual agreement on the use of its water and on the construction of any hydraulic installation. An agreement between Turkey and Iraq signed in 1946 required Turkey to report to Iraq on any hydraulic changes it made on the Tigris\u2013Euphrates river system, and allowed Iraq to construct dams on Turkish territory to manage the flow of the Euphrates.\nThe river featured on the coat of arms of Iraq from 1932 to 1959.\nTurkey and Syria completed their first dams on the Euphrates \u2013 the Keban Dam and the Tabqa Dam, respectively \u2013 within one year of each other and filling of the reservoirs commenced in 1975. At the same time, the area was hit by severe drought and river flow toward Iraq was reduced from in 1973 to in 1975. This led to an international crisis during which Iraq threatened to bomb the Tabqa Dam. An agreement was eventually reached between Syria and Iraq after intervention by Saudi Arabia and the Soviet Union. A similar crisis, although not escalating to the point of military threats, occurred in 1981 when the Keban Dam reservoir had to be refilled after it had been almost emptied to temporarily increase Turkey's hydroelectricity production. In 1984, Turkey unilaterally declared that it would ensure a flow of at least per second, or per year, into Syria, and in 1987 a bilateral treaty to that effect was signed between the two countries. Another bilateral agreement from 1989 between Syria and Iraq settles the amount of water flowing into Iraq at 60 percent of the amount that Syria receives from Turkey. In 2008, Turkey, Syria and Iraq instigated the Joint Trilateral Committee (JTC) on the management of the water in the Tigris\u2013Euphrates basin and on 3 September 2009 a further agreement was signed to this effect.\nOn 15 April 2014, Turkey began to reduce the flow of the Euphrates into Syria and Iraq. The flow was cut off completely on 16 May 2014 resulting in the Euphrates terminating at the Turkish\u2013Syrian border. This was in violation of an agreement reached in 1987 in which Turkey committed to releasing a minimum of of water per second at the Turkish\u2013Syrian border.\nDuring the Syrian civil war and the Iraqi Civil War, much of the Euphrates was controlled by the Islamic State from 2014 until 2017, when the terrorist group began losing land and was eventually defeated territorially in Syria at the Battle of Baghouz and in Iraq in the Western Iraq offensive respectively.\nEconomy.\nThroughout history, the Euphrates has been of vital importance to those living along its course. With the construction of large hydropower stations, irrigation schemes, and pipelines capable of transporting water over large distances, many more people now depend on the river for electricity and drinking water than in the past. Syria's Lake Assad is the most important source of drinking water for the city of Aleppo, to the west of the river valley. The lake also supports a modest state-operated fishing industry. Through a newly restored power line, the Haditha Dam in Iraq provides electricity to Baghdad.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10223", "revid": "50440299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10223", "title": "Estonian language", "text": "Finnic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nEstonian ( ) is a Finnic language and the official language of Estonia. It is written in the Latin script and is the first language of the majority of the country's population; it is also an official language of the European Union. Estonian is spoken natively by about 1.1 million people: 922,000 people in Estonia and 160,000 elsewhere.\nClassification.\nBy conventions of historical linguistics, Estonian is classified as a part of the Finnic (a.k.a. Baltic Finnic) branch of the Uralic (a.k.a. Uralian, or Finno-Ugric) language family. Other Finnic languages include Finnish and several endangered languages spoken around the Baltic Sea and in northwestern Russia. Estonian is typically subclassified as a Southern Finnic language, and it is the second-most-spoken language among all the Finnic languages.\nAlongside Finnish, Hungarian and Maltese, Estonian is one of the only four (out of 24) official languages of the European Union that are not Indo-European languages.\nIn terms of linguistic morphology, Estonian is a predominantly agglutinative language. The loss of word-final sounds is extensive, and this has made its inflectional morphology markedly more fusional, especially with respect to noun and adjective inflection. The transitional form from an agglutinating to a fusional language is a common feature of Estonian typologically over the course of history with the development of a rich morphological system.\nWord order is considerably more flexible than in English, but the basic order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object.\nHistory.\nThe speakers of the two major historical languages spoken in Estonia, North and South Estonian, are thought by some linguists to have arrived in Estonia in at least two different migration waves over two millennia ago, both groups having spoken considerably different vernacular. Some linguists have classified South Estonian as another, separate Finnic language, rather than a variety of Estonian. Modern standard Estonian evolved in the 18th and 19th centuries based on the dialects of northern Estonia.\nDuring the Medieval and Early Modern periods, Estonian accepted many loanwords from Germanic languages, mainly from Middle Low German (Middle Saxon) and, after the 16th-century Protestant Reformation, from the Standard German language.\nOldest written records of Estonian language date from the 13th century. The \"Originates Livoniae\" in the \"Livonian Chronicle of Henry\" contains Estonian place names, words and fragments of sentences.\nEstonian literature.\nThe earliest extant samples of connected (north) Estonian have been found in the Kullamaa Manuscript (\"Kullamaa prayers\") dating from 1524 and 1528. In 1525, the first Estonian language book was printed. It contained a religious Lutheran text which, however, never reached its intended readers, as it was immediately censored and all printed copies were destroyed.\nThe first extant Estonian book is a bilingual German-Estonian translation of the Lutheran catechism by S.Wanradt and J.Koell dating to 1535, during the Protestant Reformation period. An Estonian grammar book to be used by priests was printed in German in 1637. The New Testament was translated into the variety of South Estonian called V\u00f5ro in 1686 (northern Estonian, 1715). The two languages were united based on Northern Estonian by Anton thor Helle.\nWritings in Estonian became more significant in the 19th century during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750\u20131840).\nThe birth of native Estonian literature was during the period 1810\u20131820, when the patriotic and philosophical poems by Kristjan Jaak Peterson were published. Peterson, who was the first student to acknowledge his Estonian origin at the then German-language University of Dorpat, is commonly regarded as a herald of Estonian national literature and considered the founder of modern Estonian poetry. His birthday, March 14, is celebrated in Estonia as Mother Tongue Day. A fragment from Peterson's poem \"Kuu\" expresses the claim reestablishing the birthright of the Estonian language:\n\"Kas siis selle maa keel\"\n\"Laulutuules ei v\u00f5i\"\n\"Taevani t\u00f5ustes \u00fcles\"\n\"Igavikku omale otsida?\"\nIn English:\n\"Can the language of this land\"\n\"In the wind of incantation\"\n\"Rising up to the heavens\"\n\"Not seek for eternity?\"\n\"Kristjan Jaak Peterson\"\nIn the period from 1525 to 1917, 14,503 titles were published in Estonian; by comparison, between 1918 and 1940, 23,868 titles were published.\nIn modern times A. H. Tammsaare, Jaan Kross, and Andrus Kivir\u00e4hk are Estonia's best-known and most translated writers.\nEstonians lead the world in book ownership, owning on average 218 books per house, and 35% of Estonians owning 350 books or more (as of 2018).\nOfficial language.\nWritings in Estonian became significant only in the 19th century with the spread of the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment, during the Estophile Enlightenment Period (1750\u20131840). Although Baltic Germans at large regarded the future of Estonians as being a fusion with themselves, the Estophile educated class admired the ancient culture of the Estonians and their era of freedom before the conquests by Danes and Germans in the 13th century.\nWhen the Republic of Estonia was established in 1918, Estonian became the official language of the newly independent country. Immediately after World War II, in 1945, over 97% of the then population of Estonia self-identified as native ethnic Estonians and spoke the language.\nWhen Estonia was invaded and reoccupied by the Soviet army in 1944, the status of Estonian effectively changed to one of the two official languages (Russian being the other one). Many immigrants from Russia entered Estonia under Soviet encouragement. In the 1970s, the pressure of bilingualism for Estonians was intensified. Although teaching Estonian to non-Estonians in local schools was formally compulsory, in practice, the teaching and learning of Estonian by Russian-speakers was often considered unnecessary by the Soviet authorities.\nIn 1991, with the restoration of Estonia's independence, Estonian went back to being the only official language in Estonia. Since 2004, when Estonia joined the European Union, Estonian is also one of the (now 24) official languages of the EU.\nThe return of former Soviet immigrants to their countries of origin at the end of the 20th century has brought the proportion of native Estonian-speakers in Estonia now back above 70%. Large parts of the first- and second-generation immigrants in Estonia have now adopted Estonian (over 50% as of the 2022 census).\nDialects.\nThe Estonian dialects are divided into two groups\u00a0\u2013 the northern and southern dialects, historically associated with the cities of Tallinn in the north and Tartu in the south, in addition to a distinct \"kirderanniku\" dialect, Northeastern coastal Estonian.\nThe northern group consists of the or central dialect that is also the basis for the standard language, the or western dialect, roughly corresponding to L\u00e4\u00e4ne County and P\u00e4rnu County, the (islands' dialect) of Saaremaa, Hiiumaa, Muhu and Kihnu, and the or eastern dialect on the northwestern shore of Lake Peipus.\nOne of the pronunciation features of the Saaremaa dialect is the lack of the '\u00f5' vowel. A five-metre monument erected in 2020, marking the \"border\" between the vowels '\u00f5' and '\u00f6', humorously makes reference to this fact.\nSouth Estonian consists of the Tartu, Mulgi, V\u00f5ro and Seto varieties. These are sometimes considered either variants of South Estonian or separate languages altogether. Also, Seto and V\u00f5ro distinguish themselves from each other less by language and more by their culture and their respective Christian confession.\nWriting system.\nAlphabet.\nEstonian employs the Latin script as the basis for its alphabet. The script adds the letters \"\u00e4\", \"\u00f6\", \"\u00fc\", and \"\u00f5\", plus the later additions \"\u0161\" and \"\u017e\". The letters \"c\", \"q\", \"w\", \"x\" and \"y\" are limited to proper names of foreign origin, and \"f\", \"z\", \"\u0161\", and \"\u017e\" appear in loanwords and foreign names only. \"\u00d6\" and \"\u00dc\" are pronounced similarly to their equivalents in Swedish and German. Unlike in standard German but like Swedish (when followed by 'r') and Finnish, \"\u00c4\" is pronounced [\u00e6], as in English \"mat\". The vowels \u00c4, \u00d6 and \u00dc are clearly separate phonemes and inherent in Estonian, although the letter shapes come from German. The letter \"\u00f5\" denotes , unrounded , or a close-mid back unrounded vowel. It is almost identical to the Bulgarian \u044a and the Vietnamese \u01a1, and is also used to transcribe the Russian \u044b.\nAdditionally \"C\", \"Q\", \"W\", \"X\", and \"Y\" are used in writing foreign proper names. They do not occur in Estonian words, and are not officially part of the alphabet. Including all the foreign letters, the alphabet consists of the following 32 letters:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrthography.\nAlthough the Estonian orthography is generally guided by phonemic principles, with each grapheme corresponding to one phoneme, there are some historical and morphological deviations from this: for example preservation of the morpheme in declension of the word (writing b, g, d in places where p, k, t is pronounced) and in the use of 'i' and 'j'. Where it is very impractical or impossible to type \"\u0161\" and \"\u017e\", they are replaced by \"sh\" and \"zh\" in some written texts, although this is considered incorrect. Otherwise, the \"h\" in \"sh\" represents a voiceless glottal fricative, as in \"Pasha\" (\"pas-ha\"); this also applies to some foreign names.\nModern Estonian orthography is based on the \"Newer orthography\" created by Eduard Ahrens in the second half of the 19thcentury based on Finnish orthography. The \"Older orthography\" it replaced was created in the 17thcentury by Bengt Gottfried Forselius and Johann Hornung based on standard German orthography. Earlier writing in Estonian had, by and large, used an \"ad hoc\" orthography based on Latin and Middle Low German orthography. Some influences of the standard German orthography \u2013 for example, writing 'W'/'w' instead of 'V'/'v' \u2013 persisted well into the 1930s.\nPhonology.\nVowels.\nThere are 9 vowels and 36 diphthongs, 28 of which are native to the Estonian language.[1] All nine vowels can appear as the first component of a diphthong, but only /\u0251 e i o u/ occur as the second component. A vowel characteristic of Estonian is the unrounded back vowel /\u0264/, which may be close-mid back, close back, or close-mid central.\nConsonants.\nWord-initial \"b, d, g\" occur only in loanwords and some old loanwords are spelled with \"p, t, k\" instead of etymological \"b, d, g\": \"pank\" 'bank'. Word-medially and word-finally, \"b, d, g\" represent short plosives /p, t, k/ (may be pronounced as partially voiced consonants), \"p, t, k\" represent half-long plosives /p\u02d0, t\u02d0, k\u02d0/, and \"pp, tt, kk\" represent overlong plosives /p\u02d0\u02d0, t\u02d0\u02d0, k\u02d0\u02d0/; for example: \"kabi\" /k\u0251pi/ 'hoof' \u2014 \"kapi\" /k\u0251p\u02d0i/ 'wardrobe [gen sg] \u2014 \"kappi\" /k\u0251p\u02d0\u02d0i/ 'wardrobe [ptv sg]'.\nBefore and after \"b, p, d, t, g, k, s, h, f, \u0161, z, \u017e\", the sounds [p], [t], [k] are written as \"p, t, k\", with some exceptions due to morphology or etymology.\nRepresentation of palatalised consonants is inconsistent, and they are not always indicated.\n\u014b is an allophone of /n/ before /k/.\nWhile peripheral Estonian dialects are characterized by various degrees of vowel harmony, central dialects have almost completely lost the feature. Since the standard language is based on central dialects, it has no vowel harmony either. In the standard language, the front vowels occur exclusively on the first or stressed syllable, although vowel harmony is still apparent in older texts.\nGrammar.\nTypologically, Estonian represents a transitional form from an agglutinating language to a fusional language. The canonical word order is SVO (subject\u2013verb\u2013object), although often debated among linguists.\nIn Estonian, nouns and pronouns do not have grammatical gender, but nouns and adjectives decline in fourteen cases: nominative, genitive, partitive, illative, inessive, elative, allative, adessive, ablative, translative, terminative, essive, abessive, and comitative, with the case and number of the adjective always agreeing with that of the noun (except in the terminative, essive, abessive and comitative, where there is agreement only for the number, the adjective being in the genitive form). Thus the illative for \"kollane maja\" (\"a yellow house\") is \"kollasesse majja\" (\"into a yellow house\"), but the terminative is \"kollase majani\" (\"as far as a yellow house\"). With respect to the Proto-Finnic language, elision has occurred; thus, the actual case marker may be absent, but the stem is changed, cf. \"maja \u2013 majja\" and the Ostrobothnia dialect of Finnish \"maja\u00a0\u2013 majahan\".\nThe verbal system has no distinct future tense (the present tense serves here) and features special forms to express an action performed by an undetermined subject (the \"impersonal\").\nVocabulary.\nAlthough Estonian and the Germanic languages have very different origins and the vocabulary is considered quite different from that of the Indo-European family, one can identify many similar words in Estonian and English, for example. This is primarily because Estonian has borrowed nearly one-third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from Low Saxon (Middle Low German) during the period of , and High German (including standard German). The percentage of Low Saxon and High German loanwords can be estimated at 22\u201325 percent, with Low Saxon making up about 15 percent. Prior to the wave of new loanwords from English in the 20th and 21st centuries, historically, Swedish and Russian were also sources of borrowings but to a much lesser extent. In borrowings, often 'b' and 'p' are interchangeable, for example 'baggage' becomes 'pagas', 'lob' (to throw) becomes 'loopima'. The initial letter 's' before another consonant is often dropped, for example 'skool' becomes 'kool', 'stool' becomes 'tool'.\n\"Ex nihilo\" lexical enrichment.\nEstonian language planners such as Ado Grenzstein (a journalist active in Estonia from the 1870s to the 1890s) tried to use formation \"ex nihilo\" (\"Ursch\u00f6pfung\"); i.e. they created new words out of nothing.\nThe most well-known reformer of Estonian, Johannes Aavik (1880\u20131973), used creations \"ex nihilo\" (cf. 'free constructions', Tauli 1977), along with other sources of lexical enrichment such as derivations, compositions and loanwords (often from Finnish; cf. Saareste and Raun 1965: 76). In Aavik's dictionary (1921) lists approximately 4000 words. About 40 of the 200 words created by Johannes Aavik allegedly \"ex nihilo\" are in common use today. Examples are \"ese\" 'object', \"kolp\" 'skull', \"liibuma\" 'to cling', \"naasma\" 'to return, come back', \"n\u00f5me\" 'stupid, dull'.\nMany of the coinages that have been considered (often by Aavik himself) as words concocted \"ex nihilo\" could well have been influenced by foreign lexical items; for example, words from Russian, German, French, Finnish, English and Swedish. Aavik had a broad classical education and knew Ancient Greek, Latin and French. Consider \"roim\" 'crime' versus English \"crime\" or \"taunima\" 'to condemn, disapprove' versus Finnish \"tuomita\" 'to condemn, to judge' (these Aavikisms appear in Aavik's 1921 dictionary). These words might be better regarded as a peculiar manifestation of morpho-phonemic adaptation of a foreign lexical item.\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Estonian and English:\n\"All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10224", "revid": "1535071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10224", "title": "E-Prime", "text": "Restricted form of the English language\nE-Prime (short for English-Prime or English Prime, sometimes \u00c9 or E\u2032) denotes a restricted form of English in which authors avoid all forms of the verb \"to be\".\nE-Prime excludes forms such as \"be\", \"being\", \"been\", present tense forms (\"am\", \"is\", \"are\"), past tense forms (\"was\", \"were\") along with their negative contractions (\"isn't\", \"aren't\", \"wasn't\", \"weren't\"), and nonstandard contractions such as \"ain't\" and \"'twas\". E-Prime also excludes contractions such as \"I'm\", \"we're\", \"you're\", \"he's\", \"she's\", \"it's\", \"they're\", \"there's\", \"here's\", \"where's\", \"when's\", \"why's\", \"how's\", \"who's\", \"what's\", and \"that's\".\nSome scholars claim that E-Prime can clarify thinking and strengthen writing, while others doubt its utility.\nHistory.\nD. David Bourland Jr., who had studied under Alfred Korzybski, devised E-Prime as an addition to Korzybski's general semantics in the late 1940s. Bourland published the concept in a 1965 essay entitled \"A Linguistic Note: Writing in E-Prime\" (originally published in \"General Semantics Bulletin\"). The essay quickly generated controversy within the general semantics field, partly because practitioners of general semantics sometimes saw Bourland as attacking the verb '\"to be\"' as such, and not just certain usages.\nBourland collected and published three volumes of essays in support of his innovation. The first (1991), co-edited by Paul Dennithorne Johnston, bore the title: \"To Be or Not: An E-Prime Anthology\". For the second, \"More E-Prime: To Be or Not II\", published in 1994, he added a third editor, Jeremy Klein. Bourland and Johnston then edited a third book, \"E-Prime III: a third anthology\", published in 1997.\nFunctions of \"to be\".\nIn English, the verb 'to be' (also known as the \"copula\") has several distinct functions:\nBourland sees specifically the \"identity\" and \"predication\" functions as pernicious but advocates the exclusion of all forms for the sake of simplicity. In the case of the \"existence\" form or the \"location\" form, terms such as \"exist\", \"sit\" or \"lie\" could substitute for the copula.\nSome ergative verbs may substitute the copula, including \"taste\", \"feel\", \"smell\", \"sound\", \"grow\", \"hinge\", \"remain\", \"rest\", \"stay\", \"reside\", and \"turn\", among others.\nExamples.\nOne could rewrite the functions of \"to be\" as follows:\nRationale.\nBourland and other advocates also suggest that use of E-Prime leads to a less dogmatic style of language that reduces the possibility of misunderstanding or conflict.\nKellogg and Bourland describe misuse of the verb \"to be\" as creating a \"deity mode of speech\", allowing \"even the most ignorant to transform their opinions magically into god-like pronouncements on the nature of things\".\nPsychological effects.\nWhile teaching at the University of Florida, Alfred Korzybski counseled his students to\neliminate the infinitive and verb forms of \"to be\" from their vocabulary, whereas a second group continued to use \"I am,\" \"You are,\" \"They are\" statements as usual. For example, instead of saying, \"I am depressed,\" a student was asked to eliminate that emotionally primed verb and to say something else, such as, \"I feel depressed when ...\" or \"I tend to make myself depressed about ...\"\nKorzybski observed improvement \"of one full letter grade\" by \"students who did not generalize by using that infinitive\".\nAlbert Ellis advocated the use of E-Prime when discussing psychological distress to encourage framing these experiences as temporary (see also Solution focused brief therapy) and to encourage a sense of agency by specifying the subject of statements. According to Ellis, rational emotive behavior therapy \"has favored E-Prime more than any other form of psychotherapy and I think it is still the only form of therapy that has some of its main books written in E-Prime\". However, Ellis did not always use E-Prime because he believed it interferes with readability.\nCriticisms.\nMany authors have questioned E-Prime's effectiveness at improving readability and reducing prejudice (Lakoff, 1992; Murphy, 1992; Parkinson, 1992; Kenyon, 1992; French, 1992, 1993; Lohrey, 1993). These authors observed that communication under the copula ban can remain obscure and imply prejudice, while losing important speech patterns, such as identities and identification. Further, prejudices and judgments may become more difficult to notice or refute.\nVarious arguments against E-Prime (in the context of general semantics) have been conjectured:\nAccording to an article (written in E-Prime and advocating a role for E-Prime in ESL and EFL programs) published by the Office of English Language Programs of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs in the State Department of the United States, \"Requiring students to avoid the verb to be on every assignment would deter students from developing other fundamental skills of fluent writing.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10225", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10225", "title": "Elliptic curve", "text": "Algebraic curve in mathematics\nIn mathematics, an elliptic curve is a smooth, projective, algebraic curve of genus one, on which there is a specified point O. An elliptic curve is defined over a field K and describes points in \"K\"2, the Cartesian product of K with itself. If the field's characteristic is different from 2 and 3, then the curve can be described as a plane algebraic curve which consists of solutions (\"x\", \"y\") for:\nformula_1\nfor some coefficients a and b in K. The curve is required to be non-singular, which means that the curve has no cusps or self-intersections. (This is equivalent to the condition 4\"a\"3 + 27\"b\"2 \u2260 0, that is, being square-free in x.) It is always understood that the curve is really sitting in the projective plane, with the point O being the unique point at infinity. Many sources define an elliptic curve to be simply a curve given by an equation of this form. (When the coefficient field has characteristic 2 or 3, the above equation is not quite general enough to include all non-singular cubic curves; see below.)\nAn elliptic curve is an abelian variety \u2013 that is, it has a group law defined algebraically, with respect to which it is an abelian group \u2013 and O serves as the identity element.\nIf \"y\"2 = \"P\"(\"x\"), where P is any polynomial of degree three in x with no repeated roots, the solution set is a nonsingular plane curve of genus one, an elliptic curve. If P has degree four and is square-free this equation again describes a plane curve of genus one; however, it has no natural choice of identity element. More generally, any algebraic curve of genus one, for example the intersection of two quadric surfaces embedded in three-dimensional projective space, is called an elliptic curve, provided that it is equipped with a marked point to act as the identity.\nUsing the theory of elliptic functions, it can be shown that elliptic curves defined over the complex numbers correspond to embeddings of the torus into the complex projective plane. The torus is also an abelian group, and this correspondence is also a group isomorphism.\nElliptic curves are especially important in number theory, and constitute a major area of current research; for example, they were used in Andrew Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem. They also find applications in elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) and integer factorization.\nAn elliptic curve is \"not\" an ellipse in the sense of a projective conic, which has genus zero: see elliptic integral for the origin of the term. However, there is a natural representation of real elliptic curves with shape invariant \"j\" \u2265 1 as ellipses in the hyperbolic plane formula_2. Specifically, the intersections of the Minkowski hyperboloid with quadric surfaces characterized by a certain constant-angle property produce the Steiner ellipses in formula_2 (generated by orientation-preserving collineations). Further, the orthogonal trajectories of these ellipses comprise the elliptic curves with \"j\" \u2264 1, and any ellipse in formula_2 described as a locus relative to two foci is uniquely the elliptic curve sum of two Steiner ellipses, obtained by adding the pairs of intersections on each orthogonal trajectory. Here, the vertex of the hyperboloid serves as the identity on each trajectory curve.\nTopologically, a complex elliptic curve is a torus, while a complex ellipse is a sphere.\nElliptic curves over the real numbers.\nAlthough the formal definition of an elliptic curve requires some background in algebraic geometry, it is possible to describe some features of elliptic curves over the real numbers using only introductory algebra and geometry.\nIn this context, an elliptic curve is a plane curve defined by an equation of the form\nformula_1\nafter a linear change of variables (a and b are real numbers). This type of equation is called a \"Weierstrass normal form\", \"Weierstrass form\", or \"Weierstrass equation\".\nThe definition of elliptic curve also requires that the curve be non-singular. Geometrically, this means that the graph has no cusps, self-intersections, or isolated points. Algebraically, this holds if and only if the discriminant, formula_6, is not equal to zero.\n formula_7\nThe discriminant is zero when formula_8 for some real formula_9.\nThe real graph of a non-singular curve has \"two\" components if its discriminant is positive, and \"one\" component if it is negative. For example, in the graphs shown in figure to the right, the discriminant in the first case is 64, and in the second case is \u2212368.\nGroup law.\nWhen working in the projective plane, the equation in homogeneous coordinates becomes\n formula_10\nThis equation is not defined on the line at infinity, but we can multiply by formula_11 to get one that is:\n formula_12\nThis resulting equation is defined on the whole projective plane, and the curve it defines projects onto the elliptic curve of interest. To find its intersection with the line at infinity, we can just posit formula_13. This implies formula_14, which in a field means formula_15. formula_16 on the other hand can take any value, and thus all triplets formula_17 satisfy the equation. In projective geometry this set is simply the point formula_18, which is thus the unique intersection of the curve with the line at infinity.\nSince the curve is smooth, hence continuous, it can be shown that this point at infinity is the identity element of a group structure whose operation is geometrically described as follows:\nSince the curve is symmetric about the x axis, given any point P, we can take \u2212\"P\" to be the point opposite it. We then have formula_19, as formula_20 lies on the XZ plane, so that formula_21 is also the symmetrical of formula_20 about the origin, and thus represents the same projective point.\nIf P and Q are two points on the curve, then we can uniquely describe a third point \"P\" + \"Q\" in the following way. First, draw the line that intersects P and Q. This will generally intersect the cubic at a third point, R. We then take \"P\" + \"Q\" to be \u2212\"R\", the point opposite R.\nThis definition for addition works except in a few special cases related to the point at infinity and intersection multiplicity. The first is when one of the points is O. Here, we define \"P\" + \"O\" = \"P\" = \"O\" + \"P\", making O the identity of the group. If \"P\" = \"Q\", we only have one point, thus we cannot define the line between them. In this case, we use the tangent line to the curve at this point as our line. In most cases, the tangent will intersect a second point R, and we can take its opposite. If P and Q are opposites of each other, we define \"P\" + \"Q\" = \"O\". Lastly, if P is an inflection point (a point where the concavity of the curve changes), we take R to be P itself, and \"P\" + \"P\" is simply the point opposite itself, i.e. itself.\nLet K be a field over which the curve is defined (that is, the coefficients of the defining equation or equations of the curve are in K) and denote the curve by E. Then the K-rational points of E are the points on E whose coordinates all lie in K, including the point at infinity. The set of K-rational points is denoted by \"E\"(\"K\"). \"E\"(\"K\") is a group, because properties of polynomial equations show that if P is in \"E\"(\"K\"), then \u2212\"P\" is also in \"E\"(\"K\"), and if two of P, Q, R are in \"E\"(\"K\"), then so is the third. Additionally, if K is a subfield of L, then \"E\"(\"K\") is a subgroup of \"E\"(\"L\").\nAlgebraic interpretation.\nThe above groups can be described algebraically as well as geometrically. Given the curve \"y\"2 = \"x\"3 + \"bx\" + \"c\" over the field K (whose characteristic we assume to be neither 2 nor 3), and points \"P\" = (\"xP\", \"yP\") and \"Q\" = (\"xQ\", \"yQ\") on the curve, assume first that \"xP\" \u2260 \"xQ\" (case \"1\"). Let \"y\" = \"sx\" + \"d\" be the equation of the line that intersects P and Q, which has the following slope:\n formula_23\nThe line equation and the curve equation intersect at the points xP, xQ, and xR, so the equations have identical y values at these values.\n formula_24\nwhich is equivalent to\n formula_25\nSince xP, xQ, and xR are solutions, this equation has its roots at exactly the same x values as\n formula_26\nand because both equations are cubics, they must be the same polynomial up to a scalar. Then equating the coefficients of \"x\"2 in both equations\n formula_27\nand solving for the unknown xR,\n formula_28\nyR follows from the line equation\n formula_29\nand this is an element of K, because s is.\nIf \"xP\" = \"xQ\", then there are two options: if \"yP\" = \u2212\"yQ\" (case \"3\"), including the case where \"yP\" = \"yQ\" = 0 (case \"4\"), then the sum is defined as 0; thus, the inverse of each point on the curve is found by reflecting it across the x\u00a0axis.\nIf \"yP\" = \"yQ\" \u2260 0, then \"Q\" = \"P\" and \"R\" = (\"x\"\"R\", \"y\"\"R\") = \u2212(\"P\" + \"P\") = \u22122\"P\" = \u22122\"Q\" (case \"2\" using P as R). The slope is given by the tangent to the curve at (\"x\"\"P\", \"y\"\"P\").\n formula_30\nA more general expression for formula_31 that works in both case 1 and case 2 is\n formula_32\nas formula_33, then formula_34, so formula_35.\nThe functional equation is\nformula_36\nAs we are only interested in the behaviour of formula_37, we can use a reduced zeta function\nformula_38\nformula_39\nand so\nformula_40\nwhich leads directly to the local L-functions\nformula_41\nThe Sato\u2013Tate conjecture is a statement about how the error term formula_42 in Hasse's theorem varies with the different primes \"q\", if an elliptic curve E over Q is reduced modulo q. It was proven (for almost all such curves) in 2006 due to the results of Taylor, Harris and Shepherd-Barron, and says that the error terms are equidistributed.\nElliptic curves over finite fields are notably applied in cryptography and for the factorization of large integers. These algorithms often make use of the group structure on the points of \"E\". Algorithms that are applicable to general groups, for example the group of invertible elements in finite fields, F*\"q\", can thus be applied to the group of points on an elliptic curve. For example, the discrete logarithm is such an algorithm. The interest in this is that choosing an elliptic curve allows for more flexibility than choosing \"q\" (and thus the group of units in F\"q\"). Also, the group structure of elliptic curves is generally more complicated.\nElliptic curves over a general field.\nElliptic curves can be defined over any field \"K\"; the formal definition of an elliptic curve is a non-singular projective algebraic curve over \"K\" with genus 1 and endowed with a distinguished point defined over \"K\".\nIf the characteristic of \"K\" is neither 2 nor 3, then every elliptic curve over \"K\" can be written in the form\nformula_43\nafter a linear change of variables. Here \"p\" and \"q\" are elements of \"K\" such that the right hand side polynomial \"x\"3 \u2212 \"px\" \u2212 \"q\" does not have any double roots. If the characteristic is 2 or 3, then more terms need to be kept: in characteristic 3, the most general equation is of the form\nformula_44\nfor arbitrary constants \"b\"2, \"b\"4, \"b\"6 such that the polynomial on the right-hand side has distinct roots (the notation is chosen for historical reasons). In characteristic 2, even this much is not possible, and the most general equation is\nformula_45\nprovided that the variety it defines is non-singular. If characteristic were not an obstruction, each equation would reduce to the previous ones by a suitable linear change of variables.\nOne typically takes the curve to be the set of all points (\"x\",\"y\") which satisfy the above equation and such that both \"x\" and \"y\" are elements of the algebraic closure of \"K\". Points of the curve whose coordinates both belong to \"K\" are called \"K\"-rational points.\nMany of the preceding results remain valid when the field of definition of \"E\" is a number field \"K\", that is to say, a finite field extension of Q. In particular, the group \"E(K)\" of \"K\"-rational points of an elliptic curve \"E\" defined over \"K\" is finitely generated, which generalizes the Mordell\u2013Weil theorem above. A theorem due to Lo\u00efc Merel shows that for a given integer \"d\", there are (up to isomorphism) only finitely many groups that can occur as the torsion groups of \"E\"(\"K\") for an elliptic curve defined over a number field \"K\" of degree \"d\". More precisely, there is a number \"B\"(\"d\") such that for any elliptic curve \"E\" defined over a number field \"K\" of degree \"d\", any torsion point of \"E\"(\"K\") is of order less than \"B\"(\"d\"). The theorem is effective: for \"d\" &gt; 1, if a torsion point is of order \"p\", with \"p\" prime, then\nformula_46\nAs for the integral points, Siegel's theorem generalizes to the following: Let \"E\" be an elliptic curve defined over a number field \"K\", \"x\" and \"y\" the Weierstrass coordinates. Then there are only finitely many points of \"E(K)\" whose \"x\"-coordinate is in the ring of integers \"O\"\"K\".\nThe properties of the Hasse\u2013Weil zeta function and the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture can also be extended to this more general situation.\nElliptic curves over the complex numbers.\nThe formulation of elliptic curves as the embedding of a torus in the complex projective plane follows naturally from a curious property of Weierstrass's elliptic functions. These functions and their first derivative are related by the formula\nformula_47\nHere, \"g\"2 and \"g\"3 are constants; \u2118(\"z\") is the Weierstrass elliptic function and its derivative. It should be clear that this relation is in the form of an elliptic curve (over the complex numbers). The Weierstrass functions are doubly periodic; that is, they are periodic with respect to a lattice \u039b; in essence, the Weierstrass functions are naturally defined on a torus \"T\" = C/\u039b. This torus may be embedded in the complex projective plane by means of the map\nformula_48\nThis map is a group isomorphism of the torus (considered with its natural group structure) with the chord-and-tangent group law on the cubic curve which is the image of this map. It is also an isomorphism of Riemann surfaces from the torus to the cubic curve, so topologically, an elliptic curve is a torus. If the lattice \u039b is related by multiplication by a non-zero complex number c to a lattice \"c\"\u039b, then the corresponding curves are isomorphic. Isomorphism classes of elliptic curves are specified by the j-invariant.\nThe isomorphism classes can be understood in a simpler way as well. The constants \"g\"2 and \"g\"3, called the modular invariants, are uniquely determined by the lattice, that is, by the structure of the torus. However, all real polynomials factorize completely into linear factors over the complex numbers, since the field of complex numbers is the algebraic closure of the reals. So, the elliptic curve may be written as\nformula_49\nOne finds that\nformula_50\nand\nformula_51\nwith {{mvar|j}}-invariant {{math|\"j\"(\"\u03c4\")}} and {{math|\"\u03bb\"(\"\u03c4\")}} is sometimes called the modular lambda function. For example, let {{math|1=\"\u03c4\" = 2\"i\"}}, then {{math|1=\"\u03bb\"(2\"i\") = (\u22121 + {{sqrt|2}})4}} which implies {{math|\"g\"{{prime}}2}}, {{math|\"g\"{{prime}}3}}, and therefore {{math|\"g\"{{prime}}2{{su|p=3}} \u2212 27\"g\"{{prime}}3{{su|p=2}}}} of the formula above are all algebraic numbers if {{mvar|\u03c4}} involves an imaginary quadratic field. In fact, it yields the integer {{math|1=\"j\"(2\"i\") = 663 = {{val|287496}}}}. \nIn contrast, the modular discriminant\nformula_52\nis generally a transcendental number. In particular, the value of the Dedekind eta function {{math|\"\u03b7\"(2\"i\")}} is\nformula_53\nNote that the uniformization theorem implies that every compact Riemann surface of genus one can be represented as a torus. This also allows an easy understanding of the torsion points on an elliptic curve: if the lattice {{math|\u039b}} is spanned by the fundamental periods {{math|\"\u03c9\"1}} and {{math|\"\u03c9\"2}}, then the {{mvar|n}}-torsion points are the (equivalence classes of) points of the form\nformula_54\nfor integers {{mvar|a}} and {{mvar|b}} in the range {{math|0 \u2264 (\"a\", \"b\") &lt; \"n\"}}.\nIf\nformula_55\nis an elliptic curve over the complex numbers and\nformula_56\nthen a pair of fundamental periods of {{mvar|E}} can be calculated very rapidly by\nformula_57\nOver the complex numbers, every elliptic curve has nine inflection points. Every line through two of these points also passes through a third inflection point; the nine points and 12 lines formed in this way form a realization of the Hesse configuration.\nThe dual isogeny.\nGiven an isogeny\n formula_58\nof elliptic curves of degree formula_59, the dual isogeny is an isogeny\n formula_60\nof the same degree such that\n formula_61\nHere formula_62 denotes the multiplication-by-formula_59 isogeny formula_64 which has degree formula_65\nConstruction of the dual isogeny.\nOften only the existence of a dual isogeny is needed, but it can be explicitly given as the composition\n formula_66\nwhere formula_67 is the group of divisors of degree 0. To do this, we need maps formula_68 given by formula_69 where formula_20 is the neutral point of formula_71 and formula_72 given by formula_73\nTo see that formula_74, note that the original isogeny formula_75 can be written as a composite\n formula_76\nand that since formula_75 is of degree formula_59, formula_79 is multiplication by formula_59 on formula_81\nAlternatively, we can use the smaller Picard group formula_82, a quotient of formula_83 The map formula_68 descends to an isomorphism, formula_85 The dual isogeny is\n formula_86\nNote that the relation formula_74 also implies the conjugate relation formula_88 Indeed, let formula_89 Then formula_90 But formula_91 is surjective, so we must have formula_92\nAlgorithms that use elliptic curves.\nElliptic curves over finite fields are used in some cryptographic applications as well as for integer factorization. Typically, the general idea in these applications is that a known algorithm which makes use of certain finite groups is rewritten to use the groups of rational points of elliptic curves. For more see also:\nReferences.\nSerge Lang, in the introduction to the book cited below, stated that \"It is possible to write endlessly on elliptic curves. (This is not a threat.)\" The following short list is thus at best a guide to the vast expository literature available on the theoretical, algorithmic, and cryptographic aspects of elliptic curves.\n | author = Ian Blake |author2=Gadiel Seroussi |author3=Nigel Smart | author-link3=Nigel Smart (cryptographer)\n | year = 2000\n | title = Elliptic Curves in Cryptography\n | series=LMS Lecture Notes\n | publisher = Cambridge University Press\n | isbn=0-521-65374-6\n | author = Richard Crandall\n |author2=Carl Pomerance \n | year = 2001\n | title = Prime Numbers: A Computational Perspective\n | publisher = Springer-Verlag\n | edition = 1st\n | isbn=0-387-94777-9\n | chapter = Chapter 7: Elliptic Curve Arithmetic\n | pages = 285\u2013352\n |author2-link=Carl Pomerance \n |author-link=Richard Crandall \n | first=John | last=Cremona\n | year = 1997 | edition=2nd\n | title = Algorithms for Modular Elliptic Curves\n | publisher = Cambridge University Press\n | url = http://www.warwick.ac.uk/staff/J.E.Cremona//book/fulltext/index.html\n | isbn=0-521-59820-6\n | author = Darrel Hankerson, Alfred Menezes and Scott Vanstone\n | year = 2004\n | title = Guide to Elliptic Curve Cryptography\n | publisher = Springer\n | isbn = 0-387-95273-X\n | url = http://www.cacr.math.uwaterloo.ca/ecc/\n | first=Dale | last=Husem\u00f6ller\n | author-link=Dale Husemoller\n | year = 2004\n | title = Elliptic Curves\n | edition = 2nd\n | series = Graduate Texts in Mathematics\n | volume=111\n | publisher = Springer\n | isbn=0-387-95490-2\n | author1= Kenneth Ireland \n |author2=Michael I. Rosen | author-link2 =Michael Rosen (mathematician)\n | year = 1998\n | title = A Classical Introduction to Modern Number Theory\n | volume=84 | series=Graduate Texts in Mathematics\n | publisher = Springer\n | edition = 2nd revised\n | chapter = Chapters 18 and 19\n | isbn=0-387-97329-X\n | first = Anthony W. |last=Knapp | author-link = Anthony W. Knapp\n | orig-year = 1992 |year=2018 |url=https://books.google.com/books?id=Xf9ZDwAAQBAJ\n | title = Elliptic Curves\n | series = Mathematical Notes | volume=40\n | publisher = Princeton University Press |isbn=9780691186900\n | last = Koblitz |first=Neal | author-link = Neal Koblitz\n | year = 1993 | edition=2nd\n | title = Introduction to Elliptic Curves and Modular Forms\n | series = Graduate Texts in Mathematics\n | volume=97\n | publisher = Springer-Verlag\n | isbn=0-387-97966-2\n | last = Koblitz |first = Neal | author-link = Neal Koblitz\n | year = 1994\n | title = A Course in Number Theory and Cryptography\n | series = Graduate Texts in Mathematics\n | volume=114\n | publisher = Springer-Verlag\n | edition = 2nd\n | isbn = 0-387-94293-9\n | chapter = Chapter 6\n |title=Elliptic curves: function theory, geometry and arithmetic\n | last = Silverman | first=Joseph H. | author-link=Joseph H. Silverman\n | year = 1986\n | title = The Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves\n | series = Graduate Texts in Mathematics\n | volume=106\n | publisher = Springer-Verlag\n | isbn=0-387-96203-4\n | author = Joseph H. Silverman | author-link=Joseph H. Silverman\n | year = 1994\n | title = Advanced Topics in the Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves\n | series = Graduate Texts in Mathematics\n | volume=151\n | publisher = Springer-Verlag\n | isbn=0-387-94328-5\n | author = Joseph H. Silverman | author-link=Joseph H. Silverman\n |author2=John Tate \n | year = 1992\n | title = Rational Points on Elliptic Curves\n | publisher = Springer-Verlag\n | isbn=0-387-97825-9\n | author2-link=John Tate (mathematician)\n | author = Lawrence Washington | author-link=Lawrence C. Washington | year = 2003\n | title = Elliptic Curves: Number Theory and Cryptography\n | url = https://archive.org/details/ellipticcurvesnu0000wash | url-access = registration | publisher = Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC\n | isbn=1-58488-365-0"}
{"id": "10229", "revid": "1310621722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10229", "title": "Equidae", "text": "Family of hoofed mammals\nEquidae (commonly known as the horse family) is the taxonomic family of horses and related animals, including asses, zebras, and many extinct species known only from fossils. The family evolved more than 50 million years ago, in the Eocene epoch, from a small, multi-toed ungulate into larger, single-toed animals. All extant species are in the genus \"Equus\", which originated in North America. Equidae belongs to the order Perissodactyla, which includes the extant tapirs and rhinoceros, and several extinct families. It is more specifically grouped within the superfamily Equoidea, the only other family being the extinct Palaeotheriidae.\nThe term equid refers to any member of this family, including any equine.\nEvolution.\nThe oldest known fossils assigned to Equidae were found in North America, and date from the early Eocene epoch, 54 million years ago. They were once assigned to the genus \"Hyracotherium\", but the type species of that genus is now regarded as a palaeothere. The other species have been split off into different genera. These early equids were fox-sized animals with three toes on the hind feet, and four on the front feet. They were herbivorous browsers on relatively soft plants, and already adapted for running. The complexity of their brains suggest that they already were alert and intelligent animals. Later species reduced the number of toes, and developed teeth more suited for grinding up grasses and other tough plant food.\nThe equids, like other perissodactyls, are hindgut fermenters. They have evolved specialized teeth that cut and shear tough plant matter to accommodate their fibrous diet. Their seemingly inefficient digestion strategy is a result of their size at the time of its evolution, as they would have already had to be relatively large mammals to be supported on such a strategy.\nThe family became relatively diverse during the Miocene epoch, with many new species appearing. By this time, equids were more truly horse like, having developed the typical body shape of the modern animals. Many of these species bore the main weight of their bodies on their central third toe, with the others becoming reduced and barely touching the ground, if at all. The sole surviving genus, \"Equus\", had evolved by the early Pleistocene epoch, and spread rapidly through the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10231", "revid": "49681265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10231", "title": "List of economists", "text": "This is an incomplete alphabetical list by surname of notable economists, experts in the social science of economics, past and present. For a history of economics, see the article History of economic thought. Only economists with biographical articles in Wikipedia are listed here.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Nonumtoc/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "10232", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10232", "title": "Empirical knowledge", "text": ""}
{"id": "10233", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10233", "title": "Encyclopedist", "text": ""}
{"id": "10235", "revid": "49417305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10235", "title": "ELIZA", "text": "Natural language processing computer program\nELIZA is an early natural language processing computer program developed from 1964 to 1967 at MIT by Joseph Weizenbaum. Created to explore communication between humans and machines, ELIZA simulated conversation by using a pattern matching and substitution methodology that gave users an illusion of understanding on the part of the program, but had no representation that could be considered really understanding what was being said by either party. Whereas the ELIZA program itself was written (originally) in MAD-SLIP, the pattern matching directives that contained most of its language capability were provided in separate \"scripts\", represented in a lisp-like representation. The most famous script, DOCTOR, simulated a psychotherapist of the Rogerian school (in which the therapist often reflects back the patient's words to the patient), and used rules, dictated in the script, to respond with non-directional questions to user inputs. As such, ELIZA was one of the first chatbots (originally \"chatterbots\") and one of the first programs capable of attempting the Turing test.\nWeizenbaum intended the program as a method to explore communication between humans and machines. He was surprised that some people, including his secretary, attributed human-like feelings to the computer program, a phenomenon that came to be called the ELIZA effect. Many academics believed that the program would be able to positively influence the lives of many people, particularly those with psychological issues, and that it could aid doctors working on such patients' treatment. While ELIZA was capable of engaging in discourse, it could not converse with true understanding. However, many early users were convinced of ELIZA's intelligence and understanding, despite Weizenbaum's insistence to the contrary. \nThe original ELIZA source code had been missing since its creation in the 1960s, as it was not common to publish articles that included source code at that time. However, more recently the MAD-SLIP source code was discovered in the MIT archives and published on various platforms, such as the Internet Archive. The source code is of high historical interest since it demonstrates not only the specificity of programming languages and techniques at that time, but also the beginning of software layering and abstraction as a means of achieving sophisticated software programming.\nOverview.\nJoseph Weizenbaum's ELIZA, running the DOCTOR script, created a conversational interaction somewhat similar to what might take place in the office of \"a [non-directive] psychotherapist in an initial psychiatric interview\" and to \"demonstrate that the communication between man and machine was superficial\". While ELIZA is best known for acting in the manner of a psychotherapist, the speech patterns are due to the data and instructions supplied by the DOCTOR script. ELIZA itself examined the text for keywords, applied values to said keywords, and transformed the input into an output; the script that ELIZA ran determined the keywords, set the values of keywords, and set the rules of transformation for the output. Weizenbaum chose to make the DOCTOR script in the context of psychotherapy to \"sidestep the problem of giving the program a data base of real-world knowledge\", allowing it to reflect back the patient's statements to carry the conversation forward. The result was a somewhat intelligent-seeming response that reportedly deceived some early users of the program.\nWeizenbaum named his program ELIZA after Eliza Doolittle, a working-class character in George Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\" (also appearing in the musical \"My Fair Lady\", which was based on the play and was hugely popular at the time). According to Weizenbaum, ELIZA's ability to be \"incrementally improved\" by various users made it similar to Eliza Doolittle, since Eliza Doolittle was taught to speak with an upper-class accent in Shaw's play. However, unlike the human character in Shaw's play, ELIZA is incapable of learning new patterns of speech or new words through interaction alone. Edits must be made directly to ELIZA's active script in order to change the manner by which the program operates.\nWeizenbaum first implemented ELIZA in his own SLIP list-processing language, where, depending upon the initial entries by the user, the illusion of human intelligence could appear, or be dispelled through several interchanges. Some of ELIZA's responses were so convincing that Weizenbaum and several others have anecdotes of users becoming emotionally attached to the program, occasionally forgetting that they were conversing with a computer. Weizenbaum's own secretary reportedly asked Weizenbaum to leave the room so that she and ELIZA could have a real conversation. Weizenbaum was surprised by this, later writing: \"I had not realized\u00a0... that extremely short exposures to a relatively simple computer program could induce powerful delusional thinking in quite normal people.\"\nIn 1966, interactive computing (via a teletype) was new. It was 11 years before the personal computer became familiar to the general public, and three decades before most people encountered attempts at natural language processing in Internet services like Ask.com or PC help systems such as Microsoft Office Clippit. Although those programs included years of research and work, ELIZA remains a milestone because it was the first time a programmer had attempted such a human-machine interaction with the goal of creating the illusion (however brief) of human\u2013\"human\" interaction.\nAt the ICCC 1972, ELIZA was brought together with another early artificial-intelligence program named PARRY for a computer-only conversation. While ELIZA was built to speak as a doctor, PARRY was intended to simulate a patient with schizophrenia.\nDesign and implementation.\nWeizenbaum originally wrote ELIZA in MAD-SLIP for CTSS on an IBM 7094 as a program to make natural-language conversation possible with a computer. To accomplish this, Weizenbaum identified five \"fundamental technical problems\" for ELIZA to overcome: the identification of key words, the discovery of a minimal context, the choice of appropriate transformations, the generation of responses in the absence of key words, and the provision of an editing capability for ELIZA scripts. Weizenbaum solved these problems and made ELIZA such that it had no built-in contextual framework or universe of discourse. However, this required ELIZA to have a script of instructions on how to respond to inputs from users.\nELIZA starts its process of responding to an input by a user by first examining the text input for a \"keyword\". A \"keyword\" is a word designated as important by the acting ELIZA script, which assigns to each keyword a precedence number, or a RANK, designed by the programmer. If such words are found, they are put into a \"keystack\", with the keyword of the highest RANK at the top. The input sentence is then manipulated and transformed as the rule associated with the keyword of the highest RANK directs. For example, when the DOCTOR script encounters words such as \"alike\" or \"same\", it would output a message pertaining to similarity, in this case \"In what way?\", as these words had high precedence number. This also demonstrates how certain words, as dictated by the script, can be manipulated regardless of contextual considerations, such as switching first-person pronouns and second-person pronouns and vice versa, as these too had high precedence numbers. Such words with high precedence numbers are deemed superior to conversational patterns and are treated independently of contextual patterns.\nFollowing the first examination, the next step of the process is to apply an appropriate transformation rule, which includes two parts: the \"decomposition rule\" and the \"reassembly rule\". First, the input is reviewed for syntactical patterns in order to establish the minimal context necessary to respond. Using the keywords and other nearby words from the input, different disassembly rules are tested until an appropriate pattern is found. Using the script's rules, the sentence is then \"dismantled\" and arranged into sections of the component parts as the \"decomposition rule for the highest-ranking keyword\" dictates. The example that Weizenbaum gives is the input \"You are very helpful\", which is transformed to \"I are very helpful\". This is then broken into (1) empty (2) \"I\" (3) \"are\" (4) \"very helpful\". The decomposition rule has broken the phrase into four small segments that contain both the keywords and the information in the sentence.\nThe decomposition rule then designates a particular reassembly rule, or set of reassembly rules, to follow when reconstructing the sentence. The reassembly rule takes the fragments of the input that the decomposition rule had created, rearranges them, and adds in programmed words to create a response. Using Weizenbaum's example previously stated, such a reassembly rule would take the fragments and apply them to the phrase \"What makes you think I am (4)\", which would result in \"What makes you think I am very helpful?\". This example is rather simple, since depending upon the disassembly rule, the output could be significantly more complex and use more of the input from the user. However, from this reassembly, ELIZA then sends the constructed sentence to the user in the form of text on the screen.\nThese steps represent the bulk of the procedures that ELIZA follows in order to create a response from a typical input, though there are several specialized situations that ELIZA/DOCTOR can respond to. One Weizenbaum specifically wrote about was when there is no keyword. One solution was to have ELIZA respond with a remark that lacked content, such as \"I see\" or \"Please go on\". The second method was to use a \"MEMORY\" structure, which recorded prior recent inputs, and would use these inputs to create a response referencing a part of the earlier conversation when encountered with no keywords. This was possible due to Slip's ability to tag words for other usage, which simultaneously allowed ELIZA to examine, store, and repurpose words for usage in outputs.\nWhile these functions were all framed in ELIZA's programming, the exact manner by which the program dismantled, examined, and reassembled inputs is determined by the operating script. The script is not static and can be edited, or a new one created, as is necessary for the operation in the context needed. This would allow the program to be applied in multiple situations, including the well-known DOCTOR script, which simulates a Rogerian psychotherapist.\nA Lisp version of ELIZA, based on Weizenbaum's CACM paper, was written shortly after that paper's publication by Bernie Cosell. A BASIC version appeared in \"Creative Computing\" in 1977 (although it was written in 1973 by Jeff Shrager). This version, which was ported to many of the earliest personal computers, appears to have been subsequently translated into many other versions in many other languages. Shrager claims not to have seen either Weizenbaum's or Cosell's versions.\nIn 2021, Jeff Shrager searched MIT's Weizenbaum archives, along with MIT archivist Myles Crowley, and found files labeled Computer Conversations. These included the complete source code listing of ELIZA in MAD-SLIP, with the DOCTOR script attached. The Weizenbaum estate gave permission to open-source this code under a Creative Commons CC0 public domain license. The code and other information can be found on the ELIZAGEN site. The 1965 source code has been dated as part of a software archaeology project which brings together researchers from USC, University of Sussex, Oxford, and Stanford University, who have worked together to unravel the complicated history of ELIZA. \nIn December 2024, Rupert Lane, with the assistance of several other engineers who had been studying the original MAD-SLIP ELIZA, brought up the original ELIZA and demonstrated that the implementation of ELIZA based on the discovered code can reproduce almost exactly the published conversations with ELIZA from Weizenbaum's 1966 paper. This original ELIZA was reconstructed using the vast majority of the 1965 version of the source code: approximately 96% of the functions. This was run on a version of the original MIT CTSS running on a 7094 emulator, both of the latter due to David Pitts.\nAnother version of Eliza popular among software engineers is the version that comes with the default release of GNU Emacs, and which can be accessed by typing codice_1 from most modern Emacs implementations.\nPseudocode.\nFrom Figure 15.5, Chapter 15 of Speech and Language Processing (third edition).\n function ELIZA GENERATOR(user \"sentence\") returns \"response\"\n Let \"w\" be the word in \"sentence\" that has the highest keyword rank\n if \"w\" exists\n Let r be the highest ranked rule for w that matches sentence\n \"response\" \u2190 Apply the transform in \"r\" to \"sentence\"\n if w = 'my'\n \"future\" \u2190 Apply a transformation from the \u2018memory\u2019 rule list to \"sentence\"\n Push \"future\" onto the memory queue\n else (no keyword applies)\n Either\n \"response\" \u2190 Apply the transform for the NONE keyword to \"sentence\"\n Or\n \"response\" \u2190 Pop the oldest response from the memory queue\n Return \"response\"\nResponse and legacy.\nLay responses to ELIZA were disturbing to Weizenbaum and motivated him to write his book \"Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to Calculation\", in which he explains the limits of computers, as he wants to make clear his opinion that the anthropomorphic views of computers are just a reduction of human beings or any life form for that matter. In the independent documentary film \"Plug &amp; Pray\" (2010) Weizenbaum said that only people who misunderstood ELIZA called it a sensation.\nDavid Avidan, who was fascinated with future technologies and their relation to art, desired to explore the use of computers for writing literature. He conducted several conversations with an APL implementation of ELIZA and published them \u2013 in English, and in his own translation to Hebrew \u2013 under the title \"My Electronic Psychiatrist \u2013 Eight Authentic Talks with a Computer\". In the foreword, he presented it as a form of constrained writing.\nThere are many programs based on ELIZA in different programming languages. For MS-DOS computers, some Sound Blaster cards came bundled with Dr. Sbaitso, which functions like the DOCTOR script. Other versions adapted ELIZA around a religious theme, such as ones featuring Jesus (both serious and comedic), and another Apple II variant called \"I Am Buddha\". The 1980 game \"The Prisoner\" incorporated ELIZA-style interaction within its gameplay. In 1988, the British artist and friend of Weizenbaum Brian Reffin Smith created two art-oriented ELIZA-style programs written in BASIC, one called \"Critic\" and the other \"Artist\", running on two separate Amiga 1000 computers and showed them at the exhibition \"Salamandre\" in the Mus\u00e9e du Berry, Bourges, France. The visitor was supposed to help them converse by typing in to \"Artist\" what \"Critic\" said, and vice versa. The secret was that the two programs were identical. GNU Emacs formerly had a codice_2 command that simulates a session between ELIZA and Zippy the Pinhead. The Zippyisms were removed due to copyright issues, but the DOCTOR program remains.\nELIZA has been referenced in popular culture and continues to be a source of inspiration for programmers and developers focused on artificial intelligence. It was also featured in a 2012 exhibit at Harvard University titled \"Go Ask A.L.I.C.E.\", as part of a celebration of mathematician Alan Turing's 100th birthday. The exhibit explores Turing's lifelong fascination with the interaction between humans and computers, pointing to ELIZA as one of the earliest realizations of Turing's ideas.\nELIZA won a 2021 Legacy Peabody Award. A 2023 preprint reported that ELIZA beat OpenAI's GPT-3.5, the model used by ChatGPT at the time, in a Turing test study. However, it did not outperform GPT-4 or real humans.\nEliza Effect.\nThe Eliza effect borrowed its name from ELIZA the chatbot. This effect is first defined in \"Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies: Computer Models and the Fundamental Mechanisms of Thought\" as humans' interpretations that some computer programs understand the user inputs and make analogies.\nThese interpretations can potentially manipulate and misinform users. When interacting and communicating with chatbots, users can be overly confident in the reliability of the chatbots' answers. Other than misinforming, the chatbot's human-mimicking nature can also cause severe consequences, especially for younger users who lack a sufficient understanding of the chatbot's mechanism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10236", "revid": "34077026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10236", "title": "ELIZA effect", "text": "Cognitive bias in which computers are anthropomorphised\nIn computer science, the ELIZA effect is a tendency to project human traits \u2014 such as experience, semantic comprehension or empathy \u2014 onto rudimentary computer programs having a textual interface. ELIZA was a symbolic AI chatbot developed in 1966 by Joseph Weizenbaum that imitated a psychotherapist. Many early users were convinced of ELIZA's intelligence and understanding, despite its basic text-processing approach and the explanations of its limitations.\nHistory.\nThe effect is named for ELIZA, the 1966 chatbot developed by MIT computer scientist Joseph Weizenbaum. When executing Weizenbaum's \"DOCTOR\" script, ELIZA simulated a Rogerian psychotherapist, largely by rephrasing the \"patient\"'s replies as questions:\nHuman: &lt;q&gt;Well, my boyfriend made me come here.&lt;/q&gt;ELIZA: &lt;q&gt;Your boyfriend made you come here?&lt;/q&gt;Human: &lt;q&gt;He says I'm depressed much of the time.&lt;/q&gt;ELIZA: &lt;q&gt;I am sorry to hear you are depressed.&lt;/q&gt;Human: &lt;q&gt;It's true. I'm unhappy.&lt;/q&gt;ELIZA: &lt;q&gt;Do you think coming here will help you not to be unhappy?&lt;/q&gt;\nThough designed strictly as a mechanism to support \"natural language conversation\" with a computer, ELIZA's \"DOCTOR\" script was found to be surprisingly successful in eliciting emotional responses from users who, in the course of interacting with the program, began to ascribe understanding and motivation to the program's output. As Weizenbaum later wrote, \"I had not realized ... that extremely short exposures to a relatively simple computer program could induce powerful delusional thinking in quite normal people.\" Indeed, ELIZA's code had not been designed to evoke this reaction in the first place. Upon observation, researchers discovered users unconsciously assuming ELIZA's questions implied interest and emotional involvement in the topics discussed, even when they consciously knew that ELIZA did not simulate emotion.\nIn the 18th century, the tendency to understand mechanical operations in psychological terms was already noted by Charles Babbage. In proposing what would later be called a carry-lookahead adder, Babbage remarked that he found such terms convenient for descriptive purposes, even though nothing more than mechanical action was meant.\nCharacteristics.\nIn its specific form, the ELIZA effect refers only to \"the susceptibility of people to read far more understanding than is warranted into strings of symbols\u2014especially words\u2014strung together by computers\". A trivial example of the specific form of the Eliza effect, given by Douglas Hofstadter, involves an automated teller machine which displays the words \"THANK YOU\" at the end of a transaction. A naive observer might think that the machine is actually expressing gratitude; however, the machine is only printing a preprogrammed string of symbols.\nMore generally, the ELIZA effect describes any situation where, based solely on a system's output, users perceive computer systems as having \"intrinsic qualities and abilities which the software controlling the (output) cannot possibly achieve\" or \"assume that [outputs] reflect a greater causality than they actually do\". In both its specific and general forms, the ELIZA effect is notable for occurring even when users of the system are aware of the determinate nature of output produced by the system.\nFrom a psychological standpoint, the ELIZA effect is the result of a subtle cognitive dissonance between the user's awareness of programming limitations and their behavior towards the output of the program.\nSignificance.\nThe discovery of the ELIZA effect was an important development in artificial intelligence, demonstrating the principle of using social engineering rather than explicit programming to pass a Turing test.\nELIZA convinced some users into thinking that a machine was human. This shift in human-machine interaction marked progress in technologies emulating human behavior. Two groups of chatbots are distinguished by William Meisel as \"general personal assistants\" and \"specialized digital assistants\". General digital assistants have been integrated into personal devices, with skills like sending messages, taking notes, checking calendars, and setting appointments. Specialized digital assistants \"operate in very specific domains or help with very specific tasks\". Weizenbaum considered that not every part of the human thought could be reduced to logical formalisms and that \"there are some acts of thought that ought to be attempted only by humans\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
