{"id": "6458", "revid": "671411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6458", "title": "Ceramic", "text": "Inorganic, nonmetallic solid prepared by the action of heat\nA ceramic is any of the various hard, brittle, heat-resistant, and corrosion-resistant materials made by shaping and then firing an inorganic, nonmetallic material, such as clay, at a high temperature. Common examples are earthenware, porcelain, and brick.\nThe earliest ceramics made by humans were fired clay bricks used for building house walls and other structures. Other pottery objects such as pots, vessels, vases and figurines were made from clay, either by itself or mixed with other materials like silica, hardened by sintering in fire. Later, ceramics were glazed and fired to create smooth, colored surfaces, decreasing porosity through the use of glassy, amorphous ceramic coatings on top of the crystalline ceramic substrates. Ceramics now include domestic, industrial, and building products, as well as a wide range of materials developed for use in advanced ceramic engineering, such as semiconductors.\nThe word \"ceramic\" comes from the Ancient Greek word (), meaning \"of or for pottery\" (from \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'potter's clay, tile, pottery'). The earliest known mention of the root \"ceram-\" is the Mycenaean Greek , workers of ceramic, written in Linear B syllabic script. The word \"ceramic\" can be used as an adjective to describe a material, product, or process, or it may be used as a noun, either singular or, more commonly, as the plural noun \"ceramics\".\nMaterials.\nCeramic material is an inorganic, metallic oxide, nitride, or carbide material. Some elements, such as carbon or silicon, may be considered ceramics. Ceramic materials are brittle, hard, strong in compression, and weak in shearing and tension. They withstand the chemical erosion that occurs in other materials subjected to acidic or caustic environments. Ceramics generally can withstand very high temperatures, ranging from 1,000\u00a0\u00b0C to 1,600\u00a0\u00b0C (1,800\u00a0\u00b0F to 3,000\u00a0\u00b0F).\nThe crystallinity of ceramic materials varies widely. Most often, fired ceramics are either vitrified or semi-vitrified, as is the case with earthenware, stoneware, and porcelain. Varying crystallinity and electron composition in the ionic and covalent bonds cause most ceramic materials to be good thermal and electrical insulators (researched in ceramic engineering). With such a large range of possible options for the composition/structure of a ceramic (nearly all of the elements, nearly all types of bonding, and all levels of crystallinity), the breadth of the subject is vast, and identifiable attributes (hardness, toughness, electrical conductivity) are difficult to specify for the group as a whole. General properties such as high melting temperature, high hardness, poor conductivity, high moduli of elasticity, chemical resistance, and low ductility are the norm, with known exceptions to each of these rules (piezoelectric ceramics, low glass transition temperature ceramics, superconductive ceramics).\nComposites such as fiberglass and carbon fiber, while containing ceramic materials, are not considered to be part of the ceramic family.\nHighly oriented crystalline ceramic materials are not amenable to a great range of processing. Methods for dealing with them tend to fall into one of two categories: either making the ceramic in the desired shape by reaction \"in situ\" or \"forming\" powders into the desired shape and then sintering to form a solid body. Ceramic forming techniques include shaping by hand (sometimes including a rotation process called \"throwing\"), slip casting, tape casting (used for making very thin ceramic capacitors), injection molding, dry pressing, and other variations.\nMany ceramics experts do not consider materials with an amorphous (noncrystalline) character (i.e., glass) to be ceramics, even though glassmaking involves several steps of the ceramic process and its mechanical properties are similar to those of ceramic materials. However, heat treatments can convert glass into a semi-crystalline material known as glass-ceramic.\nTraditional ceramic raw materials include clay minerals such as kaolinite, whereas more recent materials include aluminium oxide, more commonly known as alumina. Modern ceramic materials, which are classified as advanced ceramics, include silicon carbide and tungsten carbide. Both are valued for their abrasion resistance and are therefore used in applications such as the wear plates of crushing equipment in mining operations. Advanced ceramics are also used in the medical, electrical, electronics, and armor industries.\nHistory.\nHuman beings appear to have been making their own ceramics for at least 26,000 years, subjecting clay and silica to intense heat to fuse and form ceramic materials. The earliest found so far were in southern central Europe and were sculpted figures, not dishes. The earliest known pottery was made by mixing animal products with clay and firing it at up to . While pottery fragments have been found up to 19,000 years old, it was not until about 10,000 years later that regular pottery became common. An early people that spread across much of Europe is named after its use of pottery: the Corded Ware culture. These early Indo-European peoples decorated their pottery by wrapping it with rope while it was still wet. When the ceramics were fired, the rope burned off but left a decorative pattern of complex grooves on the surface.\nThe invention of the wheel eventually led to the production of smoother, more even pottery using the wheel-forming (throwing) technique, like the pottery wheel. Early ceramics were porous, absorbing water easily. It became useful for more items with the discovery of glazing techniques, which involved coating pottery with silicon, bone ash, or other materials that could melt and reform into a glassy surface, making a vessel less pervious to water.\nArchaeology.\nCeramic artifacts have an important role in archaeology for understanding the culture, technology, and behavior of peoples of the past. They are among the most common artifacts to be found at an archaeological site, generally in the form of small fragments of broken pottery called sherds. The processing of collected sherds can be consistent with two main types of analysis: technical and traditional.\nThe traditional analysis involves sorting ceramic artifacts, sherds, and larger fragments into specific types based on style, composition, manufacturing, and morphology. By creating these typologies, it is possible to distinguish between different cultural styles, the purpose of the ceramic, and the technological state of the people, among other conclusions. Besides, by looking at stylistic changes in ceramics over time, it is possible to separate (seriate) the ceramics into distinct diagnostic groups (assemblages). A comparison of ceramic artifacts with known dated assemblages allows for a chronological assignment of these pieces.\nThe technical approach to ceramic analysis involves a finer examination of the composition of ceramic artifacts and sherds to determine the source of the material and, through this, the possible manufacturing site. Key criteria are the composition of the clay and the temper used in the manufacture of the article under study: the temper is a material added to the clay during the initial production stage and is used to aid the subsequent drying process. Types of temper include shell pieces, granite fragments, and ground sherd pieces called 'grog'. Temper is usually identified by microscopic examination of the tempered material. Clay identification is determined by a process of refiring the ceramic and assigning a color to it using Munsell Soil Color notation. By estimating both the clay and temper compositions and locating a region where both are known to occur, an assignment of the material source can be made. Based on the source assignment of the artifact, further investigations can be made into the site of manufacture.\nProperties.\nThe physical properties of any ceramic substance are a direct result of its crystalline structure and chemical composition. Solid-state chemistry reveals the fundamental connection between microstructure and properties, such as localized density variations, grain size distribution, type of porosity, and second-phase content, which can all be correlated with ceramic properties such as mechanical strength \u03c3 by the Hall-Petch equation, hardness, toughness, dielectric constant, and the optical properties exhibited by transparent materials.\nCeramography is the art and science of preparation, examination, and evaluation of ceramic microstructures. Evaluation and characterization of ceramic microstructures are often implemented on similar spatial scales to that used commonly in the emerging field of nanotechnology: from nanometers to tens of micrometers (\u00b5m). This is typically somewhere between the minimum wavelength of visible light and the resolution limit of the naked eye.\nThe microstructure includes most grains, secondary phases, grain boundaries, pores, micro-cracks, structural defects, and hardness micro indentions. Most bulk mechanical, optical, thermal, electrical, and magnetic properties are significantly affected by the observed microstructure. The fabrication method and process conditions are generally indicated by the microstructure. The root cause of many ceramic failures is evident in the cleaved and polished microstructure. Physical properties which constitute the field of materials science and engineering include the following:\nMechanical properties.\nMechanical properties are important in structural and building materials as well as textile fabrics. In modern materials science, fracture mechanics is an important tool in improving the mechanical performance of materials and components. It applies the physics of stress and strain, in particular the theories of elasticity and plasticity, to the microscopic crystallographic defects found in real materials in order to predict the macroscopic mechanical failure of bodies. Fractography is widely used with fracture mechanics to understand the causes of failures and also verify the theoretical failure predictions with real-life failures.\nCeramic materials are usually ionic or covalent bonded materials. A material held together by either type of bond will tend to fracture before any plastic deformation takes place, which results in poor toughness and brittle behavior in these materials. Additionally, because these materials tend to be porous, pores and other microscopic imperfections act as stress concentrators, decreasing the toughness further, and reducing the tensile strength. These combine to give catastrophic failures, as opposed to the more ductile failure modes of metals.\nThese materials do show plastic deformation. However, because of the rigid structure of crystalline material, there are very few available slip systems for dislocations to move, and so they deform very slowly.\nTo overcome the brittle behavior, ceramic material development has introduced the class of ceramic matrix composite materials, in which ceramic fibers are embedded and with specific coatings are forming fiber bridges across any crack. This mechanism substantially increases the fracture toughness of such ceramics. Ceramic disc brakes are an example of using a ceramic matrix composite material manufactured with a specific process.\nScientists are working on developing ceramic materials that can withstand significant deformation without breaking. A first such material that can deform in room temperature was found in 2024.\nToughening Mechanisms.\nMany strategies are employed to improve the toughness of ceramics to prevent fracture. This includes crack deflection, microcrack toughening, crack bridging, incorporation of ductile particles, and transformation toughening.\nCrack deflection is a toughening mechanism that involves deflecting cracks away from more rapid crack propagation paths, preventing catastrophic sudden failure. Cracks may be deflected using microstructures such as whiskers, as in the use of silicon carbide whiskers to reinforce molybdenum disilicide ceramic material in a 1987 paper. Crack deflecting second phases may also take the form of platelets, particles, or fibers.\nMicrocrack toughening involves nucleation (creation) of microcracks near a macroscopic crack tip where the crack propagates, which lowers the stress experienced by the tip and therefore the urgency of crack propagation. To improve toughness, second phase particles can be incorporated into ceramic such that they are subject to microcracking, which relieves stress to prevent fracture.\nCrack bridging occurs when a strong discontinuous reinforcing phase applies a force behind the propagating tip of the crack that discourages further cracking. These second phase bridges essentially pin the crack to discourage its extension. Crack bridging can be used to improve toughness via the incorporation of second phase whiskers in the ceramic, as well as other shapes, to bridge cracks.\nDuctile particle ceramic matrix composites are composed of ductile particles such as metals distributed in a ceramic matrix. These particles boost toughness by deforming plastically to absorb energy, and by bridging advancing cracks. To be most effective, the particles should be isolated from each other. The most studied iterations of these composites consist of an alumina matrix, and nickel, iron, molybdenum, copper, or silver metal particles.\nTransformation toughening occurs when a material undergoes stress-induced phase transformation. Some ceramics are capable of undergoing stress-induced martensitic transformation, which involves an energy barrier that must be overcome by absorbing energy. Martensitic transformations are diffusionless shear transformations involving the transition between an \"austenite\" or \"parent\" phase that is stable at higher temperatures and a \"martensitic\" phase that is stable at lower temperatures. Because the transformation absorbs energy, stress-induced martensitic transformations can hinder crack progression and increases toughness. A key example of this phenomenon is zirconia, whose martensitic transformation involves a crystal structure transformation from a tetragonal crystal structure (the austenite phase) to a monoclinic structure. The volume increase associated with transformation from tetragonal to monoclinic also relieves tensile stress at the crack, tip, further discouraging cracking and increasing toughness. When zirconia particles in a ceramic matrix undergo transformation during fabrication due to cooling, the stress fields around the particles lead to nucleation and extension of microcracks, which can also improve toughness of the material. These stress fields, as well as the particles themselves, can also contribute to crack deflection.\nIce-templating for enhanced mechanical properties.\nIf a ceramic is subjected to substantial mechanical loading, it can undergo a process called ice-templating, which allows some control of the microstructure of the ceramic product and therefore some control of the mechanical properties. Ceramic engineers use this technique to tune the mechanical properties to their desired application. Specifically, the strength is increased when this technique is employed. Ice templating allows the creation of macroscopic pores in a unidirectional arrangement. The applications of this oxide strengthening technique are important for solid oxide fuel cells and water filtration devices.\nTo process a sample through ice templating, an aqueous colloidal suspension is prepared to contain the dissolved ceramic powder evenly dispersed throughout the colloid, for example yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ). The solution is then cooled from the bottom to the top on a platform that allows for unidirectional cooling. This forces ice crystals to grow in compliance with the unidirectional cooling, and these ice crystals force the dissolved YSZ particles to the solidification front of the solid-liquid interphase boundary, resulting in pure ice crystals lined up unidirectionally alongside concentrated pockets of colloidal particles. The sample is then heated and at the same the pressure is reduced enough to force the ice crystals to sublime and the YSZ pockets begin to anneal together to form macroscopically aligned ceramic microstructures. The sample is then further sintered to complete the evaporation of the residual water and the final consolidation of the ceramic microstructure.\nDuring ice-templating, a few variables can be controlled to influence the pore size and morphology of the microstructure. These important variables are the initial solids loading of the colloid, the cooling rate, the sintering temperature and duration, and the use of certain additives which can influence the microstructural morphology during the process. A good understanding of these parameters is essential to understanding the relationships between processing, microstructure, and mechanical properties of anisotropically porous materials.\nElectrical properties.\nSemiconductors.\nSome ceramics are semiconductors. Most of these are transition metal oxides that are II-VI semiconductors, such as zinc oxide. While there are prospects of mass-producing blue light-emitting diodes (LED) from zinc oxide, ceramicists are most interested in the electrical properties that show grain boundary effects. One of the most widely used of these is the varistor. These are devices that exhibit the property that resistance drops sharply at a certain threshold voltage. Once the voltage across the device reaches the threshold, there is a breakdown of the electrical structure in the vicinity of the grain boundaries, which results in its electrical resistance dropping from several megohms down to a few hundred ohms. The major advantage of these is that they can dissipate a lot of energy, and they self-reset; after the voltage across the device drops below the threshold, its resistance returns to being high. This makes them ideal for surge-protection applications; as there is control over the threshold voltage and energy tolerance, they find use in all sorts of applications. The best demonstration of their ability can be found in electrical substations, where they are employed to protect the infrastructure from lightning strikes. They have rapid response, are low maintenance, and do not appreciably degrade from use, making them virtually ideal devices for this application. Semiconducting ceramics are also employed as gas sensors. When various gases are passed over a polycrystalline ceramic, its electrical resistance changes. With tuning to the possible gas mixtures, very inexpensive devices can be produced.\nSuperconductivity.\nUnder some conditions, such as extremely low temperatures, some ceramics exhibit high-temperature superconductivity (in superconductivity, \"high temperature\" means above 30 K). The reason for this is not understood, but there are two major families of superconducting ceramics.\nFerroelectricity and supersets.\nPiezoelectricity, a link between electrical and mechanical response, is exhibited by a large number of ceramic materials, including the quartz used to measure time in watches and other electronics. Such devices use both properties of piezoelectrics, using electricity to produce a mechanical motion (powering the device) and then using this mechanical motion to produce electricity (generating a signal). The unit of time measured is the natural interval required for electricity to be converted into mechanical energy and back again.\nThe piezoelectric effect is generally stronger in materials that also exhibit pyroelectricity, and all pyroelectric materials are also piezoelectric. These materials can be used to inter-convert between thermal, mechanical, or electrical energy; for instance, after synthesis in a furnace, a pyroelectric crystal allowed to cool under no applied stress generally builds up a static charge of thousands of volts. Such materials are used in motion sensors, where the tiny rise in temperature from a warm body entering the room is enough to produce a measurable voltage in the crystal.\nIn turn, pyroelectricity is seen most strongly in materials that also display the ferroelectric effect, in which a stable electric dipole can be oriented or reversed by applying an electrostatic field. Pyroelectricity is also a necessary consequence of ferroelectricity. This can be used to store information in ferroelectric capacitors, elements of ferroelectric RAM.\nThe most common such materials are lead zirconate titanate and barium titanate. Aside from the uses mentioned above, their strong piezoelectric response is exploited in the design of high-frequency loudspeakers, transducers for sonar, and actuators for atomic force and scanning tunneling microscopes.\nPositive thermal coefficient.\nTemperature increases can cause grain boundaries to suddenly become insulating in some semiconducting ceramic materials, mostly mixtures of heavy metal titanates. The critical transition temperature can be adjusted over a wide range by variations in chemistry. In such materials, current will pass through the material until joule heating brings it to the transition temperature, at which point the circuit will be broken and current flow will cease. Such ceramics are used as self-controlled heating elements in, for example, the rear-window defrost circuits of automobiles.\nAt the transition temperature, the material's dielectric response becomes theoretically infinite. While a lack of temperature control would rule out any practical use of the material near its critical temperature, the dielectric effect remains exceptionally strong even at much higher temperatures. Titanates with critical temperatures far below room temperature have become synonymous with \"ceramic\" in the context of ceramic capacitors for just this reason.\nOptical properties.\nOptically transparent materials focus on the response of a material to incoming light waves of a range of wavelengths. Frequency selective optical filters can be utilized to alter or enhance the brightness and contrast of a digital image. Guided lightwave transmission via frequency selective waveguides involves the emerging field of fiber optics and the ability of certain glassy compositions as a transmission medium for a range of frequencies simultaneously (multi-mode optical fiber) with little or no interference between competing wavelengths or frequencies. This resonant mode of energy and data transmission via electromagnetic (light) wave propagation, though low powered, is virtually lossless. Optical waveguides are used as components in Integrated optical circuits (e.g. light-emitting diodes, LEDs) or as the transmission medium in local and long haul optical communication systems. Also of value to the emerging materials scientist is the sensitivity of materials to radiation in the thermal infrared (IR) portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. This heat-seeking ability is responsible for such diverse optical phenomena as night-vision and IR luminescence.\nThus, there is an increasing need in the military sector for high-strength, robust materials which have the capability to transmit light (electromagnetic waves) in the visible (0.4 \u2013 0.7 micrometers) and mid-infrared (1 \u2013 5 micrometers) regions of the spectrum. These materials are needed for applications requiring transparent armor, including next-generation high-speed missiles and pods, as well as protection against improvised explosive devices (IED).\nIn the 1960s, scientists at General Electric (GE) discovered that under the right manufacturing conditions, some ceramics, especially aluminium oxide (alumina), could be made translucent. These translucent materials were transparent enough to be used for containing the electrical plasma generated in high-pressure sodium street lamps. During the past two decades, additional types of transparent ceramics have been developed for applications such as nose cones for heat-seeking missiles, windows for fighter aircraft, and scintillation counters for computed tomography scanners. Other ceramic materials, generally requiring greater purity in their make-up than those above, include forms of several chemical compounds, including:\nProducts.\nBy usage.\nFor convenience, ceramic products are usually divided into four main types; these are shown below with some examples:\nCeramics made with clay.\nFrequently, the raw materials of modern ceramics do not include clays.\nThose that do have been classified as:\nClassification.\nCeramics can also be classified into three distinct material categories: \nEach one of these classes can be developed into unique material properties.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6459", "revid": "45984039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6459", "title": "Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)", "text": "Chinese five elements\n (), translated as Five Moving Ones, Five Circulations, Five Types of Energy, Five Elements, Five Transformations, Five Phases or Five Agents, is a fivefold conceptual scheme used in many traditional Chinese fields of study to explain a wide array of phenomena, including terrestrial and celestial relationships, influences, and cycles, that characterise the interactions and relationships within science, medicine, politics, religion and social relationships and education within Chinese culture.\nThe Five Moving Ones are traditionally associated with the classical planets: Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn as depicted in the etymological section below. In ancient Chinese astronomy and astrology, that spread throughout East Asia, was a reflection of the seven-day planetary order of Fire, Water, Wood, Metal, Earth. When in their \"heavenly stems\" generative cycle as represented in the below cycles section and depicted in the diagram above running consecutively clockwise (Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal, Water). When in their overacting destructive arrangement of Wood, Earth, Water, Fire, Metal, natural disasters, calamity, illnesses and disease will ensue.\nThe \"wuxing\" system has been in use since the second or first century BCE during the Han dynasty. It appears in many seemingly disparate fields of early Chinese thought, including music, feng shui, alchemy, astrology, martial arts, military strategy, \"I Ching\" divination, religion and traditional medicine, serving as a metaphysics based on cosmic analogy.\nEtymology.\n\"Wuxing\" originally referred to the five classical planets (from brightest to dimmest: Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars, Saturn), which were with the combination of the Sun and the Moon, conceived as creating the five forces of earthly life (including yang and yin). This is why the word is composed of Chinese characters meaning \"five\" () and \"moving\" (). \"Moving\" is shorthand for \"planets\", since the word for planets in Chinese has been translated as \"moving stars\" (). Some of the Mawangdui Silk Texts (before 168 BC) also connect the \"wuxing\" to the \"wude\" (), the Five Virtues and Five Emotions . Scholars believe that various predecessors to the concept of \"wuxing\" were merged into one system of many interpretations in the Han dynasty.\n\"Wuxing\" was first translated into English as \"the Five Elements\", drawing parallels with the Greek and Indian Vedic static, solid or formative arrangement of the four elements. This translation is still in common use among practitioners of Traditional Chinese medicine, such as in the name of Five Element acupuncture and Japanese meridian therapy. However, this analogy could be misleading as the four elements are concerned with form, substance and quantity, whereas the post-heaven arrangement of the \"wuxing\" are \"primarily concerned with process, change, and quality\". For example, the \"wuxing\" element \"Wood\" is more accurately thought of as the \"vital essence\" and growth of trees rather than the physical innate substance wood. This led sinologist Nathan Sivin to propose the alternative translation \"five phases\" in 1987. But \"phase\" also fails to capture the full meaning of \"wuxing\". In some contexts, the \"wuxing\" are indeed associated with physical substances. Historian of Chinese medicine Manfred Porkert proposed the (somewhat unwieldy) term \"Evolutive Phase\". Perhaps the most widely accepted translation among modern scholars is the \"five agents\" or \"five transformations\".\nCycles.\nIn traditional doctrine, the five phases are connected in two cycles of interactions: a promoting or generative (\u751f \"sh\u0113ng\") cycle, also known as \"mother-son\"; and an overacting or destructive (\u514b \"k\u00e8\") cycle, also known as \"grandfather-grandson\" (see diagram). Each of these cycles can be interpreted and analyzed in a forward or reversed direction. In addition to the aforementioned cycles there is also what is considered an \"overacting\" or excessively generating version of the destructive cycle.\nInter-promoting.\nThe generative cycle (\u76f8\u751f \"xi\u0101ngsh\u0113ng\") is:\nInter-regulating.\nThe destructive cycle (\u76f8\u514b \"xi\u0101ngk\u00e8\") is:\nOveracting.\nThe excessive destructive cycle (\u76f8\u4e58 \"xi\u0101ngch\u00e9ng\") is:\nWeakening.\nThe reverse generative cycle (\u76f8\u6d29/\u76f8\u6cc4 \"xi\u0101ngxi\u00e8\") is:\nCounteracting.\nA reverse or deficient destructive cycle (\u76f8\u4fae \"xi\u0101ngw\u01d4\" or \u76f8\u8017 \"xi\u0101ngh\u00e0o\") is:\nCelestial stem.\nMing nayin.\nIn Ziwei divination, \"nayin\" () further classifies the Five Elements into 60 \"ming\" (), or life orders, based on the ganzhi. Similar to the astrology zodiac, the \"ming\" is used by fortune-tellers to analyse individual personality and destiny.\nApplications.\nThe \"wuxing\" schema is applied to explain phenomena in various fields.\nPhases of the year.\nThe five phases are around 73 days each and are usually used to describe the transformations of nature rather than their formative states.\nCosmology and feng shui.\nThe art of feng shui (Chinese geomancy) is based on \"wuxing\", with the structure of the cosmos mirroring the five phases, as well as bagua (the eight trigrams). Each phase has a complex network of associations with different aspects of nature (see table): colors, seasons and shapes all interact according to the cycles.\nAn interaction or energy flow can be expansive, destructive, or exhaustive, depending on the cycle to which it belongs. By understanding these energy flows, a feng shui practitioner attempts to rearrange energy to benefit the client.\nDynastic transitions.\nAccording to the Warring States period political philosopher Zou Yan (c.\u2009305\u2013240 BCE), each of the five elements possesses a personified virtue (), which indicates the foreordained destiny () of a dynasty; hence the cyclic succession of the elements also indicates dynastic transitions. Zou Yan claims that the Mandate of Heaven sanctions the legitimacy of a dynasty by sending self-manifesting auspicious signs in the ritual color (white, green, black, red, and yellow) that matches the element of the new dynasty (Metal, Wood, Water, Fire, and Earth). From the Qin dynasty onward, most Chinese dynasties invoked the theory of the Five Elements to legitimize their reign.\nChinese medicine.\nThe interdependence of \"zangfu\" networks in the body was said to be a circle of five things, and so mapped by the ancient Chinese doctors onto categories of syndromes and patterns called the five phases.\nIn order to explain the integrity and complexity of the human body, Traditional Chinese Medicine practitioners use the Five Elements theory to classify the human body's endogenous influences on organs, physiological activities, pathological reactions, and environmental or exogenous (external, environmental) influences. This diagnostic capacity is extensively used in traditional five phase acupuncture today, as opposed to the modern Confucian styled eight principles based Traditional Chinese medicine.\nMusic.\nThe \"Huainanzi\" and the \"Yueling\" chapter () of the \"Book of Rites\" make the following correlations:\nMartial arts.\nWuxing being an influential philosophical concept, there are several Chinese martial arts and a few other east Asian styles that incorporate five phases concepts into their systems.\nTai chi trains and focuses on five basic qualities as part of its overarching strategy.\nThe Five Steps () are:\nThese five steps are not mutable states in tai chi.\nXingyi Quan uses the five elements metaphorically to represent ideally five different energies, but energy work is subtle, so normally one starts out learning five basic techniques with complementary footwork to teach the basic concepts behind the energies. Ideally one can use any technique with any kind of energy, but there are different levels of skill one must go through.\nIn Xingyi Quan, realization of the five energies has three basic levels: Obvious power, subtle power, mysterious power.\nThe Five Animals in Shaolin martial arts are an extension of the Wuxing theory as their qualities are the embodiment and representation of the energetic qualities of the five phases in the animal kingdom. They are the,\n\"Wuxing Heqidao\", (Gogyo Aikido \u4e94\u884c\u5408\u6c14\u9053) is a life art with roots in Confucian, Taoists and Buddhist theory. It centers around applied peace and health studies rather than defence or physical action. It emphasizes the unification of mind, body and environment using the physiological theory of yin and yang as well as five-element Traditional Chinese medicine. Its movements, exercises, and teachings cultivate, direct, and harmonise the \"qi\".\nIn Japan.\nThe Japanese term is \"gogyo\" (Japanese: , gogy\u014d). During the 5th and 6th centuries (Kofun period), Japan adopted various philosophical disciplines such as Taoism, Chinese Buddhism and Confucianism through monks and physicians from China helping to evolve the \"Onmy\u014dd\u014d\" system. As opposed to theory of Godai that is a form based philosophy that was introduced to Japan through India and Tibetan Buddhism. These theories have been extensively practiced in Japanese acupuncture and traditional Kampo medicine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6461", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6461", "title": "Chinese element", "text": ""}
{"id": "6462", "revid": "14176974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6462", "title": "Church of Christ, Scientist", "text": "Christian Science denomination\nThe Church of Christ, Scientist was founded in 1879 in Boston, Massachusetts, by Mary Baker Eddy, author of \"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures,\" and founder of Christian Science. The church was founded \"to commemorate the word and works of Christ Jesus\" and \"reinstate primitive Christianity and its lost element of healing\".\nIn the early decades of the 20th century, Christian Science churches were founded in communities around the world. During the final decades of that century, there was a marked decline in membership, except in Africa, where there has been growth. Headquartered in Boston, the church does not officially report membership, and estimates as to worldwide membership range from under 100,000 to about 400,000. In 2010, there were 1,153 churches in the United States.\nHistory.\nThe church was incorporated by Mary Baker Eddy in 1879, following a claimed personal healing in 1866, which she said resulted from reading the Bible. The Bible and Eddy's textbook on Christian healing, \"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures\", are together the church's key doctrinal sources and have been ordained as the church's \"dual impersonal pastor\".\nThe First Church of Christ, Scientist publishes the weekly newspaper \"The Christian Science Monitor\" in print and online.\nBeliefs and practices.\nChristian Scientists believe that prayer is effective for healing diseases. The Church has collected over 50,000 testimonies of incidents that it considers healing through Christian Science treatment alone. While most of these testimonies represent ailments neither diagnosed nor treated by medical professionals, the Church requires three other people to vouch for any testimony published in any of its official organs, including the \"Christian Science Journal\", \"Christian Science Sentinel\", and \"Herald of Christian Science\"; verifiers say that they witnessed the healing or know the testifier well enough to vouch for them.\nA Christian Science practitioner is someone who devotes their full time to prayer for others, but they do not use drugs or make medical diagnoses. Christian Scientists may take an intensive two-week \"Primary\" class from an authorized Christian Science teacher. Those who wish to become \"\"Journal\"-listed\" (accredited) practitioners, devoting themselves full-time to the practice of healing, must first have Primary class instruction. When they have what the church regards as a record of healing, they may submit their names for publication in the directory of practitioners and teachers in the \"Christian Science Journal\". A practitioner who has been listed for at least three years may apply for \"Normal\" class instruction, given once every three years. Those who receive a certificate are authorized to teach. Both Primary and Normal classes are based on the Bible and the writings of Mary Baker Eddy. The Primary class focuses on the chapter \"Recapitulation\" in \"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures\". This chapter uses the Socratic method of teaching and contains the \"Scientific Statement of Being\". The \"Normal\" class focuses on the platform of Christian Science, contained on pages 330-340 of \"Science and Health.\"\nOrganization.\nThe First Church of Christ, Scientist is the legal title of The Mother Church and administrative headquarters of the Christian Science Church. The Mary Baker Eddy Library for the Betterment of Humanity is housed in an 11-story structure originally built for The Christian Science Publishing Society.\nAn international newspaper, \"The Christian Science Monitor\", founded by Eddy in 1908 and winner of seven Pulitzer Prizes, is published by the church through the Christian Science Publishing Society.\nBoard of directors.\nThe Christian Science Board of Directors is a five-person executive entity created by Mary Baker Eddy to conduct the business of the Christian Science Church under the terms defined in the by-laws of the \"Church Manual\". Its functions and restrictions are defined by the \"Manual\".\nControversies.\nBroadcasting.\nBeginning in the mid-1980s, church executives undertook a controversial and ambitious foray into electronic broadcast media. The first significant effort was to create a weekly half-hour syndicated television program, \"The Christian Science Monitor\" Reports. \"Monitor Reports\" was anchored in its first season by newspaper veteran Rob Nelson. He was replaced in the second by the \"Christian Science Monitor\"'s former Moscow correspondent, David Willis.\nIn October 1991, Christian Science Monitor anchor John Hart, who is not a Christian Scientist, resigned following professional disputes with the Monitor regarding Christian Science teachings and his journalistic independence.\nThe hundreds of millions lost on broadcasting brought the church to the brink of bankruptcy. However, with the 1991 publication of \"The Destiny of The Mother Church\" by the late Bliss Knapp, the church secured a $90 million bequest from the Knapp trust. The trust dictated that the book be published as \"Authorized Literature\", with neither modification nor comment. Historically, the church had censured Knapp for deviating at several points from Eddy's teaching, and had refused to publish the work. The church's archivist, fired in anticipation of the book's publication, wrote to branch churches to inform them of the book's history. Many Christian Scientists thought the book violated the church's by-laws, and the editors of the church's religious periodicals and several other church employees resigned in protest. Alternate beneficiaries subsequently sued to contest the church's claim it had complied fully with the will's terms, and the church ultimately received only half of the original sum.\nThe fallout of the broadcasting debacle also sparked a minor revolt among some prominent church members. In late 1993, a group of Christian Scientists filed suit against the Board of Directors, alleging a willful disregard for the \"Manual of The Mother Church\" in its financial dealings. The suit was thrown out by the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in 1997, but a lingering discontent with the church's financial matters persists to this day.\" The Destiny Of The Mother Church\" ceased publication in September 2023.\nMembership decline and financial setbacks.\nIn spite of its early meteoric rise, church membership has declined over the past eight decades, according to the church's former treasurer, J. Edward Odegaard. Though the Church is prohibited by the Manual from publishing membership figures, the number of branch churches in the United States has fallen steadily since World War II. In 2009, for the first time in church history, more new members came from Africa than the United States.\nIn 2005, \"The Boston Globe\" reported that the church was considering consolidating Boston operations into fewer buildings and leasing out space in buildings it owned. Church official Philip G. Davis noted that the administration and Colonnade buildings had not been fully used for many years and that vacancy increased after staff reductions in 2004. The church posted an $8 million financial loss in fiscal 2003, and in 2004 cut 125 jobs, a quarter of the staff, at the \"Christian Science Monitor\". Conversely, Davis noted that \"the financial situation right now is excellent\" and stated that the church was not facing financial problems.\nUse of spiritual healing in place of medical treatment.\nThe use of prayer, often in place of medical treatment, has been an area of controversy since the founding of the church; and the legality of practicing Christian Science was raised as early as 1887, when some Christian Science practitioners were charged with practicing medicine without a license. Avoidance of medical care is not a doctrinal obligation and is considered a personal choice. However, during the 1980s and 1990s in the United States, a number of Christian Scientist parents whose children died from lack of access to medical treatment were the subject of considerable controversy and were charged with manslaughter or even murder, but the outcomes of the cases were inconsistent. The lack of consensus regarding medical care is reflected in the laws of various U.S. states, which have also been inconsistent regarding religious exemptions from medical care.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6464", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6464", "title": "Cell phone", "text": ""}
{"id": "6466", "revid": "50236370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6466", "title": "Connecticut", "text": "U.S. state\nConnecticut ( ) is a state in the New England region of the Northeastern United States. It borders Rhode Island to the east, Massachusetts to the north, New York to the west, and Long Island Sound to the south. Its capital is Hartford, and its most populous city is Bridgeport. Connecticut lies between the major hubs of New York City and Boston along the Northeast Corridor, where the New York-Newark Combined Statistical Area, which includes four of Connecticut's seven largest cities, extends into the southwestern part of the state. Connecticut is the third-smallest state by area after Rhode Island and Delaware, and the 29th most populous with more than 3.6 million residents as of 2024, ranking it fourth among the most densely populated U.S. states.\nThe state is named after the Connecticut River, the longest in New England, which roughly bisects the state and drains into the Long Island Sound between the towns of Old Saybrook and Old Lyme. The name of the river is in turn derived from anglicized spellings of , a Mohegan-Pequot word for \"long tidal river\". Before the arrival of the first European settlers, the region was inhabited by various Algonquian tribes. In 1633, the Dutch West India Company established a small, short-lived settlement called House of Hope in Hartford. Half of Connecticut was initially claimed by the Dutch colony New Netherland, which included much of the land between the Connecticut and Delaware Rivers, although the first major settlements were established by the English around the same time. Thomas Hooker led a band of followers from the Massachusetts Bay Colony to form the Connecticut Colony, while other settlers from Massachusetts founded the Saybrook Colony and the New Haven Colony; both had merged into the first by 1664.\nConnecticut's official nickname, the \"Constitution State\", refers to the Fundamental Orders adopted by the Connecticut Colony in 1639, which is considered by some to be the first written constitution in Western history. As one of the Thirteen Colonies that rejected British rule during the American Revolution, Connecticut was influential in the development of the federal government of the United States. In 1787, Roger Sherman and Oliver Ellsworth, state delegates to the Constitutional Convention, proposed a compromise between the Virginia and New Jersey Plans; its bicameral structure for Congress, with a respectively proportional and equal representation of the states in the House of Representatives and Senate, was adopted and remains to this day. In January 1788, Connecticut became the fifth state to ratify the Constitution.\nConnecticut is a developed and affluent state, performing well on the Human Development Index and on different metrics of income except for equality. It is home to a number of prestigious educational institutions, including Yale University in New Haven, as well as other liberal arts colleges and private boarding schools in and around the \"Knowledge Corridor\". Due to its geography, Connecticut has maintained a strong maritime tradition; the United States Coast Guard Academy is located in New London by the Thames River. The state is also associated with the aerospace industry through major companies Pratt &amp; Whitney and Sikorsky Aircraft headquartered in East Hartford and Stratford, respectively. Historically a manufacturing center for arms, hardware, and timepieces, Connecticut, as with the rest of the region, had transitioned into an economy based on the financial, insurance, and real estate sectors; many multinational firms providing such services can be found concentrated in the state capital of Hartford and along the Gold Coast in Fairfield County.\nHistory.\nFirst people.\nThe name Connecticut is derived from the Mohegan-Pequot word that has been translated as \"long tidal river\" and \"upon the long river\", both referring to the Connecticut River. Evidence of human presence in the Connecticut region dates to as far back as 10,000 years ago. Stone tools were used for hunting, fishing, and woodworking. Semi-nomadic in lifestyle, these peoples moved seasonally to take advantage of various resources in the area. They shared languages based on Algonquian. The Connecticut region was inhabited by many Native American tribes that can be grouped into the Nipmuc, the Sequin or \"River Indians\" (which included the Tunxis, Schaghticoke, Podunk, Wangunk, Hammonasset, and Quinnipiac), the Mattabesec or \"Wappinger Confederacy\" and the Pequot-Mohegan. Some of these groups still reside in Connecticut, including the Mohegans, the Pequots, and the Paugusetts.\nColonial period.\nDutchman Adriaen Block was the first European explorer in Connecticut. He explored the region in 1614. Dutch fur traders then sailed up the Connecticut River, calling it Versche Rivier (\"Fresh River\") and building a fort at Dutch Point in Hartford, which they named \"House of Hope\" ().\nThe Connecticut Colony originally consisted of several smaller settlements in Windsor, Wethersfield, Saybrook, Hartford, and New Haven. The first English settlers came in 1633 and settled at Windsor, then at Wethersfield the following year. John Winthrop the Younger of Massachusetts received a commission to create Saybrook Colony at the mouth of the Connecticut River in 1635.\nA large group of Puritans arrived in 1636 from Massachusetts Bay Colony, led by Thomas Hooker, who established the Connecticut Colony at Hartford. The Fundamental Orders of Connecticut were adopted in January 1639, and have been described as the first constitutional document in America.\nThe Quinnipiack Colony was established by John Davenport, Theophilus Eaton, and others at New Haven in March 1638. The New Haven Colony had its own constitution called \"The Fundamental Agreement of the New Haven Colony\", signed on June 4, 1639.\nEach settlement was an independent political entity, established without official sanction of the English Crown. In 1662, Winthrop traveled to England and obtained a charter from CharlesII which united the settlements of Connecticut. Historically significant colonial settlements included Windsor (1633), Wethersfield (1634), Saybrook (1635), Hartford (1636), New Haven (1638), Fairfield (1639), Guilford (1639), Milford (1639), Stratford (1639), Farmington (1640), Stamford (1641), and New London (1646).\nThe Pequot War marked the first significant clash between colonists and Native Americans in New England. The Pequot had been aggressively extending their area of control at the expense of the Wampanoag to the north, Narragansett (east), Connecticut River Valley Algonquian tribes and the Mohegan (west), and Lenape Algonquian people (south). Meanwhile, the Pequot had been reacting with increasing aggression to colonial territorial expansion. In response to the 1636 murder of an English privateer and his crew, followed by the murder of a trader, colonists raided a Pequot village on Block Island. The Pequots laid siege to Saybrook Colony's garrison that autumn, then raided Wethersfield in the spring of 1637. Organizing a band of militia and allies from the Mohegan and Narragansett tribes, colonists declared war and attacked a Pequot village on the Mystic River. Death toll estimates range between 300 and 700 Pequots. After suffering another major loss at a battle in Fairfield, the Pequots sued for peace.\nConnecticut's original Charter in 1662 granted it all the land to the \"South Sea\"\u2014that is, to the Pacific Ocean. The Hartford Treaty with the Dutch was signed on September 19, 1650, but never ratified by the British, stated the western boundary of Connecticut ran north from Greenwich Bay for a distance of , \"provided the said line come not within of Hudson River\". This agreement was observed by both sides until war erupted between England and The Netherlands in 1652. Conflict continued concerning colonial limits until the Duke of York captured New Netherland in 1664.\nMost Colonial royal grants were for long east\u2013west strips. Connecticut took its grant seriously and established a ninth county between the Susquehanna River and Delaware River named Westmoreland County. This resulted in the brief Pennamite-Yankee Wars with Pennsylvania.\nYale College was established in 1701, providing Connecticut with an important institution to educate clergy and civil leaders. The Congregational church dominated religious life in the colony and, by extension, town affairs in many parts.\nWith more than of coastline including along its navigable rivers, Connecticut developed during its colonial years the antecedents of a maritime tradition that would later produce booms in shipbuilding, marine transport, naval support, seafood production, and leisure boating.\nHistorical records list the \"Tryall\" as the first vessel built in Connecticut Colony, in 1649 at a site on the Connecticut River in present-day Wethersfield. In the two decades leading up to 1776 and the American Revolution, Connecticut boatyards launched about 100 sloops, schooners and brigs according to a database of U.S. customs records maintained online by the Mystic Seaport Museum, the largest being the 180-ton \"Patient Mary\" launched in New Haven in 1763. Connecticut's first lighthouse was constructed in 1760 at the mouth of the Thames River with the New London Harbor Lighthouse.\nAmerican Revolution.\nConnecticut designated four delegates to the Second Continental Congress who signed the Declaration of Independence: Samuel Huntington, Roger Sherman, William Williams, and Oliver Wolcott. Connecticut's legislature authorized the outfitting of six new regiments in 1775, in the wake of the clashes between British regulars and Massachusetts militia at Lexington and Concord. There were some 1,200 Connecticut troops on hand at the Battle of Bunker Hill in June 1775. In 1775, David Bushnell invented the \"Turtle\" which the following year launched the first submarine attack in history, unsuccessfully against a British warship at anchor in New York Harbor.\nIn 1777, the British got word of Continental Army supplies in Danbury, and they landed an expeditionary force of some 2,000 troops in Westport. This force then marched to Danbury and destroyed homes and much of the depot. Continental Army troops and militia led by General David Wooster and General Benedict Arnold engaged them on their return march at Ridgefield in 1777. For the winter of 1778\u201379, General George Washington decided to split the Continental Army into three divisions encircling New York City, where British General Sir Henry Clinton had taken up winter quarters. Major General Israel Putnam chose Redding as the winter encampment quarters for some 3,000 regulars and militia under his command. The Redding encampment allowed Putnam's soldiers to guard the replenished supply depot in Danbury and to support any operations along Long Island Sound and the Hudson River Valley. Some of the men were veterans of the winter encampment at Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, the previous winter. Soldiers at the Redding camp endured supply shortages, cold temperatures, and significant snow, with some historians dubbing the encampment \"Connecticut's Valley Forge\".\nThe state was also the launching site for a number of raids against Long Island orchestrated by Samuel Holden Parsons and Benjamin Tallmadge, and provided soldiers and material for the war effort, especially to Washington's army outside New York City. General William Tryon raided the Connecticut coast in July 1779, focusing on New Haven, Norwalk, and Fairfield. New London and Groton Heights were raided in September 1781 by Benedict Arnold, who had turned traitor to the British.\nAt the outset of the American Revolution, the Continental Congress assigned Nathaniel Shaw Jr. of New London as its naval agent in charge of recruiting privateers to seize British vessels as opportunities presented, with nearly 50 operating out of the Thames River which eventually drew the reprisal from the British force led by Arnold.\nEarly statehood.\nEarly national period and industrial revolution.\nConnecticut ratified the U.S. Constitution on January 9, 1788, becoming the fifth state.\nThe state prospered during the era following the American Revolution, as mills and textile factories were built and seaports flourished from trade and fisheries. After Congress established in 1790 the predecessor to the U.S. Revenue Cutter Service that would evolve into the U.S. Coast Guard, President Washington assigned Jonathan Maltbie as one of seven masters to enforce customs regulations, with Maltbie monitoring the southern New England coast with a 48-foot cutter sloop named \"Argus\".\nIn 1786, Connecticut ceded territory to the U.S. government that became part of the Northwest Territory. The state retained land extending across the northern part of present-day Ohio called the Connecticut Western Reserve. The Western Reserve section was settled largely by people from Connecticut, and they brought Connecticut place names to Ohio.\nConnecticut made agreements with Pennsylvania and New York which extinguished the land claims within those states' boundaries and created the Connecticut Panhandle. The state then ceded the Western Reserve in 1800 to the federal government, which brought it to its present boundaries (other than minor adjustments with Massachusetts).\n19th century.\nFor the first time in 1800, Connecticut shipwrights launched more than 100 vessels in a single year. Over the following decade to the doorstep of renewed hostilities with Britain that sparked the War of 1812, Connecticut boatyards constructed close to 1,000 vessels, the most productive stretch of any decade in the 19th century.\nDuring the war, the British launched raids in Stonington and Essex and blockaded vessels in the Thames River. Derby native Isaac Hull became Connecticut's best-known naval figure to win renown during the conflict, as captain of the .\nThe British blockade during the War of 1812 hurt exports and bolstered the influence of Federalists who opposed the war. The cessation of imports from Britain stimulated the construction of factories to manufacture textiles and machinery. Connecticut came to be recognized as a major center for manufacturing, due in part to the inventions of Eli Whitney and other early innovators of the Industrial Revolution.\nThe war led to the development of fast clippers that helped extend the reach of New England merchants to the Pacific and Indian oceans. The first half of the 19th century saw as well a rapid rise in whaling, with New London emerging as one of the New England industry's three biggest home ports after Nantucket and New Bedford.\nThe state was known for its political conservatism, typified by its Federalist party and the Yale College of Timothy Dwight. The foremost intellectuals were Dwight and Noah Webster, who compiled his great dictionary in New Haven. Religious tensions polarized the state, as the Congregational Church struggled to maintain traditional viewpoints, in alliance with the Federalists. The failure of the Hartford Convention in 1814 hurt the Federalist cause, with the Democratic-Republican Party gaining control in 1817.\nConnecticut had been governed under the \"Fundamental Orders\" since 1639, but the state adopted a new constitution in 1818.\nCivil War era.\nConnecticut manufacturers played a major role in supplying the Union forces with weapons and supplies during the Civil War. The state furnished 55,000 men, formed into thirty full regiments of infantry, including two in the U.S. Colored Troops, with several Connecticut men becoming generals. The Navy attracted 250 officers and 2,100 men, and Glastonbury native Gideon Welles was Secretary of the Navy. James H. Ward of Hartford was the first U.S. Naval Officer killed in the Civil War. Connecticut casualties included 2,088 killed in combat, 2,801 dying from disease, and 689 dying in Confederate prison camps.\nA surge of national unity in 1861 brought thousands flocking to the colors from every town and city. However, as the war became a crusade to end slavery, many Democrats (especially Irish Catholics) pulled back. The Democrats took a pro-slavery position and included many Copperheads willing to let the South secede. The intensely fought 1863 election for governor was narrowly won by the Republicans.\nSecond industrial revolution.\nConnecticut's extensive industry, dense population, flat terrain, and wealth encouraged the construction of railroads starting in 1839. By 1840, of line were in operation, growing to in 1850 and in 1860.\nThe New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad, called the \"New Haven\" or \"The Consolidated\", became the dominant Connecticut railroad company after 1872. J. P. Morgan began financing the major New England railroads in the 1890s, dividing territory so that they would not compete. The New Haven purchased 50 smaller companies, including steamship lines, and built a network of light rails (electrified trolleys) that provided inter-urban transportation for all of southern New England. By 1912, the New Haven operated over of track with 120,000 employees.\nAs steam-powered passenger ships proliferated after the Civil War, Noank would produce the two largest built in Connecticut during the 19th century, with the 332-foot wooden steam paddle wheeler \"Rhode Island\" launched in 1882, and the 345-foot paddle wheeler \"Connecticut\" seven years later. Connecticut shipyards would launch more than 165 steam-powered vessels in the 19th century.\nIn 1875, the first telephone exchange in the world was established in New Haven.\n20th century.\nWorld War I.\nWhen World War I broke out in 1914, Connecticut became a major supplier of weaponry to the U.S. military; by 1918, 80% of the state's industries were producing goods for the war effort. Remington Arms in Bridgeport produced half the small-arms cartridges used by the U.S. Army, with other major suppliers including Winchester in New Haven and Colt in Hartford.\nConnecticut was also an important U.S. Navy supplier, with Electric Boat receiving orders for 85 submarines, Lake Torpedo Boat building more than 20 subs, and the Groton Iron Works building freighters. On June 21, 1916, the Navy made Groton the site for its East Coast submarine base and school.\nThe state enthusiastically supported the American war effort in 1917 and 1918 with large purchases of war bonds, a further expansion of industry, and an emphasis on increasing food production on the farms. Thousands of state, local, and volunteer groups mobilized for the war effort and were coordinated by the Connecticut State Council of Defense. Manufacturers wrestled with manpower shortages; Waterbury's American Brass and Manufacturing Company was running at half capacity, so the federal government agreed to furlough soldiers to work there.\nInterwar period.\nIn 1919, J. Henry Roraback started the Connecticut Light &amp; Power Co. which became the state's dominant electric utility. In 1925, Frederick Rentschler spurred the creation of Pratt &amp; Whitney in Hartford to develop engines for aircraft; the company became an important military supplier in World WarII and one of the three major manufacturers of jet engines in the world.\nOn September 21, 1938, the most destructive storm in New England history struck eastern Connecticut, killing hundreds of people. The eye of the \"Long Island Express\" passed just west of New Haven and devastated the Connecticut shoreline between Old Saybrook and Stonington from the full force of wind and waves, even though they had partial protection by Long Island. The hurricane caused extensive damage to infrastructure, homes, and businesses. In New London, a sailing ship was driven into a warehouse complex, causing a major fire. Heavy rainfall caused the Connecticut River to flood downtown Hartford and East Hartford. An estimated 50,000 trees fell onto roadways.\nWorld War II.\nThe advent of lend-lease in support of Britain helped lift Connecticut from the Great Depression, with the state a major production center for weaponry and supplies used in World WarII. Connecticut manufactured 4.1% of total U.S. military armaments produced during the war, ranking ninth among the 48 states, with major factories including Colt for firearms, Pratt &amp; Whitney for aircraft engines, Chance Vought for fighter planes, Hamilton Standard for propellers, and Electric Boat for submarines and PT boats.\nOn May 13, 1940, Igor Sikorsky made an untethered flight of the first practical helicopter. The helicopter saw limited use in World War II, but future military production made Sikorsky Aircraft's Stratford plant Connecticut's largest single manufacturing site by the start of the 21st century.\nPost-World War II economic expansion.\nConnecticut lost some wartime factories following the end of hostilities, but the state shared in a general post-war expansion that included the construction of highways and resulting in middle-class growth in suburban areas.\nPrescott Bush represented Connecticut in the U.S. Senate from 1952 to 1963; his son George H. W. Bush and grandson George W. Bush both became presidents of the United States. In 1965, Connecticut ratified its current constitution, replacing the document that had served since 1818.\nIn 1968, commercial operation began for the Connecticut Yankee Nuclear Power Plant in Haddam; in 1970, the Millstone Nuclear Power Station began operations in Waterford. In 1974, Connecticut elected Democratic Governor Ella T. Grasso, who became the first woman in any state to be elected governor without being the wife or widow of a previous governor.\nLate 20th century.\nConnecticut's dependence on the defense industry posed an economic challenge at the end of the Cold War. The resulting budget crisis helped elect Lowell Weicker as governor on a third-party ticket in 1990. Weicker's remedy was a state income tax which proved effective in balancing the budget, but only for the short-term. He did not run for a second term, in part because of this politically unpopular move.\nIn 1992, initial construction was completed on Foxwoods Casino at the Mashantucket Pequots reservation in eastern Connecticut, which became the largest casino in the Western Hemisphere. Mohegan Sun followed four years later.\nEarly 21st century.\nIn 2000, presidential candidate Al Gore chose Senator Joe Lieberman as his running mate, marking the first time that a major party presidential ticket included someone of the Jewish faith. Gore and Lieberman fell five votes short of George W. Bush and Dick Cheney in the Electoral College. In the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, 65 state residents were killed, mostly Fairfield County residents who were working in the World Trade Center. In 2004, Republican Governor John G. Rowland resigned during a corruption investigation, later pleading guilty to federal charges.\nConnecticut was hit by three major storms in just over 14 months in 2011 and 2012, with all three causing extensive property damage and electric outages. Hurricane Irene struck Connecticut August 28, and damage totaled $235 million. Two months later, the \"Halloween nor'easter\" dropped extensive snow onto trees, resulting in snapped branches and trunks that damaged power lines; some areas were without electricity for 11 days. Hurricane Sandy hit New Jersey and passed over Connecticut with hurricane-force winds and tides up to 12 feet above normal. Many coastal buildings were damaged or destroyed. Sandy's winds drove storm surges into streets and cut power to 98% of homes and businesses, with more than $360 million in damage.\nOn December 14, 2012, Adam Lanza shot and killed 26 people at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, and then killed himself. The massacre spurred renewed efforts by activists for tighter laws on gun ownership nationally.\nIn the summer and fall of 2016, Connecticut experienced a drought in many parts of the state, causing some water-use bans. As of , 45% of the state was listed at Severe Drought by the U.S. Drought Monitor, including almost all of Hartford and Litchfield counties. All the rest of the state was in Moderate Drought or Severe Drought, including Middlesex, Fairfield, New London, New Haven, Windham, and Tolland counties. This affected the agricultural economy in the state.\nGeography.\nConnecticut is bordered on the south by Long Island Sound, on the west by New York, on the north by Massachusetts, and on the east by Rhode Island. The state capital and fourth largest city is Hartford, and other major cities and towns (by population) include Bridgeport, New Haven, Stamford, Waterbury, Norwalk, Danbury, New Britain, Greenwich, and Bristol. There are 169 incorporated towns in Connecticut, with cities and villages included within some towns.\nThe highest peak in Connecticut is Bear Mountain in Salisbury in the northwest corner of the state. The highest point is just east of where Connecticut, Massachusetts, and New York meet (42\u00b03\u2032 N, 73\u00b029\u2032 W), on the southern slope of Mount Frissell, whose peak lies nearby in Massachusetts. At the opposite extreme, many of the coastal towns have areas that are less than above sea level.\nConnecticut has a long maritime history and a reputation based on that history\u2014yet the state has no direct oceanfront (technically speaking). The coast of Connecticut sits on Long Island Sound, which is an estuary. The state's access to the open Atlantic Ocean is both to the west (toward New York City) and to the east (toward the \"race\" near Rhode Island). Due to this unique geography, Long Island Sound and the Connecticut shoreline are relatively protected from high waves from storms.\nThe Connecticut River cuts through the center of the state, flowing into Long Island Sound. The most populous metropolitan region centered within the state lies in the Connecticut River Valley. Despite Connecticut's relatively small size, it features wide regional variations in its landscape; for example, in the northwestern Litchfield Hills, it features rolling mountains and horse farms, whereas in areas to the east of New Haven along the coast, the landscape features coastal marshes, beaches, and large scale maritime activities.\nConnecticut's rural areas and small towns in the northeast and northwest corners of the state contrast sharply with its industrial cities such as Stamford, Bridgeport, and New Haven, located along the coastal highways from the New York border to New London, then northward up the Connecticut River to Hartford. Many towns in northeastern and northwestern Connecticut center around a green. Near the green typically stand historical visual symbols of New England towns, such as a white church, a colonial meeting house, a colonial tavern or inn, several colonial houses, and so on, establishing a scenic historical appearance maintained for both historic preservation and tourism. Many of the areas in southern and coastal Connecticut have been built up and rebuilt over the years, and look less visually like traditional New England.\nThe northern boundary of the state with Massachusetts is marked by the Southwick Jog or Granby Notch, an approximately square detour into Connecticut. The origin of this anomaly is clearly established in a long line of disputes and temporary agreements which were finally concluded in 1804, when southern Southwick's residents sought to leave Massachusetts, and the town was split in half.\nThe southwestern border of Connecticut where it abuts New York State is marked by a panhandle in Fairfield County and the Western Connecticut Planning Region, containing the towns of Greenwich, Stamford, New Canaan, Darien, and parts of Norwalk and Wilton. This irregularity in the boundary is the result of territorial disputes in the late 17th century, culminating with New York giving up its claim to the area, whose residents considered themselves part of Connecticut, in exchange for an equivalent area extending northwards from Ridgefield to the Massachusetts border, as well as undisputed claim to Rye, New York.\nAreas maintained by the National Park Service include Appalachian National Scenic Trail, Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers Valley National Heritage Corridor, and Weir Farm National Historic Site.\nClimate.\nConnecticut lies at the rough transition zone between the southern end of the humid continental climate, and the northern portion of the humid subtropical climate. Northern Connecticut generally experiences a climate with hot, humid summers and moderataely cold winters with periodic snowfall. Far southern and coastal Connecticut has a climate with cool winters with a mix of rain and infrequent snow, and the long hot and humid summers typical of the middle and lower East Coast. Coastal Connecticut is the very broad transition zone between the humid continental climate and the humid subtropical climate.\nPrecipitation.\nConnecticut sees a fairly even precipitation pattern spread throughout the 12 months. Connecticut averages 56% of possible sunshine (higher than the U.S. national average), averaging 2,400 hours of sunshine annually. Occasionally, some months may see extremes in precipitation, either much higher or lower than normal, though long term droughts and floods are rare.\nEarly spring can range from slightly cool (40s to low 50s F) to warm (65 to 70 F), while mid and late spring (late April/May) is warm. By late May, the building Bermuda High creates a southerly flow of warm and humid tropical air, bringing hot weather conditions throughout the state. Average highs are in New London and in Windsor Locks at the peak of summer in late July. On occasion, heat waves with highs from 90 to occur across Connecticut. Connecticut's record high temperature is which occurred in Danbury on July 15, 1995. Although summers are sunny in Connecticut, quick moving summer thunderstorms can bring brief downpours with thunder and lightning. Occasionally these thunderstorms can be severe, and the state usually averages one tornado per year. During hurricane season, the remains of tropical cyclones occasionally affect the region, though a direct hit is rare. Some notable hurricanes to impact the state include the 1938 New England hurricane, Hurricane Carol in 1954, Hurricane Sandy in 2012, and Hurricane Isaias in 2020.\nWeather commonly associated with the fall season typically begins in October and lasts to the first days of December. Daily high temperatures in October and November range from the 50s to 60s F. Winters (December through mid-March) are moderately generally cold from south to north in Connecticut. The coldest month (January) has average high temperatures ranging from in the coastal lowlands to in the inland and northern portions on the state. \nThe lowest temperature recorded in Connecticut is which has been observed twice: in Falls Village on February 16, 1943, and in Coventry on January 22, 1961. The average yearly snowfall ranges from about in the higher elevations of the northern portion of the state to only along the southeast coast of Connecticut (Branford to Groton). Most of Connecticut has less than 60 days of snow cover, while coastal areas often only see 30 days or so of snowcover. Annually, 95% of seasonal snowfall in Connecticut falls from early December to late March. On occasion in winter, Connecticut can occasionally get heavy snowstorms, called nor'easters, which may produce as much as two feet of snow on rare occasions. Although rare, Ice storms also occur on occasion, such as the Southern New England ice storm of 1973. \nFlora.\nForests consist of a mix of Northeastern coastal forests of oak in southern areas of the state, to the upland New England-Acadian forests in the northwestern parts of the state. Mountain Laurel (\"Kalmia latifolia\") is the state flower and is native to low ridges in several parts of Connecticut. Rosebay rhododendron (\"Rhododendron maximum\") is also native to eastern uplands of Connecticut and Pachaug State Forest is home to the Rhododendron Sanctuary Trail. Atlantic white cedar (\"Chamaecyparis thyoides\"), is found in wetlands in the southern parts of the state. Connecticut has one native cactus (\"Opuntia humifusa\"), found in sandy coastal areas and low hillsides. Several types of beach grasses and wildflowers are also native to Connecticut. Connecticut spans USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 5b to 7a. Coastal Connecticut is the broad transition zone where more southern and subtropical plants are cultivated.\nLargest cities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, Connecticut has a population of 3,605,944, an increase of 31,847 people (0.9%) from the 2010 United States census. Among the census records, 20.4% of the population was under 18.\nIn 1790, 97% of the population in Connecticut was classified as \"rural\". The first census in which less than half the population was classified as rural was 1890. In the 2000 census, only 12.3% was considered rural. Most of western and southern Connecticut (particularly the Gold Coast) is strongly associated with New York City; this area is the most affluent and populous region of the state and has high property costs and high incomes. The center of population of Connecticut is located in the town of Cheshire.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 2,930 homeless people in Connecticut.\nIn common with the majority of the United States, non-Hispanic whites have remained the dominant racial and ethnic group in Connecticut. From being 98% of the population in 1940, however, they have declined to 63% of the population as of the 2020 census. These statistics have represented fewer Americans identifying as non-Hispanic white, which has given rise to the Hispanic and Latino American population and Asian American population overall. As of 2011[ [update]], 46.1% of Connecticut's population younger than age1 were minorities. As of 2004, 11.4% of the population (400,000) was foreign-born. In 1870, native-born Americans had accounted for 75% of the state's population, but that had dropped to 35% by 1918. Also as of 2000, 81.69% of Connecticut residents age5 and older spoke English at home and 8.42% spoke Spanish, followed by Italian at 1.59%, French at 1.31%, and Polish at 1.20%.\nThe largest ancestry groups since 2010 were: 19.3% Italian, 17.9% Irish, 10.7% English, 10.4% German, 8.6% Polish, 6.6% French, 3.0% French Canadian, 2.7% American, 2.0% Scottish, and 1.4% Scotch Irish.\nConnecticut is one of the most racially segregated states in the nation, with the nonwhite population largely concentrated in major urban areas such as Bridgeport, Hartford, New Haven and Waterbury. In many cases, towns neighboring urban areas are sharply segregated from them.\nThe top countries of origin for Connecticut's immigrants in 2018 were India, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, Poland and Ecuador.\nBirth data.\n\"Note: Births in table do not add up because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.\"\nReligion.\nA 2014 Pew survey of Connecticut residents' religious self-identification showed the following distribution of affiliations Protestant 35%, Roman Catholic 33%, non-religious 28%, Jewish 3%, Mormonism 1%, Orthodox 1%, Jehovah's Witness 1%, Hinduism 1%, Buddhism 1% and Islam 1%. Jewish congregations had 108,280 (3.2%) members in 2000.\nThe Jewish population is concentrated in the towns near Long Island Sound between Greenwich and New Haven, in Greater New Haven and in Greater Hartford, especially the suburb of West Hartford. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives, the largest Christian denominations, by number of adherents, in 2010 were: the Catholic Church, with 1,252,936; the United Church of Christ, with 96,506; and non-denominational Evangelical Protestants, with 72,863.\nRecent immigration has brought other non-Christian religions to the state, but the numbers of adherents of other religions are still low. Connecticut is also home to New England's largest Protestant church: The First Cathedral in Bloomfield, Connecticut. Hartford is seat to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Hartford, which is sovereign over the Diocese of Bridgeport and the Diocese of Norwich.\nBy a 2020 Public Religion Research Institute survey, 71% of the population identified as some form of Christian. It found the state to be 21% non-religious and specifically 19% white mainline Protestant, 19% white Catholic, 9% white evangelical Protestant, 7% black Protestant, and 7% Hispanic Catholic. In contrast to the 2014 Pew survey, the 2020 PRRI survey found Connecticut to be 40% Protestant and 28% Catholic (with the remainder of Christians being Mormon at 2%, and Orthodox at 1%). The PRRI survey found Jewish citizens to be 2% of the population and, like the Pew survey: Hindus, Buddhists, and Muslims to be 1% each.\nEconomy.\nThe total 2024 gross state product for Connecticut was $365.7\u00a0billion, up from $345.9\u00a0billion in 2023.\nConnecticut's adjusted per capita personal income in 2022 was estimated at $77,940, third-highest among states. There is a large disparity in incomes throughout the state; Connecticut was tied with California and Massachusetts for the second highest (after New York's 0.52) Gini coefficient, at 0.50, as of 2020. As of 2025, it remained tied for second with Louisiana, with only New York having higher levels of inequality. Despite its overall inequality, Connecticut has a relatively low poverty rate. According to a 2018 study by Phoenix Marketing International, Connecticut had the third-largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 7.75%. New Canaan is the wealthiest town in Connecticut, with a per capita income of $105,846. Hartford is the poorest municipality in Connecticut, with a per capita income of $16,798 in 2020. At the county level, per capita income ranged from $48,295 in Fairfield County to $26,585 in Windham County, which is close to the United States average.\nAs of December 2019, Connecticut's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 3.8%, with U.S. unemployment at 3.5% that month. Dating back to 1982, Connecticut recorded its lowest unemployment in 2000 between August and October, at 2.2%. The highest unemployment rate during that period occurred in November and December 2010 at 9.3%, but economists expected record new levels of layoffs as a result of business closures in the spring of 2020 due to the coronavirus pandemic.\nTaxation.\nTax is collected by the Connecticut Department of Revenue Services and by local municipalities.\nAs of 2012, Connecticut residents had the second highest rate in the nation of combined state and local taxes after New York, at 12.6% of income compared to the national average of 9.9% as reported by the Tax Foundation.\nBefore 1991, Connecticut had an investment-only income tax system. Income from employment was untaxed, but income from investments was taxed at 13%, the highest rate in the U.S., with no deductions allowed for costs of producing the investment income, such as interest on borrowing.\nIn 1991, under Governor Lowell P. Weicker Jr., an independent, the system was changed to one in which the taxes on employment income and investment income were equalized at a maximum rate of 4%. The new tax policy drew investment firms to Connecticut; as of 2019[ [update]], Fairfield County was home to the headquarters for 16 of the 200 largest hedge funds in the world.\nAs of 2019[ [update]], the income tax rates on Connecticut individuals were divided into seven tax brackets of 3% (on income up to $10,000); 5% ($10,000\u2013$50,000); 5.5% ($50,000\u2013$100,000); 6% ($100,000\u2013$200,000); 6.5% ($200,000\u2013$250,000); 6.9% ($250,000\u2013$500,000); and 6.99% above $500,000, with additional amounts owed depending on the bracket.\nAll wages of Connecticut residents are subject to the state's income tax, even if earned outside the state. However, in those cases, Connecticut income tax must be withheld only to the extent the Connecticut tax exceeds the amount withheld by the other jurisdiction. Since New York has higher income tax rates than Connecticut, this effectively means that Connecticut residents who work in New York have no Connecticut income tax withheld. Connecticut permits a credit for taxes paid to other jurisdictions, but since residents who work in other states are still subject to Connecticut income taxation, they may owe taxes if the jurisdictional credit does not fully offset the Connecticut tax amount.\nConnecticut levies a 6.35% state sales tax on the retail sale, lease, or rental of most goods. Some items and services in general are not subject to sales and use taxes unless specifically enumerated as taxable by statute. A provision excluding clothing under $50 from sales tax was repealed as of July\u00a01, 2011[ [update]]. There are no additional sales taxes imposed by local jurisdictions. In 2001, Connecticut instituted what became an annual sales tax \"holiday\" each August lasting one week, when retailers do not have to remit sales tax on certain items and quantities of clothing that has varied from year to year.\nState law authorizes municipalities to tax property, including real estate, vehicles and other personal property, with state statute providing varying exemptions, credits and abatements. All assessments are at 70% of fair market value. The maximum property tax credit is $200 per return and any excess may not be refunded or carried forward. According to the Tax Foundation, on a per capita basis in the 2017 fiscal year Connecticut residents paid the 3rd highest average property taxes in the nation after New Hampshire and New Jersey.\nAs of \u00a01, 2020[ [update]], gasoline taxes and fees in Connecticut were 40.13 cents per gallon, 11th highest in the United States which had a nationwide average of 36.13 cents a gallon excluding federal taxes. Diesel taxes and fees as of January 2020 in Connecticut were 46.50 cents per gallon, ninth highest nationally with the U.S. average at 37.91 cents.\nReal estate.\nIn 2019, sales of single-family homes in Connecticut totaled 33,146 units, a 2.1 percent decline from the 2018 transaction total. The median home sold in 2019 recorded a transaction amount of $260,000, up 0.4 percent from 2018.\nConnecticut had the seventh highest rate of home foreclosure activity in the country in 2019 at 0.53 percent of the total housing stock.\nIndustries.\nFinance, insurance and real estate was Connecticut's largest industry in 2018 as ranked by gross domestic product, generating $75.7 billion in GDP that year. Major employers include The Hartford, Travelers, Harman International, Cigna, the Aetna subsidiary of CVS Health, Mass Mutual, People's United Financial, Bank of America, Realogy, Bridgewater Associates, GE Capital, William Raveis Real Estate, and Berkshire Hathaway through reinsurance and residential real estate subsidiaries.\nThe combined educational, health and social services sector was the largest single industry as ranked by employment, with a combined workforce of 342,600 people at the end of 2019, ranking fourth the year before in GDP at $28.3 billion.\nThe broad business and professional services sector had the second highest GDP total in Connecticut in 2018 at an estimated $33.7 billion.\nManufacturing was the third biggest industry in 2018 with GDP of $30.8 billion, dominated by Raytheon Technologies formed in the March 2020 merger of Hartford-based United Technologies and Waltham, Mass.-based Raytheon Co. As of the merger, Raytheon Technologies employed about 19,000 people in Connecticut through subsidiaries Pratt &amp; Whitney and Collins Aerospace. Lockheed Martin subsidiary Sikorsky Aircraft operates Connecticut's single largest manufacturing plant in Stratford, where it makes helicopters.\nMajor audio equipment manufacturing company Harman International is headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut. It owns many brands like JBL, Akg and Harman kardon.\nOther major manufacturers include the Electric Boat division of General Dynamics, which makes submarines in Groton.\nConnecticut historically was a center of gun manufacturing, and four gun-manufacturing firms continued to operate in the state as of December\u00a02012[ [update]], employing 2,000 people: Colt, Stag, Ruger, and Mossberg. Marlin, owned by Remington, closed in April 2011.\nOther large components of the Connecticut economy in 2018 included wholesale trade ($18.1 billion in GDP); information services ($13.8 billion); retail ($13.7 billion); arts, entertainment and food services ($9.1 billion); and construction ($8.3 billion).\nTourists spent $9.3 billion in Connecticut in 2017 according to estimates as part of a series of studies commissioned by the state of Connecticut. Foxwoods Resort Casino and Mohegan Sun are the two biggest tourist draws and number among the state's largest employers; both are located on Native American reservations in the southeastern Connecticut.\nConnecticut's agricultural production totaled $580 million in 2017, with just over half of that revenue the result of nursery stock production. Milk production totaled $81 million that year, with other major product categories including eggs, vegetables and fruit, tobacco and shellfish.\nEnergy.\nConnecticut's economy uses less energy to produce each dollar of GDP than all other states except California, Massachusetts, and New York. It uses less energy on a per-capita basis than all but six other states. It has no fossil-fuel resources, but does have renewable resources. Average retail electricity prices are the highest among the 48 contiguous states. While most of the state's energy consumption is generated using fossil fuels, nuclear power delivered over 40% of state's electricity generation in 2019. Refuse-derived fuels and other biomass provided the largest share of renewable electricity at about a 3% share. Solar and wind generation have grown in recent years. More than three-quarters of solar generation came from distributed small-scale installations such as rooftop solar in 2019, and there is planning underway to significantly increase renewable generation with the state's offshore wind resource.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nThe Interstate highways in the state are Interstate 95 (I-95) traveling southwest to northeast along the coast, I-84 traveling southwest to northeast in the center of the state, I-91 traveling north to south in the center of the state, and I-395 traveling north to south near the eastern border of the state. The other major highways in Connecticut are the Merritt Parkway and Wilbur Cross Parkway, which together form Connecticut Route 15 (Route 15), traveling from the Hutchinson River Parkway in New York parallel to I-95 before turning north of New Haven and traveling parallel to I-91, finally becoming a surface road in Berlin. I-95 and Route 15 were originally toll roads; they relied on a system of toll plazas at which all traffic stopped and paid fixed tolls. A series of major crashes at these plazas eventually contributed to the decision to remove the tolls in 1988. Other major arteries in the state include U.S. Route7 (US7) in the west traveling parallel to the New York state line, Route8 farther east near the industrial city of Waterbury and traveling north\u2013south along the Naugatuck River Valley nearly parallel with US7, and Route9 in the east.\nBetween New Haven and New York City, I-95 is one of the most congested highways in the United States. Although I-95 has been widened in several spots, some areas are only three lanes and this strains traffic capacity, resulting in frequent and lengthy rush hour delays. Frequently, the congestion spills over to clog the parallel Merritt Parkway and even US1. The state has encouraged traffic reduction schemes, including rail use and ride-sharing.\nConnecticut also has a very active bicycling community, with one of the highest rates of bicycle ownership and use in the United States, particularly in New Haven. According to the U.S. Census 2006 American Community Survey, New Haven has the highest percentage of commuters who bicycle to work of any major metropolitan center on the East Coast.\nRail.\nRail is a popular travel mode between New Haven and New York City's Grand Central Terminal. Southwestern Connecticut is served by the Metro-North Railroad's New Haven Line, operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. Metro-North provides commuter service between New York City and New Haven, with branches to New Canaan, Danbury, and Waterbury. Connecticut lies along Amtrak's Northeast Corridor, which features frequent Northeast Regional and Acela Express service from New Haven south to New York City, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, D.C., and Norfolk, VA, as well as north to New London, Providence and Boston. Since 1990, coastal cities and towns between New Haven and New London are also served by the Shore Line East commuter line.\nIn June 2018, a commuter rail service called the Hartford Line began operating between New Haven and Springfield on Amtrak's New Haven-Springfield Line. Hartford Line service is provided by both Amtrak and the Connecticut Department of Transportation's CT Rail, and in addition to its termini serves New Haven State Street, Wallingford, Meriden, Berlin, Hartford, Windsor, and Windsor Locks. Several infill stations are planned to be added in the near future as of 2021. Amtrak's Vermonter runs from Washington to St. Albans, Vermont via the same line. In July 2019, Amtrak launched the \"Valley Flyer\", which runs between New Haven and Greenfield, Massachusetts.\nA proposed commuter rail service, the Central Corridor Rail Line, would connect New London with Norwich, Willimantic, Storrs via the main campus of the University of Connecticut, and Stafford Springs, with service continuing into Massachusetts and Brattleboro, Vermont. The proposal also adds stops to service popular tourist destinations Foxwoods Resort Casino and Mohegan Sun.\nBus.\nStatewide bus service is supplied by Connecticut Transit, owned by the Connecticut Department of Transportation, with smaller municipal authorities providing local service. Bus networks are an important part of the transportation system in Connecticut, especially in urban areas like Hartford, Stamford, Norwalk, Bridgeport and New Haven. Connecticut Transit also operates CTfastrak, a bus rapid transit service between New Britain and Hartford, which opened to the public on March 28, 2015.\nAir.\nConnecticut's largest airport is Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks, north of Hartford. Many residents of central and southern Connecticut also make heavy use of JFK International Airport and Newark International Airports, especially for international travel. Smaller regional air service is provided at Tweed New Haven Regional Airport. Larger civil airports include Danbury Municipal Airport and Waterbury-Oxford Airport in western Connecticut, Hartford\u2013Brainard Airport in central Connecticut, and Groton-New London Airport in eastern Connecticut. Sikorsky Memorial Airport is located in Stratford and mostly services cargo, helicopter and private aviation.\nFerry.\nSeveral ferry services cross Long Island Sound and connect the state to Long Island. The Bridgeport &amp; Port Jefferson Ferry travels between Bridgeport, Connecticut, and Port Jefferson, New York. Ferry service also operates out of New London to Orient, New York; Fishers Island, New York; and Block Island, Rhode Island, which are popular tourist destinations. Two ferries cross the Connecticut River: the Rocky Hill\u2013Glastonbury ferry and the Chester\u2013Hadlyme ferry, the former of which is the oldest continuously operating ferry in the United States, operating since 1655.\nLaw and government.\nHartford has been the sole capital of Connecticut since 1875. Before then, New Haven and Hartford alternated as dual capitals.\nConstitutional history.\nConnecticut is known as the \"Constitution State\". The origin of this nickname is uncertain, but it likely comes from Connecticut's pivotal role in the federal constitutional convention of 1787, during which Roger Sherman and Oliver Ellsworth helped to orchestrate what became known as the Connecticut Compromise, or the Great Compromise. This plan combined the Virginia Plan and the New Jersey Plan to form a bicameral legislature, a form copied by almost every state constitution since the adoption of the federal constitution. Variations of the bicameral legislature had been proposed by Virginia and New Jersey, but Connecticut's plan was the one that was in effect until the early 20th century, when Senators ceased to be selected by their state legislatures and were instead directly elected. Otherwise, it is still the design of Congress.\nThe nickname also might refer to the Fundamental Orders of 1638\u201339. These Fundamental Orders represent the framework for the first formal Connecticut state government written by a representative body in Connecticut. The State of Connecticut government has operated under the direction of four separate documents in the course of the state's constitutional history. After the Fundamental Orders, Connecticut was granted governmental authority by King Charles II of England through the Connecticut Charter of 1662.\nSeparate branches of government did not exist during this period, and the General Assembly acted as the supreme authority. A constitution similar to the modern U.S. Constitution was not adopted in Connecticut until 1818. Finally, the current state constitution was implemented in 1965. The 1965 constitution absorbed a majority of its 1818 predecessor, but incorporated a handful of important modifications.\nExecutive.\nThe governor heads the executive branch. As of 2020[ [update]], Ned Lamont is the Governor and Susan Bysiewicz is the Lieutenant Governor; both are Democrats. From 1639 until the adoption of the 1818 constitution, the governor presided over the General Assembly. In 1974, Ella Grasso was elected as the governor of Connecticut. This was the first time in United States history when a woman was a governor without her husband being governor first.\nThere are several executive departments: Administrative Services, Agriculture, Banking, Children and Families, Consumer Protection, Correction, Economic and Community Development, Developmental Services, Construction Services, Education, Emergency Management and Public Protection, Energy &amp; Environmental Protection, Higher Education, Insurance, Labor, Mental Health and Addiction Services, Military, Motor Vehicles, Public Health, Public Utility Regulatory Authority, Public Works, Revenue Services, Social Services, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs. In addition to these departments, there are other independent bureaus, offices and commissions.\nIn addition to the governor and lieutenant governor, there are four other executive officers named in the state constitution that are elected directly by voters: secretary of the state, treasurer, comptroller, and attorney general. All executive officers are elected to four-year terms.\nLegislative.\nConnecticut's legislative branch is known as the General Assembly. It is a bicameral legislature consisting of an upper body, the State Senate (36 senators); and a lower body, the House of Representatives (151 representatives). Bills must pass each house in order to become law. The governor can veto bills, but this veto can be overridden by a two-thirds majority in both houses. Per Article XV of the state constitution, Senators and Representatives must be at least 18 years of age and are elected to two-year terms in November on even-numbered years. There also must always be between 30 and 50 senators and 125 to 225 representatives. The Lieutenant Governor presides over the Senate, except when absent from the chamber, when the President pro tempore presides. The Speaker of the House presides over the House. As of 2021[ [update]], Matthew Ritter is the Speaker of the House of Connecticut.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], Connecticut's United States Senators are Richard Blumenthal (Democrat) and Chris Murphy (Democrat). Connecticut has five representatives in the U.S. House, all of whom are Democrats.\nLocally elected representatives also develop local ordinances to govern cities and towns. The town ordinances often include noise control and zoning guidelines. However, the State of Connecticut also provides statewide ordinances for noise control as well.\nJudicial.\nThe highest court of Connecticut's judicial branch is the Connecticut Supreme Court, headed by the Chief Justice of Connecticut. The Supreme Court is responsible for deciding on the constitutionality of laws, or cases as they relate to the law. Its proceedings are similar to those of the United States Supreme Court: no testimony is given by witnesses, and the lawyers of the two sides each present oral arguments no longer than thirty minutes. Following a court proceeding, the court may take several months to arrive at a judgment. As of 2020[ [update]], the Chief Justice is Richard A. Robinson.\nIn 1818, the court became a separate entity, independent of the legislative and executive branches. The Connecticut Appellate Court is a lesser statewide court, and the Superior Courts are lower courts that resemble county courts of other states.\nLocal government.\nConnecticut does not have county government, unlike all other states except Rhode Island. Connecticut county governments were mostly eliminated in 1960, with the exception of sheriffs elected in each county. In 2000, the county sheriff was abolished and replaced with the state marshal system, which has districts that follow the old county territories. The judicial system is divided into judicial districts at the trial-court level which largely follow the old county lines. The eight counties are still widely used for purely geographical and statistical purposes, such as weather reports and census reporting, although the latter will cease using the counties in 2024.\nThe state is divided into nine regional councils of government defined by the state Office of Planning and Management, which facilitate regional planning and coordination of services between member towns. The Intragovernmental Policy Division of this Office coordinates regional planning with the administrative bodies of these regions. Each region has an administrative body made up chief executive officers of the member towns. The regions are established for the purpose of planning \"coordination of regional and state planning activities; redesignation of logical planning regions and promotion of the continuation of regional planning organizations within the state; and provision for technical aid and the administration of financial assistance to regional planning organizations\". By 2015, the State of Connecticut recognized COGs as county equivalents, allowing them to apply for funding and grants made available to county governments in other states. In 2019 the state recommended to the United States Census Bureau that the nine Councils of Governments replace its counties for statistical purposes. This proposal was approved by the Census Bureau in 2022, and will be fully implemented by 2024.\nConnecticut shares with the rest of New England a governmental institution called the New England town. The state is divided into 169 towns which serve as the fundamental political jurisdictions. There are also 21 cities, most of which simply follow the boundaries of their namesake towns and have a merged city-town government. There are two exceptions: the City of Groton, which is a subsection of the Town of Groton, and the City of Winsted in the Town of Winchester. There are also nine incorporated boroughs which may provide additional services to a section of town. Naugatuck is a consolidated town and borough.\nPolitics.\nFor many decades, Connecticut has consistently been a blue state. As of 2024, both of its U.S. Senators, all five of its U.S. House representatives, as well as its Governor, Lt. Governor, Attorney General, and Secretary of State, are members of the Democratic Party. The last Republican presidential candidate to win Connecticut's votes in the Electoral College was George H. W. Bush in 1988.\nRegistered voters.\nConnecticut residents who register to vote may declare an affiliation to a political party, may become unaffiliated at will, and may change affiliations subject to certain waiting periods. As of 2022[ [update]], around 58% of registered voters are enrolled in a political party. The Democratic Party of Connecticut is the largest party in the state by voter registration, with 36% of voters, followed by the Connecticut Republican Party with approximately 21%. An additional 1.6% are registered to third parties. As of 2022, 4 third parties have statewide enrollment privileges (meaning any state resident may register as a member), including the Libertarian Party of Connecticut, the Independent Party of Connecticut, the Connecticut Green Party, and the Connecticut Working Families Party. Connecticut allows electoral fusion, where the same candidate can run on the ballot of more than one political party; this is often used by the Connecticut Working Families Party to cross-endorse Democratic candidates.\nVoting.\nIn July 2009, the Connecticut legislature overrode a veto by Governor M. Jodi Rell to pass SustiNet, the first significant public-option health care reform legislation in the nation.\nIn April 2012, both houses of the Connecticut state legislature passed a bill (20 to 16 and 86 to 62) that abolished capital punishment for all future crimes, while 11 inmates who were waiting on the death row at the time could still be executed.\nEducation.\nConnecticut ranked third in the nation for educational performance, according to Education Week's Quality Counts 2018 report. It earned an overall score of 83.5 out of 100 points. On average, the country received a score of 75.2. Connecticut posted a B-plus in the Chance-for-Success category, ranking fourth on factors that contribute to a person's success both within and outside the K-12 education system. Connecticut received a mark of B-plus and finished fourth for School Finance. It ranked 12th with a grade of C on the K-12 Achievement Index.\nK\u201312.\nPublic schools.\nHartford Public High School (1638) is the third-oldest secondary school in the nation after the Collegiate School (1628) in Manhattan and the Boston Latin School (1635). Today, the Connecticut State Board of Education manages the public school system for children in grades K\u201312. Board of Education members are appointed by the Governor of Connecticut.\nPrivate schools.\nConnecticut has a number of private schools. Private schools may file for approval by the state Department of Education, but are not required to. Per state law, private schools must file yearly attendance reports with the state.\nNotable private schools include Choate Rosemary Hall, The Hotchkiss School, Loomis Chaffee School, and Taft School.\nColleges and universities.\nConnecticut was home to the nation's first law school, Litchfield Law School, which operated from 1773 to 1833 in Litchfield. Well known universities in the state include Yale University, Wesleyan University, Trinity College, Sacred Heart University, Fairfield University, Quinnipiac University, and the University of Connecticut. The Connecticut State University System includes 4 state universities, and the state also has 12 community colleges. The United States Coast Guard Academy is located in New London.\nSports.\nThere are two Connecticut teams in the American Hockey League. The Bridgeport Islanders is a farm team for the New York Islanders which competes at the Total Mortgage Arena in Bridgeport. The Hartford Wolf Pack is an affiliate of the New York Rangers; they play in the PeoplesBank Arena in Hartford.\nThe Hartford Yard Goats of the Eastern League are a AA affiliate of the Colorado Rockies. Also, the Norwich Sea Unicorns play in the Futures Collegiate Baseball League. The New Britain Bees play in the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball. The Connecticut Sun of the WNBA currently play at the Mohegan Sun Arena in Uncasville. In soccer, Hartford Athletic began play in the USL Championship in 2019.\nThe state hosts several major sporting events. Since 1952, a PGA Tour golf tournament has been played in the Hartford area. It was originally called the \"Insurance City Open\" and later the \"Greater Hartford Open\" and is now known as the Travelers Championship. \nLime Rock Park in Salisbury is a road racing course, home to the International Motor Sports Association, SCCA, United States Auto Club, and K&amp;N Pro Series East races. Thompson International Speedway, Stafford Motor Speedway, and Waterford Speedbowl are oval tracks holding weekly races for NASCAR Modifieds and other classes, including the NASCAR Whelen Modified Tour. The state also hosts several major mixed martial arts events for Bellator MMA and the Ultimate Fighting Championship.\nProfessional sports teams.\nThe Hartford Whalers of the National Hockey League played in Hartford from 1975 to 1997 at the Hartford Civic Center. They departed to Raleigh, North Carolina, after disputes with the state over the construction of a new arena, and they are now known as the Carolina Hurricanes. A baseball team known as the Hartfords (or Hartford Dark Blues) played in the National Association from 1874 to 1875, before becoming charter members of the National League in 1876. The team moved to Brooklyn, New York, and then disbanded one season later. In 1926, Hartford also had a franchise in the National Football League known as the Hartford Blues. From 2000 until 2006 the city was home to the Hartford FoxForce of World TeamTennis.\nCollege sports.\nThe Connecticut Huskies are the team of the University of Connecticut (UConn); they play NCAA Division I sports. Both the men's basketball and women's basketball teams have won multiple national championships. In 2004, UConn became the first school in NCAA DivisionI history to have its men's and women's basketball programs win the national title in the same year; they repeated the feat in 2014 and are still the only DivisionI school to win both titles in the same year. The UConn women's basketball team holds the record for the longest consecutive winning streak in NCAA college basketball at 111 games, a streak that ended in 2017. Both teams play in the historic Harry A. Gampel Pavilion and PeoplesBank Arena in Hartford. The UConn Huskies football team has played its home games at Rentschler Field in East Hartford since 2003.\nNew Haven biennially hosts \"The Game\" between the Yale Bulldogs and the Harvard Crimson, the country's second-oldest college football rivalry. Yale alumnus Walter Camp is deemed the \"Father of American Football\", and he helped develop modern football while living in New Haven. Other Connecticut universities which feature DivisionI sports teams are Quinnipiac University, Fairfield University, Central Connecticut State University and Sacred Heart University.\nEtymology and symbols.\nThe name \"Connecticut\" originated with the Mohegan word \"quonehtacut\", meaning \"place of long tidal river\". Connecticut's official nickname is \"The Constitution State\", adopted in 1959 and based on its colonial constitution of 1638\u20131639 which was the first in America and, arguably, the world. Connecticut is also unofficially known as \"The Nutmeg State\", whose origin is unknown. It may have come from its sailors returning from voyages with nutmeg, which was a very valuable spice in the 18th and 19th centuries. It may have originated in the early machined sheet tin nutmeg grinders sold by early Connecticut peddlers. It is also facetiously said to come from Yankee peddlers from Connecticut who would sell small carved knobs of wood shaped to look like nutmeg to unsuspecting customers. George Washington gave Connecticut the title of \"The Provisions State\" because of the material aid that the state rendered to the American Revolutionary War effort. Connecticut is also known as \"The Land of Steady Habits\".\nAccording to \"Webster's New International Dictionary\" (1993), a person who is a native or resident of Connecticut is a \"Connecticuter\". There are numerous other terms coined in print but not in use, such as \"Connecticotian\" (Cotton Mather in 1702) and \"Connecticutensian\" (Samuel Peters in 1781). Linguist Allen Walker Read suggests the more playful term \"Connecticutie\". \"Nutmegger\" is sometimes used, as is \"Yankee\".\nThe official state song is \"Yankee Doodle\". The traditional abbreviation of the state's name is \"Conn.\"; the official postal abbreviation is CT.\nCommemorative stamps issued by the United States Postal Service with Connecticut themes include Nathan Hale, Eugene O'Neill, Josiah Willard Gibbs, Noah Webster, Eli Whitney, the whaling ship the \"Charles W. Morgan\", which is docked at Mystic Seaport, and a decoy of a broadbill duck.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nLibrary of Congress"}
{"id": "6468", "revid": "50550831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6468", "title": "Country Liberal Party", "text": "Northern Territory political party\nThe Country Liberal Party of the Northern Territory (CLP), commonly known as the Country Liberals, is a centre-right and conservative political party in Australia's Northern Territory. In territory politics, it operates in a two-party system with the Australian Labor Party (ALP). It also contests federal elections as an affiliate of the Liberal Party of Australia and National Party of Australia, the two partners in the federal coalition.\nThe CLP originated in 1971 as a division of the Country Party (later renamed the National Party), the first local branches of which were formed in 1966. It adopted its current name in 1974 to attract Liberal Party supporters, but maintained a sole affiliation with the Country Party until 1979, when it acquired observer status with the Liberals while maintaining full voting rights in the Country Party. The party dominated the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly from the inaugural election in 1974 through to its defeat at the 2001 election, winning eight consecutive elections and providing the territory's first seven chief ministers. Following its defeat in 2001, the party did not return to power until 2012, but was defeated at the 2016 election. It remained in opposition until the 2024 election, in which it regained government in a landslide and the party's leader Lia Finocchiaro, who was elected party leader and leader of the opposition in February 2020, became Chief Minister.\nAt federal level, the CLP contests elections for the Northern Territory's House of Representatives and Senate seats, which also cover the Australian Indian Ocean Territories. It is registered with the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC). Its candidates do not form a separate parliamentary party but instead join either the Liberal or National party rooms \u2013 for instance, CLP senator Nigel Scullion was a long-serving deputy leader of the Nationals. Its sole current federal legislator Jacinta Nampijinpa Price, also a senator, sits with the Liberal Party.\nThe CLP's constitution describes it as an \"independent conservative\" party and commits it to Northern Territory statehood. It has typically prioritised economic development of the territory and originally drew most of its support from Outback towns and the pastoral industry. It later developed a voter base among the urban middle-class populations of Darwin, Palmerston and Alice Springs (the latter two of which are strongholds for the party). The CLP party provided the territory's first Indigenous MP (Hyacinth Tungutalum) and Australia's first Indigenous head of government (Adam Giles).\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nA party system did not develop in the Northern Territory until the 1960s, due to its small population and lack of regular elections. The Australian Labor Party (ALP) contested elections as early as 1905, but rarely faced an organised opposition; anti-Labor candidates usually stood as independents. The regionalist North Australia Party (NAP), established by Lionel Rose for the 1965 Legislative Council election, has been cited as a predecessor of the CLP.\nA Darwin branch of the Country Party was established on 20 July 1966, following by an Alice Springs branch on 29 July. The creation of the branches was spurred by the upcoming 1966 federal election and the announcement by the Northern Territory's federal MP Jock Nelson that he would be retiring from politics. The Country Party achieved its first electoral success with the election of Sam Calder as Nelson's replacement. It subsequently won four out of eleven seats at the 1968 Legislative Council election. A third branch of the party was established in Katherine in February 1971. The branches affiliated with the Federal Council of the Australian Country Party in July 1971, establishing a formal entity with a central council, executive and annual conference. The party was formally named the \"Australian Country Party \u2013 Northern Territory\".\nThe Country Party primarily drew its support from Alice Springs, small towns, and the pastoral industry, including \"a fair proportion of the non-urban Aboriginal vote\". The party did not have a strong presence in Darwin. A branch of the Liberal Party, the Country Party's coalition partner at a federal level, had been established in Darwin in 1966, representing commercial interests and urban professionals. The Liberals fielded candidates at the 1968 Legislative Council elections, but by 1970 the local branch had ceased to function. In 1973, the Country Party began actively working to include Liberal supporters within its organisation, spurred by the Whitlam government's announcement of a fully elective Northern Territory Legislative Assembly. Following informal negotiations led by Goff Letts, a joint committee was established to determine changes to the Country Party's constitution and policy. These were officially approved, along with the adoption of the name Country Liberal Party, at the party's annual conference in Alice Springs on 20 July 1974. Per its 2018 constitution, the party reckons 1974 as its founding date.\n1974\u20132001: Foundation and early dominance.\nThe Whitlam government passed legislation in 1974 to establish a fully elected unicameral Northern Territory Legislative Assembly, replacing the previous partly elected Legislative Council, which had been in existence since 1947. The CLP won 17 out of 19 seats at the inaugural elections in October 1974, with independents holding the other two seats. Goff Letts became the inaugural majority leader, a title changed to chief minister after the granting of self-government in 1978. The CLP governed the Northern Territory from 1974 until the 2001 election. During this time, it never faced more than nine opposition members. Indeed, the CLP's dominance was so absolute that its internal politics were seen as a bigger threat than any opposition party. This was especially pronounced in the mid-1980s, when a series of party-room coups resulted in the Territory having three Chief Ministers during the 1983\u201387 term and also saw the creation of the Northern Territory Nationals as a short-lived splinter group under the leadership of former CLP chief minister Ian Tuxworth. According to ABC election analyst Antony Green, the CLP weathered these severe ructions because Territory Labor was \"unelectable\" at the time.\nThe Whitlam government also passed legislation to give the Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory (ACT) representation in the federal Senate, with each territory electing two senators. Bernie Kilgariff was elected as the CLP's first senator at the 1975 federal election, sitting alongside Sam Calder in the parliamentary National Country Party. On 3 February 1979 a special conference of the CLP resolved that \"the Federal CLP Parliamentarians be permitted to sit in the Party Rooms of their choice in Canberra\". Despite personal misgivings, Kilgariff chose to sit with the parliamentary Liberal Party from 8 March 1979 in order that the CLP have representation in both parties, a practice which has been maintained where possible.\n2001\u20132012: In opposition.\nAt the 2001 election, the Australian Labor Party won government by one seat, ending 27 years of CLP government. The loss marked a major turning point in Northern Territory politics, a result which was exacerbated when, at the 2005 election, the ALP won the second-largest majority government in the history of the Territory, reducing the once-dominant party to just four members in the Legislative Assembly. This result was only outdone by the 1974 election, in which the CLP faced only two independents as opposition. The CLP even lost two seats in Palmerston, an area where the ALP had never come close to winning any seats before.\nIn the 2001 federal election, the CLP won the newly formed seat of Solomon, based on Darwin/Palmerston, in the House of Representatives.\nIn the 2004 federal election, the CLP held one seat in the House of Representatives, and one seat in the Senate. The CLP lost its federal lower house seat in the 2007 federal election, but regained it when Palmerston deputy mayor Natasha Griggs won back Solomon for the CLP. She sat with the Liberals in the House.\nThe 2008 election saw the CLP recover from the severe loss it suffered three years earlier, increasing its representation from four to 11 members. Following the 2011 decision of ALP-turned-independent member Alison Anderson to join the CLP, this increased CLP's representation to 12 in the Assembly, leaving the incumbent Henderson Government to govern in minority with the support of Independent MP Gerry Wood.\nHistorically, the CLP has been particularly dominant in the Territory's two major cities, Darwin/Palmerston and Alice Springs. However, in recent years the ALP has pulled even with the CLP in the Darwin area; indeed, its 2001 victory was fueled by an unexpected swing in Darwin.\n2012\u20132016: Return to government and internal conflict.\nThe CLP under the leadership of Terry Mills returned to power in the 2012 election with 16 of 25 seats, defeating the incumbent Labor government led by Paul Henderson. In the lead up to the Territory election, CLP Senator Nigel Scullion sharply criticised the Federal Labor government for its suspension of the live cattle trade to Indonesia - an economic mainstay of the territory.\nThe election victory ended 11 years of ALP rule in the Northern Territory. The victory was also notable for the support it achieved from indigenous people in pastoral and remote electorates. Large swings were achieved in remote Territory electorates (where the indigenous population comprised around two-thirds of voters) and a total of five Aboriginal CLP candidates won election to the Assembly. Among the indigenous candidates elected were high-profile Aboriginal activist Bess Price and former ALP member Alison Anderson. Anderson was appointed Minister for Indigenous Advancement. In a nationally reported speech in November 2012, Anderson condemned welfare dependency and a culture of entitlement in her first ministerial statement on the status of Aboriginal communities in the Territory and said the CLP would focus on improving education and on helping create real jobs for indigenous people.\nLeadership spills.\nAdam Giles replaced Mills as Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and party leader at the 2013 CLP leadership ballot on 13 March while Mills was on a trade mission in Japan. Giles was sworn in as Chief Minister on 14 March, becoming the first indigenous head of government of an Australian state or territory.\nWillem Westra van Holthe challenged Giles at the 2015 CLP leadership ballot on 2 February and was elected leader by the party room in a late night vote conducted by phone. However, Giles refused to resign as Chief Minister following the vote. On 3 February, \"ABC News\" reported that officials were preparing an instrument for Giles' removal by the Administrator. The swearing-in of Westra van Holthe, which had been scheduled for 11:00 local time (01:30 UTC), was delayed. After a meeting of the parliamentary wing of the CLP, Giles announced that he would remain as party leader and Chief Minister, and that Westra van Holthe would be his deputy.\nDefections and minority government.\nAfter four defections during the parliamentary term, the CLP was reduced to minority government by July 2015. Giles raised the possibility of an early election on 20 July stating that he would \"love\" to call a snap poll, but that it was \"pretty much impossible to do\". Crossbenchers dismissed the notion of voting against a confidence motion to bring down the government.\n2016\u20132024: In opposition.\nTerritory government legislation passed in February 2016 changed the voting method of single-member electorates from full-preferential voting to optional preferential voting ahead of the 2016 territory election held on 27 August.\nFederally, a MediaReach seat-level opinion poll of 513 voters in the seat of Solomon conducted 22\u221223 June ahead of the 2016 federal election held on 2 July surprisingly found Labor candidate Luke Gosling heavily leading two-term CLP incumbent Natasha Griggs 61\u201339 on the two-party vote from a large 12.4 percent swing. The CLP lost Solomon to Labor at the election, with Gosling defeating Griggs 56\u201344 on the two-party vote from a 7.4 percent swing.\nPolling ahead of the 2016 Territory election indicated a large swing against the CLP, including a near-total collapse in Darwin/Palmerston. By the time the writs were dropped, commentators had almost universally written off the CLP. At 27 August Territory election, the CLP was swept from power in a massive Labor landslide, suffering easily the worst defeat of a sitting government in Territory history and one of the worst defeats a governing party has ever suffered at the state or territory level in Australia. The party not only lost all of the bush seats it picked up in 2012, but was all but shut out of Darwin/Palmerston, winning only one seat there. All told, the CLP only won two seats, easily its worst showing in an election. Giles himself lost his own seat, becoming the second Majority Leader/Chief Minister to lose his own seat. Even before Giles' defeat was confirmed, second-term MP Gary Higgins\u2014the only surviving member of the Giles cabinet\u2014was named the party's new leader, with Lia Finocchiaro as his deputy. On 20 January 2020, Higgins announced his resignation as party leader and announced his retirement at the next election. Finocchiaro succeeded him as CLP leader and leader of the opposition on 1 February 2020.\nFinocchiaro led the CLP to a modest recovery at the 2020 Territory election. The CLP picked up a six-seat swing, boosting its seat count to eight. However, it failed to make significant inroads in the Darwin/Palmerston area, winning only two seats there, including that of Finocchiaro.\nThe CLP lost the seat of Daly to Labor in a 2021 by-election, the first time an incumbent government had won a seat from the opposition in territory history.\n2024\u2013present: Return to government.\nThe CLP won a landslide victory in the 2024 Northern Territory general election.\nIdeology.\nThe CLP stands for office in the Northern Territory Assembly and Federal Parliament of Australia and primarily concerns itself with representing Territory interests. It is a regionally based party, that has parliamentary representation in both the Federal Parliament and at the territory level. It brands as a party with strong roots in the Territory.\nThe CLP competes against the Territory Labor Party (the local branch of Australia's largest social democratic party). It is closely affiliated with, but is independent from the Liberal Party of Australia (a mainly urban, pro-business party comprising mainly liberal membership) and the National Party of Australia (a conservative and regional interests party).\nThe foreword to the constitution of the party describes it as an \"independent conservative political party\". One of the objectives in the party's constitution is to \"work toward the achievement of Statehood in the Northern Territory\". The party promotes traditional Liberal Party values such as individualism and private enterprise, and what it describes as \"progressive\" political policy such as full statehood for the Northern Territory.\nIn February 2023, the party voted to oppose the Voice to Parliament.\nVoter base.\nTraditionally, the CLP's voting base has been mostly concentrated in Palmerston, Alice Springs, Katherine and parts of Darwin, as well as in rural towns where the majority of people are white.\nInitially, remote Indigenous communities around Australia voted strongly for Labor, but in recent years, Indigenous Australians have been more frequently voting for the Coalition, particularly in remote communities. At the same time, Labor has become stronger in Darwin and Palmerston. At the 2012 general election, the CLP won government by gaining five remote seats where the majority of the population identify as Aboriginal and that were traditionally considered safe seats for Labor. In 2016, the CLP was defeated by Labor in a landslide, and thus lost most of its ground territory-wide. However, in 2020, the CLP gained back some of its ground in remote areas (including narrowly gaining the seat of Barkly, which they did not win in 2012, with a huge swing to them).\nThe CLP's rule was once so tight, that a former minister once said the CLP had a \"'rightful inheritance of being the party that runs this place'\".\nDemographics.\nA 2023 poll conducted by the Redbridge Group, which found that the CLP would win the 2024 general election in a landslide, looked at demographics by voting intention in the Northern Territory. The poll found that the CLP has a support base among many demographics. The poll found that the CLP is overwhelmingly more popular than Labor among middle and high-income earners and people over 40, and that the CLP had more support than Labor among both Indigenous and non-Indigenous people, English and non-English speakers, and both men and women. The poll found that people aged between 18 and 40 are still more likely to vote for the CLP than they are any party, but by a smaller margin than people over 40.\nAs less parties and candidates contest Northern Territory general elections than they do Australian federal elections in the Northern Territory, the CLP, Labor and independents usually have a higher vote share at territory elections than at federal elections in the Northern Territory due to the absence of right-wing minor parties such as Pauline Hanson's One Nation and the fact that the Greens do not run in every seat at territory elections. On the territory level, the Redbridge poll found that 25% of One Nation supporters would vote for the CLP on the territory level, second to only the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party (SFF) at 33%.\nOrganisation.\nBranch delegates and members of the party's Central Council attend the Annual Conference of the Country Liberal Party to decide the party's platform. The Central Council is composed of the party's office bearers, its leaders from the Territory Assembly and the Federal Parliament and representatives of party branches.\nThe Annual Conference of the Country Liberal Party, attended by branch delegates and members of the party's Central Council, decides matters relating to the party's platform and philosophy. The Central Council administers the party and makes decisions on pre-selections. It is composed of the party's office bearers, its leaders in the Northern Territory Legislative Assembly, members in the Federal Parliament, and representation from each of the party's branches.\nThe CLP president has full voting rights with the National Party and observer status with the Liberal Party. Both the Liberals and Nationals receive Country Liberal delegations at their conventions. After federal elections, the CLP directs its federal members and senators as to which of the two other parties they should sit with in the parliamentary chamber. In practice, since the 1980s CLP House members usually sit with the Liberals, while CLP Senators usually sit with the Nationals.\nParliamentary Leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6469", "revid": "28979433", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6469", "title": "Canon law", "text": "Set of ordinances and regulations made by ecclesiastical authority\nCanon law (from , , a 'straight measuring rod, ruler') is a set of ordinances and regulations made by ecclesiastical authority (church leadership) for the government of a Christian organization or church and its members.\nCanon law includes the internal ecclesiastical law, or operational policy, governing the Catholic Church (both the Latin Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches), the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches, and the individual national churches within the Anglican Communion. The way that such church law is legislated, interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these four bodies of churches. In all three traditions, a canon was originally a rule adopted by a church council; these canons formed the foundation of canon law.\nEtymology.\nGreek / , Arabic / , Hebrew / , 'straight'; a rule, code, standard, or measure; the root meaning in all these languages is 'reed'; see also the Romance-language ancestors of the English word \"cane\".\nIn the fourth century, the First Council of Nicaea (325) calls canons the disciplinary measures of the church: the term canon, \u03ba\u03b1\u03bd\u1f60\u03bd, means in Greek, a rule. There is a very early distinction between the rules enacted by the church and the legislative measures taken by the state called , Latin for laws.\nApostolic Canons.\nThe \"Apostolic Canons\" or \"Ecclesiastical Canons of the Same Holy Apostles\" is a collection of ancient ecclesiastical decrees (eighty-five in the Eastern, fifty in the Western Church) concerning the government and discipline of the Early Christian Church, incorporated with the Apostolic Constitutions which are part of the Ante-Nicene Fathers.\nCatholic Church.\nIn the Catholic Church, canon law is the system of laws and legal principles made and enforced by the church's hierarchical authorities to regulate its external organization and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the church. It was the first modern Western legal system and is the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West.\nIn the Latin Church, positive ecclesiastical laws, based directly or indirectly upon immutable divine law or natural law, derive formal authority in the case of universal laws from the supreme legislator (i.e., the Supreme Pontiff), who possesses the totality of legislative, executive, and judicial power in his person, while particular laws derive formal authority from a legislator inferior to the supreme legislator. The actual subject material of the canons is not just doctrinal or moral in nature, but all-encompassing of the human condition, and therefore extending beyond what is taken as revealed truth.\nThe Catholic Church also includes the main five rites (groups) of churches which are in full union with the Holy See and the Latin Church:\nAll of these church groups are in full communion with the Supreme Pontiff and are subject to the \"Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches\".\nHistory, sources of law, and codifications.\nThe Catholic Church has what is claimed to be the oldest continuously functioning internal legal system in Western Europe, much later than Roman law but predating the evolution of modern European civil law traditions.\nThe history of Latin canon law can be divided into four periods: the \"jus antiquum\", the \"jus novum\", the \"jus novissimum\" and the \"Code of Canon Law\". In relation to the Code, history can be divided into the \"jus vetus\" (all law before the Code) and the \"jus novum\" (the law of the Code, or \"jus codicis\").\nThe canon law of the Eastern Catholic Churches, which had developed some different disciplines and practices, underwent its own process of codification, resulting in the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches promulgated in 1990 by Pope John Paul II.\nCatholic canon law as legal system.\nRoman Catholic canon law is a fully developed legal system, with all the necessary elements: courts, lawyers, judges, a fully articulated legal code, principles of legal interpretation, and coercive penalties, though it lacks civilly-binding force in most secular jurisdictions. One example where conflict between secular and canon law occurred was in the English legal system, as well as systems, such as the U.S., that derived from it. Here criminals could apply for the benefit of clergy. Being in holy orders, or fraudulently claiming to be, meant that criminals could opt to be tried by ecclesiastical rather than secular courts. The ecclesiastical courts were generally more lenient. Under the Tudors, the scope of clerical benefit was steadily reduced by Henry VII, Henry VIII, and Elizabeth I. The papacy disputed secular authority over priests' criminal offenses. The benefit of clergy was systematically removed from English legal systems over the next 200 years, although it still occurred in South Carolina in 1855.\nIn English Law, the use of this mechanism, which by that point was a legal fiction used for first offenders, was abolished by the Criminal Law Act 1827.\nThe academic degrees in Catholic canon law are the J.C.B. (\"Juris Canonici Baccalaureatus\", Bachelor of Canon Law, normally taken as a graduate degree), J.C.L. (\"Juris Canonici Licentiatus\", Licentiate of Canon Law) and the J.C.D. (\"Juris Canonici Doctor\", Doctor of Canon Law). Because of its specialized nature, advanced degrees in civil law or theology are normal prerequisites for the study of canon law.\nMuch of Catholic canon law's legislative style was adapted from the Roman Code of Justinian. As a result, Roman ecclesiastical courts tend to follow the Roman Law style of continental Europe with some variation, featuring collegiate panels of judges and an investigative form of proceeding, called \"inquisitorial\", from the Latin \"inquirere\", to enquire. This is in contrast to the adversarial form of proceeding found in the common law system of English and U.S. law, which features such things as juries and single judges.\nThe institutions and practices of Catholic canon law paralleled the legal development of much of Europe, and consequently, both modern civil law and common law bear the influences of canon law. As Edson Luiz Sampel, a Brazilian expert in Catholic canon law, says, canon law is contained in the genesis of various institutes of civil law, such as the law in continental Europe and Latin American countries. Indirectly, canon law has significant influence in contemporary society.\nCatholic Canonical jurisprudential theory generally follows the principles of Aristotelian-Thomistic legal philosophy. While the term \"law\" is never explicitly defined in the Catholic Code of Canon Law, the \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" cites Aquinas in defining law as \"an ordinance of reason for the common good, promulgated by the one who is in charge of the community\" and reformulates it as \"a rule of conduct enacted by competent authority for the sake of the common good\".\nCode for the Eastern Churches.\nThe law of the Eastern Catholic Churches in full communion with the Roman papacy was in much the same state as that of the Latin Church before 1917; much more diversity in legislation existed in the various Eastern Catholic Churches. Each had its own special law, in which custom still played an important part. One major difference in Eastern Europe however, specifically in the Eastern Orthodox Christian churches, was in regards to divorce. Divorce started to slowly be allowed in specific instances such as adultery being committed, abuse, abandonment, impotence, and barrenness being the primary justifications for divorce. Eventually, the church began to allow remarriage to occur (for both spouses) post-divorce. In 1929 Pius XI informed the Eastern Churches of his intention to work out a Code for the whole of the Eastern Church. The publication of these Codes for the Eastern Churches regarding the law of persons was made between 1949 through 1958 but finalized nearly 30 years later.\nThe first Code of Canon Law (1917) was exclusively for the Latin Church, with application to the Eastern Churches only \"in cases which pertain to their very nature\". After the Second Vatican Council (1962 \u2013 1965), the Vatican produced the \"Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches\" which became the first code of Eastern Catholic Canon Law.\nEastern Orthodox Church.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, principally through the work of 18th-century Athonite monastic scholar Nicodemus the Hagiorite, has compiled canons and commentaries upon them in a work known as the (, 'Rudder'), so named because it is meant to \"steer\" the church in her discipline. The dogmatic determinations of the Councils are to be applied rigorously since they are considered to be essential for the church's unity and the faithful preservation of the Gospel.\nAnglican Communion.\nIn the Church of England, the ecclesiastical courts that formerly decided many matters such as disputes relating to marriage, divorce, wills, and defamation, still have jurisdiction of certain church-related matters (e.g. discipline of clergy, alteration of church property, and issues related to churchyards). Their separate status dates back to the 12th century when the Normans split them off from the mixed secular/religious county and local courts used by the Saxons. In contrast to the other courts of England, the law used in ecclesiastical matters is at least partially a civil law system, not common law, although heavily governed by parliamentary statutes. Since the Reformation, ecclesiastical courts in England have been royal courts. The teaching of canon law at the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge was abrogated by Henry VIII; thereafter practitioners in the ecclesiastical courts were trained in civil law, receiving a Doctor of Civil Law (D.C.L.) degree from Oxford, or a Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) degree from Cambridge. Such lawyers (called \"doctors\" and \"civilians\") were centered at \"Doctors Commons\", a few streets south of St Paul's Cathedral in London, where they monopolized probate, matrimonial, and admiralty cases until their jurisdiction was removed to the common law courts in the mid-19th century.\nOther churches in the Anglican Communion around the world (e.g., the Episcopal Church in the United States and the Anglican Church of Canada) still function under their own private systems of canon law.\nIn 2002 a Legal Advisors Consultation meeting at Canterbury concluded:(1) There are principles of canon law common to the churches within the Anglican Communion; (2) Their existence can be factually established; (3) Each province or church contributes through its own legal system to the principles of canon law common within the Communion; (4) these principles have strong persuasive authority and are fundamental to the self-understanding of each of the member churches; (5) These principles have a living force, and contain within themselves the possibility for further development; and (6) The existence of the principles both demonstrates and promotes unity in the Communion.\nPresbyterian and Reformed churches.\nIn Presbyterian and Reformed churches, canon law is known as \"practice and procedure\" or \"church order\", and includes the church's laws respecting its government, discipline, legal practice, and worship.\nRoman canon law had been criticized by the Presbyterians as early as 1572 in the Admonition to Parliament. The protest centered on the standard defense that canon law could be retained so long as it did not contradict the civil law. According to Polly Ha, the Reformed church government refuted this, claiming that the bishops had been enforcing canon law for 1500 years.\nLutheranism.\nThe Book of Concord is the historic doctrinal statement of the Lutheran Church, consisting of ten credal documents recognized as authoritative in Lutheranism since the 16th century. However, the Book of Concord is a confessional document (stating orthodox belief) rather than a book of ecclesiastical rules or discipline, like canon law. Each Lutheran national church establishes its own system of church order and discipline, though these are referred to as \"canons\".\nUnited Methodist Church.\nThe Book of Discipline contains the laws, rules, policies, and guidelines for The United Methodist Church. Its latest edition was published in 2024.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCatholic\nAnglican"}
{"id": "6470", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6470", "title": "Computational Linguistics", "text": ""}
{"id": "6500", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6500", "title": "Colleges and universities/OldList", "text": ""}
{"id": "6501", "revid": "47424798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6501", "title": "Columbanus", "text": "Irish missionary (543\u2013615)\nSaint Columbanus (; 543 \u2013 21 November 615) was an Irish missionary notable for founding a number of monasteries after 590 in the Frankish and Lombard kingdoms, most notably Luxeuil Abbey in present-day France and Bobbio Abbey in present-day Italy.\nColumbanus taught an Irish monastic rule and penitential practices for those repenting of sins, which emphasised private confession to a priest, followed by penances imposed by the priest in reparation for the sins. Columbanus is one of the earliest identifiable Hiberno-Latin writers.\nSources.\nMost of what we know about Columbanus is based on Columbanus' own works (as far as they have been preserved) and Jonas of Susa's \"Vita Columbani\" (\"Life of Columbanus\"), which was written between 639 and 641.\nJonas entered Bobbio after Columbanus' death but relied on reports of monks who still knew Columbanus. A description of miracles of Columbanus written by an anonymous monk of Bobbio is of much later date. In the second volume of his \"Acta Sanctorum O.S.B.\", Mabillon gives the life in full, together with an appendix on the miracles of Columbanus, written by an anonymous member of the Bobbio community.\nBiography and early life.\nColumbanus (the Latinised form of \"Colm\u00e1n\", meaning \"little dove\") was born in Leinster, Ireland in 543. After his conception, his mother was said to have had a vision of her child's \"remarkable genius\".\nHe was first educated under Abbot Sinell of Cluaninis, whose monastery was on an island of the River Erne, in modern County Fermanagh. Under Sinell's instruction, Columbanus composed a commentary on the Psalms.\nColumbanus then moved to Bangor Abbey where he studied to become a teacher of the Bible. He was well-educated in the areas of grammar, rhetoric, geometry, and the Holy Scriptures. Abbot Comgall taught him Greek and Latin. He stayed at Bangor until c. 590, when Comgall reluctantly gave him permission to travel to the continent.\nFrankish Gaul (c. 590 \u2013 610).\nColumbanus set sail with twelve companions: Attala, Columbanus the Younger, Gallus, Domgal, Cummain, Eogain, Eunan, Gurgano, Libran, Lua, Sigisbert and Waldoleno. They crossed the channel via Cornwall and landed in Saint-Malo, Brittany.\nColumbanus then entered Burgundian France. Jonas writes that:At that time, either because of the numerous enemies from without, or on account of the carelessness of the bishops, the Christian faith had almost departed from that country. The creed alone remained. But the saving grace of penance and the longing to root out the lusts of the flesh were to be found only in a few. Everywhere that he went the noble man [Columbanus] preached the Gospel. And it pleased the people because his teaching was adorned by eloquence and enforced by examples of virtue.Columbanus and his companions were welcomed by King Guntram of Burgundy, who granted them land at Anegray, where they converted a ruined Roman fortress into a school. Despite its remote location in the Vosges Mountains, the school rapidly attracted so many students that they moved to a new site at Luxeuil and then established a second school at Fontaines. These schools remained under Columbanus' authority, and their rules of life reflected the Celtic tradition in which he had been educated.\nAs these communities expanded and drew more pilgrims, Columbanus sought greater solitude. Often he would withdraw to a cave seven miles away, with a single companion who acted as messenger between himself and his companions.\nConflict with Frankish Bishops.\nTensions arose in 603 CE when St. Columbanus and his followers argued with Frankish bishops over the exact date of Easter. (St. Columbanus celebrated Easter according to Celtic rites and the Celtic Christian calendar.)\nThe Frankish bishops may have feared his growing influence. During the first half of the sixth century, the councils of Gaul had given to bishops absolute authority over religious communities. Celtic Christians, Columbanus and his monks used the Irish Easter calculation, a version of Bishop Augustalis's 84-year for determining the date of Easter (quartodecimanism), whereas the Franks had adopted the Victorian cycle of 532 years. The bishops objected to the newcomers' continued observance of their own dating, which \u2013 among other issues \u2013 caused the end of Lent to differ. They also complained about the distinct Irish tonsure.\nIn 602, the bishops assembled to judge Columbanus, but he did not appear before them as requested. Instead, he sent a letter to the prelates \u2013 a strange mixture of freedom, reverence, and charity \u2013 admonishing them to hold synods more frequently, and advising them to pay more attention to matters of equal importance to that of the date of Easter. In defence of his following his traditional paschal cycle, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen the bishops refused to abandon the matter, Columbanus appealed directly to Pope Gregory I. In the third and only surviving letter, he asks \"the holy Pope, his Father\" to provide \"the strong support of his authority\" and to render a \"verdict of his favour\", apologising for \"presuming to argue as it were, with him who sits in the chair of Peter, Apostle and Bearer of the Keys\". None of the letters were answered, most likely due to the pope's death in 604.\nColumbanus then sent a letter to Gregory's successor, Pope Boniface IV, asking him to confirm the tradition of his elders \u2013 if it was not contrary to the Faith \u2013 so that he and his monks could follow the rites of their ancestors. Before Boniface responded, Columbanus moved outside the jurisdiction of the Frankish bishops. As the Easter issue appears to end around that time, Columbanus may have stopped celebrating the Irish date of Easter after moving to Italy.\nConflict with Brunhilda of Austrasia.\nColumbanus was also involved in a dispute with members of the Burgundian dynasty. Upon the death of King Guntram of Burgundy, the succession passed to his nephew, Childebert II, the son of his brother Sigebert and Sigebert's wife Brunhilda of Austrasia. When Childebert II died, his territories were divided between his two sons: Theuderic II inherited the Kingdom of Burgundy and Theudebert II inherited the Kingdom of Austrasia. Both were minors and Brunhilda, their grandmother, ruled as their regents.\nTheuderic II \"very often visited\" Columbanus, but when Columbanus rebuked him for having a concubine, Brunhilda became his bitterest foe because she feared the loss of her influence if Theuderic II married. Brunhilda incited the court and Catholic bishops against Columbanus and Theuderic II confronted Columbanus at Luxeuil, accusing him of violating the \"common customs\" and \"not allowing all Christians\" in the monastery. Columbanus asserted his independence to run the monastery without interference and was imprisoned at Besan\u00e7on for execution.\nColumbanus escaped and returned to Luxeuil. When the king and his grandmother found out, they sent soldiers to drive him back to Ireland by force, separating him from his monks by insisting that only those from Ireland could accompany him into exile.\nColumbanus was taken to Nevers, then travelled by boat down the Loire river to the coast. At Tours he visited the tomb of Martin of Tours, and sent a message to Theuderic II indicating that within three years he and his children would perish. When he arrived at Nantes, he wrote a letter before embarkation to his fellow monks at Luxeuil monastery. The letter urged his brethren to obey Attala, who stayed behind as abbot of the monastic community.\nThe letter concludes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSoon after the ship set sail from Nantes, a severe storm drove the vessel back ashore. Convinced that his holy passenger caused the tempest, the captain refused further attempts to transport the monk. Columbanus found sanctuary with Chlothar II of Neustria at Soissons, who gave him an escort to the court of King Theudebert II of Austrasia.\nThe Alps (611\u2013612).\nColumbanus arrived at Theudebert II's court in Metz in 611, where members of the Luxeuil school met him and Theudebert II granted them land at Bregenz. They travelled up the Rhine via Mainz to the lands of the Suebi and Alemanni in the northern Alps, intending to preach the Gospel to these people. He followed the Rhine river and its tributaries, the Aar and the Limmat, and then on to Lake Zurich. Columbanus chose the village of Tuggen as his initial community, but the work was not successful. He continued north-east by way of Arbon to Bregenz on Lake Constance. Here he found an oratory dedicated to Aurelia of Strasbourg containing three brass images of their tutelary deities. Columbanus commanded Gallus, who knew the local language, to preach to the inhabitants, and many were converted. The three brass images were destroyed, and Columbanus blessed the little church, placing the relics of Aurelia beneath the altar. A monastery was erected, Mehrerau Abbey, and the brethren observed their regular life. Columbanus stayed in Bregenz for about one year.\nIn the spring of 612, war broke out between Austrasia and Burgundy and Theudebert II was resoundingly beaten by Theuderic II. Austrasia was subsumed under the kingdom of Burgundy and Columbanus was again vulnerable to Theuderic II's opprobrium. When Columbanus' students began to be murdered in the woods, Columbanus decided to cross the Alps into Lombardy.\nGallus remained in this area until his death in 646. About seventy years later at the place of Gallus' cell the Abbey of Saint Gall was founded. The city of St. Gallen originated as an adjoining settlement of the abbey.\nLombardy (612\u2013615).\nColumbanus arrived in Milan in 612 and was welcomed by King Agilulf and Queen Theodelinda of the Lombards. He immediately began refuting the teachings of Arianism, which had enjoyed a degree of acceptance in Italy. He wrote a treatise against Arianism, which has since been lost. In 614, Agilulf granted Columbanus land for a school at the site of a ruined church at Bobbio.\nAt the king's request, Columbanus wrote a letter to Pope Boniface IV on the controversy over the \"Three Chapters\" \u2013 writings by Syrian bishops suspected of Nestorianism, which had been condemned in the fifth century as heresy. Pope Gregory I had tolerated in Lombardy those persons who defended the \"Three Letters\", among them King Agilulf. Columbanus agreed to take up the issue on behalf of the king. The letter has a diplomatic tone and begins with an apology that a \"foolish Scot\" (, Irishman) would be writing for a Lombard king. After acquainting the pope with the imputations brought against him, he entreats the pontiff to prove his orthodoxy and assemble a council. When critiquing Boniface, he writes that his freedom of speech is consistent with the custom of his country. Some of the language used in the letter might now be regarded as disrespectful, but in that time, faith and austerity could be more indulgent. Columbanus was tactful when making critiques, as he begins the letter he expresses with the most affectionate and impassioned devotion to the Holy See.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We Irish, though dwelling at the far ends of the earth, are all disciples of Saint Peter and Saint Paul\u00a0... we are bound to the Chair of Peter, and although Rome is great and renowned, through that Chair alone is she looked on as great and illustrious among us\u00a0... On account of the two Apostles of Christ, you are almost celestial, and Rome is the head of the whole world, and of the Churches.\nLater, he reveals charges against the Papacy so as to encourage Boniface to make concessions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For, as I hear, you are alleged to favour heretics\u2014God forbid men should believe that this has been, is, or shall be true. For they say that Eutyches, Nestorius, and Dioscorus, old heretics as we know, were favoured at some Council, at the fifth, by Vigilius. Here, as they say, is the cause of the whole calumny; if, as is reported, you also favour thus, or if you know that even (Pope) Vigilius himself died under such a taint, why do you repeat his name against your conscience? Already it is your fault if you have erred from the true belief and made your first faith void; justly do your subordinates oppose you, and justly do they hold no communion with you.\nColumbanus' deference towards Rome is sufficiently clear, calling the pope \"his Lord and Father in Christ\", the \"Chosen Watchman\", and the \"First Pastor, set higher than all mortals\", also asserting that \"we Irish, inhabitants of the world\u2019s edge, are disciples of Saints Peter and Paul and of all the disciples\" and that \"the unity of faith has produced in the whole world a unity of power and privilege.\"\nKing Agilulf gave Columbanus a tract of land called Bobbio between Milan and Genoa near the Trebbia river, situated in a defile of the Apennine Mountains, to be used as a base for the conversion of the Lombard people. The area contained a ruined church and wastelands known as \"Ebovium\", which had formed part of the lands of the papacy prior to the Lombard invasion. Columbanus wanted this secluded place, for while enthusiastic in the instruction of the Lombards he preferred solitude for his monks and himself. Next to the little church, which was dedicated to Peter the Apostle, Columbanus erected a monastery in 614. Bobbio Abbey at its foundation followed the Rule of Saint Columbanus, based on the monastic practices of Celtic Christianity. For centuries it remained the stronghold of orthodoxy in northern Italy.\nDeath.\nDuring the last year of his life, Columbanus received messages from King Chlothar II, inviting him to return to Burgundy, now that his enemies were dead. Columbanus did not return, but requested that the king should always protect his monks at Luxeuil Abbey. He prepared for death by retiring to his cave on the mountainside overlooking the Trebbia river, where, according to a tradition, he had dedicated an oratory to Our Lady. Columbanus died at Bobbio on 21 November 615 and is buried there.\nRule of Saint Columbanus.\nThe Rule of Saint Columbanus embodied the customs of Bangor Abbey and other Irish monasteries. Much shorter than the Rule of Saint Benedict, the Rule of Saint Columbanus consists of ten chapters, on the subjects of obedience, silence, food, poverty, humility, chastity, choir offices, discretion, mortification, and perfection.\nIn the first chapter, Columbanus introduces the great principle of his Rule: obedience, absolute and unreserved. The words of seniors should always be obeyed, just as \"Christ obeyed the Father up to death for us\". One manifestation of this obedience was constant hard labour designed to subdue the flesh, exercise the will in daily self-denial, and set an example of industry in cultivation of the soil. The least deviation from the Rule entailed corporal punishment, or a severe form of fasting. In the second chapter, Columbanus instructs that the rule of silence be \"carefully observed\", since it is written: \"But the nurture of righteousness is silence and peace\". He also warns, \"Justly will they be damned who would not say just things when they could, but preferred to say with garrulous loquacity what is evil\". In the third chapter, Columbanus instructs, \"Let the monks' food be poor and taken in the evening, such as to avoid repletion, and their drink such as to avoid intoxication, so that it may both maintain life and not harm\". Columbanus continues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn the fourth chapter, Columbanus presents the virtue of poverty and of overcoming greed, and that monks should be satisfied with \"small possessions of utter need, knowing that greed is a leprosy for monks\". Columbanus also instructs that \"nakedness and disdain of riches are the first perfection of monks, but the second is the purging of vices, the third the most perfect and perpetual love of God and unceasing affection for things divine, which follows on the forgetfulness of earthly things. Since this is so, we have need of few things, according to the word of the Lord, or even of one.\" In the fifth chapter, Columbanus warns against vanity, reminding the monks of Jesus' warning in Luke 16:15: \"You are the ones who justify yourselves in the eyes of others, but God knows your hearts. What people value highly is detestable in God's sight.\" In the sixth chapter, Columbanus instructs that \"a monk's chastity is indeed judged in his thoughts\" and warns, \"What profit is it if he be virgin in body, if he be not virgin in mind? For God, being Spirit.\"\nIn the seventh chapter, Columbanus instituted a service of perpetual prayer, known as , by which choir succeeded choir, both day and night. In the eighth chapter, Columbanus stresses the importance of discretion in the lives of monks to avoid \"the downfall of some, who beginning without discretion and passing their time without a sobering knowledge, have been unable to complete a praiseworthy life\". Monks are instructed to pray to God to \"illumine this way, surrounded on every side by the world's thickest darkness\". Columbanus continues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So discretion has got its name from discerning, for the reason that it discerns in us between good and evil, and also between the moderate and the complete. For from the beginning either class has been divided like light and darkness, that is, good and evil, after evil began through the devil's agency to exist by the corruption of good, but through God's agency Who first illumines and then divides. Thus righteous Abel chose the good, but unrighteous Cain fell upon evil.\nIn the ninth chapter, Columbanus presents mortification as an essential element in the lives of monks, who are instructed, \"Do nothing without counsel.\" Monks are warned to \"beware of a proud independence, and learn true lowliness as they obey without murmuring and hesitation\". According to the Rule, there are three components to mortification: \"not to disagree in mind, not to speak as one pleases with the tongue, not to go anywhere with complete freedom\". This mirrors the words of Jesus, \"For I have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me.\" (John 6:38) In the tenth and final chapter, Columbanus regulates forms of penance (often corporal) for offences, and it is here that the Rule of Saint Columbanus differs significantly from that of Saint Benedict.\nThe Communal Rule of Columbanus required monks to fast every day until \"None\" or 3 p.m.; this was later relaxed and observed on designated days. Columbanus' Rule regarding diet was very strict. Monks were to eat a limited diet of beans, vegetables, flour mixed with water and a small bread of a loaf, taken in the evenings.\nThe habit of the monks consisted of a tunic of undyed wool, over which was worn the cuculla, or cowl, of the same material. A great deal of time was devoted to various kinds of manual labour, not unlike the life in monasteries of other rules. The Rule of Saint Columbanus was approved of by the Fourth Council of M\u00e2con in 627, but it was superseded at the close of the century by the Rule of Saint Benedict. For several centuries in some of the greater monasteries the two rules were observed conjointly.\nCharacter.\nColumbanus did not lead a perfect life. According to Jonas and other sources, he could be impetuous and even headstrong, for by nature he was eager, passionate, and dauntless. These qualities were both the source of his power and the cause of his mistakes. His virtues, however, were quite remarkable. Like many saints, he had a great love for God's creatures. Stories claim that as he walked in the woods, it was not uncommon for birds to land on his shoulders to be caressed, or for squirrels to run down from the trees and nestle in the folds of his cowl. Although a strong defender of Irish traditions, he never wavered in showing deep respect for the Holy See as the supreme authority. His influence in Europe was due to the conversions he effected and to the rule that he composed. It may be that the example and success of Columba in Caledonia inspired him to similar exertions. The life of Columbanus stands as the prototype of missionary activity in Europe, followed by such men as Kilian, Vergilius of Salzburg, Donatus of Fiesole, Wilfrid, Willibrord, Suitbert of Kaiserwerdt, Boniface, and Ursicinus of Saint-Ursanne.\nMiracles.\nThe following are the principal miracles attributed to his intercession:\nJonas relates the occurrence of a miracle during Columbanus' time in Bregenz, when that region was experiencing a period of severe famine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although they were without food, they were bold and unterrified in their faith, so that they obtained food from the Lord. After their bodies had been exhausted by three days of fasting, they found so great an abundance of birds, just as the quails formerly covered the camp of the children of Israel, that the whole country near there was filled with birds. The man of God knew that this food had been scattered on the ground for his own safety and that of his brethren, and that the birds had come only because he was there. He ordered his followers first to render grateful praises to the Creator, and then to take the birds as food. And it was a wonderful and stupendous miracle; for the birds were seized according to the father's commands and did not attempt to fly away. The manna of birds remained for three days. On the fourth day, a priest from an adjacent city, warned by divine inspiration, sent a supply of grain to Saint Columban. When the supply of grain arrived, the Omnipotent, who had furnished the winged food to those in want, immediately commanded the phalanxes of birds to depart. We learned this from Eustasius, who was present with the others, under the command of the servant of God. He said that no one of them remembered ever having seen birds of such a kind before; and the food was of so pleasant savor that it surpassed royal viands. Oh, wonderful gift of divine mercy!\nLegacy.\nHistorian Alexander O'Hara states that Columbanus had a \"very strong sense of Irish identity\u00a0... He's the first person to write about Irish identity, he's the first Irish person that we have a body of literary work from, so even on that point of view he\u2019s very important in terms of Irish identity.\" In 1950 a congress celebrating the 1,400th anniversary of his birth took place in Luxeuil, France. It was attended by Robert Schuman, Se\u00e1n MacBride, the future Pope John XXIII, and John A. Costello who said \"All statesmen of today might well turn their thoughts to St Columban and his teaching. History records that it was by men like him that civilisation was saved in the 6th century.\"\nColumbanus is also remembered as the first Irish person to be the subject of a biography. An Italian monk named Jonas of Bobbio wrote a biography of him some twenty years after Columbanus' death. His use of the phrase in 600 AD (all of Europe) in a letter to Pope Gregory the Great is the first known use of the expression.\nAt Saint-Malo in Brittany, there is a granite cross bearing Columbanus's name to which people once came to pray for rain in times of drought. The nearby village of Saint-Coulomb commemorates him in name.\nIn France, the ruins of Columbanus' first monastery at Annegray are legally protected through the efforts of the Association Internationale des Amis de St Columban, which purchased the site in 1959. The association also owns and protects the site containing the cave, which served as Columbanus' cell, and the holy well that he created nearby. At Luxeuil-les-Bains, the Basilica of Saint Peter stands on the site of Columbanus' first church. A statue near the entrance, unveiled in 1947, shows him denouncing the immoral life of King Theuderic II. Formally an abbey church, the basilica contains old monastic buildings, which have been used as a minor seminary since the nineteenth century. It is dedicated to Columbanus and houses a bronze statue of him in its courtyard.\nLuxeuil Abbey, described in the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" as \"the nursery of saints and apostles\", produced sixty-three apostles who carried his rule, together with the Gospel, into France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy. These disciples of Columbanus are credited with founding more than a hundred different monasteries. The canton and town still bearing the name of St. Gallen testify to how well one of his disciples succeeded.\nBobbio Abbey became a renowned center of learning in the Early Middle Ages, so famous that it rivaled the monastic community at Monte Cassino in wealth and prestige. St. Attala continued St. Columbanus' work at Bobbio, proselytizing and collecting religious texts for the abbey's library. In Lombardy, San Colombano al Lambro in Milan, San Colombano Belmonte in Turin, and San Colombano Cert\u00e9noli in Genoa all take their names from the saint.\nIn 2024, the XXV International Meeting of Columban Associations for the \"Columban's Day 2024\" took place in Piacenza, Italy. Pope Francis said Columbanus enhanced the Catholic Church and that the life and labours of the Columban monks proved decisive for the preservation and renewal of European culture.\nThe Missionary Society of Saint Columban, founded in 1916, and the Missionary Sisters of St. Columban, founded in 1924, are both dedicated to Columbanus.\nVeneration.\nThe remains of Columbanus are preserved in the crypt at Bobbio Abbey. Many miracles have been credited to his intercession. In 1482, the relics were placed in a new shrine and laid beneath the altar of the crypt. The sacristy at Bobbio possesses a portion of the skull of Columbanus, his knife, wooden cup, bell, and an ancient water vessel, formerly containing sacred relics and said to have been given to him by Pope Gregory I. According to some authorities, twelve teeth of Columbanus were taken from the tomb in the fifteenth century and kept in the treasury, but these have since disappeared.\nColumbanus is named in the \"Roman Martyrology\" on 23 November, which is his feast day in Ireland. His feast is observed by the Benedictines on 21 November. In art, Columbanus is represented bearded, bearing the monastic cowl, holding in his hand a book with an Irish satchel, and standing in the midst of wolves. Sometimes he is depicted in the attitude of taming a bear, or with sun-beams over his head.\nThe Bishop of Hereford, John Oliver, suggested Columbanus as a patron of motorcyclists because of his extensive travels through Europe during his lifetime. His patronage was declared by the Vatican in 2002.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6502", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6502", "title": "Clean Air Act (1970)", "text": ""}
{"id": "6503", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6503", "title": "Concord, New Hampshire", "text": "Capital city of New Hampshire, United States\nConcord () is the capital city of the U.S. state of New Hampshire and the seat of Merrimack County. As of the 2020 United States census the population was 43,976, making it the 3rd most populous city in New Hampshire after Manchester and Nashua.\nThe area was first settled by Europeans in 1659. On January 17, 1725, the Province of Massachusetts Bay granted the Concord area as the Plantation of Penacook, and it was incorporated on February 9, 1734, as the Town of Rumford. Governor Benning Wentworth gave the city its current name in 1765 following a boundary dispute with the neighboring town of Bow; the name was meant to signify the new harmony between the two towns. In 1808, Concord was named the official seat of state government, and the State House was completed in 1819; it remains the oldest U.S. state capitol wherein the legislature meets in its original chambers.\nConcord is entirely within the Merrimack River watershed and the city is centered on the river. The Merrimack runs from northwest to southeast through the city. The city's eastern boundary is formed by the Soucook River, which separates Concord from the town of Pembroke. The Turkey River passes through the southwestern quarter of the city. The city consists of its downtown, including the North End and South End neighborhoods, along with the four villages of Penacook, Concord Heights, East Concord, and West Concord. Penacook sits along the Contoocook River, just before it flows into the Merrimack.\nAs of 2020, the top employer in the city was the State of New Hampshire, and the largest private employer was Concord Hospital. Concord is home to the University of New Hampshire School of Law, New Hampshire's only law school; St. Paul's School, a private preparatory school; NHTI, a two-year community college; the New Hampshire Police Academy; and the New Hampshire Fire Academy. Concord's Old North Cemetery is the final resting place of Franklin Pierce, 14th President of the United States.\nInterstate 89 and Interstate 93 are the two main interstate highways serving the city, and general aviation access is via Concord Municipal Airport. The nearest airport with commercial air service is Manchester\u2013Boston Regional Airport, to the south. There has been no passenger rail service to Concord since 1981. Historically, the Boston and Maine Railroad served the city.\nHistory.\nThe area that would become Concord was originally settled thousands of years ago by Abenaki Native Americans called the Pennacook. The tribe fished for migrating salmon, sturgeon, and alewives with nets strung across the rapids of the Merrimack River. The stream was also the transportation route for their birch bark canoes, which could travel from Lake Winnipesaukee to the Atlantic Ocean. The broad sweep of the Merrimack River valley floodplain provided good soil for farming beans, gourds, pumpkins, melons and maize.\nThe area was first settled by Europeans in 1659 as Penacook, after the Abenaki word \"pannukog\" meaning \"bend in the river,\" referencing the steep bends of the Merrimack River through the area. On January 17, 1725, the Province of Massachusetts Bay, which then claimed territories west of the Merrimack, granted the Concord area as the Plantation of Penacook. It was settled between 1725 and 1727 by Captain Ebenezer Eastman and others from Haverhill, Massachusetts. On February 9, 1734, the town was incorporated as \"Rumford\", from which Sir Benjamin Thompson, Count Rumford, would take his title. It was renamed \"Concord\" in 1765 by Governor Benning Wentworth following a bitter boundary dispute between Rumford and the town of Bow; the city name was meant to reflect the new concord, or harmony, between the disputant towns. Citizens displaced by the resulting border adjustment were given land elsewhere as compensation. In 1779, New Pennacook Plantation was granted to Timothy Walker Jr. and his associates at what would be incorporated in 1800 as Rumford, Maine, the site of Pennacook Falls.\nConcord grew in prominence throughout the 18th century, and some of the earliest houses from this period survive at the northern end of Main Street. In the years following the Revolution, Concord's central geographical location made it a logical choice for the state capital, particularly after Samuel Blodget in 1807 opened a canal and lock system to allow vessels passage around the Amoskeag Falls downriver, connecting Concord with Boston by way of the Middlesex Canal. In 1808, Concord was named the official seat of state government, and in 1816 architect Stuart Park was commissioned to design a new capitol building for the state legislature on land sold to the state by local Quakers. Construction on the State House was completed in 1819, and it remains the oldest capitol in the nation in which the state's legislative branches meet in their original chambers. Concord was also named the seat of Merrimack County in 1823, and the Merrimack County Courthouse was constructed in 1857 in the North End at the site of the Old Town House.\nIn the early 19th century, much of the city's economy was dominated by furniture-making, printing, and granite quarrying; granite had become a popular building material for many monumental halls in the early United States, and Concord granite was used in the construction of both the New Hampshire State House and the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. In 1828, Lewis Downing joined J. Stephens Abbot to form Abbot and Downing. Their most famous product was their Concord coach, widely used in the development of the American West, and their enterprise largely boosted and changed the city economy in the mid-19th century. In subsequent years, Concord would also become a hub for the railroad industry, with Penacook a textile manufacturing center using water power from the Contoocook River. The city also around this time started to become a center for the emerging healthcare industry, with New Hampshire State Hospital opening in 1842 as one of the first psychiatric hospitals in the United States. The State Hospital continued to expand throughout the following decades, and in 1891 Concord Hospital opened its doors as Margaret Pillsbury General Hospital, the first general hospital in the state of New Hampshire.\nConcord's economy changed once again in the 20th century with the declining railroad and textile industry. The city developed into a center for national politics due to New Hampshire's first-in-the-nation primary, and many presidential candidates still visit the Concord area during campaign season. The city also developed an identity within the emerging space industry, with the McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center opening in 1990 to commemorate Alan Shepard, the first American in space from nearby Derry, and Christa McAuliffe, a teacher at Concord High School who died in the 1986 Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster. Today, Concord remains a center for politics, law, healthcare, and insurance companies.\nGeography.\nConcord is located in south-central New Hampshire at (43.2070, \u221271.5371). It is north of the Massachusetts border, west of the Maine border, east of the Vermont border, and south of the Canadian border at Pittsburg.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of . of it are land and of it are water, comprising 4.81% of the city. Concord is drained by the Merrimack River. Penacook Lake, the largest lake in the city and its main source of water, is in the west. The highest point in Concord is above sea level on Oak Hill, just west of the hill's summit in neighboring Loudon.\nConcord lies fully within the Merrimack River watershed and is centered on the river, which runs from northwest to southeast through the city. Downtown is located on a low terrace to the west of the river, with residential neighborhoods climbing hills to the west and extending southwards towards the town of Bow. To the east of the Merrimack, atop a bluff, is a flat, sandy plain known as Concord Heights, which has seen most of the city's commercial development since 1960. The eastern boundary of Concord (with the town of Pembroke) is formed by the Soucook River, a tributary of the Merrimack. The Turkey River winds through the southwestern quarter of the city, passing through the campus of St. Paul's School before entering the Merrimack River in Bow. In the northern part of the city, the Contoocook River enters the Merrimack at the village of Penacook.\nConcord is north of Manchester, New Hampshire's largest city, and north of Boston.\nVillages.\nThe city of Concord is made up of its downtown, including its North End and South End neighborhoods, plus the four distinct villages of Penacook, Concord Heights, East Concord, and West Concord.\nClimate.\nConcord, as with much of New England, is within the humid continental climate zone (K\u00f6ppen \"Dfb\"), with long, cold, snowy winters, warm (and at times humid) summers, and relatively brief autumns and springs. In winter, successive storms deliver moderate to at times heavy snowfall amounts, contributing to the relatively reliable snow cover. In addition, lows reach below on an average 15 nights per year, and the city straddles the border between USDA Hardiness Zone 5b and 6a. However, thaws are frequent, with one to three days per month with + highs from December to February. Summer can bring stretches of humid conditions as well as thunderstorms, and there is an average of 12 days of + highs annually. The window for freezing temperatures on average begins on September 27 and expires on May 14.\nThe monthly daily average temperature range from in January to in July. Temperature extremes have ranged from in February 1943 to in July 1966.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 43,976 people residing in the city. The population density was . At the 2010 census there were 42,695 residents and 10,052 families in the city, as well as 18,852 housing units at an average density of . \nIn 2010 there were 17,592 households, out of which 28.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.3% were headed by married couples living together, 11.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 42.9% were non-families. 33.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.0% were someone living alone who was 65\u00a0years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26, and the average family size was 2.90.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 20.7% under the age of 18, 9.3% from 18 to 24, 28.0% from 25 to 44, 28.2% from 45 to 64, and 13.8% who were 65\u00a0years of age or older. The median age was 39.4\u00a0years. For every 100 females, there were 98.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.9 males.\nFor the period 2019\u20132023, the median annual income for a household in the city was $83,701. The per capita income for the city was $45,420. About 8.7% of those in Concord were below the poverty line during 2019\u20132023.\nRace and ethnicity.\nThe racial makeup of the city in 2020 was 84.5% White, 4.9% Black or African American, 1.0% Native American, 4.9% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.4% from some other race, and 1.8% from two or more races. 4.9% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.The most reported ancestries in 2020 were:\nEconomy.\nTop employers.\nIn 2020, the top employer in the city remained the State of New Hampshire, with over 6,000 employed workers, while the largest private employer was Concord Hospital, with just under 3,000 employees. According to the City of Concord's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top 10 employers in the city for the Fiscal Year 2020 were:\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nInterstate 89 and Interstate 93 are the two main interstate highways serving Concord, and join just south of the city limits. Interstate 89 links Concord with Lebanon and the state of Vermont to the northwest, while Interstate 93 connects the city to Plymouth, Littleton, and the White Mountains to the north and Manchester and Boston to the south. Interstate 393 is a spur highway leading east from Concord and merging with U.S. Route 4 as a direct route to New Hampshire's Seacoast region. North-south U.S. Route 3 serves as Concord's Main Street, while U.S. Route 202 and New Hampshire Route 9 cross the city from east to west. State routes 13 and 132 also serve the city: Route 13 leads southwest out of Concord towards Goffstown and Milford, while Route 132 travels north parallel to Interstate 93. New Hampshire Route 106 passes through the easternmost part of Concord, crossing I-393 and NH 9 before crossing the Soucook River south into the town of Pembroke. To the north, NH 106 leads to Loudon, Belmont and Laconia.\nRailroads.\nHistorically, Concord served as an important railroad terminal and station for the Boston and Maine Railroad. The former Concord Station was located at what is now a Burlington department store on Storrs Street. The station itself was built in 1860, but the fourth and most famous iteration of the station was built in 1885, which had a brick head house designed by Bradford L. Gilbert. The head house was demolished in 1959 and replaced by a smaller \"McGinnis Era\" station. By 1967, all passenger rail services to Concord had been discontinued. For 13 months in 1980 and 1981, MBTA Commuter Rail ran two round trips a day between Boston and Concord. Since then, there has not been any passenger rail service to Concord.\nIn 2021, Amtrak announced their plan to implement new service between Boston and Concord by 2035.\nBus.\nLocal bus service is provided by Concord Area Transit (CAT), with three routes through the city. Regional bus service provided by Concord Coach Lines and Greyhound Lines is available from the Concord Transportation Center at 30 Stickney Avenue next to Exit 14 on Interstate 93, with service south to Boston and points in between, as well as north to Littleton and northeast to Berlin.\nOther modes.\nGeneral aviation services are available through Concord Municipal Airport, located east of downtown. There is no commercial air service within the city limits; the nearest such airport is Manchester\u2013Boston Regional Airport, to the south.\nComplete Streets Improvement Project.\nConcord's downtown underwent a significant renovation between 2015 and 2016, during the city's \"Complete Streets Improvement Project\". At a proposed cost of $12 million, the project promised to deliver on categories of maintenance to aging infrastructure, improved accessibility, increased sustainability, a safer experience for walkers, bikers and motorists alike, and to stimulate economic growth in an increasingly idle downtown. The main infrastructural change was reducing the four-lane street (two in each direction) to two lanes plus a turning lane in the center. The freed-up space would contribute to extra width for bikes to ride in either direction, increased curb size and an added median where there is no need for a turning lane. Concord opted to add shared lane markings for bikes, rather than a dedicated protected bike lane.\nBy adding curb space, this project created new opportunities for pedestrians to enjoy the downtown. Many power lines were buried, and street trees, colorful benches, art installations, and other green spaces were added, all allowing people to reclaim a space long dominated by cars. Main Street underwent serious traffic calming, including a road diet, increased diagonal parking, widening sidewalks, adding shared lane markings, adding trees, texturing medians and coloring crosswalks red. Another aspect of the new construction was adding heated sidewalk capabilities, utilizing excess steam from the local Concord Steam plant, and minimizing sand and snow blowing needed during the winter months.\nFunding for Complete Streets came from a combination of $4,710,000 from a USDOT TIGER grant and the rest from the City of Concord. The project was initially proposed as costing $7,850,000, but ran over budget due to overambitious ideas. After scrapping some of the most expensive offenders, the budget ended up at $14.2 million, with the project actually coming in $1.1 million below that. Although adding final aesthetic touches with the extra money were debated, the city council ended up deciding to save for financially straining years ahead. The design was carried out by McFarland Johnson, IBI Group, and City of Concord Engineering.\nGovernment.\nConcord is governed via the council-manager system. The city council consists of a mayor and 14 councilors, ten of which are elected to two-year terms representing each of the city wards, while the other four are elected at-large to four-year terms. The mayor is elected directly every two years. The current mayor as of 2024 is Byron Champlin, who was elected on November 7, 2023, with more than 75% of the vote.\nAccording to the Concord city charter, the mayor chairs the council, however has very few formal powers over the day-to-day management of the city. The actual operations of the city are overseen by the city manager, currently Thomas J. Aspell Jr. The current police chief is Bradley S. Osgood.\nIn the New Hampshire Senate, Concord is in the 15th District, represented by Democrat Becky Whitley since December 2020. On the New Hampshire Executive Council, Concord is in the 2nd District, represented by Cinde Warmington, the sole Democrat on the council. In the United States House of Representatives, Concord is in New Hampshire's 2nd congressional district, represented by Democrat Maggie Goodlander.\nNew Hampshire Department of Corrections operates the New Hampshire State Prison for Men and New Hampshire State Prison for Women in Concord.\nConcord leans strongly Democratic in presidential elections; the last Republican nominee to carry the city was then Vice President George H. W. Bush in 1988. Voter turnout was 72.7% in the 2020 general election, down from 76.2% in 2016, but still above the 2020 national turnout of 66.7%.\nMedia.\nNewspapers and journals\nRadio\nThe city is otherwise served by . New Hampshire Public Radio is headquartered in Concord.\nTelevision\nSites of interest.\nThe New Hampshire State House, designed by architect Stuart Park and constructed between 1815 and 1818, is the oldest state house in which the legislature meets in its original chambers. The building was remodeled in 1866, and the third story and west wing were added in 1910.\nAcross from the State House is the Eagle Hotel on Main Street, which has been a downtown landmark since its opening in 1827. U.S. Presidents Ulysses S. Grant, Rutherford Hayes, and Benjamin Harrison all dined there, and Franklin Pierce spent the night before departing for his inauguration. Other well-known guests included Jefferson Davis, Charles Lindbergh, Eleanor Roosevelt, Richard M. Nixon (who carried New Hampshire in all three of his presidential bids), and Thomas E. Dewey. The hotel closed in 1961.\nSouth from the Eagle Hotel on Main Street is Phenix Hall, which replaced \"Old\" Phenix Hall, which burned in 1893. Both the old and new buildings featured multi-purpose auditoriums used for political speeches, theater productions, and fairs. Abraham Lincoln spoke at the old hall in 1860; Theodore Roosevelt, at the new hall in 1912.\nNorth on Main Street is the Walker-Woodman House, also known as the Reverend Timothy Walker House, the oldest standing two-story house in Concord. It was built for the Reverend Timothy Walker between 1733 and 1735.\nOn the north end of Main Street is the Pierce Manse, in which President Franklin Pierce lived in Concord before and following his presidency. The mid-1830s Greek Revival house was moved from Montgomery Street to North Main Street in 1971 to prevent its demolition.\nBeaver Meadow Golf Course, located in the northern part of Concord, is one of the oldest golf courses in New England. Besides this golf course, other important sporting venues in Concord include Everett Arena and Memorial Field.\nThe SNOB (Somewhat North Of Boston) Film Festival, started in the fall of 2002, brings independent films and filmmakers to Concord and has provided an outlet for local filmmakers to display their films. SNOB Film Festival was a catalyst for the building in 2007 of Red River Theatres, a locally owned, nonprofit, independent cinema named after the 1948 film featuring John Wayne.\nOther sites of interest include the Capitol Center for the Arts, the New Hampshire Historical Society, which has two facilities in Concord, and the McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center, a science museum named after Christa McAuliffe, the Concord teacher who died during the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster in 1986, and Alan Shepard, the Derry-born astronaut who was the second person and first American in space as well as the fifth and oldest person to walk on the Moon.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nConcord's public schools are within the Concord School District, except for schools in the Penacook area of the city, which are within the Merrimack Valley School District, a district which also includes several towns north of Concord. The only public high school in the Concord School District is Concord High School, which had about 1,450 students as of Fall 2023. The only public middle school in the Concord School District is Rundlett Middle School, which had roughly 770 students as of Fall 2023. Concord School District's elementary schools underwent a major re-configuration in 2012, with three newly constructed schools opening and replacing six previous schools. Kimball School and Walker School were replaced by Christa McAuliffe School on the Kimball School site, Conant School (and Rumford School, which closed a year earlier) were replaced by Abbot-Downing School at the Conant site, and Eastman and Dame schools were replaced by Mill Brook School, serving kindergarten through grade two, located next to Broken Ground Elementary School, serving grades three to five. Beaver Meadow School, the remaining elementary school, was unaffected by the changes.\nConcord schools in the Merrimack Valley School District include Merrimack Valley High School and Merrimack Valley Middle School, which are adjacent to each other and to Rolfe Park in Penacook village, and Penacook Elementary School, just south of the village.\nPrivate and charter schools.\nConcord has two parochial schools, Bishop Brady High School and Saint John Regional School.\nOther area private schools include Concord Christian Academy, Parker Academy, Trinity Christian School, and Shaker Road School. Also in Concord is St. Paul's School, a boarding school located in the city's West End neighborhood.\nPost-secondary schools.\nConcord is home to New Hampshire Technical Institute, the city's primary community college, and Granite State College, which offers online two-year and four-year degrees. The University of New Hampshire School of Law is located near downtown, and the Franklin Pierce University Doctorate of Physical Therapy program also has a location in the city. Concord Hospital recently announced plans to open a joint program with the New England College School of Nursing as part of their Bachelor of Nursing degree. Concord is also a major clinical site of Dartmouth College's Geisel School of Medicine, New Hampshire's only medical school.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6505", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6505", "title": "Chlorophyceae", "text": "Class of green algae\nThe Chlorophyceae, also known as chlorophycean algae, are one of the classes of green algae, within the phylum Chlorophyta. They are a large assemblage of mostly freshwater and terrestrial organisms; many members are important primary producers in the ecosystems they inhabit. Their body plans are diverse and range from single flagellated or non-flagellated cells to colonies or filaments of cells. The class Chlorophyceae has been distinguished on the basis of ultrastructural morphology; molecular traits are also being used to classify taxa within the class.\nDescription.\nChlorophycean algae are eukaryotic organisms composed of cells which occur in a variety of forms. Depending on the species, Chlorophyceae can grow unicellular (e.g. \"Chlamydomonas)\", colonial (e.g. \"Volvox\"), coenocytic (e.g. \"Characiosiphon\"), or filamentous (e.g. \"Chaetophora\"). In their vegetative state, some members have flagella while others produce them only in reproductive stages; still others never produce flagella.\nChloroplasts.\nChlorophycean algae have chloroplasts and nearly all members are photosynthetic. There are a few exceptions, such as \"Polytoma\", which have plastids that have lost the ability to photosynthesize. They are usually green due to the presence of chlorophyll \"a\" and \"b\"; they can also contain the pigment beta-carotene. Chloroplasts are diverse in morphology and include many forms, including, cup-shaped (e.g. \"Chlamydomonas\"), or axial, or parietal and reticulate (e.g. \"Oedogonium\").\nIn many species, there may be one or more storage bodies called pyrenoids (central proteinaceous body covered with a starch sheath) that are localised around the chloroplast. Some algae may also store food in the form of oil droplets. The inner cell wall layer is made of cellulose and the outer layer of pectose.\nUltrastructure.\nCells of Chlorophyceae usually have two or four flagella, but in some cases may have numerous flagella. The flagella emerge from the apex of the cell, and are connected to the nucleus via rhizoplasts. The arrangement of flagella may be in one of two configurations, termed CW (\"clockwise\") or DO (\"directly opposed\"). In the CW configuration, the basal bodies are arranged clockwise in the 1\u20137 o'clock position. In the DO configuration, the basal bodies are arranged in 12\u20136 o'clock. Taxa with the CW arrangement and DO arrangement correspond to two different clades, roughly corresponding to the orders Chlamydomonadales and Sphaeropleales, respectively.\nA combination of ultrastructural features are characteristic of the Chlorophyceae. These include: closed mitosis, the telophase spindle collapsing before cytokinesis, and a system of microtubules called a phycoplast running parallel to the plane of cytokinesis.\nReproduction.\nChlorophyceae can reproduce both asexually and sexually. In asexual reproduction, cells may produce autospores, aplanospores or zoospores. Autospores (by definition) lack flagella and appear as smaller versions of vegetative cells. Zoospores typically have an elongate, hydrodynamic shape and often have eyespots. Aplanospores are similar to zoospores in that they have characteristics typical of zoospores (such as contractile vacuoles), but lack flagella.\nIn addition to normal asexual reproduction, some genera such as \"Chlamydomonas\" and \"Dunaliella\" can go through a temporary phase known as the \"palmella stage\", in which flagella are absent and the cells divide vegetatively within a common mucilaginous envelope. Algae enter the palmella stage in response to stressful conditions, such as changes in salinity or predation. Additionally, \"Haematococcus\" produces resistant stages with thick cell walls, termed akinetes.\nSexual reproduction shows considerable variation in the type and formation of sex cells; it may be isogamous (with two morphologically identical gamete types), anisogamous (with two morphologically distinct gamete types), and oogamous (with larger, nonmotile eggs and smaller motile sperm cells). Members of Chlorophyceae that undergo sexual reproduction have a zygotic life cycle, in which the zygotes are the only diploid stages. Zygotes may have thick and/or spiny cell walls; these are called hypnozygotes and they also function as resting stages.\nThey share many similarities with higher plants, including the presence of asymmetrical flagellated cells, the breakdown of the nuclear envelope at mitosis, and the presence of phytochromes, flavonoids, and the chemical precursors to the cuticle. However, unlike higher plants they do not go through a multicellular alternation of generations.\nTaxonomy.\nThe current taxonomy of algae is based on molecular phylogenetics. Older classifications are simpler and more morphologically aligned; however, these classifications are recognized as artificial due to the extensive morphological convergence present within the class (and more broadly within algae). In even older, historical classifications, the term Chlorophyceae is sometimes used to apply to all the green algae except the Charales, and the internal division is considerably different.\nAs of May\u00a02023[ [update]], AlgaeBase accepted the following orders in the class Chlorophyceae:\nAlong with these genera, AlgaeBase recognizes several taxa that are incertae sedis (i.e. unplaced to an order):\nOther orders that have been recognized include:\nPhylogeny.\nCurrent thinking of phylogenetic relationships are as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6508", "revid": "18481282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6508", "title": "Cyril", "text": "Cyril (also Cyrillus or Cyryl) is a masculine given name. It is derived from the Greek name (\"K\u00fdrillos\"), meaning 'lordly, masterful', which in turn derives from Greek (\"k\u00fdrios\") 'lord'. There are various variant forms of the name \"Cyril\" such as \"Cyrill\", \"Cyrille\", \"Ciril\", \"Kirill\", \"Kiryl\", \"Kirillos\", \"Kyrylo\", \"Kiril\", \"Kiro\", \"Kyril\", \"Kyrill\" and \"Quirrel\".\nIt may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name. "}
{"id": "6510", "revid": "55814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6510", "title": "Color space encoding", "text": ""}
{"id": "6511", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6511", "title": "Computational complexity", "text": "Amount of resources to perform an algorithm\nIn computer science, the computational complexity or simply complexity of an algorithm is the amount of resources required to run it. Particular focus is given to computation time (generally measured by the number of needed elementary operations) and memory storage requirements. The complexity of a problem is the complexity of the best algorithms that allow solving the problem.\nThe study of the complexity of explicitly given algorithms is called analysis of algorithms, while the study of the complexity of problems is called computational complexity theory. Both areas are highly related, as the complexity of an algorithm is always an upper bound on the complexity of the problem solved by this algorithm. Moreover, for designing efficient algorithms, it is often fundamental to compare the complexity of a specific algorithm to the complexity of the problem to be solved. Also, in most cases, the only thing that is known about the complexity of a problem is that it is lower than the complexity of the most efficient known algorithms. Therefore, there is a large overlap between analysis of algorithms and complexity theory.\nAs the amount of resources required to run an algorithm generally varies with the size of the input, the complexity is typically expressed as a function \"n\" \u2192 \"f\"(\"n\"), where \"n\" is the size of the input and \"f\"(\"n\") is either the worst-case complexity (the maximum of the amount of resources that are needed over all inputs of size \"n\") or the average-case complexity (the average of the amount of resources over all inputs of size \"n\"). Time complexity is generally expressed as the number of required elementary operations on an input of size \"n\", where elementary operations are assumed to take a constant amount of time on a given computer and change only by a constant factor when run on a different computer. Space complexity is generally expressed as the amount of memory required by an algorithm on an input of size \"n\".\nResources.\nTime.\nThe resource that is most commonly considered is time. When \"complexity\" is used without qualification, this generally means time complexity.\nThe usual units of time (seconds, minutes etc.) are not used in complexity theory because they are too dependent on the choice of a specific computer and on the evolution of technology. For instance, a computer today can execute an algorithm significantly faster than a computer from the 1960s; however, this is not an intrinsic feature of the algorithm but rather a consequence of technological advances in computer hardware. Complexity theory seeks to quantify the intrinsic time requirements of algorithms, that is, the basic time constraints an algorithm would place on \"any\" computer. This is achieved by counting the number of \"elementary operations\" that are executed during the computation. These operations are assumed to take constant time (that is, not affected by the size of the input) on a given machine, and are often called \"steps\".\nBit complexity.\nFormally, the \"bit complexity\" refers to the number of operations on bits that are needed for running an algorithm. With most models of computation, it equals the time complexity up to a constant factor. On computers, the number of operations on machine words that are needed is also proportional to the bit complexity. So, the \"time complexity\" and the \"bit complexity\" are equivalent for realistic models of computation.\nSpace.\nAnother important resource is the size of computer memory that is needed for running algorithms.\nCommunication.\nFor the class of distributed algorithms that are commonly executed by multiple, interacting parties, the resource that is of most interest is the communication complexity. It is the necessary amount of communication between the executing parties.\nOthers.\nThe number of arithmetic operations is another resource that is commonly used. In this case, one talks of arithmetic complexity. If one knows an upper bound on the size of the binary representation of the numbers that occur during a computation, the time complexity is generally the product of the arithmetic complexity by a constant factor.\nFor many algorithms the size of the integers that are used during a computation is not bounded, and it is not realistic to consider that arithmetic operations take a constant time. Therefore, the time complexity, generally called bit complexity in this context, may be much larger than the arithmetic complexity. For example, the arithmetic complexity of the computation of the determinant of a \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" integer matrix is formula_1 for the usual algorithms (Gaussian elimination). The bit complexity of the same algorithms is exponential in n, because the size of the coefficients may grow exponentially during the computation. On the other hand, if these algorithms are coupled with multi-modular arithmetic, the bit complexity may be reduced to \"O\"~(\"n\"4).\nIn sorting and searching, the resource that is generally considered is the number of entry comparisons. This is generally a good measure of the time complexity if data are suitably organized.\nComplexity as a function of input size.\nIt is impossible to count the number of steps of an algorithm on all possible inputs. As the complexity generally increases with the size of the input, the complexity is typically expressed as a function of the size \"n\" (in bits) of the input, and therefore, the complexity is a function of \"n\". However, the complexity of an algorithm may vary dramatically for different inputs of the same size. Therefore, several complexity functions are commonly used.\nThe worst-case complexity is the maximum of the complexity over all inputs of size n, and the average-case complexity is the average of the complexity over all inputs of size n (this makes sense, as the number of possible inputs of a given size is finite). Generally, when \"complexity\" is used without being further specified, this is the worst-case time complexity that is considered.\nAsymptotic complexity.\nIt is generally difficult to compute precisely the worst-case and the average-case complexity. In addition, these exact values provide little practical application, as any change of computer or of model of computation would change the complexity somewhat. Moreover, the resource use is not critical for small values of n, and this makes that, for small n, the ease of implementation is generally more interesting than a low complexity.\nFor these reasons, one generally focuses on the behavior of the complexity for large n, that is on its asymptotic behavior when n tends to the infinity. Therefore, the complexity is generally expressed by using big O notation.\nFor example, the usual algorithm for integer multiplication has a complexity of formula_2 this means that there is a constant formula_3 such that the multiplication of two integers of at most n digits may be done in a time less than formula_4 This bound is \"sharp\" in the sense that the worst-case complexity and the average-case complexity are formula_5 which means that there is a constant formula_6 such that these complexities are larger than formula_7 The radix does not appear in these complexity, as changing of radix changes only the constants formula_3 and formula_9\nModels of computation.\nThe evaluation of the complexity relies on the choice of a model of computation, which consists in defining the basic operations that are done in a unit of time. When the model of computation is not explicitly specified, it is generally implicitely assumed as being a multitape Turing machine, since several more realistic models of computation, such as random-access machines are asymptotically equivalent for most problems. It is only for very specific and difficult problems, such as integer multiplication in time formula_10 that the explicit definition of the model of computation is required for proofs.\nDeterministic models.\nA deterministic model of computation is a model of computation such that the successive states of the machine and the operations to be performed are completely determined by the preceding state. Historically, the first deterministic models were recursive functions, lambda calculus, and Turing machines. The model of random-access machines (also called RAM-machines) is also widely used, as a closer counterpart to real computers.\nWhen the model of computation is not specified, it is generally assumed to be a multitape Turing machine. For most algorithms, the time complexity is the same on multitape Turing machines as on RAM-machines, although some care may be needed in how data is stored in memory to get this equivalence.\nNon-deterministic computation.\nIn a non-deterministic model of computation, such as non-deterministic Turing machines, some choices may be done at some steps of the computation. In complexity theory, one considers all possible choices simultaneously, and the non-deterministic time complexity is the time needed, when the best choices are always done. In other words, one considers that the computation is done simultaneously on as many (identical) processors as needed, and the non-deterministic computation time is the time spent by the first processor that finishes the computation. This parallelism is partly amenable to quantum computing via superposed entangled states in running specific quantum algorithms, like e.g. Shor's factorization of yet only small integers (as of \u00a02018[ [update]]: 21 = 3 \u00d7 7).\nEven when such a computation model is not realistic yet, it has theoretical importance, mostly related to the P = NP problem, which questions the identity of the complexity classes formed by taking \"polynomial time\" and \"non-deterministic polynomial time\" as least upper bounds. Simulating an NP-algorithm on a deterministic computer usually takes \"exponential time\". A problem is in the complexity class NP, if it may be solved in polynomial time on a non-deterministic machine. A problem is NP-complete if, roughly speaking, it is in NP and is not easier than any other NP problem. Many combinatorial problems, such as the Knapsack problem, the travelling salesman problem, and the Boolean satisfiability problem are NP-complete. For all these problems, the best known algorithm has exponential complexity. If any one of these problems could be solved in polynomial time on a deterministic machine, then all NP problems could also be solved in polynomial time, and one would have P = NP. As of 2017[ [update]] it is generally conjectured that P \u2260 NP, with the practical implication that the worst cases of NP problems are intrinsically difficult to solve, i.e., take longer than any reasonable time span (decades!) for interesting lengths of input.\nParallel and distributed computation.\nParallel and distributed computing consist of splitting computation on several processors, which work simultaneously. The difference between the different model lies mainly in the way of transmitting information between processors. Typically, in parallel computing the data transmission between processors is very fast, while, in distributed computing, the data transmission is done through a network and is therefore much slower.\nThe time needed for a computation on N processors is at least the quotient by N of the time needed by a single processor. In fact this theoretically optimal bound can never be reached, because some subtasks cannot be parallelized, and some processors may have to wait a result from another processor.\nThe main complexity problem is thus to design algorithms such that the product of the computation time by the number of processors is as close as possible to the time needed for the same computation on a single processor.\nQuantum computing.\nA quantum computer is a computer whose model of computation is based on quantum mechanics. The Church\u2013Turing thesis applies to quantum computers; that is, every problem that can be solved by a quantum computer can also be solved by a Turing machine. However, some problems may theoretically be solved with a much lower time complexity using a quantum computer rather than a classical computer. This is, for the moment, purely theoretical, as no one knows how to build an efficient quantum computer.\nQuantum complexity theory has been developed to study the complexity classes of problems solved using quantum computers. It is used in post-quantum cryptography, which consists of designing cryptographic protocols that are resistant to attacks by quantum computers.\nProblem complexity (lower bounds).\nThe complexity of a problem is the infimum of the complexities of the algorithms that may solve the problem, including unknown algorithms. Thus the complexity of a problem is not greater than the complexity of any algorithm that solves the problems.\nIt follows that every complexity of an algorithm, that is expressed with big O notation, is also an upper bound on the complexity of the corresponding problem.\nOn the other hand, it is generally hard to obtain nontrivial lower bounds for problem complexity, and there are few methods for obtaining such lower bounds.\nFor solving most problems, it is required to read all input data, which, normally, needs a time proportional to the size of the data. Thus, such problems have a complexity that is at least linear, that is, using big omega notation, a complexity formula_11\nThe solution of some problems, typically in computer algebra and computational algebraic geometry, may be very large. In such a case, the complexity is lower bounded by the maximal size of the output, since the output must be written. For example, a system of n polynomial equations of degree d in n indeterminates may have up to formula_12 complex solutions, if the number of solutions is finite (this is B\u00e9zout's theorem). As these solutions must be written down, the complexity of this problem is formula_13 For this problem, an algorithm of complexity formula_14 is known, which may thus be considered as asymptotically quasi-optimal.\nA nonlinear lower bound of formula_15 is known for the number of comparisons needed for a sorting algorithm. Thus the best sorting algorithms are optimal, as their complexity is formula_16 This lower bound results from the fact that there are \"n\"! ways of ordering n objects. As each comparison splits in two parts this set of \"n\"! orders, the number of N of comparisons that are needed for distinguishing all orders must verify formula_17 which implies formula_18 by Stirling's formula.\nA standard method for getting lower bounds of complexity consists of \"reducing\" a problem to another problem. More precisely, suppose that one may encode a problem A of size n into a subproblem of size \"f\"(\"n\") of a problem B, and that the complexity of A is formula_19 Without loss of generality, one may suppose that the function f increases with n and has an inverse function h. Then the complexity of the problem B is formula_20 This is the method that is used to prove that, if P \u2260 NP (an unsolved conjecture), the complexity of every NP-complete problem is formula_21 for every positive integer k.\nUse in algorithm design.\nEvaluating the complexity of an algorithm is an important part of algorithm design, as this gives useful information on the performance that may be expected.\nIt is a common misconception that the evaluation of the complexity of algorithms will become less important as a result of Moore's law, which posits the exponential growth of the power of modern computers. This is wrong because this power increase allows working with large input data (big data). For example, when one wants to sort alphabetically a list of a few hundreds of entries, such as the bibliography of a book, any algorithm should work well in less than a second. On the other hand, for a list of a million of entries (the phone numbers of a large town, for example), the elementary algorithms that require formula_22 comparisons would have to do a trillion of comparisons, which would need around three hours at the speed of 10 million of comparisons per second. On the other hand, the quicksort and merge sort require only formula_23 comparisons (as average-case complexity for the former, as worst-case complexity for the latter). For \"n\" = 1,000,000, this gives approximately 30,000,000 comparisons, which would only take 3 seconds at 10 million comparisons per second.\nThus the evaluation of the complexity may allow eliminating many inefficient algorithms before any implementation. This may also be used for tuning complex algorithms without testing all variants. By determining the most costly steps of a complex algorithm, the study of complexity allows also focusing on these steps the effort for improving the efficiency of an implementation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6512", "revid": "45317835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6512", "title": "Coercion", "text": "Forcing involuntary behavior in another\nCoercion involves compelling a party to act in an involuntary manner through the use of threats, including threats to use force against that party. It involves a set of forceful actions which violate the free will of an individual in order to induce a desired response. These actions may include extortion, blackmail, or even torture and sexual assault. Common-law systems codify the act of violating a law while under coercion as a duress crime.\nCoercion used as leverage may force victims to act in a way contrary to their own interests. Coercion can involve not only the infliction of bodily harm, but also psychological abuse (the latter intended to enhance the perceived credibility of the threat). The threat of further harm may also lead to the acquiescence of the person being coerced. The concepts of coercion and persuasion are similar, but various factors distinguish the two. These include the intent, the willingness to cause harm, the result of the interaction, and the options available to the coerced party.126\nPolitical authors such as John Rawls, Thomas Nagel, and Ronald Dworkin contend whether governments are inherently coercive.28 In 1919, Max Weber (1864\u20131920), building on the view of Ihering (1818\u20131892), defined a state as \"a human community that (successfully) claims a monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force\". Morris argues that the state can operate through incentives rather than coercion.42 Healthcare systems may use informal coercion to make a patient adhere to a doctor's treatment plan. Under certain circumstances, medical staff may use physical coercion to treat a patient involuntarily., a practice which raises ethical concerns. Such practices has also been shown to cause moral distress among healthcare staff, especially when staff attitudes toward coercive measures are negative. To minimize the need for coercion in psychiatric care, various models such as \"Safewards\" and \"Six Core Strategies\" have been implemented with promising results.\nOverview.\nThe purpose of coercion is to substitute one's aims with weaker ones that the aggressor wants the victim to have. For this reason, many social philosophers have considered coercion as the polar opposite to freedom. Various forms of coercion are distinguished: first on the basis of the \"kind of injury\" threatened, second according to its \"aims\" and \"scope\", and finally according to its \"effects\", from which its legal, social, and ethical implications mostly depend.\nPhysical.\nPhysical coercion is the most commonly considered form of coercion, where the content of the conditional threat is the use of force against a victim, their relatives or property. An often used example is \"putting a gun to someone's head\" (\"at gunpoint\") or putting a \"knife under the throat\" (\"at knifepoint\" or cut-throat) to compel action under the threat that non-compliance may result in the attacker harming or even killing the victim. These are so common that they are also used as metaphors for other forms of coercion.\nArmed forces in many countries use firing squads to maintain discipline and intimidate the masses, or opposition, into submission or silent compliance. However, there also are nonphysical forms of coercion, where the threatened injury does not immediately imply the use of force. Byman and Waxman (2000) define coercion as \"the use of threatened force, including the limited use of actual force to back up the threat, to induce an adversary to behave differently than it otherwise would.\" Coercion does not in many cases amount to destruction of property or life since compliance is the goal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6513", "revid": "50918057", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6513", "title": "Client\u2013server model", "text": "Distributed application structure in computing\nThe client\u2013server model is a distributed application structure that partitions tasks or workloads between the providers of a resource or service, called servers, and service requesters, called clients. Often clients and servers communicate over a computer network on separate hardware, but both client and server may be on the same device. A server host runs one or more server programs, which share their resources with clients. A client usually does not share its computing resources, but it requests content or service from a server and may share its own content as part of the request. Clients, therefore, initiate communication sessions with servers, which await incoming requests.\nExamples of computer applications that use the client\u2013server model are email, network printing, and the World Wide Web.\nClient and server role.\nThe server component provides a function or service to one or many clients, which initiate requests for such services.\nServers are classified by the services they provide. For example, a web server serves web pages and a file server serves computer files. A shared resource may be any of the server computer's software and electronic components, from programs and data to processors and storage devices. The sharing of resources of a server constitutes a \"service\".\nWhether a computer is a client, a server, or both, is determined by the nature of the application that requires the service functions. For example, a single computer can run a web server and file server software at the same time to serve different data to clients making different kinds of requests. The client software can also communicate with server software within the same computer. Communication between servers, such as to synchronize data, is sometimes called \"inter-server\" or \"server-to-server\" communication.\nClient and server communication.\nGenerally, a service is an abstraction of computer resources and a client does not have to be concerned with how the server performs while fulfilling the request and delivering the response. The client only has to understand the response based on the relevant application protocol, i.e. the content and the formatting of the data for the requested service.\nClients and servers exchange messages in a request\u2013response messaging pattern. The client sends a request, and the server returns a response. This exchange of messages is an example of inter-process communication. To communicate, the computers must have a common language, and they must follow rules so that both the client and the server know what to expect. The language and rules of communication are defined in a communications protocol. All protocols operate in the application layer. The application layer protocol defines the basic patterns of the dialogue. To formalize the data exchange even further, the server may implement an application programming interface (API). The API is an abstraction layer for accessing a service. By restricting communication to a specific content format, it facilitates parsing. By abstracting access, it facilitates cross-platform data exchange.\nA server may receive requests from many distinct clients in a short period. A computer can only perform a limited number of tasks at any moment, and relies on a scheduling system to prioritize incoming requests from clients to accommodate them. To prevent abuse and maximize availability, the server software may limit the availability to clients. Denial of service attacks are designed to exploit a server's obligation to process requests by overloading it with excessive request rates.\nEncryption should be applied if sensitive information is to be communicated between the client and the server.\nExample.\nWhen a bank customer accesses online banking services with a web browser (the client), the client initiates a request to the bank's web server. The customer's login credentials are compared against a database, and the webserver accesses that database server as a client. An application server interprets the returned data by applying the bank's business logic and provides the output to the webserver. Finally, the webserver returns the result to the client web browser for display.\nIn each step of this sequence of client\u2013server message exchanges, a computer processes a request and returns data. This is the request-response messaging pattern. When all the requests are met, the sequence is complete.\nThis example illustrates a design pattern applicable to the client\u2013server model: separation of concerns.\nServer-side.\nServer-side refers to programs and operations that run on the server. This is in contrast to client-side programs and operations which run on the client.\nGeneral concepts.\n\"Server-side software\" refers to a computer application, such as a web server, that runs on remote server hardware, reachable from a user's local computer, smartphone, or other device. Operations may be performed server-side because they require access to information or functionality that is not available on the client, or because performing such operations on the client side would be slow, unreliable, or insecure.\nClient and server programs may be commonly available ones such as free or commercial web servers and web browsers, communicating with each other using standardized protocols. Or, programmers may write their own server, client, and communications protocol which can only be used with one another.\nServer-side operations include both those that are carried out in response to client requests, and non-client-oriented operations such as maintenance tasks.\nComputer security.\nIn a computer security context, server-side vulnerabilities or attacks refer to those that occur on a server computer system, rather than on the client side, or in between the two. For example, an attacker might exploit an SQL injection vulnerability in a web application in order to maliciously change or gain unauthorized access to data in the server's database. Alternatively, an attacker might break into a server system using vulnerabilities in the underlying operating system and then be able to access database and other files in the same manner as authorized administrators of the server.\nExamples.\nIn the case of distributed computing projects such as SETI@home and the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, while the bulk of the operations occur on the client side, the servers are responsible for coordinating the clients, sending them data to analyze, receiving and storing results, providing reporting functionality to project administrators, etc. In the case of an Internet-dependent user application like Google Earth, while querying and display of map data takes place on the client side, the server is responsible for permanent storage of map data, resolving user queries into map data to be returned to the client, etc.\nWeb applications and services can be implemented in almost any language, as long as they can return data to standards-based web browsers (possibly via intermediary programs) in formats which they can use.\nClient side.\nClient-side refers to operations that are performed by the client in a computer network.\nGeneral concepts.\nTypically, a client is a computer application, such as a web browser, that runs on a user's local computer, smartphone, or other device, and connects to a server as necessary. Operations may be performed client-side because they require access to information or functionality that is available on the client but not on the server, because the user needs to observe the operations or provide input, or because the server lacks the processing power to perform the operations in a timely manner for all of the clients it serves. Additionally, if operations can be performed by the client, without sending data over the network, they may take less time, use less bandwidth, and incur a lesser security risk.\nWhen the server serves data in a commonly used manner, for example according to standard protocols such as HTTP or FTP, users may have their choice of a number of client programs (e.g. most modern web browsers can request and receive data using both HTTP and FTP). In the case of more specialized applications, programmers may write their own server, client, and communications protocol which can only be used with one another.\nPrograms that run on a user's local computer without ever sending or receiving data over a network are not considered clients, and so the operations of such programs would not be termed client-side operations.\nComputer security.\nIn a computer security context, client-side vulnerabilities or attacks refer to those that occur on the client / user's computer system, rather than on the server side, or in between the two. As an example, if a server contained an encrypted file or message which could only be decrypted using a key housed on the user's computer system, a client-side attack would normally be an attacker's only opportunity to gain access to the decrypted contents. For instance, the attacker might cause malware to be installed on the client system, allowing the attacker to view the user's screen, record the user's keystrokes, and steal copies of the user's encryption keys, etc. Alternatively, an attacker might employ cross-site scripting vulnerabilities to execute malicious code on the client's system without needing to install any permanently resident malware.\nExamples.\nDistributed computing projects such as SETI@home and the Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search, as well as Internet-dependent applications like Google Earth, rely primarily on client-side operations. They initiate a connection with the server (either in response to a user query, as with Google Earth, or in an automated fashion, as with SETI@home), and request some data. The server selects a data set (a server-side operation) and sends it back to the client. The client then analyzes the data (a client-side operation), and, when the analysis is complete, displays it to the user (as with Google Earth) and/or transmits the results of calculations back to the server (as with SETI@home).\nEarly history.\nAn early form of client\u2013server architecture is remote job entry, dating at least to OS/360 (announced 1964), where the request was to run a job, and the response was the output.\nWhile formulating the client\u2013server model in the 1960s and 1970s, computer scientists building ARPANET (at the Stanford Research Institute) used the terms \"server-host\" (or \"serving host\") and \"user-host\" (or \"using-host\"), and these appear in the early documents RFC 5 and RFC 4. This usage was continued at Xerox PARC in the mid-1970s.\nOne context in which researchers used these terms was in the design of a computer network programming language called Decode-Encode Language (DEL). The purpose of this language was to accept commands from one computer (the user-host), which would return status reports to the user as it encoded the commands in network packets. Another DEL-capable computer, the server-host, received the packets, decoded them, and returned formatted data to the user-host. A DEL program on the user-host received the results to present to the user. This is a client\u2013server transaction. Development of DEL was just beginning in 1969, the year that the United States Department of Defense established ARPANET (predecessor of Internet).\nClient-host and server-host.\n\"Client-host\" and \"server-host\" have subtly different meanings than \"client\" and \"server\". A host is any computer connected to a network. Whereas the words \"server\" and \"client\" may refer either to a computer or to a computer program, \"server-host\" and \"client-host\" always refer to computers. The host is a versatile, multifunction computer; \"clients\" and \"servers\" are just programs that run on a host. In the client\u2013server model, a server is more likely to be devoted to the task of serving.\nAn early use of the word \"client\" occurs in \"Separating Data from Function in a Distributed File System\", a 1978 paper by Xerox PARC computer scientists Howard Sturgis, James Mitchell, and Jay Israel. The authors are careful to define the term for readers, and explain that they use it to distinguish between the user and the user's network node (the client). By 1992, the word \"server\" had entered into general parlance.\nCentralized computing.\nThe client-server model does not dictate that server-hosts must have more resources than client-hosts. Rather, it enables any general-purpose computer to extend its capabilities by using the shared resources of other hosts. Centralized computing, however, specifically allocates a large number of resources to a small number of computers. The more computation is offloaded from client-hosts to the central computers, the simpler the client-hosts can be. It relies heavily on network resources (servers and infrastructure) for computation and storage. A diskless node loads even its operating system from the network, and a computer terminal has no operating system at all; it is only an input/output interface to the server. In contrast, a rich client, such as a personal computer, has many resources and does not rely on a server for essential functions.\nAs microcomputers decreased in price and increased in power from the 1980s to the late 1990s, many organizations transitioned computation from centralized servers, such as mainframes and minicomputers, to rich clients. This afforded greater, more individualized dominion over computer resources, but complicated information technology management. During the 2000s, web applications matured enough to rival application software developed for a specific microarchitecture. This maturation, more affordable mass storage, and the advent of service-oriented architecture were among the factors that gave rise to the cloud computing trend of the 2010s.\nComparison with peer-to-peer architecture.\nIn addition to the client-server model, distributed computing applications often use the peer-to-peer (P2P) application architecture.\nIn the client-server model, the server is often designed to operate as a centralized system that serves many clients. The computing power, memory and storage requirements of a server must be scaled appropriately to the expected workload. Load-balancing and failover systems are often employed to scale the server beyond a single physical machine.\nLoad balancing is defined as the methodical and efficient distribution of network or application traffic across multiple servers in a server farm. Each load balancer sits between client devices and backend servers, receiving and then distributing incoming requests to any available server capable of fulfilling them.\nIn a peer-to-peer network, two or more computers (\"peers\") pool their resources and communicate in a decentralized system. Peers are coequal, or equipotent nodes in a non-hierarchical network. Unlike clients in a client-server or client-queue-client network, peers communicate with each other directly. In peer-to-peer networking, an algorithm in the peer-to-peer communications protocol balances load, and even peers with modest resources can help to share the load. If a node becomes unavailable, its shared resources remain available as long as other peers offer it. Ideally, a peer does not need to achieve high availability because other, redundant peers make up for any resource downtime; as the availability and load capacity of peers change, the protocol reroutes requests.\nBoth client-server and master-slave are regarded as sub-categories of distributed peer-to-peer systems.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6514", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6514", "title": "County Dublin", "text": "County in Ireland\nCounty Dublin ( or ) is a county in Ireland, and holds its capital city, Dublin. It is located on the island's east coast, within the province of Leinster. Until 1994, County Dublin (excluding the city) was a single local government area; in that year, the county council was divided into three new administrative counties: D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown, Fingal and South Dublin. The three administrative counties together with Dublin City proper form a NUTS III statistical region of Ireland (coded IE061). County Dublin remains a single administrative unit for the purposes of the courts (including the Dublin County Sheriff, but excluding the bailiwick of the Dublin City Sheriff) and Dublin County combined with Dublin City forms the Judicial County of Dublin, including Dublin Circuit Court, the Dublin County Registrar and the Dublin Metropolitan District Court. Dublin also sees law enforcement (the Garda Dublin metropolitan division) and fire services (Dublin Fire Brigade) administered county-wide.\nDublin is Ireland's most populous county, with a population of 1,458,154 as of 2022[ [update]] \u2013 approximately 28% of the Republic of Ireland's total population. Dublin city is the capital and largest city of the Republic of Ireland, and the largest city on the island of Ireland. Roughly 9 out of every 10 people in County Dublin lives within Dublin city and its suburbs. Several sizeable towns that are considered separate from the city, such as Rush, Donabate and Balbriggan, are located in the far north of the county. Swords, while separated from the city by a green belt around Dublin Airport, is considered a suburban commuter town and an emerging small city.\nThe third smallest county by land area, Dublin is bordered by Meath to the west and north, Kildare to the west, Wicklow to the south and the Irish Sea to the east. The southern part of the county is dominated by the Dublin Mountains, which rise to around and contain numerous valleys, reservoirs and forests. The county's east coast is punctuated by several bays and inlets, including Rogerstown Estuary, Broadmeadow Estuary, Baldoyle Bay and most prominently, Dublin Bay. The northern section of the county, today known as Fingal, varies enormously in character, from densely populated suburban towns of the city's commuter belt to flat, fertile plains, which are some of the country's largest horticultural and agricultural hubs.\nDublin is the oldest county in Ireland, and was the first part of the island to be shired following the Norman invasion in the late 1100s. While it is no longer a local government area, Dublin retains a strong identity, and continues to be referred to as both a region and county interchangeably, including at government body level.\nEtymology.\nCounty Dublin is named after the city of Dublin, which is an anglicisation of its Old Norse name . The city was founded in the 9th century AD by Viking settlers who established the Kingdom of Dublin. The Viking settlement was preceded by a Christian ecclesiastical site known as , from which took its name. derives from the Middle Irish word (literally \"Blackpool\"), from \"black, dark\" and \"pool\", referring to a dark tidal pool. This tidal pool was located where the River Poddle entered the Liffey, to the rear of Dublin Castle.\nThe hinterland of Dublin in the Norse period was named .24\nIn addition to , a Gaelic settlement known as ('ford of hurdles') was located further up the Liffey, near present-day Father Mathew Bridge. means 'town of the hurdled ford', with referring to a fording point along the river. As with , an early Christian monastery was also located at , on the site that is currently occupied by the Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church.\nDublin was the first county in Ireland to be shired after the Norman Conquest in the late 12th century. The Normans captured the Kingdom of Dublin from its Norse-Gael rulers and the name was used as the basis for the county's official Anglo-Norman, and later English name. In Modern Irish the region was named after the Gaelic settlement of or simply . As a result, Dublin is one of four counties in Ireland with a different name origin for both Irish and English \u2013 the others being Wexford, Waterford, and Wicklow, whose English names are also derived from Old Norse.\nHistory.\nThe earliest recorded inhabitants of present-day Dublin settled along the mouth of the River Liffey. The remains of five wooden fish traps were discovered near Spencer Dock in 2007. These traps were designed to catch incoming fish at high tide and could be retrieved at low tide. Thin-bladed stone axes were used to craft the traps and radiocarbon dating places them in the Late Mesolithic period (c.\u20096,100\u20135,700 BCE).\nThe Vikings invaded the region in the mid-9th century AD and founded what would become the city of Dublin. Over time they mixed with the natives of the area, becoming Norse\u2013Gaels. The Vikings raided across Ireland, Britain, France and Spain during this period and under their rule Dublin developed into the largest slave market in Western Europe. While the Vikings were formidable at sea, the superiority of Irish land forces soon became apparent, and the kingdom's Norse rulers were first exiled from the region as early as 902. Dublin was captured by the High King of Ireland, M\u00e1el Sechnaill II, in 980, who freed the kingdom's Gaelic slaves. Dublin was again defeated by M\u00e1el Sechnaill in 988 and forced to accept Brehon law and pay taxes to the High King. Successive defeats at the hands of Brian Boru in 999 and, most famously, at the Battle of Clontarf in 1014, relegated Dublin to the status of lesser kingdom.\nIn 1170, the ousted king of Leinster, Diarmait Mac Murchada, and his Norman allies agreed to capture Dublin at a war council in Waterford. They evaded the intercepting army of High King Ruaidr\u00ed Ua Conchobair by marching through the Wicklow Mountains, arriving outside the walls of Dublin in late September. The king of Dublin, Ascall mac Ragnaill, met with Mac Murchada for negotiations; however, while talks were ongoing, the Normans, led by de Cogan and FitzGerald, stormed Dublin and overwhelmed its defenders, forcing mac Ragnaill to flee to the Northern Isles. Separate attempts to retake Dublin were launched by both Ua Conchobair and mac Ragnaill in 1171, both of which were unsuccessful.\nThe authority over Ireland established by the Anglo-Norman king Henry II was gradually lost during the Gaelic resurgence from the 13th century onwards. English power diminished so significantly that by the early 16th century English laws and customs were restricted to a small area around Dublin known as \"The Pale\". The Earl of Kildare's failed rebellion in 1535 reignited Tudor interest in Ireland, and Henry VIII proclaimed the Kingdom of Ireland in 1542, with Dublin as its capital. Over the next 60 years the Tudor conquest spread to every corner of the island, which was fully subdued by 1603.\nDespite harsh penal laws and unfavourable trade restrictions imposed upon Ireland, Dublin flourished in the 18th century. The Georgian buildings which still define much of Dublin's architectural landscape to this day were mostly built over a 50-year period spanning from about 1750 to 1800. Bodies such as the Wide Streets Commission completely reshaped the city, demolishing most of medieval Dublin in the process. During the Enlightenment, the penal laws were gradually repealed and members of the Protestant Ascendancy began to regard themselves as citizens of a distinct Irish nation. The Irish Patriot Party, led by Henry Grattan, agitated for greater autonomy from Great Britain, which was achieved under the Constitution of 1782. These freedoms proved short-lived, as the Irish Parliament was abolished under the Acts of Union 1800 and Ireland was incorporated into the United Kingdom. Dublin lost its political status as a capital and went into a marked decline throughout the 19th century, leading to widespread demands to repeal the union.\nAlthough at one time the second city of the British Empire, by the late 1800s Dublin was one of the poorest cities in Europe. The city had the worst housing conditions of anywhere in the United Kingdom, and overcrowding, disease and malnourishment were rife within central Dublin. In 1901, \"The Irish Times\" reported that the disease and mortality rates in Calcutta during the 1897 bubonic plague outbreak compared \"favourably with those of Dublin at the present moment\". Most of the upper and middle class residents of Dublin had moved to wealthier suburbs, and the grand Georgian homes of the 1700s were converted en masse into tenement slums. In 1911, over 20,000 families in Dublin were living in one-room tenements which they rented from wealthy landlords. Henrietta Street was particularly infamous for the density of its tenements, with 845 people living on the street in 1911, including 19 families \u2013 totalling 109 people \u2013 living in just one house.\nAfter decades of political unrest, Ireland appeared to be on the brink of civil war as a result of the Home Rule crisis. Despite being the centre of Irish unionism outside of Ulster, Dublin was overwhelmingly in favour of Home Rule. Unionist parties had performed poorly in the county since the 1870s, leading contemporary historian W. E. H. Lecky to conclude that \"Ulster unionism is the only form of Irish unionism that is likely to count as a serious political force\". Unlike their counterparts in the north, \"southern unionists\" were a clear minority in the rest of Ireland, and as such were much more willing to co-operate with the Irish Parliamentary Party (IPP) to avoid partition. Following the Anglo-Irish Treaty, Belfast unionist Dawson Bates decried the \"effusive professions of loyalty and confidence in the Provisional Government\" that was displayed by former unionists in the new Irish Free State.\nThe question of Home Rule was put on hold due to the outbreak of the First World War but was never to be revisited as a series of missteps by the British government, such as executing the leaders of the 1916 Easter Rising and the Conscription Crisis of 1918, fuelled the Irish revolutionary period. The IPP were nearly wiped out by Sinn F\u00e9in in the 1918 general election and, following a brief war of independence, 26 of Ireland's 32 counties seceded from the United Kingdom in December 1922, with Dublin becoming the capital of the Irish Free State, and later the Republic of Ireland.\nFrom the 1960s onwards, Dublin city greatly expanded due to urban renewal works and the construction of large suburbs such as Tallaght, Coolock and Ballymun, which resettled both the rural and urban poor of County Dublin in newer state-built accommodation. Dublin was the driving force behind Ireland's Celtic Tiger period, an era of rapid economic growth that started in the early 1990s. In stark contrast to the turn of the 20th century, Dublin entered the 21st century as one of Europe's richest cities, attracting immigrants and investment from all over the world.\nGeography and subdivisions.\nDublin is the third smallest of Ireland's 32 counties by area, and the largest in terms of population. It is the third-smallest of Leinster's 12 counties in size and the largest by population. Dublin shares a border with three counties \u2013 Meath to the north and west, Kildare to the west and Wicklow to the south. To the east, Dublin has an Irish Sea coastline which stretches for .\nDublin is a topographically varied region. The city centre is generally very low-lying, and many areas of coastal Dublin are at or near sea-level. In the south of the county, the topography rises steeply from sea-level at the coast to over in just a few kilometres. This natural barrier has resulted in densely populated coastal settlements in D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown and westward urban sprawl in South Dublin. In contrast, Fingal is generally rural in nature and much less densely populated than the rest of the county. Consequently, Fingal is significantly larger than the other three local authorities and covers about 49.5% of County Dublin's land area. Fingal is also perhaps the flattest region in Ireland, with the low-lying Naul Hills rising to a maximum height of just .\nDublin is bounded to the south by the Wicklow Mountains. Where the mountains extend into County Dublin, they are known locally as the Dublin Mountains (\"Sl\u00e9ibhte Bhaile \u00c1tha Cliath\"). Kippure, on the Dublin\u2013Wicklow border, is the county's highest mountain, at above sea level. Crossed by the Dublin Mountains Way, they are a popular amenity area, with Two Rock, Three Rock, Tibradden, Ticknock, Montpelier Hill, and Glenasmole being among the most heavily foot-falled hiking destinations in Ireland. Forest cover extends to over within the county, nearly all of which is located in the Dublin Mountains. With just 6.5% of Dublin under forest, it is the 6th least forested county in Ireland.\nMuch of the county is drained by its three major rivers \u2013 the River Liffey, the River Tolka in north Dublin, and the River Dodder in south Dublin. The Liffey, at in length, is the 8th longest river in Ireland, and rises near Tonduff in County Wicklow, reaching the Irish Sea at the Dublin Docklands. The Liffey cuts through the centre of Dublin city, and the resultant Northside\u2013Southside divide is an often used social, economic and linguistic distinction. Notable inlets include the central Dublin Bay, Rogerstown Estuary, the estuary of the Broadmeadow and Killiney Bay, under Killiney Hill. Headlands include Howth Head, Drumanagh and the Portraine Shore. In terms of biodiversity, these estuarine and coastal regions are home to a wealth ecologically important areas. County Dublin contains 11 EU-designated Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) and 11 Special Protection Areas (SPAs).\nThe bedrock geology of Dublin consists primarily of Lower Carboniferous limestone, which underlies about two thirds of the entire county, stretching from Skerries to Booterstown. During the Lower Carboniferous (ca. 340 Mya), the area was part of a warm tropical sea inhabited by an abundance of corals, crinoids and brachiopods. The oldest rocks in Dublin are the Cambrian shales located on Howth Head, which were laid down ca. 500 Mya. Disruption following the closure of the Iapetus Ocean approximately 400 Mya resulted in the formation of granite. This is now exposed at the surface from the Dublin Mountains to the coastal areas of D\u00fan Laoghaire. 19th-century Lead extraction and smelting at the Ballycorus Leadmines caused widespread lead poisoning, and the area was once nicknamed \"Death Valley\".\nClimate.\nDublin is in a maritime temperate oceanic region according to K\u00f6ppen climate classification. Its climate is characterised by cool winters, mild humid summers, and a lack of temperature extremes. Met \u00c9ireann have a number of weather stations in the county, with its two primary stations at Dublin Airport and Casement Aerodrome.\nAnnual temperatures typically fall within a narrow range. In Merrion Square, the coldest month is February, with an average minimum temperature of , and the warmest month is July, with an average maximum temperature of . Due to the urban heat island effect, Dublin city has the warmest summertime nights in Ireland. The average minimum temperature at Merrion Square in July is , similar to London and Berlin, and the lowest July temperature ever recorded at the station was on 3 July 1974. At Dublin Airport, the driest month is February with of rainfall, and the wettest month is November, with of rain on average.\nAs the prevailing wind direction in Ireland is from the south and west, the Wicklow Mountains create a rain shadow over much of the county. Dublin's sheltered location makes it the driest place in Ireland, receiving only about half the rainfall of the west coast. Ringsend in the south of Dublin city records the lowest rainfall in the country, with an average annual precipitation of . The wettest area of the county is the Glenasmole Valley, which receives of rainfall per year. As a temperate coastal county, snow is relatively uncommon in lowland areas; however, Dublin is particularly vulnerable to heavy snowfall on rare occasions where cold, dry easterly winds dominate during the winter.\nDuring the late summer and early autumn, Dublin can experience Atlantic storms, which bring strong winds and torrential rain to Ireland. Dublin was the county worst-affected by Hurricane Charley in 1986. It caused severe flooding, especially along the River Dodder, and is reputed to be the worst flood event in Dublin's history. Rainfall records were shattered across the county. Kippure recorded of rain over a 24-hour period, the greatest daily rainfall total ever recorded in Ireland. The government allocated IR\u00a36,449,000 (equivalent to US$20.5 million in 2020) to repair the damage wrought by Charley. The two reservoirs at Bohernabreena in the Dublin Mountains were upgraded in 2006 after a study into the impact of Hurricane Charley concluded that a slightly larger storm would have caused the reservoir dams to burst, which would have resulted in catastrophic damage and significant loss of life.\nOffshore islands.\nIn contrast with the Atlantic Coast, the east coast of Ireland has relatively few islands. County Dublin has one of the highest concentrations of islands on the Irish east coast. Colt Island, St. Patrick's Island, Shenick Island and numerous smaller islets are clustered off the coast of Skerries, and are collectively known as the \"Skerries Islands Natural Heritage Area\". Further out lies Rockabill, which is Dublin's most isolated island, at about offshore. Lambay Island, at , is the largest island off Ireland's east coast and the easternmost point of County Dublin. Lambay supports one of the largest seabird colonies in Ireland and, curiously, also supports a population of non-native Red-necked wallabies. To the south of Lambay lies a smaller island known as Ireland's Eye \u2013 the result of a mistranslation of the island's Irish name by invading Vikings.\nBull Island is a man-made island lying roughly parallel to the shoreline which began to form following the construction of the Bull Wall in 1825. The island is still growing and is currently long and wide. In 1981, North Bull Island (\"Oile\u00e1n an Tairbh Thuaidh\") was designated as a UNESCO biosphere.\nSubdivisions.\nFor statistical purposes at European level, the county as a whole forms the Dublin Region \u2013 a NUTS III entity \u2013 which is in turn part of the Eastern and Midland Region, a NUTS II entity. Each of the local authorities have representatives on the Eastern and Midland Regional Assembly.\nBaronies.\nThere are ten historic baronies in the county. While baronies continue to be officially defined units, they ceased to have any administrative function following the Local Government Act 1898, and any changes to county boundaries after the mid-19th century are not reflected in their extent. The last boundary change of a barony in Dublin was in 1842, when the barony of Balrothery was divided into Balrothery East and Balrothery West. The largest recorded barony in Dublin in 1872 was Uppercross, at , and the smallest barony was Dublin, at .\nTownlands.\nTownlands are the smallest officially defined geographical divisions in Ireland. There are 1,090 townlands in Dublin, of which 88 are historic town boundaries. These town boundaries are registered as their own townlands and are much larger than rural townlands. The smallest rural townlands in Dublin are just 1 acre in size, most of which are offshore islands (\"Clare Rock Island, Lamb Island, Maiden Rock, Muglins, Thulla Island\"). The largest rural townland in Dublin is 2,797 acres (\"Caastlekelly\"). The average size of a townland in the county (excluding towns) is 205 acres.\nUrban and rural districts.\nUnder the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898, County Dublin was divided into urban districts of Blackrock, Clontarf, Dalkey, Drumcondra, Clonliffe and Glasnevin, Killiney and Ballybrack, Kingstown, New Kilmainham, Pembroke, and Rathmines and Rathgar, and the rural districts of Balrothery, Celbridge No. 2, North Dublin, Rathdown, and South Dublin.\nHowth, formerly within the rural district of Dublin North, became an urban district in 1919. Kingstown was renamed D\u00fan Laoghaire in 1920. The rural districts were abolished in 1930.\nBalbriggan, in the rural district of Balrothery, had town commissioners under the Towns Improvement (Ireland) Act 1854. This became a town council in 2002. In common with all town councils, it was abolished in 2014.\nThe urban districts were gradually absorbed by the city of Dublin, except for four coastal districts of Blackrock, Dalkey, D\u00fan Laoghaire, and Killiney and Ballybrack, which formed the borough of D\u00fan Laoghaire in 1930.\nCounties and the city.\nThe city of Dublin had been administered separately since the 13th century. Under the Local Government (Ireland) Act 1898, the two areas were defined as the administrative county of Dublin and the county borough of Dublin, with the latter in the city area.\nIn 1985, County Dublin was divided into three electoral counties: Dublin\u2013Belgard to the southwest (South Dublin from 1991), Dublin\u2013Fingal to the north (Fingal from 1991), and D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown to the southeast.\nIn January 1994, under the Local Government (Dublin) Act 1993, the County Dublin ceased to exist as a local government area, and was succeeded by the counties of D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown, Fingal and South Dublin, each coterminous (with minor boundary adjustments) with the area of the corresponding electoral county. In discussing the legislation, Avril Doyle TD said, \"The Bill before us today effectively abolishes County Dublin, and as one born and bred in these parts of Ireland I find it rather strange that we in this House are abolishing County Dublin. I am not sure whether Dubliners realise that that is what we are about today, but in effect that is the case.\"\nAlthough the Electoral Commission should, as far as practicable, avoid breaching county boundaries when recommending D\u00e1il constituencies, this does not include the boundaries of a city or the boundary between the three counties in Dublin. There is also still a sheriff appointed for County Dublin.\nThe term \"County Dublin\" is still in common usage. Many organisations and sporting teams continue to organise on a County Dublin basis. The Placenames Branch of the Department of Rural and Community Development and the Gaeltacht maintains a Placenames Database that records all placenames, past and present. County Dublin is listed in the database along with the subdivisions of that county. It is also used as an address for areas within Dublin outside of the Dublin postal district system.\nFor a period in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic, to reduce person-to-person contact, government regulations restricted activity to \"within the county in which the relevant residence is situated\". Within the regulations, the local government areas of \"D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown, Fingal, South Dublin and Dublin City\" were deemed to be a single county (as were the city and the county of Cork, and the city and the county of Galway).\nThe latest Ordnance Survey Ireland \"Discovery Series\" (Third Edition 2005) 1:50,000 map of the Dublin Region, Sheet 50, shows the boundaries of the city and three surrounding counties of the region. Extremities of the Dublin Region, in the north and south of the region, appear in other sheets of the series, 43 and 56 respectively.\nLocal government.\nThere are four local authorities whose remit collectively encompasses the geographic area of the county and city of Dublin. These are Dublin City Council, South Dublin County Council, D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown County Council and Fingal County Council.\nUntil January 1994, the administrative county of Dublin was administered by Dublin County Council. From that date, its functions were succeeded by D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown County Council, Fingal County Council and South Dublin County Council, each with its county seat, respectively administering the new counties established on that date.\nThe city was previously designated a county borough and administered by Dublin Corporation. Under the Local Government Act 2001, the country was divided into local government areas of cities and counties, with the county borough of Dublin being designated a city for all purposes, now administered by Dublin City Council. Each local authority is responsible for certain local services such as sanitation, planning and development, libraries, the collection of motor taxation, local roads and social housing.\nDublin, comprising the four local government areas in the county, is a strategic planning area within the Eastern and Midland Regional Assembly (EMRA). It is a NUTS Level III region of Ireland. The region is one of eight regions of Ireland for Eurostat statistics at NUTS 3 level. Its NUTS code is IE061.\nThis area formerly came under the remit of the Dublin Regional Authority. This Authority was dissolved in 2014.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2022 census, the population of Dublin was 1,458,154, an 8.4% increase since the 2016 Census. The county's population first surpassed 1\u00a0million in 1981, and is projected to reach 1.8\u00a0million by 2036.\nDublin is Ireland's most populous county, a position it has held since the 1926 Census, when it overtook County Antrim. As of 2022, County Dublin has over twice the population of County Antrim and two and a half times the population of County Cork. Approximately 21% of Ireland's population lives within County Dublin, 28% if only the Republic of Ireland is counted. Dublin has more people than the combined populations of Ireland's 16 smallest counties.\nWith an area of just , Dublin is by far the most densely populated county in Ireland. The population density of the county is 1,582 people per square kilometre \u2013 over 7 times higher than Ireland's second most densely populated county, County Down in Northern Ireland.\nDuring the Celtic Tiger period, a large number of Dublin natives (Dubliners) moved to the rapidly expanding commuter towns in the adjoining counties. As of 2022, approximately 27.2% (345,446) of Dubliners were living outside of County Dublin. People born within Dublin account for 28% of the population of Meath, 32% of Kildare, and 37% of Wicklow. There are 922,744 Dublin natives living within the county, accounting for 63.3% of the population. People born in other Irish counties living within Dublin account for roughly 11% of the population.\nBetween 2016 and 2022, international migration produced a net increase of 88,300 people. Dublin has the highest proportion of international residents of any county in Ireland, with around 25% of the county's population being born outside of the Republic of Ireland.\nAs of the 2022 census, 5.6 percent of the county's population was reported as younger than 5 years old, 25.7 percent were between 5 and 25, 55.3 percent were between 25 and 65, and 13.4 percent of the population was older than 65. Of this latter group, 48,865 people (3.4 percent) were over the age of 80, more than doubling since 2016. Across all age groups, there were slightly more females (51.06 percent) than males (48.94 percent).\nIn 2021, there were 16,596 births within the county. The average age of a first time mother was 31.9.\nMigration.\nOver a quarter (25.2 percent) of County Dublin's population was born outside of the Republic of Ireland. In 2022, Dublin City had the highest percentage of non-nationals in the county (27.3 percent), and South Dublin had the lowest (20.9 percent). Historically, the immigrant population of Dublin was mainly from the United Kingdom and other European Union member states. Results from the 2022 census revealed that immigrants from non-EU/UK countries were the largest source of foreign-born residents for the first time, accounting for 12.9 percent of the county's population. Those from other European Union member states accounted for 8.3 percent of Dublin's population, and those from the United Kingdom a further 4.1 percent.\nPrior to the 2000s, the UK was consistently the largest single source of non-nationals living in Dublin. After declining in the previous two census periods, the number of UK-born residents living in Dublin increased by 5.8 percent between 2016 and 2022. There was a large difference between the number of people living in Dublin who were born in the UK (58,586) and those who held sole-UK citizenship in the 2022 census (22,936).\nThis discrepancy can arise for a variety of factors, such as people born in Northern Ireland claiming Irish citizenship rather than UK citizenship, Irish people born in the UK who now live in Dublin, British people who have become natural citizens, and foreign residents of Dublin who were born in the UK but are not UK citizens. Depending on an individual's responses in the census, all of these examples could result in the country of birth being registered by the CSO as the United Kingdom, but nationality being registered as Irish or a third country.\nFollowing its accession to the EU, the Polish quickly became the fastest growing immigrant community in Dublin. Just 188 Poles applied for Irish work permits in 1999. By 2006 this number had grown to 93,787. After the 2008 Irish economic downturn, as many as 3,000 Poles left Ireland each month. Despite this, Poles remain one of Dublin's largest foreign-born groups. In contrast to more recent arrivals, a large percentage of Dublin's Polish citizens (30.9 percent) also hold Irish citizenship.\nOutside of Europe, Indians and Brazilians are the predominant foreign-national groups. As of 2022, Indians were the fastest growing major immigrant group in Dublin, and they are now the county's second largest foreign-born group after the UK. Dublin's Indian community grew by 155.2 percent between 2016 and 2022. There were 29,582 Indian-born residents within Dublin as of 2022, up from 9,884 in the 2011 census. The influx of Indians is driven in part by multinational tech companies such as Microsoft, Google and Meta who have located their European headquarters within the county, in areas such as the Silicon Docks and Sandyford. In August 2020, the first dedicated Hindu temple in Ireland was built in Walkinstown.\nThe number of Brazilian citizens living in Dublin more than tripled between 2011 and 2022, from 4,641 to 16,441. This increase is mainly a result of Ireland's participation in the Brazilian government's \"Ci\u00eancia sem Fronteiras\" programme, which sees thousands of Brazilian students come to study in Ireland each year, many of whom remain in the country afterwards.\nAlthough not fully captured during the census period, Dublin also houses a significant number of Ukrainian refugees under the Temporary Protection Directive. As of October 2023, the number of Ukrainians living in emergency accommodation within the county is estimated to be around 14,000.\nEthnicity.\nAccording to the Central Statistics Office, in 2022 the population of County Dublin self-identified as:\nIn terms of total numbers, Dublin has the largest non-white population in Ireland, with an estimated 158,653 residents, accounting for 11.1% of the county's population. Over two-fifths (42.2 percent) of Ireland's black residents live within the county. In terms of percentage of population, Fingal has the highest percentage of both black (3.6 percent) and non-white (12.4 percent) residents of any local authority in Ireland. Conversely, D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown in the south of the county has one of Ireland's lowest percentages of black residents, with only 0.77% of the population identifying as black in 2022. 43.3% of Ireland's multiracial population lives within County Dublin. Those who did not state their ethnicity more than doubled between 2016 and 2022, from 4.1% to 8.5%.\nReligion.\nThe largest religious denomination by both number of adherents and as a percentage of Dublin's population in 2022 was the Roman Catholic Church, at 57.4 percent. All other Christian denominations including Church of Ireland, Eastern Orthodox, Presbyterian and Methodist accounted for 8.1 percent of Dublin's population. Together, all denominations of Christianity accounted for 65.5 percent of the county's population.\nIn the 2022 census, D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown is the least religious local authority in Ireland, with 23.9 percent of the population declaring themselves non-religious, followed closely by Dublin city (22.6 percent). In the county as a whole, those unaffiliated with any religion represented 20.1 percent of the population, which is the largest percentage of non-religious people of any county in Ireland. A further 9.1 percent of the population did not state their religion, up from just 4.1 percent in 2016.\nOf the non-Christian religions, Islam is the largest in terms of number of adherents, with Muslims accounting for 2.6% of the population. After Islam, the largest non-Christian religions in 2022 were Hinduism (1.4 percent) and Buddhism (0.27 percent). While relatively small in absolute terms, County Dublin contains over half of Ireland's Hindu (58.7 percent) residents, and just under half of its Eastern Orthodox (45.3 percent), Islamic (45.0 percent) and Buddhist (41.7 percent) residents.\nDublin and its hinterland has been a Christian diocese since 1028. For centuries, the Primacy of Ireland was disputed between Dublin, the social and political capital of Ireland, and Armagh, site of Saint Patrick's main church, which was founded in 445 AD. In 1353 the dispute was settled by Pope Innocent VI, who proclaimed that the archbishop of Dublin was \"Primate of Ireland\", while the archbishop of Armagh was titled \"Primate of All Ireland\". These two distinct titles were replicated in the Church of Ireland following the Reformation.\nHistorically, County Dublin was the epicentre of Protestantism in Ireland outside of Ulster. The 1891 census show that the county was 21.4 percent Protestant towards the end of the 19th century. By the 1911 census this had gradually declined to around 20% due to poor economic conditions, as Dublin Protestants moved to industrial Belfast. Following the War of Independence (1919\u20131921), Dublin's Protestant community went into a steady decline, falling to 8.5 percent of the population by 1936.\nBetween 2016 and 2022, the fastest-growing religions in Dublin were Hinduism (148.9 percent), Eastern Orthodox (51.6 percent), and Islam (27.9 percent), while the most rapidly declining religions were Evangelicalism (\u221210.4 percent), Catholicism (\u22128.7 percent), Jehovah's Witnesses (\u22125.9 percent) and Buddhism (\u22125.4 percent).\nMetropolitan area.\nDublin city.\nThe boundaries of Dublin City Council form the urban core of the city, often referred to as \"Dublin city centre\", an area of 117.8 square kilometres. This encompasses the central suburbs of the city, extending as far south as Terenure and Donnybrook; as far north as Ballymun and Donaghmede; and as far west as Ballyfermot. As of 2022, there were 592,713 people living within Dublin city centre. However, as the continuous built-up area extends beyond the city boundaries, the term \"Dublin city and suburbs\" is commonly employed when referring to the actual extent of Dublin.\nDublin city and suburbs.\nDublin city and suburbs is a CSO-designated urban area which includes the densely populated contiguous built-up area which surrounds Dublin city centre. As of the 2022 census, Dublin city and suburbs encompassed 345\u00a0km2, expanding in size by 8.7 percent (or 27.5\u00a0km2) since the 2016 census. The population of Dublin city and suburbs grew from 1,173,179 in 2016 to 1,263,219 in 2022, an increase of 7.7 percent.\nFollowing the 2022 census, Dublin city and suburbs was designated a cross-county settlement for the first time, as the CSO included the Kribensis Manor housing development within the contiguous built-up area of the city. The houses are located in County Meath, along the R149 road between Hilltown and the village of Clonee.\nApproximately 87% of County Dublin's population lives within Dublin city and suburbs as of the 2022 census. The remainder of the county covers roughly two thirds of Dublin's land area, but is home to just 196,140 people.\nDublin metropolitan area.\nAs the city proper does not extend beyond Dublin Airport, nearby towns such as Swords, Donabate, Portmarnock and Malahide are not considered part of the city, and are recorded by the CSO as separate settlements. However, under Ireland's National Planning Framework, these towns are considered part of the Dublin Metropolitan Area Strategic Plan (MASP). The MASP also includes towns outside of the county, such as Naas, Leixlip and Maynooth in County Kildare, Dunboyne in County Meath, and Bray, Kilmacanogue and Greystones in County Wicklow, but does not include Balbriggan, Lusk, Rush or Skerries, which are located in the far north of County Dublin.\nGreater Dublin Area.\nThe Greater Dublin Area (GDA) is a commonly used planning jurisdiction which extends to the wider network of commuter towns that are economically connected to Dublin city. The GDA consists of County Dublin and its three neighboring counties, Kildare, Meath and Wicklow.\nWith a population of 2.1 million and an area of 6,986 square kilometres, it contains 40% of the population of the State, and covers 9.9% of its land area.\nUrban areas.\nUnder CSO classification, an \"urban area\" is a town with a population greater than 1,500. Dublin is the most urbanised county in Ireland, with 98% of its residents residing in urban areas as of 2022. Of Dublin's three non-city local authorities, Fingal has the highest proportion of people living in rural areas (7.9%), while D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown has the lowest (1.19%). The western suburbs of Dublin city such as Tallaght and Blanchardstown have experienced rapid growth in recent decades, and both areas have a population roughly equivalent to Galway city.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTransportation.\nCounty Dublin has the oldest and most extensive transportation infrastructure in Ireland. The Dublin and Kingstown Railway, opened in December 1834, was Ireland's first railway line. The line, which ran from Westland Row to D\u00fan Laoghaire, was originally intended to be used for cargo. However, it proved far more popular with passengers and became the world's first commuter railway line. The line has been upgraded multiple times throughout its history and is still in use to this day, making it the oldest commuter railway route in the world.\nPublic transport in Dublin was managed by the Dublin Transportation Office until 2009, when it was replaced by the National Transport Authority (NTA). The three pillars underpinning the public transport network of the Greater Dublin Area (GDA) are Dublin Suburban Rail, the Luas and the bus system. There are six commuter lines in Dublin, which are managed by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann. Five of these lines serve as routes between Dublin and towns across the GDA and beyond. The sixth route, known as Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART), is electrified and serves only Dublin and northern Wicklow. The newest addition to Dublin's public transport network is a tram system called the Luas. The service began with two disconnected lines in 2004, with three extensions opened in 2009, 2010 and 2011 before a cross-city link between the lines and further extension opened in 2017.\nHistorically, Dublin had an extensive tram system which commenced in 1871 and at its peak had over of active line. It was operated by the Dublin United Transport Company (DUTC) and was very advanced for its day, with near-full electrification from 1901. From the 1920s onwards, the DUTC began to acquire private bus operators and gradually closed some of its lines. Further declines in passenger numbers were driven in part by a belief at the time that trams were outdated and archaic. All tram lines terminated in 1949, except for the tram to Howth, which ran until 1959.\nDublin Bus is the county's largest bus operator, carrying 138 million passengers in 2019. For much of the city, particularly west Dublin, the bus is the only public transport option available, and there are numerous smaller private bus companies in operation across County Dublin. National bus operator Bus \u00c9ireann provides long-distance routes to towns and villages located outside of Dublin city and its immediate hinterland.\nIn November 2005, the government announced a \u20ac34 billion initiative called Transport 21 which included a substantial expansion to Dublin's transport network. The project was cancelled in May 2011 in the aftermath of the 2008 recession. Consequently, by 2017 Hugh Creegan, deputy chief of the NTA, stated that there had been a \"\"chronic underinvestment in public transport for more than a decade\". By 2019, Dublin was reportedly the 17th most congested city in the world, and had the 5th highest average commute time in the European Union. The Luas and rail network regularly experience significant overcrowding and delays during peak hours, and in 2019 Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann was widely ridiculed for asking commuters to \"stagger morning journeys\"\" to alleviate the problem.\nThe M50 is a orbital motorway around Dublin city, and is the busiest motorway in the country. It serves as the centre of both Dublin and Ireland's motorway network, and most of the national primary roads to other cities begin at the M50 and radiate outwards. The current route was built in various sections over the course of 27 years, from 1983 to 2010. All major roads in Ireland are managed by Transport Infrastructure Ireland (TII), which is headquartered in Parkgate Street, Dublin 8. As of 2019, there were over 550,000 cars registered in County Dublin, accounting for 25.3% of all cars registered in the State. Due to the county's small area and high degree of urbanisation, there is a preference for \"D\" registered used cars throughout Ireland, as they are considered to have undergone less wear and tear.\nFor international travel, around 1.7 million passengers travel by ferry through Dublin Port each year. A D\u00fan Laoghaire to Holyhead ferry was formerly operated by Stena Line, but the route was closed in 2015. Dublin Airport is Ireland's largest airport, and 32.9 million passengers passed through it in 2019, making it Europe's 12th-busiest airport.\nEconomy.\nThe Dublin Region, which is conterminous with County Dublin, has the largest and most highly developed economy in Ireland, accounting for over two-fifths of national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The Central Statistics Office estimates that the GDP of the Dublin Region in 2020 was \u20ac157.2\u00a0billion ($187\u00a0billion / \u00a3141\u00a0billion at 2020 exchange rates).\nIn nominal terms, Dublin's economy is larger than roughly 140 sovereign states. The county's GDP per capita is \u20ac107,808 ($117,688 / \u00a392,620), one of the highest regional GDPs per capita in the EU. As of 2019, Dublin also had the highest Human Development Index in Ireland at 0.965, placing it among the most developed places in the world in terms of life expectancy, education and per capita income.\nAffluence.\nIn 2020, average disposable income per person in Dublin was \u20ac27,686, or 118% of the national average (\u20ac23,400), the highest of any county in Ireland. As Ireland's most populous county, Dublin has the highest total household income in the country, at an estimated \u20ac46.8 billion in 2017 \u2013 higher than the Border, Midlands, West and South-East regions combined. Dublin residents were the highest per capita tax contributors in the State, returning a total of \u20ac15.1 billion in taxes in 2017.\nMany of Ireland's most prominent political, educational, cultural and media centres are concentrated south of the River Liffey in Dublin city. Further south, areas like D\u00fan Laoghaire, Dalkey and Killiney have long been some of Dublin's most affluent areas, and D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown consistently has the highest average house prices in Ireland. This has resulted in a perceived socio-economic divide in Dublin, between the generally less affluent Northside and the wealthier Southside.\nIn Dublin, both city and county, residents will commonly refer to themselves as a \"Northsider\" or a \"Southsider\". The division is often caricatured in Irish comedy, media and literature, for example Ross O'Carroll-Kelly and Damo and Ivor. References to the divide have also become colloquialisms in their own right, such as \"D4\" (referring to the Dublin 4 postal district), which is a pejorative term for an upper middle class Irish person.\nWhile the northside-southside divide remains prevalent in popular culture, economic indices such as the Pobal HP deprivation index have shown that the distinction does not reflect economic reality. Many of Dublin's most affluent areas (Clontarf, Raheny, Howth, Portmarnock, Malahide) are located in the north of the county, and many of its most deprived areas (Jobstown, Ballyogan, Ballybrack, Dolphin's Barn, Clondalkin) are located in the south of the county.\nUtilising CSO data from the past three censuses, Pobal HP revealed that there was a much higher concentration of below average, disadvantaged and very disadvantaged areas in west Dublin. In 2012, Irish Times columnist Fintan O'Toole posited that the real economic divide in Dublin was not north\u2013south, but east\u2013west \u2013 between the older coastal areas of eastern Dublin and the newer sprawling suburbs of western Dublin \u2013 and that the perpetuation of the northside\u2013southside \"myth\" was a convenient way to gloss over class division within the county. O'Toole argued that framing the city's wealth divide as a light-hearted north\u2013south stereotype was easier than having to address the socio-economic impacts of deliberate government policy to remove working-class people from the city centre and settle them on the margins.\nFinance.\nDublin is both a European and Global financial hub, and around 200 of the world's leading financial services firms have operations within the county. In 2017 and 2018 respectively, Dublin was ranked 5th in Europe and 31st globally in the Global Financial Centres Index (GFCI). In the mid-1980s, parts of central Dublin had fallen into a state of dereliction and the Irish government pursued an urban regeneration programme. An 11-hectare special economic zone (SEZ) was set up in 1987, known as the International Financial Services Centre (IFSC). At the time of its establishment, the SEZ had the lowest corporate tax rate in the EU. The IFSC has since expanded into a 37.8-hectare site centred around the Dublin Docklands. As of 2020, over \u20ac1.8 trillion of funds are administered from Ireland.\nThere was renewed interest in Dublin's financial services sector in the wake of the UK's vote to withdraw from the European Union in 2016. Many firms, including Barclays and Bank of America, pre-emptively moved some of their operations from London to Dublin in anticipation of restricted EU market access. A survey conducted by Ernst &amp; Young in 2021 found that Dublin was the most popular destination for firms in the UK considering relocating to the EU, ahead of Luxembourg and Frankfurt. It is estimated that Dublin's financial sector will grow by about 25% as a direct result of Brexit, and as many as 13,000 jobs could move from the UK to County Dublin in the years immediately after its withdrawal.\nIndustry and energy.\nThe economy of Dublin benefits from substantial amounts of both indigenous and foreign investment. In 2018, the Financial Times ranked Dublin the most attractive large city in the world for Foreign Direct Investment, and the city has been consistently ranked by Forbes as one of the world's most business-friendly. The economy is centered on financial services, the pharmaceuticals and biotechnology industries, information technology, logistics and storage, professional services, agriculture and tourism. IDA Ireland, the state agency responsible for attracting foreign direct investment, was founded in Dublin in 1949.\nDublin has four power plants, all of which are concentrated in the docklands area of Dublin city. Three are natural-gas plants operated by the ESB, and the Poolbeg Incinerator is operated by Covanta Energy. The four plants have a combined capacity of 1.039 GW, roughly 12.5% of the island of Ireland's generation capacity as of 2019. The disused Poolbeg chimneys are the tallest structures in the county, and were granted protection by Dublin city council in 2014.\nAs a result of Dublin city's location within a sheltered bay at the mouth of a navigable river, shipping has been a key industry in the county since medieval times. By the 18th-century, Dublin was a bustling maritime city and large-scale engineering projects were undertaken to enhance the port's capacity, such as the Great South Wall, which was the largest sea wall in the world at the time of its construction in 1715. Dublin Port was originally located along the Liffey, but gradually moved towards the coast over the centuries as vessel size increased. It is today the largest and busiest port in Ireland. It handles 50% of the Republic of Ireland's trade, and receives 60% of all vessel arrivals.\nDublin Port occupies an area of in one of the most expensive places in the country, with an estimated price per acre of around \u20ac10 million. Since the 2000s, there have been calls to relocate Dublin Port out of the city and free up its land for residential and commercial development. This was first proposed by the Progressive Democrats at the height of the Celtic Tiger in 2006, who valued the land at between \u20ac25 and \u20ac30 billion, although nothing became of this proposal. During the housing crisis of the late 2010s the idea again began to attract supporters, among them economist David McWilliams. Currently, there are no official plans to move the port elsewhere, and the Dublin Port Company strongly opposes relocation.\nDublin hosts the headquarters of some of Ireland's largest multinational corporations, including 14 of the 20 companies which make up the ISEQ 20 index \u2013 those with the highest trading volume and market capitalisation of all Irish Stock Exchange listed companies. These are: AIB, Applegreen, Bank of Ireland, Cairn Homes, Continental Group, CRH, Dalata Hotel Group, Flutter Entertainment, Greencoat Renewables, Hibernia REIT, IRES, Origin Enterprises, Ryanair and Smurfit Kappa.\nTourism.\nCounty Dublin receives by far the most overseas tourists of any county in Ireland. This is primarily due to Dublin city's status as Ireland's largest city and its transportation hub. Dublin is also Ireland's most popular destination for domestic tourists. In 2017, Dublin received nearly 6 million overseas tourists, and just under 1.5 million domestic tourists. Most of Ireland's international flights transit through Dublin Airport, and the vast majority of passenger ferry arrivals dock at Dublin Port. In 2019, the port also facilitated 158 cruise ship arrivals. The tourism industry in the county is worth approximately \u20ac2.3 billion per year.\nAs of 2019, 4 of the top 10 fee-paying tourist attractions in Ireland are located within County Dublin, as well as 5 of the top 10 free attractions. The Guinness Storehouse at St. James's Gate is Ireland's most visited tourist attraction, receiving 1.7 million visitors in 2019, and over 20 million total visits since 2000. Dublin contains Ireland's 3rd (Dublin Zoo), 4th (Book of Kells) and 6th (St Patrick's Cathedral) most visited fee-paying attractions. The top free attractions in Dublin are the National Gallery of Ireland, the National Botanic Gardens, the National Museum of Ireland and the Irish Museum of Modern Art, all of which receive over half a million visitors per year.\nAgriculture.\nDespite having the smallest farmed area of any county, Dublin is one of Ireland's major agricultural producers. Dublin is the largest producer of fruit and vegetables in Ireland, the third largest producer of oilseed rape and has the fifth largest fishing industry. Fingal alone produces 55% of Ireland's fresh produce, including soft fruits and berries, apples, lettuces, peppers, asparagus, potatoes, onions, and carrots. As of 2020, the Irish Farmers' Association estimates that the total value of Dublin's agricultural produce is \u20ac205 million. According to the CSO, fish landings in the county are worth a further \u20ac20 million.\nApproximately 41% of the county's land area (38,576 ha) is farmed. Of this, is under tillage, the 9th highest in the country, and is dedicated to fruit &amp; horticulture, the 4th highest. Rural County Dublin is considered a peri-urban region, where an urban environment transitions into a rural one. Due to the growth of Dublin city and its commuter towns in the north of the county, the region is considered to be under significant pressure from urban sprawl.\nBetween 1991 and 2010, the amount of agricultural land within the county decreased by 22.9%. In 2015, the local authorities of Fingal, South Dublin and D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown developed a joint Dublin Rural Local Development Strategy aimed at enhancing the region's agricultural output, while also managing and minimising the impact of urbanisation on biodiversity and the identity and culture of rural Dublin.\nThe county has a small forestry industry that is based almost entirely in the upland areas of south County Dublin. According to the 2017 National Forestry Inventory, of the county was under forest, of which was private forestry. The majority of Dublin's forests are owned by the national forestry company, Coillte. In the absence of increased private planting, the county's commercial timber capacity is expected to decrease in the coming decades, as Coillte intends to convert much of their holdings in the Dublin Mountains into non-commercial mixed forests.\nDublin has 810 individual farms with an average size of , the largest average farm size of any county in Ireland. Roughly 9,400 people within the county are directly employed in either agriculture or the food and drink processing industry. Numerous Irish and multinational food and drink companies are either based in Dublin or have facilities within the county, including Mondelez, Coca-Cola, Mars, Diageo, Kellogg's, Danone, Ornua, Pernod Ricard and Glanbia. In 1954, Tayto Crisps were established in Coolock and developed into cultural phenomenon throughout much of the Republic of Ireland. Its operations and headquarters have since moved to neighbouring County Meath. Another popular crisp brand, Keogh's, are based in Oldtown.\nEducation.\nIn Ireland, spending on education is controlled by the government and the allocation of funds is decided each year in the annual budget. Local authorities retain limited responsibilities such as funding for school meals, service supports costs and the upkeep of libraries.\nThere are hundreds of primary and secondary schools within County Dublin, most of which are English-language schools. Several international schools are based in Dublin, such as St Kilian's German School and Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais d'Irlande, which teach in foreign languages. There is also a large minority of students attending gaelscoileanna (Irish-language primary schools). There are 34 gaelscoileanna and 10 gaelchol\u00e1ist\u00ed (Irish-language secondary schools) in the county, with a total of 12,950 students as of 2018. In terms of college acceptance rates, gaelchol\u00e1ist\u00ed are consistently the best performing schools in Dublin, and among the best performing in Ireland.\nAlthough the government pays for a large majority of school costs, including teachers' salaries, the Roman Catholic Church is the largest owner of schools in Dublin, and preference is given to Catholic students over non-Catholic students in oversubscribed areas. This has resulted in a growing movement towards non-denominational and co-educational schools in the county.\nThe majority of private secondary schools in Dublin are still single sex, and continue to have religious patronages with either congregations of the Catholic Church (Spiritans, Sisters of Loreto, Jesuits) or Protestant denominations (Church of Ireland, Presbyterian). Newer private schools which cater for the Leaving Cert cycle such as the Institute of Education and Ashfield College are generally non-denominational and co-educational. In 2018, Nord Anglia International School Dublin opened in Leopardstown, becoming the most expensive private school in Ireland.\nAs of 2023\u201324, four of Dublin's third level institutions are listed in the Top 500 of either the Times Higher Education Rankings or the QS World Rankings, placing them amongst the top 5% of all third level institutions in the world. TCD (81), UCD (171) and DCU (436) are within the Top 500 of the QS rankings; and TCD (161), RCSI (201\u2013250), UCD (201\u2013250) and DCU (451\u2013500) and are within the Top 500 of the Times rankings. Newly amalgamated TUD also placed within the world's Top 1,000 universities in the QS rankings, and within the Top 500 for Engineering and Electronics.\nCounty Dublin has four public universities, as well as numerous other colleges, institutes of technology and institutes of further education. Several of Dublin's largest third level institutions and their associated abbreviations are listed below:\nPolitics.\nElections.\nFor elections to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, the area of the county is currently divided into eleven constituencies: Dublin Bay North, Dublin Bay South, Dublin Central, Dublin Fingal, Dublin Mid-West, Dublin North-West, Dublin Rathdown, Dublin South-Central, Dublin South-West, Dublin West, and D\u00fan Laoghaire. Together they return 45 deputies (TDs) to the D\u00e1il.\nThe first Irish Parliament convened in the small village of Castledermot, County Kildare on 18 June 1264. Representatives from seven constituencies were present, one of which was the constituency of Dublin City. Dublin was historically represented in the Irish House of Commons through the constituencies of Dublin City and County Dublin. Three smaller constituencies had been created by the 17th century: Swords; which was created sometime between 1560 and 1585, with Walter Fitzsimons and Thomas Taylor being its first recorded MPs; Newcastle in the west of the county, created in 1613; and Dublin University, which was a university constituency covering Trinity College, also created in 1613. While proceedings of the Irish Parliament were well-documented, many of the records from this time were lost during the shelling of the Four Courts in July 1922.\nFollowing the Acts of Union 1800, Dublin was represented in Westminster through three constituencies from 1801 to 1885: Dublin City, County Dublin and the Dublin University. A series of local government and electoral reforms in the late 19th century radically alerted the county's political map, and by 1918 there were twelve constituencies within County Dublin.\nThroughout the twentieth century the representation in Dublin expanded as the population grew. In the Electoral Act 1923, the first division of constituencies arranged by Irish legislation, Dublin was represented by 23 of the 147 TDs in geographical constituencies; this contrasts with 49 of 174 TDs under the Electoral (Amendment) Act 2023.\nOf the fifteen people to have held the office of Taoiseach since 1922, more than half were either born or raised within County Dublin: W. T. Cosgrave, John A. Costello, Se\u00e1n Lemass, Liam Cosgrave, Charles Haughey (born in County Mayo but raised in Dublin), Garret FitzGerald, Bertie Ahern and Leo Varadkar (Cosgrave held the office of President of the Executive Council; by convention, Taoisigh are numbered to include this position). Conversely, just one of Ireland's nine presidents have hailed from the county, namely Se\u00e1n T. O'Kelly, who served as president from 1945 to 1959.\nEuropean elections.\nThe four local government areas in County Dublin form the 4-seat constituency of Dublin in European Parliament elections.\nNational government.\nAs the capital city, Dublin is the seat of the national parliament of Ireland, the Oireachtas. It is composed of the president of Ireland, D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann as a house of representatives, and Seanad \u00c9ireann as an upper house. Both houses of the Oireachtas meet in Leinster House, a former ducal palace on Kildare Street. It has been the home of the Irish government since the creation of the Irish Free State. The First D\u00e1il of the revolutionary Irish Republic met in the Round Room of the Mansion House, the present-day residence of the lord mayor of Dublin, in January 1919. The former Irish Parliament, which was abolished in 1801, was located at College Green; Parliament House now holds a branch of Bank of Ireland. Government Buildings, located on Merrion Street, houses the Department of the Taoiseach, the Council Chamber, the Department of Finance, and the Office of the Attorney General.\nThe president resides in \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in in Phoenix Park, a stately ranger's lodge built in 1757. The house was bought by the Crown in 1780 to be used as the summer residence of the lord lieutenant of Ireland, the British viceroy in the Kingdom of Ireland. Following independence, the lodge was earmarked as the potential home of the governor-general, but this was highly controversial as it symbolised continued British rule over Ireland, so it was left empty for many years. President Douglas Hyde \"temporarily\" occupied the building in 1938, as Taoiseach \u00c9amon de Valera intended to demolish it and build a more modest presidential bungalow on the site. Those plans were scrapped during The Emergency and the lodge became the president's permanent residence.\nMuch like \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in, many of the grand estate homes of the former aristocracy were re-purposed for State use in the 20th century. The Deerfield Residence, also in Phoenix Park, is the official residence of the United States ambassador to Ireland, while Glencairn House in south Dublin is used as the British ambassador's residence. Farmleigh House, one of the Guinness family residences, was acquired by the government in 1999 for use as the official Irish state guest house.\nMany other prominent judicial and political organs are located within Dublin, including the Four Courts, which is the principal seat of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, the High Court and the Dublin Circuit Court; and the Custom House, which houses the Department of Housing, Local Government and Heritage. Once the centuries-long seat of the British government's administration in Ireland, Dublin Castle is now only used for ceremonial purposes, such as policy launches, hosting of State visits, and the inauguration of the president.\nSocial issues and ideology.\nDublin is among the most socially liberal places in Ireland, and popular sentiment on issues such as LGBT rights, abortion and divorce has often foreran the rest of the island. Referendums held on these issues have consistently received much stronger support within Dublin, particularly the south of the county, than the majority of the country. While over 66% of voters nationally voted in favour of the Eighth Amendment in 1983, 58% of voters in D\u00fan Laoghaire and 55% in Dublin South voted against it. In 2018, over 75.5% of voters in County Dublin voted to repeal the amendment, compared with 66.4% nationally.\nIn 1987, Dublin Senator David Norris took the Irish government to the European Court of Human Rights (see \"Norris v. Ireland\") over the criminalisation of homosexual acts. In 1988, the court ruled that the law criminalising same sex activities was contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights, in particular Article 8 which protects the right to respect for private life. The law was held to infringe on the right of adults to engage in acts of their own choice. This led directly to the repeal of the law in 1993. Numerous LGBT events and venues are now located within the county. Dublin Pride is an annual pride parade held on the last Saturday of June and is Ireland's largest public LGBT event. In 2018, an estimated 60,000 people attended. During the 2015 vote to allow same-sex marriage, 71% of County Dublin voted in favour, compared with 62% nationally.\nIn general, the south-eastern coastal regions of the county such as D\u00fan Laoghaire and Dublin Bay South are a stronghold for the liberal-conservative Fine Gael party. Since the late-2000s the Green Party has also developed a strong support base in these areas. The democratic socialist Sinn F\u00e9in party generally performs well in south-central and west Dublin, in areas like Tallaght and Crumlin. In recent elections Sinn F\u00e9in have increasingly taken votes in traditional Labour Party areas, whose support has been on the decline since 2016. As a result of the economic crisis, centre-right Fianna F\u00e1il failed to gain a single seat in Dublin in the 2011 general election. This was a first for the long-time dominant party of Irish politics. The party regained a footing in 7 of the 11 Dublin constituencies in 2020, and were also the largest party in Dublin City, Fingal and South Dublin in the 2019 local elections.\nSport.\nGAA.\nDublin is a dual county in Gaelic games, and it competes at a similar level in both hurling/camogie and Gaelic football. The Dublin county board is the governing body for Gaelic games within the county. The county's current GAA crest, adopted in 2004, represents Dublin's four constituent areas. The castle represents Dublin city, the raven represents Fingal, the Viking longboat represents D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown and the book of Saint Tamhlacht in the centre represents South Dublin.\nIn Gaelic football, the Dublin county team competes annually in Division 1 of the National Football League and the provincial Leinster Senior Football Championship. Dublin is the dominant force of Leinster football, with 62 Leinster Senior Championship wins. Nationally, the county is second only to Kerry for All-Ireland Senior Football Championship titles. The two counties are fierce rivals, and a meeting between them is considered the biggest game in Gaelic football. Dublin has won the All-Ireland on 31 occasions, including a record 6 in a row from 2015 to 2020.\nIn hurling, the Dublin hurling team currently compete in Division 1B of the National Hurling League and in the Leinster Senior Hurling Championship. Dublin is the second most successful hurling county in Leinster after Kilkenny, albeit a distant second, with 24 Leinster hurling titles. The county has seen less success in the All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship, ranking joint-fifth alongside Wexford. Dublin has been in 21 All-Ireland hurling finals, winning just 6, the most recent of which was in 1938.\nWithin the county, Gaelic football and hurling clubs compete in the Dublin Senior Football Championship and the Dublin Senior Hurling Championship, which were both established in 1887. St Vincents based in Marino and Faughs based in Templeogue are by far the most successful clubs in Dublin their respective sports. Four Dublin football teams have won the All-Ireland Senior Club Football Championship; St Vincents, Kilmacud Crokes, UCD and Ballyboden St Enda's. Despite their historic dominance in Dublin, Faughs have never won an All-Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship. Since the early 2010s, Dalkey's Cuala have been the county's main hurling force, and the club won back-to-back All-Ireland's in 2017 and 2018.\nSoccer.\nAssociation football (soccer) is one of the most popular sports within the county. While Gaelic games are the most watched sport in Dublin, association football is the most widely played, and there are over 200 amateur football clubs in County Dublin. Dalymount Park in Phibsborough is known as the \"home of Irish football\", as it is both the country's oldest stadium and the former home ground for the national team from 1904 until 1990. The Republic of Ireland national football team is currently based in the 52,000 seater Aviva Stadium, which was built on the site of the old Lansdowne Road stadium in 2010. The Aviva Stadium has hosted the final of the UEFA Europa League twice, in 2011 and 2024. Five League of Ireland football clubs are based within County Dublin; Bohemians F.C., Shamrock Rovers, St Patrick's Athletic, University College Dublin and Shelbourne.\nShamrock Rovers, formerly of Milltown but now based in Tallaght, are the most successful club in the country, with 21 League of Ireland titles. They were also the first Irish side to reach the group stages of a European competition when they qualified for the 2011\u201312 UEFA Europa League group stage. The Dublin University Football Club, founded in 1854, are technically the world's oldest extant football club. However, the club currently only plays rugby union. Bohemians are Ireland's third oldest club currently playing football, after Belfast's Cliftonville F.C. and Athlone Town A.F.C. The Bohemians\u2013Shamrock Rovers rivalry not only involves Dublin's two biggest clubs, but it is also a Northside-Southside rivalry, making it the most intense derby match in the county.\nOther sports.\nRugby Union is the county's third most popular sport, after Gaelic games and football. Leinster Rugby play their competitive home games in the RDS Arena &amp; the Aviva Stadium. Donnybrook Stadium hosts Leinster's friendlies and A games, as well as the Ireland A and Women's teams, Leinster Schools and Youths and the home club games of All Ireland League sides Old Wesley and Bective Rangers. County Dublin is home to 13 of the senior rugby union clubs in Ireland, including 5 of the 10 sides in the top division 1A.\nOther popular sports in the county include: cricket, hockey, golf, tennis, athletics and equestrian activities. Dublin has two ODI cricket grounds in Castle Avenue and Malahide Cricket Club Ground, and the Phoenix Cricket Club, founded in 1830, is the oldest in Ireland. As with many other sporting organisations in the county, the Fitzwilliam Lawn Tennis Club is one of the world's oldest. It hosted the now-discontinued Irish Open from 1879 until 1983. Field hockey, particularly women's field hockey, is becoming increasingly popular within the county. The Ireland women's national field hockey team made it to the 2018 World Cup final, and many of the players on that team were from Dublin clubs, such as UCD, Old Alex, Loreto, Monkstown, Muckross and Railway Union.\nThe Dublin Horse Show takes place at the RDS, which hosted the Show Jumping World Championships in 1982, and the county has a horse racing track at Leopardstown which hosts the Irish Champion Stakes every September. Dublin houses the national stadium for both boxing (National Stadium) and basketball (National Basketball Arena), and the city hosted the 2003 Special Olympics. Although a small county in size, Dublin contains one third of Leinster's 168 golf courses, and three-time major winner P\u00e1draig Harrington is from Rathfarnham.\nMedia.\nLocal radio stations include 98FM, FM104, Dublin City FM, Q102, SPIN 1038, Sunshine 106.8, Raidi\u00f3 Na Life and Radio Nova.\nLocal newspapers include \"The Echo\", and the \"Liffey Champion\".\nMost of the area can receive the five main UK television channels as well as the main Irish channels, along with Sky TV and Virgin Media Ireland cable television.\nPlaces of interest.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6515", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6515", "title": "Celebrity atheists", "text": ""}
{"id": "6516", "revid": "50627357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6516", "title": "Cosmological argument", "text": "Argument for the existence of God\nIn the philosophy of religion, a cosmological argument is an argument for the existence of God based upon observational and factual statements concerning the universe (or some general category of its natural contents) typically in the context of causation, change, contingency or finitude. In referring to reason and observation alone for its premises, and precluding revelation, this category of argument falls within the domain of natural theology. A cosmological argument can also sometimes be referred to as an argument from universal causation, an argument from first cause, the causal argument or the prime mover argument.\nThe concept of causation is a principal underpinning idea in all cosmological arguments, particularly in affirming the necessity for a First Cause. The latter is typically determined in philosophical analysis to be God, as identified within classical conceptions of theism.\nThe origins of the argument date back to at least Aristotle, developed subsequently within the scholarly traditions of Neoplatonism and early Christianity, and later under medieval Islamic scholasticism through the 9th to 12th centuries. It would eventually be re-introduced to Christian theology in the 13th century by Thomas Aquinas. In the 18th century, it would become associated with the principle of sufficient reason formulated by Gottfried Leibniz and Samuel Clarke, itself an exposition of the Parmenidean causal principle that \"nothing comes from nothing\".\nContemporary defenders of cosmological arguments include William Lane Craig, Robert Koons, John Lennox, Stephen Meyer, and Alexander Pruss.\nHistory.\nClassical philosophy.\nPlato (c. 427\u2013347 BC) and Aristotle (c. 384\u2013322 BC) both posited first cause arguments, though each had certain notable caveats. In \"The Laws\" (Book X), Plato posited that all movement in the world and the Cosmos was \"imparted motion\". This required a \"self-originated motion\" to set it in motion and to maintain it. In \"Timaeus\", Plato posited a \"demiurge\" of supreme wisdom and intelligence as the creator of the Cosmos.\nAristotle argued \"against\" the idea of a first cause, often confused with the idea of a \"prime mover\" or \"unmoved mover\" ( or \"primus motor\"), in his \"Physics\" and \"Metaphysics\". Aristotle argued in \"favor\" of the idea of several unmoved movers, one powering each celestial sphere, which he believed lived beyond the sphere of the fixed stars, and explained why motion in the universe (which he believed was eternal) had continued for an infinite period of time. Aristotle argued that the atomists' assertion of a non-eternal universe would require an uncaused first cause\u2014in his terminology, an efficient first cause\u2014an idea he considered a nonsensical flaw in the atomists' reasoning.\nLike Plato, Aristotle believed in an eternal cosmos with no beginning and no end (which in turn follows Parmenides' famous statement that \"nothing comes from nothing\"). In what he called \"first philosophy\" or metaphysics, Aristotle \"did\" intend a theological correspondence between the prime mover and a deity; functionally, however, he provided an explanation for the apparent motion of the \"fixed stars\" (now understood as the daily rotation of the Earth). According to his theses, immaterial unmoved movers are eternal unchangeable beings that constantly think about thinking, but being immaterial, they are incapable of interacting with the cosmos and have no knowledge of what transpires therein. From an \"aspiration or desire\", the celestial spheres, \"imitate\" that purely intellectual activity as best they can, by uniform circular motion. The unmoved movers \"inspiring\" the planetary spheres are no different in kind from the prime mover, they merely suffer a dependency of relation to the prime mover. Correspondingly, the motions of the planets are subordinate to the motion inspired by the prime mover in the sphere of fixed stars. Aristotle's natural theology admitted no creation or capriciousness from the immortal pantheon, but maintained a defense against dangerous charges of impiety.\nLate antiquity to the Islamic Golden Age.\nPlotinus, a third-century Platonist, taught that the One transcendent absolute caused the universe to exist simply as a consequence of its existence (\"creatio ex deo\"). His disciple Proclus stated, \"The One is God\". In the 6th century, Syriac Christian neo-Platonist John Philoponus (c. 490\u00a0\u2013 c. 570) examined the contradiction between Greek pagan adherences to the concept of a past-eternal world and Aristotelian rejection of the existence of actual infinities. Thereupon, he formulated arguments in defense of temporal finitism, which underpinned his arguments for the existence of God. Philosopher Steven M. Duncan notes that Philoponus's ideas eventually received their fullest articulation \"at the hands of Muslim and Jewish exponents of \"kalam\"\", or medieval Islamic scholasticism.\nIn the 11th century, Islamic philosopher Avicenna (c. 980\u00a0\u2013 1037) inquired into the question of being, in which he distinguished between essence (\"m\u0101hiyya\") and existence (\"wu\u01e7\u016bd\"). He argued that the fact of existence could not be inferred from or accounted for by the essence of existing things, and that form and matter by themselves could not originate and interact with the movement of the universe or the progressive actualization of existing things. Thus, he reasoned that existence must be due to an agent cause that necessitates, imparts, gives, or adds existence to an essence. To do so, the cause must coexist with its effect and be an existing thing.\nMedieval Christian theology.\nThomas Aquinas (c. 1225\u00a0\u2013 1274) adapted and enhanced the argument he found in his reading of Aristotle, Avicenna (the Proof of the Truthful) and Maimonides to formulate one of the most influential versions of the cosmological argument. His conception of the first cause was the idea that the universe must be caused by something that is itself uncaused, which he claimed is 'that which we call God':\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The second way is from the nature of the efficient cause. In the world of sense we find there is an order of efficient causes. There is no case known (neither is it, indeed, possible) in which a thing is found to be the efficient cause of itself; for so it would be prior to itself, which is impossible. Now in efficient causes it is not possible to go on to infinity, because in all efficient causes following in order, the first is the cause of the intermediate cause, and the intermediate is the cause of the ultimate cause, whether the intermediate cause be several, or only one. Now to take away the cause is to take away the effect. Therefore, if there be no first cause among efficient causes, there will be no ultimate, nor any intermediate cause. But if in efficient causes it is possible to go on to infinity, there will be no first efficient cause, neither will there be an ultimate effect, nor any intermediate efficient causes; all of which is plainly false. Therefore it is necessary to admit a first efficient cause, to which everyone gives the name of God.\nImportantly, Aquinas's Five Ways, given the second question of his \"Summa Theologica\", are not the entirety of Aquinas's demonstration that the Christian God exists. The Five Ways form only the beginning of Aquinas's Treatise on the Divine Nature.\nGeneral principles.\nThe infinite regress.\nA \"regress\" is a series of related elements, arranged in some type of sequence of succession, examined in backwards succession (regression) from a fixed point of reference. Depending on the type of regress, this retrograde examination may take the form of recursive analysis, in which the elements in a series are studied as products of prior, often simpler, elements. If there is no 'last member' in a regress (i.e. no 'first member' in the series) it becomes an infinite regress, continuing in perpetuity. In the context of the cosmological argument the term 'regress' usually refers to \"causal regress\", in which the series is a chain of cause and effect, with each element in the series arising from causal activity of the prior member. Some variants of the argument may also refer to \"temporal regress\", wherein the elements are past events (discrete units of time) arranged in a temporal sequence.\nAn infinite regress argument attempts to establish the falsity of a proposition by showing that it entails an infinite regress that is vicious. The cosmological argument is a type of \"positive\" infinite regress argument given that it defends a proposition (in this case, the existence of a first cause) by arguing that its negation would lead to a vicious regress. An infinite regress may be vicious due to various reasons:\nAccidental and essential ordering of causes.\nAquinas refers to the distinction found in Aristotle's \"Physics\" (8.5) that a series of causes may either be accidental or essential, though the designation of this terminology would follow later under John Duns Scotus at the turn of the 14th century.\nIn an accidentally ordered series of causes, earlier members need not continue exerting causal activity (having done so to propagate the chain) for the series to continue. For example, in a generational line, ancestors need no longer exist for their offspring to continue the sequence of descent. In an essential series, prior members must maintain causal interrelationship for the series to continue: If a hand grips a stick that moves a rock along the ground, the rock would stop motion once the hand or stick ceases to exist.\nBased upon this distinction Frederick Copleston (1907\u20131994) characterises two types of causation: Causes \"in fieri\", which cause an effect's \"becoming\", or coming into existence, and causes \"in esse\", which causally sustain an effect, in \"being\", once it exists.\nTwo specific properties of an essentially ordered series have significance in the context of the cosmological argument:\nThomistic philosopher, R. P. Phillips comments on the characteristics of essential ordering:\n\"Each member of the series of causes possesses being solely by virtue of the actual present operation of a superior cause ... Life is dependent \"inter alia\" on a certain atmospheric pressure, this again on the continual operation of physical forces, whose being and operation depends on the position of the earth in the solar system, which itself must endure relatively unchanged, a state of being which can only be continuously produced by a definite\u2014if unknown\u2014constitution of the material universe. This constitution, however, cannot be its own cause ... We are thus irresistibly led to posit a first efficient cause which, while itself uncaused, shall impart causality to a whole series.\"\nVersions of the argument.\nAquinas's argument from contingency.\nIn the scholastic era, Aquinas formulated the \"argument from contingency\", following Aristotle, in claiming that there must be something to explain the existence of the universe. Since the universe could, under different circumstances, conceivably \"not\" exist (i.e. it is contingent) its existence must have a cause. This cause cannot be embodied in another contingent thing, but something that exists by necessity (i.e. that \"must\" exist in order for anything else to exist). It is a form of argument from universal causation, therefore compatible with the conception of a universe that has no beginning in time. In other words, according to Aquinas, even if the universe has always existed, it still owes its continuing existence to an uncaused cause, he states: \"...\u00a0and this we understand to be God.\"\nAquinas's argument from contingency is formulated as the (Q2, A3) in the \"Summa Theologica\". It may be expressed as follows:\nHe concludes thereupon that contingent beings are an insufficient explanation for the existence of other contingent beings. Furthermore, that there must exist a \"necessary\" being, whose non-existence is impossible, to explain the origination of all contingent beings.\nLeibnizian cosmological argument.\nIn 1714, German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz presented a variation of the cosmological argument based upon the principle of sufficient reason. He writes: \"There can be found no fact that is true or existent, or any true proposition, without there being a sufficient reason for its being so and not otherwise, although we cannot know these reasons in most cases.\" Stating his argument succinctly:\n\"Why is there something rather than nothing? The sufficient reason ... is found in a substance which ... is a necessary being bearing the reason for its existence within itself.\"\nAlexander Pruss formulates the argument as follows:\nPremise 1 expresses the principle of sufficient reason. In premise 2, Leibniz proposes the existence of a logical conjunction of all contingent facts, referred to in later literature as the \"Big Conjunctive Contingent Fact\" (BCCF), representing the sum total of contingent reality. Premise 3 applies the principle of sufficient reason to the BCCF, given that it too, as a contingency, has a sufficient explanation. It follows, in statement 4, that the explanation of the BCCF must be necessary, not contingent, given that the BCCF incorporates all contingent facts. Statement 5 proposes that the necessary being explaining the totality of contingent facts is God.\nPhilosophers Joshua Rasmussen and T. Ryan Byerly have argued in defence of the inference from statement 4 to statement 5.\nDuns Scotus's metaphysical argument.\nAt the turn of the 14th century, medieval Christian theologian John Duns Scotus (1265/66\u20131308) formulated a metaphysical argument for the existence of God inspired by Aquinas's . Like other philosophers and theologians, Scotus believed that his statement for God's existence could be considered distinct to that of Aquinas. The form of the argument can be summarised as follows:\nScotus affirms, in premise 5, that an accidentally ordered series of causes is impossible without higher-order laws and processes that govern the basic principles of accidental causation, which he characterises as essentially ordered causes.\nPremise 6 continues, in accordance with Aquinas's discourses on the and , that an essentially ordered series of causes cannot be an infinite regress. On this, Scotus posits that, if it is merely possible that a first agent exists, then it is necessarily true that a first agent exists, given that the non-existence of a first agent entails the impossibility of its own existence (by virtue of being a first cause in the chain). He argues further that it is \"not impossible\" for a being to exist that is causeless by virtue of ontological perfection.\nWith the formulation of this argument, Scotus establishes the first component of his 'triple primacy': The characterisation of a being that is first in efficient causality, final causality and pre-eminence, or maximal excellence, which he ascribes to God.\nKalam cosmological argument.\nThe Kalam cosmological argument's central thesis is the impossibility of an infinite temporal regress of events (or past-infinite universe). Though a modern formulation that defends the finitude of the past through philosophical and scientific arguments, many of the argument's ideas originate in the writings of early Christian theologian John Philoponus (490\u2013570 AD), developed within the proceedings of medieval Islamic scholasticism through the 9th to 12th centuries, eventually returning to Christian theological scholarship in the 13th century.\nThese ideas were revitalised for modern discourse by philosopher and theologian William Lane Craig through publications such as \"The Kal\u0101m Cosmological Argument\" (1979) and the \"Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology\" (2009). The form of the argument popularised by Craig is expressed in two parts, as an initial deductive syllogism followed by further philosophical analysis.\nConceptual analysis of the conclusion.\nCraig argues that the cause of the universe necessarily embodies specific properties in creating the universe \"ex nihilo\" and in effecting creation from a timeless state (implying free agency). Based upon this analysis, he appends a further premise and conclusion:\nFor scientific evidence of the finitude of the past, Craig refers to the Borde-Guth-Vilenkin theorem, which posits a past boundary to cosmic inflation, and the general consensus on the standard model of cosmology, which refers to the origin of the universe in the Big Bang.\nFor philosophical evidence, he cites Hilbert's paradox of the grand hotel and the paradox of Tristram Shandy to prove (respectively) the impossibility of actual infinites existing in reality and of forming an actual infinite by successive addition. He concludes that past events, in comprising a series of events that are instantiated in reality and formed by successive addition, cannot extend to an infinite past.\nCraig remarks upon the theological implications that follow from the conclusion of the argument:\n\"... our whole universe was caused to exist by something beyond it and greater than it. For it is no secret that one of the most important conceptions of what theists mean by 'God' is Creator of heaven and earth.\"\nCriticism and discourse.\n\"What caused the first cause?\".\nObjections to the cosmological argument may question why a first cause is unique in that it does not require any causes. Critics contend that the concept of a first cause qualifies as special pleading, or that arguing for the first cause's exemption raises the question of why there should be a first cause at all. Defenders maintain that this question is addressed by various formulations of the cosmological argument, emphasizing that none of its major iterations rests on the premise that everything requires a cause.\nAndrew Loke refers to the Kalam cosmological argument, in which the causal premise (\"whatever begins to exist has a cause\") stipulates that only things which \"begin to exist\" require a cause. William Lane Craig asserts that\u2014even if one posits a plurality of causes for the existence of the universe\u2014a first uncaused cause is necessary, otherwise an infinite regress of causes would arise, which he argues is impossible. Similarly, Edward Feser proposes, in accordance with Aquinas's discourses on the , that an essentially ordered series of causes cannot regress to infinity, even if it may be theoretically possible for accidentally ordered causes to do so.\nVarious arguments have been presented to demonstrate the metaphysical impossibility of an actually infinite regress occurring in the real world, referring to thought experiments such as Hilbert's Hotel, the tale of Tristram Shandy, and variations.\n\"Does the universe need a cause?\".\nCraig maintains that the causal principle is predicated in the metaphysical intuition that \"nothing comes from nothing.\" If such intuitions are false, he argues it would be inexplicable why anything and everything does not randomly come into existence without a cause. Yet, not all philosophers subscribe to the view of causality as \"a priori\" in justification. David Hume contends that the principle is rooted in experience, therefore within the category of \"a posteriori\" knowledge and subject to the problem of induction.\nWhereas J. L. Mackie argues that cause and effect cannot be extrapolated to the origins of the universe based upon our inductive experiences and intellectual preferences, Craig proposes that causal laws are unrestricted metaphysical truths that are \"not contingent upon the properties, causal powers, and dispositions of the natural kinds of substances which happen to exist\".\nIdentifying the first cause.\nSecular philosophers such as Michael Martin argue that a cosmological argument may establish the existence of a first cause, but falls short of identifying that cause as personal, or as God as defined within classical or other specific conceptions of theism.\nDefenders of the argument note that most formulations, such as by Aquinas, Duns Scotus and Craig, employ conceptual analysis to establish the identity of the cause. In Aquinas's \"Summa Theologica\", the \"Prima Pars\" (First Part) is devoted predominantly to establishing the attributes of the cause, such as uniqueness, perfection and intelligence. In Scotus's \"Ordinatio\", his metaphysical argument is the first component of the 'triple primacy' through which he characterises the first cause as a being with the attributes of maximal excellence.\nTimeless origin of the universe.\nIn the topic of cosmic origins and the standard model of cosmology, the initial singularity of the Big Bang is postulated to be the point at which space and time, as well as all matter and energy, came into existence. J. Richard Gott and James E. Gunn assert that the question of \"What was there before the Universe?\" makes no sense and that the concept of \"before\" becomes meaningless when considering a timeless state. They add that questioning what occurred before the Big Bang is akin to questioning what is north of the North Pole.\nCraig refers to Kant's postulate that a cause can be simultaneous with its effect, denoting that this is true of the moment of creation when time itself came into being. He affirms that the history of 20th century cosmology belies the proposition that researchers have no strong intuition to pursue a causal explanation of the origin of time and the universe. Accordingly, physicists have sought to examine the causal origins of the Big Bang by conjecturing such scenarios as the collision of membranes. Feser also notes that versions of the cosmological argument presented by classical philosophers do not require a commitment to the Big Bang, or even to a cosmic origin.\nThe Hume-Edwards principle.\nWilliam L. Rowe characterises the Hume-Edwards principle, referring to arguments presented by David Hume, and later Paul Edwards, in their criticisms of the cosmological argument:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"If the existence of every member of a set is explained, the existence of that set is thereby explained.\"\nThe principle stipulates that a causal series\u2014even one that regresses to infinity\u2014requires no explanatory causes beyond those that are members within that series. If every member of a series has a causal explanation within the sequence, the series in itself is explanatorily complete. Thus, it rejects arguments, such as by Duns Scotus, for the existence of higher-order, efficient causes that govern the basic principles of material causation. Notably, it contradicts Hume's own \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\", in which the character Demea reflects that, even if a succession of causes is infinite, the very existence of the chain still requires a cause.\nCausal loop arguments.\nSome objections to the cosmological argument refer to the possibility of loops in the structure of cause and effect that would avoid the need for a first cause. Gott and Li refer to the curvature of spacetime and closed timelike curves as possible mechanisms by which the universe may bring about its own existence. Richard Hanley contends that causal loops are neither logically nor physically impossible, remarking: \"[In timed systems] the only possibly objectionable feature that all causal loops share is that coincidence is required to explain them.\"\nAndrew Loke argues that there is insufficient evidence to postulate a causal loop of the type that would avoid a first cause. He proposes that such a mechanism would suffer from the problem of vicious circularity, rendering it metaphysically impossible.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6517", "revid": "38556235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6517", "title": "Clutch", "text": "Mechanical device that connects and disconnects two rotating shafts or other moving parts\nA clutch is a mechanical device that allows an output shaft to be disconnected from a rotating input shaft. The clutch's input shaft is typically attached to a motor, while the clutch's output shaft is connected to the mechanism that does the work.\nIn a motor vehicle, the clutch acts as a mechanical linkage between the engine and transmission. By disengaging the clutch, the engine speed (RPM) is no longer determined by the speed of the driven wheels.\nAnother example of clutch usage is in electric drills. The clutch's input shaft is driven by a motor and the output shaft is connected to the drill bit (via several intermediate components). The clutch allows the drill bit to either spin at the same speed as the motor (clutch engaged), spin at a lower speed than the motor (clutch slipping) or remain stationary while the motor is spinning (clutch disengaged).\nTypes.\nDry clutch.\nA \"dry clutch\" uses dry friction to transfer power from the input shaft to the output shaft, for example a \"friction disk\" presses against a car engine's flywheel by a spring mechanism. The wheels of the vehicle are only powered when the flywheel is in contact with the friction disk. To stop the transfer of power, the friction disk is moved away from the flywheel by means of a lever mechanism. The majority of automotive clutches on manual transmissions are dry clutches. Slippage of a friction clutch (where the clutch is partially engaged but the shafts are rotating at different speeds) is sometimes required, such as when a motor vehicle accelerates from a standstill; however the slippage should be minimised to avoid increased wear rates.\nIn a \"pull-type\" clutch, pressing the pedal pulls the release bearing to disengage the clutch. In a \"push-type\" clutch, pressing the pedal pushes the release bearing to disengage the clutch.\nA \"multi-plate clutch\" consists of several friction plates arranged concentrically. In some cases, it is used instead of a larger diameter clutch. Drag racing cars use multi-plate clutches to control the rate of power transfer to the wheels as the vehicle accelerates from a standing start.\nSome clutch disks include springs designed to change the natural frequency of the clutch disc, in order to reduce NVH within the vehicle. Also, some clutches for manual transmission cars use a clutch delay valve to avoid abrupt engagements of the clutch.\nWet clutch.\nIn a \"wet clutch\", the friction material sits in an oil bath (or has flow-through oil) which cools and lubricates the clutch. This can provide smoother engagement and a longer lifespan of the clutch, however wet clutches can have a lower efficiency due to some energy being transferred to the oil. Since the surfaces of a wet clutch can be slippery (as with a motorcycle clutch bathed in engine oil), stacking multiple clutch discs can compensate for the lower coefficient of friction and so eliminate slippage under power when fully engaged.\nWet clutches often use a composite paper material.\nCentrifugal clutch.\nA centrifugal clutch automatically engages as the speed of the input shaft increases and disengages as the input shaft speed decreases. Applications include small motorcycles, motor scooters, chainsaws, and some older automobiles.\nCone clutch.\nA cone clutch is similar to dry friction plate clutch, except the friction material is applied to the outside of a conical shaped object. This conical shape allows wedging action to occur during engagement. A common application for cone clutches is the synchronizer ring in a manual transmission.\nDog clutch.\nA dog clutch is a non-slip design of clutch which is used in non-synchronous transmissions.\nSingle-revolution clutch.\nThe \"single-revolution clutch\" was developed in the 19th century to power machinery such as shears or presses where a single pull of the operating lever or (later) press of a button would trip the mechanism, engaging the clutch between the power source and the machine's crankshaft for exactly one revolution before disengaging the clutch. When the clutch is disengaged, the driven member is stationary. Early designs were typically dog clutches with a cam on the driven member used to disengage the dogs at the appropriate point.\nGreatly simplified single-revolution clutches were developed in the 20th century, requiring much smaller operating forces and in some variations, allowing for a fixed fraction of a revolution per operation. Fast action friction clutches replaced dog clutches in some applications, eliminating the problem of impact loading on the dogs every time the clutch engaged.\nIn addition to their use in heavy manufacturing equipment, single-revolution clutches were applied to numerous small machines. In tabulating machines, for example, pressing the operate key would trip a single revolution clutch to process the most recently entered number. In typesetting machines, pressing any key selected a particular character and also engaged a single rotation clutch to cycle the mechanism to typeset that character. Similarly, in teleprinters, the receipt of each character tripped a single-revolution clutch to operate one cycle of the print mechanism.\nIn 1928, Frederick G. Creed developed a single-turn wrap spring clutch that was particularly well suited to the repetitive start-stop action required in teleprinters. In 1942, two employees of Pitney Bowes Postage Meter Company developed an improved single turn spring clutch. In these clutches, a coil spring is wrapped around the driven shaft and held in an expanded configuration by the trip lever. When tripped, the spring rapidly contracts around the power shaft engaging the clutch. At the end of one revolution, if the trip lever has been reset, it catches the end of the spring (or a pawl attached to it), and the angular momentum of the driven member releases the tension on the spring. These clutches have long operating lives\u2014many have performed tens and perhaps hundreds of millions of cycles without the need of maintenance other than occasional lubrication.\n\"Cascaded-pawl single-revolution clutches\" superseded wrap-spring single-revolution clutches in page printers, such as teleprinters, including the Teletype Model 28 and its successors, using the same design principles. IBM Selectric typewriters also used them. These are typically disc-shaped assemblies mounted on the driven shaft. Inside the hollow disc-shaped drive drum are two or three freely floating pawls arranged so that when the clutch is tripped, the pawls spring outward much like the shoes in a drum brake. When engaged, the load torque on each pawl transfers to the others to keep them engaged. These clutches do not slip once locked up, and they engage very quickly, on the order of milliseconds. A trip projection extends out from the assembly. If the trip lever engaged this projection, the clutch was disengaged. When the trip lever releases this projection, internal springs and friction engage the clutch. The clutch then rotates one or more turns, stopping when the trip lever again engages the trip projection.\nUsage in automobiles.\nManual transmissions.\nMost cars and trucks with a manual transmission use a dry clutch, which is operated by the driver using the left-most pedal. The motion of the pedal is transferred to the clutch using mechanical linkage, hydraulics (master and slave cylinders) or a cable. The clutch is only disengaged at times when the driver is pressing on the clutch pedal, therefore the default state is for the transmission to be connected to the engine. A \"neutral\" gear position is provided, so that the clutch pedal can be released with the vehicle remaining stationary.\nThe clutch is required for standing starts and in vehicles whose transmissions lack synchronising means to assist in matching the speeds of the engine and transmission during gear changes to avoid gear \u201ccrashing,\u201d which can cause serious damage to gear teeth.\nThe clutch is usually mounted directly to the face of the engine's flywheel, as this already provides a convenient large-diameter steel disk that can act as one driving plate of the clutch. Some racing clutches use small multi-plate disk packs that are not part of the flywheel. Both clutch and flywheel are enclosed in a conical bellhousing for the gearbox. The friction material used for the clutch disk varies, with a common material being an organic compound resin with a copper wire facing or a ceramic material.\nAutomatic transmissions.\nIn an automatic transmission, the role of the clutch is performed by a torque converter. However, the transmission itself often includes internal clutches, such as a \"lock-up clutch\" to prevent slippage of the torque converter, in order to reduce the energy loss through the transmission and therefore improve fuel economy.\nFans and compressors.\nOlder belt-driven engine cooling fans often use a heat-activated clutch, in the form of a bimetallic strip. When the temperature is low, the spring winds and closes the valve, which lets the fan spin at about 20% to 30% of the crankshaft speed. As the temperature of the spring rises, it unwinds and opens the valve, allowing fluid past the valve, making the fan spin at about 60% to 90% of crankshaft speed.\nA vehicle's air-conditioning compressor often uses magnetic clutches to engage the compressor as required.\nUsage in motorcycles.\nMotorcycles typically employ a wet clutch with the clutch riding in the same oil as the transmission. These clutches are usually made up of a stack of alternating friction plates and steel plates. The friction plates have lugs on their outer diameters that lock them into a basket that is turned by the crankshaft. The steel plates have lugs on their inner diameters that lock them to the transmission input shaft. A set of coil springs or a diaphragm spring plate force the plates together when the clutch is engaged.\nOn motorcycles the clutch is operated by a hand lever on the left handlebar. No pressure on the lever means that the clutch plates are engaged (driving), while pulling the lever back towards the rider disengages the clutch plates through cable or hydraulic actuation, allowing the rider to shift gears or coast. Racing motorcycles often use slipper clutches to eliminate the effects of engine braking, which, being applied only to the rear wheel, can cause instability.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6520", "revid": "120807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6520", "title": "Cow tipping", "text": "Urban legend\nCow tipping is the purported activity of sneaking up on any unsuspecting or sleeping upright cow and pushing it over for entertainment. The practice of cow tipping is generally considered an urban legend and stories of such feats viewed as tall tales. The implication that rural citizens seek such entertainment due to lack of alternatives is viewed as a stereotype. The concept of cow tipping apparently developed in the 1970s, though tales of animals that cannot rise if they fall has historical antecedents dating to the Roman Empire.\nCows routinely lie down and can easily regain their footing unless sick or injured. Scientific studies have been conducted to determine if cow tipping is theoretically possible, with varying conclusions. All agree that cows are large animals that are difficult to surprise and will generally resist attempts to be tipped. Estimates suggest a force of between is needed, and that at least four and possibly as many as fourteen people would be required to achieve this. In real-life situations where cattle have to be laid on the ground, or \"cast\", such as for branding, hoof care or veterinary treatment, either rope restraints are required or specialized mechanical equipment is used that confines the cow and then tips it over. On rare occasions, cattle can lie down or fall down in proximity to a ditch or hill that restricts their normal ability to rise without help. Cow tipping has many references in popular culture and is also used as a figure of speech.\nScientific study.\nSome versions of the urban legend suggest that because cows sleep standing up, it is possible to approach them and push them over without the animals reacting. However, cows only sleep lightly while standing up, and they are easily awakened. They lie down to sleep deeply. Furthermore, numerous sources have questioned the practice's feasibility, since most cows weigh over and easily resist any lesser force.\nA 2005 study led by Margo Lillie, a zoologist at the University of British Columbia, and her student Tracy Boechler, concluded that tipping a cow would require a force of nearly and is therefore impossible to accomplish by a single person. Her calculations found that it would require more than four people to apply enough force to push over a cow, based on an estimate that a single person could exert of force. However, since a cow can brace itself, Lillie and Boechler suggested that five or six people would, most likely, be needed. Further, cattle are well aware of their surroundings and are very difficult to surprise, due to excellent senses of both smell and hearing. Lillie and Boechler's analysis found that if a cow did not move, the principles of static physics suggest that two people might be able to tip a cow if its centre of mass were pushed over its hooves before the cow could react. However, cows are not rigid or unresponsive, and the faster humans have to move, the less force they can exert. Thus Lillie and Boechler concluded that it is unlikely that cows can actually be tipped over in this way. Lillie stated, \"It just makes the physics of it all, in my opinion, impossible.\"\nAlthough biologist Steven Vogel agrees that it would take a force of about 3,000 newtons to push over a standing cow, he thinks that the study by Lillie and Boechler overestimates the pushing ability of an individual human. Using data from Cotterell and Kamminga, who estimated that humans exert a pushing force of 280 newtons, Vogel suggests that someone applying force at the requisite height to topple a cow might generate a maximum push of no more than 300 newtons. By this calculation, at least 10 people would be needed to tip over a non-reacting cow. However, this combined force requirement, he says, might not be the greatest impediment to such a prank. Standing cows are not asleep and, like other animals, have ever-vigilant reflexes. \"If the cow does no more than modestly widen its stance without an overall shift of its center of gravity\", he says, \"about 4,000 newtons or 14 pushers would be needed\u2014quite a challenge to deploy without angering the cow.\"\nHistorical origins.\nThe belief that certain animals cannot rise if pushed over has historical antecedents. Julius Caesar recorded a belief that a European elk had no knee joints and could not get up if it fell. Pliny said the same about the hind legs of an animal he called the achlis, which Pliny's 19th-century translators Bostock and Riley said was merely another name for the elk. They noted that Pliny's belief about the jointless back legs of the achlis (elk) was false.\nIn 1255, Louis IX of France gave an elephant to Henry III of England for his menagerie in the Tower of London. A drawing by the historian Matthew Paris for his \"Chronica Majora\" can be seen in his bestiary at Parker Library of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge. An accompanying text cites elephant lore suggesting that elephants did not have knees and were unable to get up if they fell.\nJournalist Jake Steelhammer believes the American urban myth of cow tipping originated in the 1970s. It \"stampeded into the '80s\", he says, \"when movies like \"Tommy Boy\" and \"Heathers\" featured cow tipping expeditions.\" Stories about cow tipping tend to be second-hand, he says, told by someone who does not claim to have tipped a cow but who knows someone else who says they did.\nVeterinary and husbandry practices.\nCattle may need to be deliberately thrown or tipped over for certain types of husbandry practices and medical treatment. When done for medical purposes, this is often called \"casting\", and when performed without mechanical assistance requires the attachment of of rope around the body and legs of the animal. After the rope is secured by non-slip bowline knots, it is pulled to the rear until the animal is off-balance. Once the cow is forced to lie down in sternal recumbency (on its chest), it can be rolled onto its side and its legs tied to prevent kicking.\nA calf table or calf cradle, also called a \"tipping table\" or a \"throw down\", is a relatively modern invention designed to be used on calves that are being branded. A calf is run into a chute, confined, and then tipped by the equipment onto its side for easier branding and castration.\nHydraulic tilt tables for adult cattle have existed since the 1970s and are designed to lift and tip cattle onto their sides to enable veterinary care, particularly of the animals' genitalia, and for hoof maintenance. (Unlike horses, cows generally do not cooperate with a farrier when standing.) A Canadian veterinarian explained, \"Using the table is much safer and easier than trying to get underneath to examine the animal\", and noted that cows tipped over on a padded table usually stop struggling and become calm fairly quickly. One design, developed at the Western College of Veterinary Medicine in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, included \"cow comfort\" as a unique aspect of care using this type of apparatus.\nInvoluntary recumbency.\nCows may inadvertently tip themselves. Due to their bulk and relatively short legs, cattle cannot roll over. Those that lie down and roll to their sides with their feet pointing uphill may become stuck and unable to rise without assistance, with potentially fatal results. In such cases, two humans can roll or flip a cow onto its other side, so that its feet are aimed downhill, thus allowing it to rise on its own. In one documented case of \"real-life cow tipping\", a pregnant cow rolled into a gully in New Hampshire and became trapped in an inverted state until rescued by volunteer fire fighters. The owner of the cow commented that he had seen this happen \"once or twice\" before.\nTrauma or illness may also result in a cow unable to rise to its feet. Such animals are sometimes called \"downers.\" Sometimes this occurs as a result of muscle and nerve damage from calving or a disease such as mastitis. Leg injuries, muscle tears, or a massive infection of some sort may also be causes. Downer cows are encouraged to get to their feet and have a much greater chance of recovery if they do. If unable to rise, some have survived\u2014with medical care\u2014as long as 14 days and were ultimately able to get back on their feet. Appropriate medical treatment for a downer cow to prevent further injury includes rolling from one side to the other every three hours, careful and frequent feeding of small amounts of fodder, and access to clean water.\nDeath.\nDead animals may appear to have been tipped over, but this is actually the process of rigor mortis, which stiffens the muscles of the carcass, beginning six to eight hours after death and lasting for one to two days. It is particularly noticeable in the limbs, which stick out straight. Post-mortem bloat also occurs because of gas formation inside the body. The process may result in cattle carcasses that wind up on their back with all four feet in the air.\nIn popular culture.\nAssorted individuals have claimed to have performed cow tipping, often while under the influence of alcohol. These claims, to date, cannot be reliably verified, with Jake Swearingen of \"Modern Farmer\" noting in 2013 that YouTube, a popular source of videos of challenges and stunts, \"fails to deliver one single actual cow-tipping video\".\nPranksters have sometimes pushed over artificial cows. Along Chicago's Michigan Avenue in 1999, two \"apparently drunk\" men felled six fiberglass cows that were part of a Cows on Parade public art exhibit. Four other vandals removed a \"Wow cow\" sculpture from its lifeguard chair at Oak Street Beach and abandoned it in a pedestrian underpass. A year later, New York City anchored its CowParade art cows, including \"A Streetcow Named Desire\", to concrete bases \"to prevent the udder disrespect of cow-tippers and thieves.\"\nCow tipping has been featured in films from the 1980s and later, such as \"Heathers\" (1988), \"Tommy Boy\" (1995), \" Barnyard\" (2006), and \"I Love You, Beth Cooper\" (2009). It was also used in the title of a 1992 documentary film by Randy Redroad, \"Cow Tipping\u2014The Militant Indian Waiter\". \nVariants of cow tipping have also been seen in popular media such as the film \"Cars\" (2006), which features a vehicular variant called tractor-tipping, and the video game \"\", which allows the character to sneak up on and tip over a Brahmin, the game's two-headed cow-like animal. The board game \"Battle Cattle\" is based on the practice, with heavily armed cows having \"Tipping Defense Numbers.\"\nIn the Little Willies song \"Lou Reed\" from their 2006 self-titled debut album, Norah Jones sings about a fictional event during which musician Lou Reed tips cows in Texas. In another medium, \"The Big Bang Theory\", a television show, uses cow tipping lore as an element to establish the nature of a rural character, Penny.\nThe term \"cow tipping\" is sometimes used as a figure of speech for pushing over something big. In \"A Giant Cow-Tipping by Savages\", author John Weir Close uses the term to describe contemporary mergers and acquisitions. \"Tipping sacred cows\" has been used as a deliberate mixed metaphor in titles of books on Christian ministry and business management.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6522", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6522", "title": "Chief Executive Officer", "text": ""}
{"id": "6524", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6524", "title": "Clam Dip", "text": ""}
{"id": "6526", "revid": "47056208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6526", "title": "Cassandra", "text": "Mythological prophetess and princess of Troy\nIn Greek mythology, Cassandra, also spelled Kassandra or Casandra, (; , , or referred to as Alexandra; ) was a Trojan priestess dedicated to the god Apollo and fated by him to utter true prophecies, but never be believed. Cassandra lived through the Trojan War and survived the sack of the city, but was murdered by Clytemnestra and Aegisthus when Agamemnon brought her to Mycenae as a \"pallake\". \nIn contemporary usage, her name is employed as a rhetorical device to indicate a person whose accurate predictions, generally of impending disaster, are not believed. \nEtymology.\nHjalmar Frisk (\"Griechisches Etymologisches W\u00f6rterbuch\", Heidelberg, 1960\u20131970) notes \"unexplained etymology\", citing \"various hypotheses\" found in Wilhelm Schulze, Edgar Howard Sturtevant, J. Davreux, and Albert Carnoy. R. S. P. Beekes cites Garc\u00eda Ram\u00f3n's derivation of the name from the Proto-Indo-European root *\"(s)kend-\" \"raise\". The Online Etymology Dictionary states \"though the second element looks like a fem. form of Greek \"andros\" \"of man, male human being.\" Watkins suggests PIE \"*(s)kand-\" \"to shine\" as source of second element. The name also has been connected to \"kekasmai\" \"to surpass, excel.\"\nDescription.\nCassandra was described by the chronicler Malalas in his account of the \"Chronography\" as \"shortish, round-faced, white, mannish figure, good nose, good eyes, dark pupils, blondish, curly, good neck, bulky breasts, small feet, calm, noble, priestly, an accurate prophet foreseeing everything, practicing hard, virgin\". Meanwhile, in the account of Dares the Phrygian, she was illustrated as \". . .of moderate stature, round-mouthed, and auburn-haired. Her eyes flashed. She knew the future.\" In the \"Iliad\", Homer described Cassandra as the fairest of all Priam's daughters. Euripides wrote that she had golden hair and wore a crown of laurels when prophesizing.\nGift of prophecy.\nCassandra was given the gift of uttering true prophecies, but was cursed so that they would never be believed. Commonly, Cassandra incurred Apollo's wrath by refusing him sexual favors after promising herself to him in exchange for the gift of prophecy. \nIn Aeschylus' \"Agamemnon\", she bemoans her relationship with the god:\n&lt;poem&gt;Apollo, Apollo!\nGod of all ways, but only Death's to me,\nOnce and again, O thou, Destroyer named,\nThou hast destroyed me, thou, my love of old!&lt;/poem&gt;\nAnd she acknowledges her fault:\n&lt;poem&gt;I consented [marriage] to Loxias [Apollo] but broke my word. ... Ever since that fault I could persuade no one of anything.&lt;/poem&gt;\nLatin author Hyginus writes in his \"Fabulae\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Cassandra, daughter of the king and queen, in the temple of Apollo, exhausted from practising, is said to have fallen asleep; whom, when Apollo wished to embrace her, she did not afford the opportunity of her body. On account of which thing, when she prophesied true things, she was not believed.\nHowever, other versions of the story have been given; Tzetzes wrote that Cassandra and her brother Helenus received their gifts of prophecy after being left overnight in the temple of Apollo, and in the morning they were found with serpents licking their ears. Additionally, Euripides wrote that Apollo left Cassandra to be a virgin, and the god was angered when Agamemnon took her as a concubine. \nHer cursed gift became an endless pain and frustration to her. She was seen as a liar and a madwoman by her family and by the Trojan people. Because of this, her father, Priam, had locked her away in a chamber and guarded her like the madwoman she was believed to be. Though Cassandra made many predictions that went unheeded, the one prophecy that was believed was that of Paris being her abandoned brother.\nAncient sources.\nCassandra appears in texts by Homer, Virgil, Aeschylus and Euripides. While details such as her parentage remain the same between accounts, each author depicts her prophetic powers differently.\nHomer.\nCassandra is mentioned in both the \"Iliad\" and the \"Odyssey\". In the \"Iliad\", she is named as the comeliest daughter of King Priam, and a \"peer of golden Aphrodite.\" When her brother Hector was killed, she announced his death to the Trojan people so they could mourn and see his body as it was brought back into the city.\nIn the \"Odyssey\", Agamemnon's shade informs Odysseus of his death at the hands of his wife Clytemnestra; Cassandra was murdered as she stood next to him.\nVirgil.\nAs the \"Aeneid\" takes place after Cassandra's death, she is mentioned by multiple characters but does not appear herself. Cassandra is mentioned prophesizing the fall of Troy and Aeneas' journey to Italy. In one scene, when Trojan soldiers saw the Greeks had kidnapped Cassandra from Minerva's temple and bound her in chains, they attempted to free her, but were quickly defeated. Coroebus, who was in love with Cassandra, was the first to charge into battle. He died alongside Rhipeus, Dymas, and Hypanis. \nSeneca the Younger.\nLikewise Seneca the Younger, in his play \"Agamemnon\", has her prophesy why Agamemnon deserves his recorded death:\"Quid me vocatis sospitem solam e meis, umbrae meorum? te sequor, tota pater Troia sepulte; frater, auxilium Phrygum terrorque Danaum, non ego antiquum decus video aut calentes ratibus ambustis manus, sed lacera membra et saucios vinclo gravi illos lacertos. te sequor\u2026 (Ag. 741\u2013747)\"&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\n\"Why do you call me, the lone survivor of my family, My shades? I follow you, father buried with all of Troy; Brother, bulwark of Trojans, terrorizer of Greeks, I do not see your beauty of old or hands warmed by burnt ships, But your lacerated limbs and those famous shoulders savaged By heavy chains. I follow you...\"This behavior is reflected in acts 4 and 5 as \"her mantic vision\" is \"supplemented by a further (in)sight into what is going on inside the palace in act 5 when she becomes a quasi-messenger and provides a meticulous account of Agamemnon's murder in the bath: 'I see and I am there and I enjoy it, no false vision deceives my eyes: let's watch' (\"video et intersum et fruor, / imago visus dubia non fallit meos: / spectemus\".).\"\nAeschylus.\nIn Aeschylus' \"Agamemnon\", a play in the \"Oresteia\" trilogy, Cassandra has been taken by Agamemnon to Mycenae, where they are welcomed home by Clytemnestra and an entourage of servants. Agamemnon enters the palace after his wife but Cassandra remains outside in the chariot. There, Cassandra receives violent visions and prophesizes that Clytemnestra will murder Agamemnon; a crows watches on, but is unable to comprehend was she says.\nIn this version of the story, Clytemnestra waits until Agamemnon has gotten into the bath before she entangles him in a net and stabs him three times with a blade. Cassandra, accepting her fate, walks into her inevitable offstage murder with full knowledge of what is to befall her. Clytemnestra announces that she murdered Cassandra to avenge her honor as a wife, as she was insulted that Agamemnon took a concubine.\nMythology.\nBefore the fall of Troy.\nBefore the fall of Troy, Cassandra foresaw that if Paris went to Sparta and brought Helen back as his wife, her arrival would spark the Trojan War and lead to the destruction of the city. Ignoring Cassandra's warning, Paris went to Sparta and returned with Helen. While the people of Troy rejoiced, Cassandra was enraged; she furiously snatched Helen's golden veil off her head and tore at her hair. \nIn the \"Aeneid\", Cassandra warned the Trojans about the Greeks hiding inside the Trojan Horse, Agamemnon's death, her own demise at the hands of Aegisthus and Clytemnestra, her mother Hecuba's fate, Odysseus's ten-year wanderings before returning home, and the murder of Aegisthus and Clytemnestra by the latter's children Electra and Orestes. Cassandra additionally predicted that her cousin Aeneas would escape during the fall of Troy and found a new nation in Rome.\nThe sack of Troy.\nCoroebus and Othronus came to the aid of Troy during the Trojan War out of love for Cassandra and in exchange for her hand in marriage, but both were killed. According to one account, Priam offered Cassandra to Telephus's son Eurypylus, in order to induce Eurypylus to fight on the side of the Trojans. Cassandra was also the first to see the body of her brother Hector being brought back to the city.In \"The Fall of Troy\" by Quintus Smyrnaeus, Cassandra attempted to warn the Trojan people that Greek warriors were hiding in the Trojan Horse while they were celebrating their victory over the Greeks with feasting. Disbelieving Cassandra, the Trojans resorted to calling her names and hurling insults at her. Attempting to prove herself right, Cassandra took an axe in one hand and a burning torch in the other, and ran towards the Trojan Horse, intent on destroying the Greeks herself, but the Trojans stopped her. The Greeks hiding inside the Horse were relieved, but alarmed by how clearly she had divined their plan.\nDuring the sack of the city, Cassandra sought shelter in the temple of Athena. There, she embraced the wooden statue of Athena in supplication for her protection, but was abducted and brutally raped by Ajax the Lesser. Cassandra clung so tightly to the statue of the goddess that Ajax knocked it from its stand as he dragged her away. Ajax's actions amounted to sacrilege, as he had defiled both the Athena's temple and a person under her protection.\nIn Pseudo-Apollodorus' \"Epitome\", Ajax's death comes at the hands of both Athena and Poseidon. Athena threw a thunderbolt at his ship, destroying it. Ajax made his way to safety on a rock, and declared that he had been saved in spite of Athena's intentions. However, Poseidon then split the rock with his trident, casting Ajax to his death. Eventually his body washed upon the shores of Myconos, where he was buried by Thetis.\nIn some versions, Cassandra intentionally left a chest behind in Troy that would curse whichever Greek opened it first. Inside the chest was an image of Dionysus, made by Hephaestus and presented to the Trojans by Zeus. It was given to the Greek leader Eurypylus as a part of his share of the victory spoils of Troy. When he opened the chest and saw the image of the god, he went mad.\nThe aftermath of Troy and Cassandra's death.\nOnce Troy had fallen, Cassandra was taken as a \"pallake\" (concubine) by King Agamemnon of Mycenae. While he was away at war, Agamemnon's wife, Clytemnestra, had taken Aegisthus as her lover. When Cassandra and Agememnon returned to Mycenae, they were ambushed and murdered by Clytemnestra or Aegisthus. In many tellings, Cassandra foresees her death and willingly accepts it. Various sources state that Cassandra and Agamemnon had twin boys, Teledamus and Pelops, who were murdered by Aegisthus.\nThe final resting place of Cassandra is either in Amyclae or Mycenae. Statues of Cassandra exist both in Amyclae and across the Peloponnese peninsula from Mycenae to Leuctra. In Mycenae, German business man and pioneer archeologist Heinrich Schliemann discovered in Grave Circle A the graves of Cassandra and Agamemnon and telegraphed back to King George I of Greece:\"With great joy I announce to Your Majesty that I have discovered the tombs which the tradition proclaimed by Pausanias indicates to be the graves of Agamemnon, Cassandra, Eurymedon and their companions, all slain at a banquet by Clytemnestra and her lover Aegisthos.\"However, it was later discovered that the graves predated the Trojan War by at least 300 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6530", "revid": "41086463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6530", "title": "Couplet", "text": "Pair of successive lines of metre in poetry\nIn poetry, a couplet ( ) or distich ( ) is a pair of successive lines that rhyme and have the same metre. A couplet may be formal (closed) or run-on (open). In a formal (closed) couplet, each of the two lines is end-stopped, implying that there is a grammatical pause at the end of a line of verse. In a run-on (open) couplet, the meaning of the first line continues to the second.\nBackground.\nThe word \"couplet\" comes from the French word meaning \"two pieces of iron riveted or hinged together\". The term \"couplet\" was first used to describe successive lines of verse in Sir P. Sidney's \"Arcadia \"in 1590: \"In singing some short coplets, whereto the one halfe beginning, the other halfe should answere.\"\nWhile couplets traditionally rhyme, not all do. Poems may use white space to mark out couplets if they do not rhyme. Couplets in iambic pentameter are called \"heroic couplets\". John Dryden in the 17th century and Alexander Pope in the 18th century were both well known for their writing in heroic couplets. The Poetic epigram is also in the couplet form. Couplets can also appear as part of more complex rhyme schemes, such as sonnets.\nRhyming couplets are one of the simplest rhyme schemes in poetry. Because the rhyme comes so quickly, it tends to call attention to itself. Good rhyming couplets tend to \"explode\" as both the rhyme and the idea come to a quick close in two lines. Here are some examples of rhyming couplets where the sense as well as the sound \"rhymes\":\n True wit is nature to advantage dress'd;\n What oft was thought, but ne'er so well express'd.\n \u2014 Alexander Pope\n Whether or not we find what we are seeking\n Is idle, biologically speaking.\n \u2014 Edna St. Vincent Millay (at the end of a sonnet)\nOn the other hand, because rhyming couplets have such a predictable rhyme scheme, they can feel artificial and plodding. Here is a Pope parody of the predictable rhymes of his era:\n Where-e'er you find \"the cooling western breeze,\"\n In the next line, it \"whispers through the trees;\"\n If crystal streams \"with pleasing murmurs creep,\"\n The reader's threatened (not in vain) with \"sleep.\"\nIn English poetry.\nRegular rhyme was not originally a feature of English poetry: Old English verse came in metrically paired units somewhat analogous to couplets, but constructed according to alliterative verse principles. The rhyming couplet entered English verse in the early Middle English period through the imitation of medieval Latin and Old French models. The earliest surviving examples are a metrical paraphrase of the Lord's Prayer in short-line couplets, and the \"Poema Morale\" in septenary (or \"heptameter\") couplets, both dating from the twelfth century.\nRhyming couplets were often used in Middle English and early modern English poetry. Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\", for instance, is predominantly written in rhyming couplets, and Chaucer also incorporated a concluding couplet into his rhyme royal stanza. Similarly, Shakespearean sonnets often employ rhyming couplets at the end to emphasize the theme. Take one of Shakespeare's most famous sonnets, Sonnet 18, for example (the rhyming couplet is shown in italics):\n Shall I compare thee to a summer's day?\n Thou art more lovely and more temperate:\n Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,\n And summer's lease hath all too short a date:\n Sometimes too hot the eye of heaven shines,\n And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;\n And every fair from fair sometime declines,\n By chance or nature's changing course untrimm'd;\n But thy eternal summer shall not fade\n Nor lose possession of that fair thou owest;\n Nor shall Death brag thou wander'st in his shade,\n When in eternal lines to time thou growest:\n \"So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,\"\n \"So long lives this and this gives life to thee.\"\nIn the late seventeenth century and early eighteenth-century English rhyming couplets achieved the zenith of their prestige in English verse, in the popularity of heroic couplets. The heroic couplet was used by famous poets for ambitious translations of revered Classical texts, for instance, in John Dryden's translation of the \"Aeneid\" and in Alexander Pope's translation of the \"Iliad\".\nThough poets still sometimes write in couplets, the form fell somewhat from favour in English in the twentieth century; contemporary poets writing in English sometimes prefer unrhymed couplets, distinguished by layout rather than by matching sounds.\nIn Chinese poetry.\nCouplets called duilian may be seen on doorways in Chinese communities worldwide. Duilian displayed as part of the Chinese New Year festival, on the first morning of the New Year, are called chunlian (\u6625\u806f; \u6625\u8054). These are usually purchased at a market a few days before and glued to the doorframe. The text of the couplets is often traditional and contains hopes for prosperity. Other chunlian reflect more recent concerns. For example, the CCTV New Year's Gala usually promotes couplets reflecting current political themes in mainland China.\nSome duilian may consist of two lines of four characters each. Duilian are read from top to bottom where the first line starts from the right.\nIn Tamil poetry.\nTamil literature contains some of the notable examples of ancient couplet poetry. The Tamil language has a rich and refined grammar for couplet poetry, and distichs in Tamil poetry follow the venpa metre. One of the most notable examples of Tamil couplet poetry is the ancient Tamil moral text of the Tirukkural, which contains a total of 1330 couplets written in the kural venpa metre from which the title of the work was derived centuries later. Each Kural couplet is made of exactly 7 words\u20144 in the first line and 3 in the second. The first word may rhyme with the fourth or the fifth word. Below is an example of a couplet:\n. (Tirukkural, verse 205)\n\"Transliteration\": Ilan endru theeyavai seyyarkka seyyin\nIlanaagum matrum peyartthu\n\"Translation\": Make not thy poverty a plea for ill;\nThine evil deeds will make thee poorer still. (Pope, 1886)\nIn Hindustani poetry.\nIn Hindi, a couplet is called a \"doha\", while in Urdu, it is called a \"sher\".\nCouplets were the most common form of poetry between the 12th and 18th Centuries, in Hidustani. Famous poets include Kabir, Tulsidas and Rahim Khan-i-Khanan.\nKabir (also known as Kabirdas) is thought to be one of the greatest composers of Hindustani couplets.\nDistich.\nThe American poet J. V. Cunningham was noted for many distichs included in the various forms of epigrams included in his poetry collections, as exampled here:\nDeep summer, and time passes. Sorrow wastes&lt;br&gt;To a new sorrow. While Time heals time hastes\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6531", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6531", "title": "Chinese Cuisine", "text": ""}
{"id": "6532", "revid": "47751324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6532", "title": "Charlotte Bront\u00eb", "text": "English novelist and poet (1816\u20131855)\nCharlotte Nicholls (n\u00e9e\u00a0Bront\u00eb; 21 April 1816\u00a0\u2013 31 March 1855), commonly known by her maiden name Charlotte Bront\u00eb (, ), was an English novelist and poet, and was the elder sister of Emily, Anne and Branwell Bront\u00eb. She is best known for her novel \"Jane Eyre\", which was first published under the pseudonym Currer Bell. \"Jane Eyre\" was a great success on publication, and has since become known as a classic of English literature.\nCharlotte was the third of six siblings born to Maria Branwell, the daughter of a Cornish merchant, and Patrick Bront\u00eb, an Irish clergyman. Maria died when Charlotte was only five years old, and three years later, Charlotte was sent to the Clergy Daughters' School at Cowan Bridge in Lancashire, along with her three sisters, Maria, Elizabeth and Emily. Conditions at the school were appalling, with frequent outbreaks of disease. Charlotte's two elder sisters fell ill there and died shortly afterwards at home; Charlotte attributed her own lifelong ill-health to her time at Cowan Bridge, and later used it as the model for Lowood School in \"Jane Eyre\".\nIn 1831, Charlotte became a pupil at Roe Head School in Mirfield, but left the following year in order to teach her sisters, Emily and Anne, at home. In 1835, Charlotte returned to Roe Head as a teacher. In 1839, she accepted a job as governess to a local family, but left after a few months.\nIn 1842, Charlotte joined the Heger Pensionnat, a girls' boarding school in Brussels, as a student, then later as a teacher, in the hope of acquiring the skills required to open a school of her own. However, she was obliged to leave after falling in love with the school's director, Constantin Heger, a married man, who inspired both the character of Rochester in \"Jane Eyre\", and Charlotte's first novel, \"The Professor\".\nCharlotte, Emily and Anne then attempted to open a school in Haworth, but failed to attract pupils. In 1846 the sisters published a collection of poems under the pseudonyms Currer, Ellis, and Acton Bell. Although Charlotte's first novel, \"The Professor\", was rejected by publishers, her second novel, \"Jane Eyre\", was published in 1847, attracting both praise and controversy. The sisters' true identities were revealed in 1848, and by the following year Charlotte was known in London literary circles.\nIn 1854, Charlotte married Arthur Bell Nicholls, her father's curate. She became pregnant shortly after her wedding in June 1854, but died on 31 March 1855, possibly of tuberculosis, although there is evidence that she may have died from hyperemesis gravidarum, a complication of pregnancy.\nEarly years and education.\nCharlotte Bront\u00eb was born on 21 April 1816, the third of six children born to Maria Branwell, the daughter of an affluent grocer and tea merchant from Cornwall, and Patrick Bront\u00eb (born Brunty) an Anglican curate. Patrick Bront\u00eb was one of ten children born to a poor Irish family, and, having shown both ambition and an aptitude for learning, had been educated in Latin and Greek by a local clergyman before earning a place at St John's College, Cambridge. Maria Branwell was from a more prosperous background, and her letters to Patrick remain the primary source of information about her. The couple were married at St Oswald\u2019s Church in Guiseley in December 1812. In 1815 Patrick took a new position in the Yorkshire village of Thornton, near Bradford, where Charlotte and her siblings were born.\nHaworth.\nIn 1820, Maria and Patrick moved with their six young children, Maria, Elizabeth, Charlotte, Branwell, Emily and Anne, to the village of Haworth, on the edge of the Yorkshire moors, where Patrick had been offered the position of perpetual curate of St Michael and All Angels Church. His salary was modest, but the post came with the use of a parsonage overlooking the churchyard and the moors. Patrick, as an Irish immigrant, struggled to be accepted in Haworth, and his children, who at first shared his Irish accent, also shared his lifelong sense of being an outsider. Living conditions in Haworth were poor, with high levels of early mortality and a water supply contaminated by runoff from the graveyard, as reported by in 1850 in a damning health report by Benjamin Babbage. Historians have speculated that these factors may have contributed to the deaths of Charlotte and her siblings.\nDeath of Maria Branwell.\nSoon after arriving in Haworth, Maria fell ill with what may have been cancer. She died on 15 September 1821, after a long and painful illness, leaving her six children in the care of her sister, Elizabeth Branwell. Charlotte was then only five years old, but the loss of her mother affected her throughout her life. In 1850, she wrote to a friend:It was strange now to peruse, for the first time, the records of a mind whence my own sprang \u2026 and at once sad and sweet to find that mind of a truly fine, pure and elevated order \u2026 There is a refinement, a modesty, a gentleness about them indescribable ... I wish that she had lived, and that I had known her. \nCowan Bridge.\nIn August 1824, Patrick sent Maria, Elizabeth, Charlotte, and Emily to the Clergy Daughters' School at Cowan Bridge in Lancashire. The sisters were aged ten, nine, eight and five respectively, and had previously had no formal education. Charlotte's school report mentions that the eight-year old Charlotte \"writes indifferently\" and \"knows nothing of grammar, geography, history, or accomplishments\", although she is \"altogether clever of her age\". Conditions at the school were harsh, with insanitary conditions, poor food and frequent outbreaks of disease, and in 1825, after an outbreak of typhus, Charlotte's two elder sisters both fell ill and subsequently died at home. Charlotte later maintained that conditions at the school had permanently affected her own health and physical development (she was of slight build and was less than tall), with very poor eyesight. After the deaths of Maria and Elizabeth, Patrick removed Charlotte and Emily from the school and arranged for them to be taught at home. Charlotte was greatly affected by the deaths of her older sisters, and later used Cowan Bridge as the model for Lowood School in \"Jane Eyre,\" which is similarly subject to outbreaks of tuberculosis and typhus exacerbated by the poor conditions. The headmaster of Cowan Bridge School, the Reverend William Carus-Wilson, was represented by Charlotte in her portrait of Mr Brocklehurst, the headmaster of Lowood, a depiction that later prompted Carus-Wilson to threaten to sue for libel.\nJuvenilia.\nAt home in Haworth Parsonage, the nine-year-old Charlotte now took over the care of her younger siblings under the supervision of their aunt Elizabeth Branwell. Patrick Bront\u00eb, though a difficult character in many ways, encouraged all his children to read widely, to take an interest in politics and current affairs and to enjoy music, art and poetry. He introduced them to the work of Lord Byron, and allowed them to read the newspapers and periodicals to which he subscribed. Although girls were not allowed access to the village library, Branwell shared his books with his sisters. Favourites included John Milton's \"Paradise Lost\", John Bunyan's \"Pilgrim's Progress\", and Isaac Watts' \"Doctrine of the Passions\". Charlotte also enjoyed the copies of the \"Lady's Magazine\" that had belonged to her mother, writing: \"I shall never see anything which will interest me so much again\", although Patrick later burnt them because \"they contained foolish love stories.\"\nThe siblings, who had grown very close, often played together, creating imaginative 'plays' using their toys. One of the most influential of these 'plays' began in 1827, when Branwell received the gift of twelve wooden soldiers. These soldiers formed the basis of an ongoing fantasy role-playing game, featuring the 'Young Men', or 'The Twelves', which gradually came to dominate the lives of Charlotte and her siblings.\nThe ten-year-old Charlotte writes on June 5, 1826:Papa bought Branwell some wooden soldiers at leeds when papa came home it was night and we were in Bed so next morning Branwell came to our Door with a Box of soldiers Emily and I jumped out of Bed, and I snat(c)hed up one and exclaimed this is the Duke of Wellington it shall be mine!! when I had said this Emily likewise took one up and said it should be hers when Anne came down she took one also. Mine was the prettiest of the whole, and the tallest, and the most perfect in every part Emily\u2019s was a grave-looking fellow, and we called him \u2018Gravey\u2019 Anne\u2019s was a queer little thing much like herself. he was called waiting boy Branwell chose Buonaparte.The world in which these plays were set began as a series of islands off the coast of a fictionalised West Africa. Each child controlled one island, all of which had a capital named Glass Town: this eventually became the \"Glass Town Confederacy.\" A number of stories, little books and magazines were created by Charlotte and Branwell over this time to tie in with the Young Men's adventures. Charlotte and Branwell were the primary creators of this shared world and its juvenilia, but their younger siblings also contributed. Charlotte began writing poetry when she was thirteen in 1829, writing more than two hundred poems throughout her life. Many of these poems first appeared in a homemade magazine entitled \"Branwell's Blackwood's Magazine\", which was linked to the \"Glass Town Confederacy\". Charlotte, in private letters, called \"Glass Town\" her 'world below', a fantasy in which she could explore different lives and identities. Over the course of the project Charlotte showed her love for romantic settings, love affairs, and high society, while Branwell's contribution reflected his interest in battles and politics. From 1831 onwards, Emily and Anne withdrew from the \"Glass Town\" project to create a fictional land of their own called \"Gondal,\" while Charlotte and Branwell concentrated on an expanded version of the \"Glass Town Confederacy\" called \"Angria\". Christine Alexander, a Bront\u00eb juvenilia historian, wrote: ...both Charlotte and Branwell ensured the consistency of their imaginary world. When Branwell exuberantly kills off important characters in his manuscripts, Charlotte comes to the rescue and, in effect, resurrects them for the next stories [...]; and when Branwell becomes bored with his inventions, such as the Glass Town magazine he edits, Charlotte takes over his initiative and keeps the publication going for several more years. The sagas created by the siblings exist as partial manuscripts, some of which have been published. The siblings continued to create narratives around their imaginary lands throughout their childhood and adolescence, an interest that continued even into adulthood.In 1833 Charlotte wrote several novellas, including \"The Green Dwarf\", under the name Wellesley, one of her Angrian heroes. From about 1833, her stories seemed to show less of an interest in the supernatural and a shift to more realistic subject matters.\nRoe Head.\nIn 1831, when she was fifteen, Charlotte was sent twenty miles away to Roe Head, a boarding school in Mirfield (now part of Hollybank Special School). There she became friends with two girls of her own age, Ellen Nussey and Mary Taylor. Mary was bright and outgoing, Ellen quieter and more reserved, but both girls became close to Charlotte, and continued to visit and correspond with her throughout her life. Both Mary and Ellen recalled Charlotte's old-fashioned clothing and Irish accent, while Ellen noted Charlotte's lack of appetite and reluctance to eat meat. Both mentioned that Charlotte's eyesight was very poor, which meant that she was unable to join in ball games or learn to play from sheet music, although her friends mentioned her love of drawing and poetry.\n\"Farewell to Angria\".\nIn 1832 Charlotte left Roe Head in order to teach her sisters at home in Haworth. In 1835, she returned to Roe Head as a teacher, remaining until 1838. Lonely and unhappy in her teaching post, Charlotte found an escape in writing poetry. Many of her poems were set in the imaginary world of \"Angria\", often featuring Byronic heroes. Later, one of her ex-pupils was to describe Miss Bront\u00eb writing at her desk, in tiny letters, with her eyes shut; and Charlotte's writing from this period expresses her disgust for her \"oafish\" pupils and her desire to escape into fantasy. In December 1836, just before her twenty-first birthday, she wrote to the Poet Laureate Robert Southey asking for encouragement in her hoped-for career as a poet, and announcing her ambition to 'be forever known'. Southey wrote in response: Literature cannot be the business of a woman's life, and it ought not to be. The more she is engaged in her proper duties, the less leisure will she have for it even as an accomplishment and a recreation.Charlotte entered into a short correspondence with Southey, thanking him for his advice, but making clear her intention to pursue her writing. In 1839, Charlotte received a proposal of marriage from Henry Nussey, the brother of her school friend Ellen Nussey. Charlotte declined, writing in a letter to Ellen: I felt that though I esteemed Henry... I had not, and never could have that intense attachment which would make me willing to die for him \u2013 and if I ever marry it must be in that light of adoration that I will regard my Husband.To Henry himself, she wrote:I have no personal repugnance to the idea of a union with you \u2014 but I feel convinced that mine is not the sort of disposition calculated to form the happiness of a man like you \u2026 You do not know me, I am not this serious, grave, cool-headed individual you suppose \u2014 You would think me romantic and eccentric \u2014 you would say I was satirical and severe. However, I scorn deceit and I will never for the sake of attaining the distinction of matrimony and escaping the stigma of an old maid take a worthy man whom I am conscious I cannot render happy.At the end of 1839, Charlotte wrote \"Farewell to Angria,\" a manuscript in which she explored her growing dependency on her fantasy world. Fearing for her sanity, and with the sense that she was losing her grip on reality, she finally made the decision to set Angria aside for good. In this document, she speaks of the pain of leaving her 'friends' and venturing into 'lands unknown'.\nBetween 1839 and 1841, Charlotte sought employment as a governess to several local families. She was unhappy in her work, beleiving that her employers treated her as a servant, and were constantly humiliating her.In 1839 she joined the Sidgwick family at Stone Gappe as governess to their son, John Benson Sidgwick. According to Charlotte, John was an unruly child, who once threw a Bible at her, an incident that may have inspired the section of \"Jane Eyre\" in which John Reed throws a book at Jane. The Sidgwicks confirm this story, but stated that Charlotte was difficut to deal with, often took offence when none was intended, and 'often went to bed all day' leaving the heavily pregnant Mrs Sidgwick to look after the children. Charlotte left Stone Gappe to work as a governess to the White family, but although the Whites were 'well satisfied' by her work with their children, Charlotte found her menial position in the household difficult to cope with, and complains in letters to Ellen Nussey of her employers' 'vulgarity'.\nBrussels.\nIn 1842 Charlotte travelled with Emily to Brussels to the Pensionnat Heger, a boarding school run by Constantin Heger (1809\u20131896) and his wife, Claire. Both were student teachers, with Charlotte teaching English and Emily eventually teaching music in return for board and lodging. In this way they hoped eventually to acquire the language skills they needed to open a school of their own. Charlotte, a Protestant, liked and respected Madame Heger whilst objecting to her Catholicism. She was happy at the Pensionnat, and developed a close relationship with her tutor, Constantin Heger.\nShe writes:There is one individual of whom I have not yet spoken M Heger the husband of Madame - he is a professor of Rhetoric a man of power as to mind but very choleric &amp; irritable in temperament - a little, black, ugly being with a face that varies in expression, sometimes he borrows the lineaments of an insane Tomcat - sometimes those of a delirious Hyena - occasionally - but very seldom he discards these perilous attractions and assumes an air not above a hundred degrees removed from what you would call mild &amp; gentleman-like ...In October 1842 the sisters were called back to Haworth in haste by the death of their aunt Elizabeth Branwell. Charlotte's grief at the loss of her aunt was compounded by the deaths from cholera of two young friends of the family; William Weightman, who had been Patrick Bront\u00eb's curate, and Martha, the sister of Charlotte's friend Mary Taylor.\nIn January 1843, Charlotte returned to Brussels alone to take up a teaching post at the school. It was the first time she had travelled alone, and she found the experience alarming, later describing it in her novel \"Villette\". However, in spite of her eagerness to return, Charlotte became increasingly homesick and lonely. Her initial liking for Madame Heger changed to outright dislike, and her attachment to Constantin Heger had developed into an unrequited passion and an obsessive need for his approval, all of which made it impossible for her to remain. Charlotte returned to Haworth in January 1844, and later used her time in Brussels as the inspiration for some of the events in \"The Professor\" and \"Villette.\" Heger later attempted to destroy the letters sent to him by Charlotte, in which she expresses her deep feelings and her expectation to hear from him, but his wife retrieved and preserved them, although his own letters to Charlotte are missing.\nAfter Charlotte's return to Haworth, the sisters attempted to open their own boarding school at the Parsonage. It was advertised as \"The Misses Bront\u00eb's Establishment for the Board and Education of a limited number of Young Ladies\" and inquiries were made to prospective pupils and sources of funding. But Charlotte had little enthusiasm for the project, and the remote location made it difficult to attract pupils. In October 1844 the project was abandoned.\nFirst publication.\nIn May 1846, at Charlotte's insistence, the three sisters paid for the publication of a collection of their poems under the pseudonyms Currer, Ellis and Acton Bell. The sisters took names that corresponded with their initials: thus Charlotte was Currer Bell, Emily was Ellis, and Anne was Acton. Of this decision to conceal their identities, Charlotte wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Averse to personal publicity, we veiled our own names under those of Currer, Ellis and Acton Bell; the ambiguous choice being dictated by a sort of conscientious scruple at assuming Christian names positively masculine, while we did not like to declare ourselves women, because\u00a0\u2013 without at that time suspecting that our mode of writing and thinking was not what is called \"feminine\"\u00a0\u2013 we had a vague impression that authoresses are liable to be looked on with prejudice; we had noticed how critics sometimes use for their chastisement the weapon of personality, and for their reward, a flattery, which is not true praise.\nOnly two copies of the collection of poems were sold, but Charlotte, though disappointed, sent copies of the book to a number of prominent writers, including William Wordsworth, Alfred Tennyson, and Thomas de Quincey. Although Emily and Anne continued to write poems, Charlotte did not, but prepared to submit a novel under her \"nom de plume\".\n\"Jane Eyre\".\nIn 1846 Charlotte submitted her first novel, \"The Professor\", to London publisher Henry Colburn, along with Emily's \"Wuthering Heights\" and Anne's \"Agnes Grey.\" In her accompanying letter she describes these as: 'Three tales, each occupying a volume and capable of being published together or separately, as thought most advisable,' and draws his attention to the fact that the authors have already been published elsewhere.\nThe publisher rejected \"The Professor\", whilst accepting the other two novels, but expressed interest in any further works by Currer Bell. Charlotte submitted a second manuscript, \"Jane Eyre\", to a different publisher, Smith, Elder &amp; Co. in August 1847, and it was published six weeks later. The novel follows the life of a plain young woman, Jane, depicting her troubled childhood, her unhappy schooldays and her arrival in a new post as a governess to a young girl in a secluded mansion in Yorkshire. Jane falls in love with her employer, Mr Rochester, who is secretly hiding the fact that his first wife, a dangerous madwoman, is being kept in the attic. The book's style combined Romanticism, naturalism and gothic melodrama, but broke new ground with its first-person female perspective. Charlotte believed art was most convincing when based on personal experience; in \"Jane Eyre\" she transformed her experience into novel form.\n\"Jane Eyre\" had immediate commercial success and initially received favourable reviews. G. H. Lewes wrote that it was \"an utterance from the depths of a struggling, suffering, much-enduring spirit\", and declared that it consisted of \"\"suspiria de profundis\"!\" (sighs from the depths). The subsequent publication of \"Wuthering Heights\" by Ellis Bell and \"Agnes Grey\" by Acton Bell, which had been delayed by the publisher, now caused further speculation about the identity of Currer Bell, including a change in the attitude of critics to Charlotte's work, as well as accusations that the writing was \"coarse\". This criticism was linked to the media's growing suspicion that Currer Bell was a woman. However, sales of \"Jane Eyre\" continued to grow. Charlotte executed the drawings for the second edition of \"Jane Eyre\" herself, and in the summer of 1834 two of her paintings were shown at an exhibition by the Royal Northern Society for the Encouragement of the Fine Arts in Leeds.\n\"Shirley\".\nIn 1848, Charlotte began her third novel, \"Shirley\", but that year saw the deaths of all three of her remaining siblings within eight months of each other. In September, Branwell died of multiple conditions exacerbated by his heavy drinking. Emily died three months later of tuberculosis, and in May 1849, Anne died of the same illness. After the deaths of Emily and Anne, a family servant, Martha Brown, recalled how the sisters had used to walk round the dining-room table in the Parsonage, discussing their writings, and spoke of her sadness \"to hear Miss Bront\u00eb walking, walking on alone\".\nAfter Anne's death Charlotte resumed writing as a way of dealing with her grief, and \"Shirley\", which deals with themes of industrial unrest and the role of women in society, was published in October 1849. The novel's reception was not as enthusiastic as that of \"Jane Eyre\"; a reviewer in \"The Times\" described it as: \"\"'at once the most high-flown and the stalest of fictions.' Charlotte, as her late sisters\u2019 executor, edited and wrote an explanatory introduction to \"Wuthering Heights\" in order to make it less shocking to the public. She also suppressed the republication of Anne's second novel, \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\", which had been published, to great success, the previous year. This decision had a negative effect on Anne's popularity as a novelist and has remained controversial among the sisters' biographers ever since.\nIn society.\nAlthough Emily and Anne were both opposed to their real identities being known, Charlotte discreetly revealed herself to her publisher and friends as the author of \"Jane Eyre\". This led Charlotte to make occasional visits to London, where she began to move in more exalted social circles, becoming friends with Elizabeth Gaskell and Harriet Martineau whose sister Rachel had taught Gaskell's daughters. Charlotte sent an early copy of \"Shirley\" to Martineau whose home at Ambleside she visited. The two friends shared an interest in racial relations and the abolitionist movement; recurrent themes in their writings. Charlotte was also acquainted with William Makepeace Thackeray and G. H. Lewes. In spite of this, she never left Haworth for more than a few weeks at a time, and surprised the London literary world by her lack of social brilliance. Thackeray's daughter, writer Anne Isabella Thackeray Ritchie, recalled a visit to her father by Charlotte:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; ...\u00a0two gentlemen come in, leading a tiny, delicate, serious, little lady, with fair straight hair and steady eyes. She may be a little over thirty; she is dressed in a little \"bar\u00e8ge\" dress with a pattern of faint green moss. She enters in mittens, in silence, in seriousness; our hearts are beating with wild excitement. This then is the authoress, the unknown power whose books have set all London talking, reading, speculating; some people even say our father wrote the books\u00a0\u2013 the wonderful books.\u00a0... The moment is so breathless that dinner comes as a relief to the solemnity of the occasion, and we all smile as my father stoops to offer his arm; for, genius though she may be, Miss Bront\u00eb can barely reach his elbow. My own personal impressions are that she is somewhat grave and stern, specially to forward little girls who wish to chatter.\u00a0... Everyone waited for the brilliant conversation which never began at all. Miss Bront\u00eb retired to the sofa in the study, and murmured a low word now and then to our kind governess\u00a0... the conversation grew dimmer and more dim, the ladies sat round still expectant, my father was too much perturbed by the gloom and the silence to be able to cope with it at all\u00a0... after Miss Bront\u00eb had left, I was surprised to see my father opening the front door with his hat on. He put his fingers to his lips, walked out into the darkness, and shut the door quietly behind him\u00a0... long afterwards\u00a0... Mrs Procter asked me if I knew what had happened.\u00a0... It was one of the dullest evenings [Mrs Procter] had ever spent in her life\u00a0... the ladies who had all come expecting so much delightful conversation, and the gloom and the constraint, and how finally, overwhelmed by the situation, my father had quietly left the room, left the house, and gone off to his club.\n\"Villette\".\nCharlotte's last novel published in her lifetime was \"Villette\", which appeared in 1853. Its main themes include isolation, how such a condition can be borne, and the internal conflict brought about by social repression of individual desire. Its main character, Lucy Snowe, travels abroad to teach in a boarding school in the fictional town of Villette, where she encounters a culture and religion different from her own and falls in love with a man (Paul Emanuel) whom she cannot marry. Her experiences result in a breakdown but eventually, she achieves independence and fulfilment through running her own school. A substantial amount of the novel's dialogue is in the French language. \"Villette\" marked Charlotte's return to writing from a first-person perspective, a technique she had used in \"Jane Eyre\". Another similarity to \"Jane Eyre\" lies in the use of aspects of her own life as inspiration for fictional events, in particular her reworking of the time she spent at the \"pensionnat\" in Brussels. \"Villette\" was acknowledged by critics of the day as a potent and sophisticated piece of writing although it was criticised for \"coarseness\" and for not being suitably \"feminine\" in its portrayal of Lucy's desires.\nMarriage.\nShortly before the publication of \"Villette\", Charlotte received a proposal of marriage from the Reverend Arthur Bell Nicholls, an Irishman from County Antrim in her father's native Ulster, who had been educated in County Offaly. Nicholls had been her father's curate, and had long been in love with Charlotte. She initially refused him, and her father objected to the union at least partly because of Nicholls's poor financial status. Elizabeth Gaskell, who believed that marriage provided \"clear and defined duties\" that were beneficial for a woman, encouraged Charlotte to consider the positive aspects of such a union and tried to use her contacts to engineer an improvement in Nicholls's finances. According to James Pope-Hennessy in \"The Flight of Youth,\" it was the generosity of Richard Monckton Milnes that made the marriage possible. Charlotte, meanwhile, was increasingly attracted to Nicholls and by January 1854, she had accepted his proposal. They gained the approval of her father by April and married on 29 June. Her father Patrick had intended to give Charlotte away, but at the last minute decided he could not, and Charlotte had to make her way to the church without him.Because her father did not attend, it was Miss Wooler (Charlotte's former teacher at Roe Head School, and life-long friend) who gave her away. The married couple took their honeymoon in Banagher, County Offaly, Ireland. By all accounts, her marriage was a success and Charlotte found herself very happy in a way that was new to her.\nDeath.\nCharlotte became pregnant soon after her wedding, but her health declined rapidly and, according to Gaskell, she was attacked by \"sensations of perpetual nausea and ever-recurring faintness\". She died, along with her unborn child, on 31 March 1855, three weeks before her 39th birthday. Her death certificate gives the cause of death as phthisis, but biographer Claire Harman, among others, suggests that she died from complications caused by severe morning sickness or hyperemesis gravidarum. She was buried in the family vault in the Church of St Michael and All Angels at Haworth.\n\"The Professor\", Charlotte's first novel, was published posthumously in 1857. The fragment of a new novel she had been writing in her last years has been twice completed by recent authors, the more famous version being \"Emma Brown: A Novel from the Unfinished Manuscript by Charlotte Bront\u00eb\" by Clare Boylan in 2003. Most of her writings about the imaginary country of Angria have also been published since her death.\nPersonality and character.\nCharlotte's character is largely known to us through private letters to her family, friends and publisher, as well as Elizabeth Gaskell's biography \"The Life of Charlotte Bront\u00eb,\" which was begun during her lifetime. Gaskell described her first meeting with Charlotte in a letter, writing: She is underdeveloped, thin and more than half a head shorter than I ... [with] a reddish face, large mouth and many teeth gone; altogether plain. Later, Gaskell portrays her in a less unflattering way, but empahsizes her physical frailty. In a letter to her publisher, Charlotte complains of Gaskell's tendency to depict her as weak and helpless, writing: \"She seems determined that I shall be a sort of invalid. Why may I not be well like other people?\" It has been argued that Gaskell's approach transferred the focus of attention away from the Bront\u00eb sisters' 'difficult' novels, and began a process of sanctification of their private lives.\n\"The Life of Charlotte Bront\u00eb\".\nElizabeth Gaskell's biography was published in 1857, and, though it omits certain details, remains a primary source of information about Charlotte and her family. It was an important step for a leading female novelist to write a biography of another, and Gaskell's approach was unusual in that, rather than analysing her subject's achievements, she concentrated on private details of Charlotte's life, sanitising those aspects that might have justified the accusations of \"coarseness\" levelled at her writing. The biography is frank in places, but omits details of Charlotte's love for Constantin Heger as being too much of an affront to contemporary morals and a likely source of distress to Charlotte's father, widower, and friends. Gaskell also provided a large amount of anecdotal and possibly inaccurate information about Patrick Bront\u00eb and other members of the family, to which Patrick heartily objected.\nReligion.\nThe daughter of an Irish Anglican clergyman, Charlotte was herself an Anglican. In a letter to her publisher, she claims to \"love the Church of England. Her Ministers indeed, I do not regard as infallible personages, I have seen too much of them for that \u2013 but to the Establishment, with all her faults \u2013 the profane Athanasian Creed excluded \u2013 I am sincerely attached.\" In spite of this, she attended a service in a Catholic church during her final year in Brussels, and took confession from the priest. She writes about this in a letter to Emily, asking her not to tell their father of the incident, and it appears later as an episode in \"Villette\".\nLetters.\nCharlotte was the most prolific letter-writer of the Bront\u00eb siblings, and her correspondence forms the backbone of her biographies. Most of her surviving letters are to her old school friend Ellen Nussey, although her letters to her other school friend Mary Taylor, to whom she confided her imaginary world and literary ambitions, were destroyed. However, Charlotte frequently used letter-writing as a means of experimenting with different identities and styles, as with Currer Bell, and although she is often intimate, even unhinhibited in her letter-writing, she also uses this technique as a means of hiding aspects of her true personality. The biographer Lucasta Miller describes her as a 'self-mythologiser', perpetuating both 'the positive myth of female self-creation embodied by her autobiographical heroines' and that of the 'quiet and trembling creature, reared in total seclusion, a martyr to duty and a model of Victorian femininity,' neither of which are entirely representative. \nNussey Letters.\nAbout 350 of roughly 500 letters sent by Charlotte to Ellen Nussey survive, whereas all of Ellen's letters to Charlotte were burned at Nicholls's request. After their marriage, Nicholls not only asked Charlotte to burn Ellen's letters after reading them, but censored some of Charlotte's letters to her friend before allowing them to be sent. The surviving letters, preserved by Ellen in defiance of Nicholls's wishes, provide most of the information available on Charlotte Bront\u00eb's daily life, feelings and relationships. Their tone is intimate, confiding and have even been interpreted by some to have romantic undertones. Charlotte writes on one occasion: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What shall I do without you? How long are we likely to be separated? Why are we to be denied each other's society ... I long to be with you. Why are we to be divided? Surely, Ellen, it must be because we are in danger of loving each other too well ...\nHeger letters.\nOn 29 July 1913 \"The Times\" of London printed four letters Charlotte had written to Constantin Heger after leaving Brussels in 1844. Written in French except for one postscript in English, the letters challenged the prevailing image of Charlotte as an angelic martyr to Christian and female duties that had been constructed by many biographers, beginning with Gaskell. These letters, which formed part of a larger and somewhat one-sided correspondence to which Heger frequently appears not to have replied, seem to reveal her love for a married man, although the letters have also been interpreted in other ways, including as an example of literary self-dramatisation and an expression of gratitude from a former pupil. In January 1845, she writes:...all I know \u2013 is that I cannot \u2013 that I will not resign myself to the total loss of my master\u2019s friendship \u2013 I would rather undergo the greatest bodily pains that have my heart constantly lacerated by searing regrets. If my master withdraws his friendship from me entirely I shall be absolutely without hope \u2013 if he gives me a little friendship \u2013 a very little \u2013 I shall be content \u2013 happy, I would have a motive for living \u2013 for working. Monsieur, the poor do not need a great deal to live on \u2013 they ask only the crumbs of bread which fall from the rich men\u2019s table \u2013 but if they are refused these crumbs \u2013 they die of hunger \u2013 No more do I need a great deal of affection from those I love \u2013 I would not know what to do with a whole and complete friendship \u2013 I am not accustomed to it \u2013 but you showed a little interest in me in days gone by when I was your pupil in Brussels \u2013 and I cling to the preservation of this little interest \u2013 I cling to it as I would cling on to life.\nLetters to George Smith.\nCharlotte later also engaged in frequent correspondence with her editor, George Smith. The often flirtatious tone of these letters has been remarked upon by historians as a possible sign that Charlotte was in love with him, and her letter to him on hearing of his impending marriage to another has been interpreted as a sign of her despair:My dear Sir\nIn great happiness, as in great grief - words of sympathy should be few. Accept my meed of congratulation - and believe me\nSincerely yours,\nC. Bront\u00eb\nLegacy.\nA number of authors have cited Charlotte Bront\u00eb as an influence, including Kazuo Ishiguro, who, when asked to name his favourite novelist, answered \"Charlotte Bront\u00eb's recently edged out Dostoevsky...I owe my career, and a lot else besides, to \"Jane Eyre\" and \"Villette.\"\" \nDaphne du Maurier's novel \"Rebecca\" is strongly influenced by \"Jane Eyre\"; Jean Rhys wrote the story of the first Mrs Rochester in \"Wide Sargasso Sea\". Other novels inspired by Charlotte Bront\u00eb's work include: \"Jane Steele\", by Lyndsay Faye; \"The Bront\u00eb Cabinet: Three Lives in Nine Objects\", by Deborah Lutz; \"The Eyre Affair,\" by Jasper Fforde; \"The Madwwoman Upstairs\" by Catherine Lowell; and \"Reader, I Married Him\", a collection of short stories edited by Tracy Chevalier.\nThe town of Bronte, Texas, is named for Charlotte Bront\u00eb (though the town's name is pronounced \"brahnt\").\nIn 1980 a commemorative plaque was unveiled at the Centre for Fine Arts, Brussels, on the site of Madame Heger's school, in honour of Charlotte and Emily.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6533", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6533", "title": "Charles Williams (British writer)", "text": "British writer, theologian, and literary critic (1886-1945)\nCharles Walter Stansby Williams (20 September 1886 \u2013 15 May 1945) was an English poet, novelist, playwright, theologian and literary critic. Most of his life was spent in London, where he was born, but in 1939 he moved to Oxford with the university press for which he worked until his death.\nEarly life and education.\nCharles Williams was born in London in 1886, the only son of (Richard) Walter Stansby Williams (1848\u20131929) and Mary (n\u00e9e Wall). His father Walter was a journalist and foreign business correspondent for an importing firm, writing in French and German, who was a 'regular and valued' contributor of verse, stories and articles to many popular magazines. His mother Mary, the sister of the ecclesiologist and historian J. Charles Wall, was a former milliner (hatmaker), of Islington. He had one sister, Edith, born in 1889. The Williams family lived in 'shabby-genteel' circumstances, owing to Walter's increasing blindness and the decline of the firm by which he was employed, in Holloway. In 1894 the family moved to St Albans in Hertfordshire, where Williams lived until his marriage in 1917.\nEducated at St Albans School, Williams was awarded a scholarship to University College London, but he left in 1904 without attempting to gain a degree due to an inability to pay tuition fees.\nWilliams began work in 1904 in a Methodist bookroom. He was employed by the Oxford University Press (OUP) as a proofreading assistant in 1908 and quickly climbed to the position of editor. He continued to work at the OUP in various positions of increasing responsibility until his death in 1945. One of his greatest editorial achievements was the publication of the first major English-language edition of the works of S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard. His work was part of the literature event in the art competition at the 1924 Summer Olympics.\nAlthough chiefly remembered as a novelist, Williams also published poetry, works of literary criticism, theology, drama, history, biography, and a voluminous number of book reviews. Some of his best-known novels are \"War in Heaven\" (1930), \"Descent into Hell\" (1937), and \"All Hallows' Eve\" (1945). T. S. Eliot, who wrote an introduction for the last of these, described Williams's novels as \"supernatural thrillers\" because they explore the sacramental intersection of the physical with the spiritual while also examining the ways in which power, even spiritual power, can corrupt as well as sanctify.\nAll of Williams's fantasies, unlike those of J. R. R. Tolkien and most of those of C. S. Lewis, are set in the contemporary world. Williams has been described by Colin Manlove as one of the three main writers of \"Christian fantasy\" in the twentieth century (the other two being C. S. Lewis and T. F. Powys). Some writers of fantasy novels with contemporary settings, notably Tim Powers, cite Williams as their inspiration.\nW. H. Auden, one of Williams's greatest admirers, reportedly re-read Williams's extraordinary and highly unconventional history of the church, \"The Descent of the Dove\" (1939), every year. Williams's study of Dante entitled \"The Figure of Beatrice\" (1944) was very highly regarded at its time of publication and continues to be consulted by Dante scholars today. His work inspired Dorothy L. Sayers to undertake her translation of \"The Divine Comedy\". Williams, however, regarded his most important work to be his extremely dense and complex Arthurian poetry, of which two books were published, \"Taliessin through Logres\" (1938) and \"The Region of the Summer Stars\" (1944), and more remained unfinished at his death. Some of Williams's essays were collected and published posthumously in \"Image of the City and Other Essays\" (1958), edited by Anne Ridler.\nWilliams gathered many followers and disciples during his lifetime. He was, for a period, a member of the Salvator Mundi Temple of the Fellowship of the Rosy Cross. He met fellow Anglican Evelyn Underhill in 1937 and later wrote the introduction to her published \"Letters\" in 1943.\nWhen World War II broke out in 1939, Oxford University Press moved its offices from London to Oxford. Williams was reluctant to leave his beloved city, and his wife Florence refused to go. From the nearly 700 letters he wrote to his wife during the war years, a generous selection has been published \u2013 \"primarily\u2026 love letters,\" the editor calls them.\nThe move to Oxford did allow him to participate regularly in Lewis's literary society, the Inklings. In this setting Williams read (and improved) his final published novel, \"All Hallows' Eve.\" He heard J. R. R. Tolkien read aloud to the group some of his early drafts of \"The Lord of the Rings\". In addition to meeting in Lewis's rooms at Oxford, they regularly met at The Eagle and Child pub in Oxford. During this time Williams gave lectures at Oxford on John Milton, William Wordsworth, and other authors. He received an honorary M.A. degree in 1943.\nWilliams is buried in Holywell Cemetery in Oxford. His headstone bears the word \"poet\" followed by the words \"Under the Mercy\", a phrase often used by Williams himself.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1917 Williams married his first sweetheart, Florence Conway, following a long courtship during which he presented her with a sonnet sequence that would later become his first published book of poetry, \"The Silver Stair\". Williams nicknamed his wife 'Michal'. Their son Michael was born in 1922.\nWilliams was an unswerving and devoted member of the Church of England, reputedly with a tolerance of the scepticism of others and a firm belief in the necessity of a \"doubting Thomas\" in any apostolic body.\nCharles, Florence and Michael are buried in Holywell Cemetery in Oxford, next to St Cross Church where they worshipped.\nColleagues.\nAlthough Williams attracted the attention and admiration of some of the most notable writers of his day, including T. S. Eliot and W. H. Auden, his greatest admirer was probably C. S. Lewis, whose novel \"That Hideous Strength\" (1945) has been regarded as partially inspired by his acquaintance with both the man and his novels and poems. Williams came to know Lewis after reading Lewis's then-recently published study \"The Allegory of Love\"; he was so impressed he jotted down a letter of congratulation and dropped it in the mail. Coincidentally, Lewis had just finished reading Williams's novel \"The Place of the Lion\" and had written a similar note of congratulation. The letters crossed in the mail and led to an enduring and fruitful friendship.\nLewis wrote the Preface to \"Essays presented to Charles Williams\", originally intended as a festschrift for Williams, but published after his death. Essays were contributed by Lewis, Sayers, Tolkien, Owen Barfield, Gervase Mathew and Warren Lewis.\nTheology.\nWilliams developed the concept of co-inherence and gave rare consideration to the theology of romantic love. Falling in love for Williams was a form of mystical envisioning in which one saw the beloved as he or she was seen through the eyes of God. Co-inherence was a term used in Patristic theology to describe the relationship between the human and divine natures of Jesus Christ and the relationship between the persons of the blessed Trinity. Williams extended the term to include the ideal relationship between the individual parts of God's creation, including human beings. It is our mutual indwelling: Christ in us and we in Christ, interdependent. It is also the web of interrelationships, social and economic and ecological, by which the social fabric and the natural world function. But especially for Williams, co-inherence is a way of talking about the Body of Christ and the communion of saints. He proposed founding an order, to be called the Companions of the Co-inherence, who would practice substitution and exchange, living in love-in-God, truly bearing one another's burdens, being willing to sacrifice and to forgive, living from and for one another in Christ. According to Gunnar Urang, co-inherence is the focus of all Williams's novels.\nWorks.\nFiction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He is writing that sort of book in which we begin by saying, let us \"suppose\" that this everyday world were at some one point invaded by the marvellous.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6535", "revid": "10674883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6535", "title": "Celery", "text": "Species of edible plant\nCelery (Apium graveolens\" Dulce Group or Apium graveolens\" var. \"dulce\") is a cultivated plant belonging to the species \"Apium graveolens\" in the family Apiaceae that has been used as a vegetable since ancient times.\nThe original wild species has been selectively bred over centuries into three primary cultivar groups: stalk celery (Dulce Group), consumed for its fibrous edible stalks; leaf celery (Secalinum Group), grown for its aromatic leaves; and celeriac (Rapaceum Group), cultivated for its large, edible hypocotyl. Celery is characterized by its long, ribbed stalks, pinnate leaves, and small white flowers arranged in umbels.\nCelery is composed primarily of water (95%) but contains large amounts of vitamin K and negligible fat. The vegetable is commonly consumed raw in salads, cooked in soups and stews, or juiced. Celery seeds, which have a strong, aromatic flavor, are used as a spice or processed into celery salt. Celery is among a small group of foods that may provoke allergic reactions.\nHistorically, celery has held medicinal, culinary, and symbolic significance. Literary evidence indicates celery cultivation in Ancient Greece, while ancient Egyptians incorporated it into funeral garlands. Celery remains eaten around the world.\nDescription.\nCelery leaves are pinnate to bipinnate with rhombic leaflets long and broad. The flowers are creamy-white, in diameter, and are produced in dense compound umbels. The seeds are broad ovoid to globose, long and wide. Modern cultivars have been selected for either solid petioles, leaf stalks, or a large hypocotyl. A celery stalk readily separates into \"strings\" which are bundles of angular collenchyma cells exterior to the vascular bundles.\nChemistry.\nThe main chemicals responsible for the aroma and taste of celery are butylphthalide and sedanolide.\nEtymology.\nFirst attested and printed in English as \"sellery\" by John Evelyn in 1664, the modern English word \"celery\" derives from the French \"c\u00e9leri\", in turn from Italian \"seleri\", the plural of \"selero\", which comes from Late Latin \"selinon\", the latinisation of the , \"celery\". The earliest-attested form of the word is the Mycenaean Greek \"se-ri-no\", written in Linear B syllabic script.\nTaxonomy.\nThe species \"Apium graveolens\" was described by Carl Linnaeus in Volume One of his \"Species Plantarum\" in 1753. Cultivated celery has been called \"Apium graveolens\" var. \"dulce\" or \"Apium graveolens\" Dulce Group.\nCultivation.\nThe plants are raised from seed, sown either in a hot bed or in the open garden according to the season of the year, and, after one or two thinnings and transplantings, they are, on attaining a height of , planted out in deep trenches for convenience of blanching, which is effected by earthing up to exclude light from the stems. Development of self-blanching varieties of celery, which do not need to be earthed up, dominate both the commercial and amateur market.\nCelery was first grown as a winter and early spring vegetable. It was considered a cleansing tonic to counter the deficiencies of a winter diet based on salted meats without fresh vegetables. By the 19th century, the season for celery in England had been extended, to last from the beginning of September to late in April.\nIn North America, commercial production of celery is dominated by the cultivar called 'Pascal' celery. Gardeners can grow a range of cultivars, many of which differ from the wild species, mainly in having stouter leaf stems. They are ranged under two classes, white and red. The stalks grow in tight, straight, parallel bunches, and are typically marketed fresh that way. They are sold without roots and only a small amount of green leaf remaining.\nThe stalks can be eaten raw, or as an ingredient in salads, or as a flavouring in soups, stews, and pot roasts.\nHarvesting and storage.\nHarvesting occurs when the average size of celery in a field is marketable; due to extremely uniform crop growth, fields are harvested only once. The petioles and leaves are removed and harvested; celery is packed by size and quality (determined by colour, shape, straightness and thickness of petiole, stalk and midrib length and absence of disease, cracks, splits, insect damage and rot). During commercial harvesting, celery is packaged into cartons which contain between 36 and 48 stalks and weigh up to . Under optimal conditions, celery can be stored for up to seven weeks from . Inner stalks may continue growing if kept at temperatures above . Shelf life can be extended by packaging celery in anti-fogging, micro-perforated shrink wrap. Freshly cut petioles of celery are prone to decay, which can be prevented or reduced through the use of sharp blades during processing, gentle handling, and proper sanitation.\nCelery stalk may be preserved through pickling by first removing the leaves, then boiling the stalks in water before finally adding vinegar, salt, and vegetable oil.\nSulfites.\nIn the past, restaurants used to store celery in a container of water with powdered vegetable preservative, but it was found that the sulfites in the preservative caused allergic reactions in some people. In 1986, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration banned the use of sulfites on fruits and vegetables intended to be eaten raw.\nAllergic reactions.\nCelery is among a small group of foods that may provoke allergic reactions; for people with celery allergy, exposure can cause potentially fatal anaphylactic shock. Cases of allergic reaction to ingestion of celery root have also been reported in pollen-sensitive individuals resulting in gastrointestinal disorders and other symptoms, although in most cases, celery sensitivity is not considered clinically significant. In the European Union and the United Kingdom, foods that contain or may contain celery, even in trace amounts, must be clearly marked.\nThe \"Apium graveolens\" plant has an OPALS allergy scale rating of 4 out of 10, indicating moderate potential to cause allergic reactions, exacerbated by over-use of the same plant throughout a garden. Celery has caused skin rashes and cross-reactions with carrots and ragweed.\nUses.\nNutrition.\nRaw celery is 95% water, 3% carbohydrates, 0.7% protein, and contains negligible fat. A reference amount provides 14 calories of food energy and is a rich source of vitamin K, providing 24% of the Daily Value, with no other micronutrients in significant content.\nCulinary.\nCelery is eaten around the world as a vegetable. In North America and Europe the crisp petiole (leaf stalk) is used. In Europe the hypocotyl is also used as a root vegetable. The leaves are strongly flavoured and are used less often, either as a flavouring in soups and stews or as a dried herb. Celery, onions, and bell peppers are the \"holy trinity\" of Louisiana Creole and Cajun cuisine. Celery, onions, and carrots make up the French mirepoix, often used as a base for sauces and soups. Celery is a staple in many soups. It is used in the Iranian stew \"khoresh karafs\".\nLeaves.\nCelery leaves are frequently used in cooking to add a mild spicy flavour to foods, similar to, but milder than black pepper. Celery leaves are suitable dried and sprinkled on baked, fried or roasted fish or meats, or as part of a blend of fresh seasonings suitable for use in soups and stews. They may also be eaten raw, mixed into a salad or as a garnish.\nSeeds.\nIn temperate countries, celery is also grown for its seeds. Actually very small fruit, these \"seeds\" yield a valuable essential oil that is used in the perfume industry. The oil contains the chemical compound apiole. Celery seeds can be used as flavouring or spice, either as whole seeds or ground.\nCelery salt.\nCelery seeds can be ground and mixed with salt to produce celery salt. Celery salt can be made from an extract of the roots or by using dried leaves. Celery salt is used as a seasoning, in cocktails (commonly to enhance the flavour of Bloody Mary cocktails), on the Chicago-style hot dog, and in Old Bay Seasoning. Similarly, combinations of celery powder and salt are used to flavour and preserve cured pork and other processed meats as an alternative to industrial curing salt. The naturally occurring nitrates in celery work synergistically with the added salt to cure food.\nCelery juice.\nIn 2019, a trend of drinking celery juice was reported in the United States, based on \"detoxification\" claims posted on a blog. The claims have no scientific basis, but the trend caused a sizable spike in celery prices.\nIn culture.\nDaniel Zohary and Maria Hopf note that celery leaves and inflorescences were part of the garlands found in the tomb of pharaoh Tutankhamun (died 1323\u00a0BCE), and celery mericarps dated to the seventh century BCE were recovered in the Heraion of Samos. However, they note \"A. graveolens\" grows wild in these areas, it is hard to decide whether these remains represent wild or cultivated forms.\" Only by classical antiquity is it thought that celery was cultivated.\nM. Fragiska mentions an archeological find of celery dating to the 9th century BCE, at Kastanas; however, the literary evidence for ancient Greece is far more abundant. In Homer's \"Iliad\", the horses of the Myrmidons graze on wild celery that grows in the marshes of Troy, and in \"Odyssey\", there is mention of the meadows of violet and wild celery surrounding Calypso's Cave.\nIn the \"Capitulary\" of Charlemagne, compiled c. 800, \"apium\" appears, as does \"olisatum\", or alexanders, among medicinal herbs and vegetables the Frankish emperor desired to see grown. At some later point in medieval Europe, celery displaced alexanders.\nThe name \"celery\" retraces the plant's route of successive adoption in European cooking, as the English \"celery\" (1664) is derived from the French \"c\u00e9leri\" coming from the Lombard term, \"seleri\", from the Latin \"selinon\", borrowed from Greek.\nCelery's late arrival in the English kitchen is an end-product of the long tradition of seed selection needed to reduce the sap's bitterness and increase its sugars. By 1699, John Evelyn could recommend it in his \"Acetaria. A Discourse of Sallets\": \"Sellery, apium Italicum, (and of the Petroseline Family) was formerly a stranger with us (nor very long since in Italy) is a hot and more generous sort of Macedonian Persley or Smallage... and for its high and grateful Taste is ever plac'd in the middle of the Grand Sallet, at our Great Men's tables, and Praetors feasts, as the Grace of the whole Board\".\nCelery makes a minor appearance in colonial American gardens; its culinary limitations are reflected in the observation by the author of \"A Treatise on Gardening, by a Citizen of Virginia\" that it is \"one of the species of parsley\". Its first extended treatment in print was in Bernard M'Mahon's \"American Gardener's Calendar\" (1806).\nAfter the mid-19th century, continued selections for refined crisp texture and taste brought celery to American tables, where it was served in celery vases to be salted and eaten raw. Celery was so popular in the United States during the 19th and early 20th centuries that the New York Public Library's http:// shows that it was the third-most-popular dish in New York City menus during that time, behind only coffee and tea. In those days, celery cost more than caviar, as it was difficult to cultivate. There were also many varieties of celery back then that are no longer around because they are difficult to grow and do not ship well.\nA chthonian symbol among the ancient Greeks, celery was said to have sprouted from the blood of Kadmilos, father of the Cabeiri, chthonian divinities celebrated in Samothrace, Lemnos, and Thebes. The spicy odor and dark leaf colour encouraged this association with the cult of death. In classical Greece, celery leaves were used as garlands for the dead, and the wreaths of the winners at the Isthmian Games were first made of celery before being replaced by crowns made of pine. According to Pliny the Elder, in Achaea, the garland worn by the winners of the sacred Nemean Games was also made of celery. The Ancient Greek colony of Selinous (, \"Selinous\"), on Sicily, was named after wild parsley that grew abundantly there; Selinountian coins depicted a parsley leaf as the symbol of the city.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6536", "revid": "13870908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6536", "title": "CPM", "text": "CPM may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "6537", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6537", "title": "Celestines", "text": "Former Roman Catholic monastic order\nThe Celestines were a Roman Catholic monastic order, a branch of the Benedictines, founded in 1244. At the foundation of the new rule, they were called Hermits of St Damiano, or Moronites (or Murronites), and did not assume the appellation of Celestines until after the election of their founder, Peter of Morone (Pietro Murrone), to the Papacy as Celestine V. They used the post-nominal initials O.S.B. Cel. The last house closed in 1785. \nFounding.\nThe fame of the holy life and the austerities practised by Pietro Morone in his solitude on the Mountain of Majella, near Sulmona, attracted many visitors, several of whom were moved to remain and share his mode of life. They built a small convent on the spot inhabited by the holy hermit, which became too small for the accommodation of those who came to share their life of privations. Peter of Morone (later Pope Celestine V), their founder, built a number of other small oratories in that neighborhood.\nAround the year 1254, Peter of Morone gave the order a rule formulated in accordance with his own practices. In 1264 the new institution was approved as a branch of the Benedictines by Urban IV; however, the next pope Pope Gregory X had commanded that all orders founded since the prior Lateran Council should not be further multiplied. Hearing a rumor that the order was to be suppressed, the reclusive Peter traveled to Lyon, where the Pope was holding a council. There he persuaded Gregory to approve his new order, making it a branch of the Benedictines and following the rule of Saint Benedict, but adding to it additional severities and privations. Gregory took it under the Papal protection, assured to it the possession of all property it might acquire, and endowed it with exemption from the authority of the ordinary. Nothing more was needed to ensure the rapid spread of the new association and Peter the hermit of Morone lived to see himself \"Superior-General\" to thirty-six monasteries and more than six hundred monks. \nAs soon as he had seen his new order thus consolidated he gave up the government of it to a certain Robert, and retired once again to an even more remote site to devote himself to solitary penance and prayer. Shortly afterwards, in a chapter of the order held in 1293, the original monastery of Majella being judged to be too desolate and exposed to too rigorous a climate, it was decided that the Abbey of the Holy Spirit at Monte Morrone, located in Sulmona, should be the headquarters of the order and the residence of the General-Superior, where it continued for centuries. The next year Peter of Morrone, despite his reluctance, was elected Pope by the name of Celestine V. From there on, the order he had founded took the name of Celestines. During his short reign as Pope, the former hermit confirmed the rule of the order, which he had himself composed, and conferred on the society a variety of special graces and privileges. In the only creation of cardinals promoted by him, among the twelve raised to the purple, there were two monks of his order. He also visited personally the Benedictine monastery on Monte Cassino, where he persuaded the monks to accept his more rigorous rule. He sent fifty monks of his order to introduce it, who remained there, however, for only a few months.\nAfter the death of the founder the order was favoured and privileged by Benedict XI, and rapidly spread through Italy, Germany, Flanders, and France, where they were received by Philip the Fair in 1300.\nThe administration of the order was carried on somewhat after the pattern of Cluny, that is all monasteries were subject to the Abbey of the Holy Ghost at Sulmona, and these dependent houses were divided into provinces. The Celestines had ninety-six houses in Italy, twenty-one in France, and a few in Germany.\nSubsequently, the French Celestines, with the consent of the Italian superiors of the order, and of Pope Martin V in 1427, obtained the privilege of making new constitutions for themselves, which they did in the 17th century in a series of regulations accepted by the provincial chapter in 1667. At that time the French congregation of the order was composed of twenty-one monasteries, the head of which was that of Paris, and was governed by a Provincial with the authority of General. Paul V was a notable benefactor of the order. The order became extinct in the eighteenth century.\nDescription of order.\nAccording to their special constitutions the Celestines were bound to say matins in the choir at two o'clock in the morning, and always to abstain from eating meat, save in illness. The distinct rules of their order with regard to fasting are numerous, but not more severe than those of similar congregations, though much more so than is required by the old Benedictine rule. In reading their minute directions for divers degrees of abstinence on various days, it is impossible to avoid being struck by the conviction that the great object of the framers of these rules was the general purpose of ensuring an ascetic mode of life.\nThe Celestines wore a white woollen cassock bound with a linen band, and a leathern girdle of the same colour, with a scapular unattached to the body of the dress, and a black hood. It was not permitted to them to wear any shirt save of serge. Their dress in short was very like that of the Cistercians. But it is a tradition in the order that in the time of the founder they wore a coarse brown cloth. The church and monastery of San Pietro in Montorio originally belonged to the Celestines in Rome; but they were turned out of it by Sixtus IV to make way for Franciscans, receiving from the Pope in exchange the Church of St Eusebius of Vercelli with the adjacent mansion for a monastery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6539", "revid": "1318313436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6539", "title": "Cessna", "text": "Aircraft manufacturing subsidiary of Textron\nCessna () is an American brand of general aviation aircraft owned by Textron Aviation since 2014, headquartered in Wichita, Kansas. Originally, it was a brand of the Cessna Aircraft Company, an American general aviation aircraft manufacturing corporation also headquartered in Wichita. The company produced small, piston-powered aircraft, as well as business jets. For much of the mid-to-late 20th century, Cessna was one of the highest-volume and most diverse producers of general aviation aircraft in the world. It was founded in 1927 by Clyde Cessna and Victor Roos and was purchased by General Dynamics in 1985, then by Textron in 1992. In March 2014, when Textron purchased the Beechcraft and Hawker Aircraft corporations, Cessna ceased operations as a subsidiary company, and joined the others as one of the three distinct brands produced by Textron Aviation.\nThroughout its history, and especially in the years following World War II, Cessna became best known for producing small, high-wing, piston aircraft. Its most popular and iconic aircraft is the Cessna 172, delivered since 1956 (with a break from 1986 to 1996), with more sold than any other aircraft in history. Since the first model was delivered in 1972, the brand has also been well known for its Citation family of low-wing business jets which vary in size.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nClyde Cessna, a farmer in Rago, Kansas, built his own aircraft and flew it in June 1911. He was the first person to do so between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains. Cessna started his wood-and-fabric aircraft ventures in Enid, Oklahoma, testing many of his early planes on the salt flats. When bankers in Enid refused to lend him more money to build his planes, he moved to Wichita.\nCessna Aircraft was formed when Clyde Cessna and Victor Roos became partners in the Cessna-Roos Aircraft Company in 1927. Roos resigned just one month into the partnership, selling back his interest to Cessna. Shortly afterward, Roos's name was dropped from the company name.\nThe Cessna DC-6 earned certification on the same day as the stock market crash of 1929, October 29, 1929.\nIn 1932, the Cessna Aircraft Company closed due to the Great Depression.\nHowever, the Cessna CR-3 custom racer made its first flight in 1933. The plane won the 1933 American Air Race in Chicago and later set a new world speed record for engines smaller than 500 cubic inches by averaging .\nCessna's nephews, brothers Dwane and Dwight Wallace, bought the company from Cessna in 1934. They reopened it and began the process of building it into what would become a global success.\nThe Cessna C-37 was introduced in 1937 as Cessna's first seaplane when equipped with Edo floats. In 1940, Cessna received their largest order to date, when they signed a contract with the U.S. Army for 33 specially equipped Cessna T-50s, their first twin engine plane. Later in 1940, the Royal Canadian Air Force placed an order for 180 T-50s.\nPostwar boom.\nCessna returned to commercial production in 1946, after the revocation of wartime production restrictions (L-48), with the release of the Model 120 and Model 140. The approach was to introduce a new line of all-metal aircraft that used production tools, dies and jigs, rather than the hand-built tube-and-fabric construction process used before the war.\nThe Model 140 was named by the US Flight Instructors Association as the \"Outstanding Plane of the Year\" in 1948.\nCessna's first helicopter, the Cessna CH-1, received FAA type certification in 1955.\nCessna introduced the Cessna 172 in 1956. It became the most produced airplane in history. During the post-World War II era, Cessna was known as one of the \"Big Three\" in general aviation aircraft manufacturing, along with Piper and Beechcraft.\nIn 1959, Cessna acquired Aircraft Radio Corporation (ARC), of Boonton, New Jersey, a leading manufacturer of aircraft radios. During these years, Cessna expanded the ARC product line, and rebranded ARC radios as \"Cessna\" radios, making them the \"factory option\" for avionics in new Cessnas. However, during this time, ARC radios suffered a severe decline in quality and popularity. Cessna kept ARC as a subsidiary until 1983, selling it to avionics-maker Sperry.\nIn 1960, Cessna acquired McCauley Industrial Corporation, of Ohio, a leading manufacturer of propellers for light aircraft. McCauley became the world's leading producer of general aviation aircraft propellers, largely through their installation on Cessna airplanes.\nIn 1960, Cessna affiliated itself with Reims Aviation of Reims, France. In 1963, Cessna produced its 50,000th airplane, a Cessna 172.\nCessna's first business jet, the Cessna Citation I, performed its maiden flight on September 15, 1969.\nCessna produced its 100,000th single-engine airplane in 1975.\nIn 1985, Cessna ceased to be an independent company. It was purchased by General Dynamics. Production of the Cessna Caravan began. General Dynamics in turn sold Cessna to Textron in 1992.\nLate in 2007, Cessna purchased the bankrupt Columbia Aircraft company for US$26.4M and would continue production of the Columbia 350 and 400 as the Cessna 350 and Cessna 400 at the Columbia factory in Bend, Oregon. However, production of both aircraft had ended by 2018.\nChinese production controversy.\nOn November 27, 2007, Cessna announced the then-new Cessna 162 would be built in China by Shenyang Aircraft Corporation, which is a subsidiary of the China Aviation Industry Corporation I (AVIC I), a Chinese government-owned consortium of aircraft manufacturers. Cessna reported that the decision was made to save money and because the company had no more plant capacity in the United States at the time. Cessna received much negative feedback for this decision, with complaints centering on the recent quality problems with Chinese production of other consumer products, China's human rights record, exporting of jobs and China's less than friendly political relationship with the United States. The customer backlash surprised Cessna and resulted in a company public relations campaign. In early 2009, the company attracted further criticism for continuing plans to build the 162 in China while laying off large numbers of workers in the United States. In the end, the Cessna 162 was not a commercial success and only a small number were delivered before production was cancelled.\n2008\u20132010 economic crisis.\nThe company's business suffered notably during the late-2000s recession, laying off more than half its workforce between January 2009 and September 2010.\nOn November 4, 2008, Cessna's parent company, Textron, indicated that Citation production would be reduced from the original 2009 target of 535 \"due to continued softening in the global economic environment\" and that this would result in an undetermined number of lay-offs at Cessna.\nOn November 8, 2008, at the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) Expo, CEO Jack Pelton indicated that sales of Cessna aircraft to individual buyers had fallen, but piston and turboprop sales to businesses had not. \"While the economic slowdown has created a difficult business environment, we are encouraged by brisk activity from new and existing propeller fleet operators placing almost 200 orders for 2009 production aircraft,\" Pelton stated.\nBeginning in January 2009, a total of 665 jobs were cut at Cessna's Wichita and Bend, Oregon, plants. The Cessna factory at Independence, Kansas, which builds the Cessna piston-engined aircraft and the Cessna Mustang, did not see any layoffs, but one third of the workforce at the former Columbia Aircraft facility in Bend was laid off. This included 165 of the 460 employees who built the Cessna 350 and 400. The remaining 500 jobs were eliminated at the main Cessna Wichita plant.\nIn January 2009, the company laid off an additional 2,000 employees, bringing the total to 4,600. The job cuts included 120 at the Bend, Oregon, facility reducing the plant that built the Cessna 350 and 400 to fewer than half the number of workers that it had when Cessna bought it. Other cuts included 200 at the Independence, Kansas, plant that builds the single-engined Cessnas and the Mustang, reducing that facility to 1,300 workers.\nOn April 29, 2009, the company suspended the Citation Columbus program and closed the Bend, Oregon, facility. The Columbus program was finally cancelled in early July 2009. The company reported, \"Upon additional analysis of the business jet market related to this product offering, we decided to formally cancel further development of the Citation Columbus\". With the 350 and 400 production moving to Kansas, the company indicated that it would lay off 1,600 more workers, including the remaining 150 employees at the Bend plant and up to 700 workers from the Columbus program.\nIn early June 2009, Cessna laid off an additional 700 salaried employees, bringing the total number of lay-offs to 7,600, which was more than half the company's workers at the time.\nThe company closed its three Columbus, Georgia, manufacturing facilities between June 2010 and December 2011. The closures included the new facility that was opened in August 2008 at a cost of US$25M, plus the McCauley Propeller Systems plant. These closures resulted in total job losses of 600 in Georgia. Some of the work was relocated to Cessna's Independence, Kansas, or Mexican facilities.\nCessna's parent company, Textron, posted a loss of US$8M in the first quarter of 2010, largely driven by continuing low sales at Cessna, which were down 44%. Half of Cessna's workforce remained laid-off and CEO Jack Pelton stated that he expected the recovery to be long and slow.\nIn September 2010, a further 700 employees were laid off, bringing the total to 8,000 jobs lost. CEO Jack Pelton indicated this round of layoffs was due to a \"stalled [and] lackluster economy\" and noted that while the number of orders cancelled for jets had been decreasing, new orders had not met expectations. Pelton added, \"our strategy is to defend and protect our current markets while investing in products and services to secure our future, but we can do this only if we succeed in restructuring our processes and reducing our costs.\"\n2010s.\nOn May 2, 2011, CEO Jack J. Pelton retired. The new CEO, Scott A. Ernest, started on May 31, 2011. Ernest joined Textron after 29 years at General Electric, where he had most recently served as vice president and general manager, global supply chain for GE Aviation. Ernest previously worked for Textron CEO Scott Donnelly when both worked at General Electric.\nIn September 2011, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) proposed a US$2.4\u00a0million fine against the company for its failure to follow quality assurance requirements while producing fiberglass components at its plant in Chihuahua, Mexico. Excess humidity meant that the parts did not cure correctly and quality assurance did not detect the problems. The failure to follow procedures resulted in the delamination in flight of a section of one Cessna 400's wing skin from the spar while the aircraft was being flown by an FAA test pilot. The aircraft was landed safely. The FAA also discovered 82 other aircraft parts that had been incorrectly made and not detected by the company's quality assurance. The investigation resulted in an emergency Airworthiness Directive that affected 13 Cessna 400s.\nSince March 2012, Cessna has been pursuing building business jets in China as part of a joint venture with Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC). The company stated that it intends to eventually build all aircraft models in China, saying \"The agreements together pave the way for a range of business jets, utility single-engine turboprops and single-engine piston aircraft to be manufactured and certified in China.\"\nIn late April 2012, the company added 150 workers in Wichita as a result of anticipated increased demand for aircraft production. Overall, they have cut more than 6000 jobs in the Wichita plant since 2009.\nIn March 2014, Cessna ceased operations as a company and instead became a brand of Textron Aviation.\nMarketing initiatives.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, Cessna's marketing department followed the lead of Detroit automakers and came up with many unique marketing terms in an effort to differentiate its product line from their competitors.\nOther manufacturers and the aviation press widely ridiculed and spoofed many of the marketing terms, but Cessna built and sold more aircraft than any other manufacturer during the boom years of the 1960s and 1970s.\nGenerally, the names of Cessna models do not follow a theme, but there is usually logic to the numbering: the 100 series are the light singles, the 200s are the heftier, the 300s are light to medium twins, the 400s have \"wide oval\" cabin-class accommodation and the 500s are jets. Many Cessna models have names starting with C for the sake of alliteration (e.g. Citation, Crusader, Chancellor).\nCompany terminology.\nCessna marketing terminology includes:\nAircraft.\nIn October 2020, Textron Aviation was producing the following Cessna-branded models:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6542", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6542", "title": "Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz", "text": "Polish-American poet and Nobel laureate (1911\u20132004)\nCzes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz ( , , ; 30 June 1911 \u2013 14 August 2004) was a Polish-American poet, prose writer, translator, and diplomat. He primarily wrote his poetry in Polish. Regarded as one of the great poets of the 20th century, he won the 1980 Nobel Prize in Literature. In its citation, the Swedish Academy called Mi\u0142osz a writer who \"voices man's exposed condition in a world of severe conflicts\".\nMi\u0142osz survived the German occupation of Warsaw during World War II and became a cultural attach\u00e9 for the Polish government during the postwar period. When communist authorities threatened his safety, he defected to France and ultimately chose exile in the United States, where he became a professor at the University of California, Berkeley. His poetry\u2014particularly about his wartime experience\u2014and his appraisal of Stalinism in a prose book, \"The Captive Mind\", brought him renown as a leading \"\u00e9migr\u00e9\" artist and intellectual.\nThroughout his life and work, Mi\u0142osz tackled questions of morality, politics, history, and faith. As a translator, he introduced Western works to a Polish audience, and as a scholar and editor, he championed a greater awareness of Slavic literature in the West. Faith played a role in his work as he explored his Catholicism and personal experience. He wrote in Polish and English.\nMi\u0142osz died in Krak\u00f3w, Poland, in 2004. He is interred in Ska\u0142ka, a church known in Poland as a place of honor for distinguished Poles.\nLife in Europe.\nOrigins and early life.\nCzes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz was born on 30 June 1911, in the village of \u0160eteniai (), Kovno Governorate, Russian Empire (now K\u0117dainiai district, Kaunas County, Lithuania). He was the son of Aleksander Mi\u0142osz (1883\u20131959), a Polish civil engineer, and his wife, Weronika (n\u00e9e Kunat; 1887\u20131945).\nMi\u0142osz was born into a prominent family. On his mother's side, his grandfather was Zygmunt Kunat, a descendant of a Polish family that traced its lineage to the 13th century and owned an estate in Krasnogruda (in present-day Poland). Having studied agriculture in Warsaw, Zygmunt settled in \u0160eteniai after marrying Mi\u0142osz's grandmother, Jozefa, a descendant of the noble Syru\u0107 family, which was of Lithuanian origin. One of her ancestors, Szymon Syru\u0107, had been personal secretary to Stanis\u0142aw I, King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania. Mi\u0142osz's paternal grandfather, Artur Mi\u0142osz, was also from a noble family and fought in the 1863 January Uprising for Polish independence. Mi\u0142osz's grandmother, Stanis\u0142awa, was a doctor's daughter from Riga, Latvia, and a member of the German-Polish von Mohl family. The Mi\u0142osz estate was in Serbinai, a name that Mi\u0142osz's biographer Andrzej Franaszek has suggested could indicate Serbian origin; it is possible the Mi\u0142osz family originated in Serbia and settled in present-day Lithuania after being expelled from Germany centuries earlier. Mi\u0142osz's father was born and educated in Riga. Mi\u0142osz's mother was born in \u0160eteniai and educated in Krak\u00f3w.\nDespite this noble lineage, Mi\u0142osz's childhood on his maternal grandfather's estate in \u0160eteniai lacked the trappings of wealth or the customs of the upper class. He memorialized his childhood in a 1955 novel, \"The Issa Valley\", and a 1959 memoir, \"Native Realm.\" In these works, he described the influence of his Catholic grandmother, Jozefa, his burgeoning love for literature, and his early awareness, as a member of the Polish gentry in Lithuania, of the role of class in society.\nMi\u0142osz's early years were marked by upheaval. When his father was hired to work on infrastructure projects in Siberia, he and his mother traveled to be with him. After World War I broke out in 1914, Mi\u0142osz's father was conscripted into the Russian army, tasked with engineering roads and bridges for troop movements. Mi\u0142osz and his mother were sheltered in Vilnius when the German army captured it in 1915. Afterward, they once again joined Mi\u0142osz's father, following him as the front moved further into Russia, where, in 1917, Mi\u0142osz's brother, Andrzej, was born. Finally, after moving through Estonia and Latvia, the family returned to \u0160eteniai in 1918. But the Polish\u2013Soviet War broke out in 1919, during which Mi\u0142osz's father was involved in a failed attempt to incorporate the newly independent Lithuania into the Second Polish Republic, resulting in his expulsion from Lithuania and the family's move to what was then known as Wilno, which had come under Polish control after the Polish\u2013Lithuanian War of 1920. The Polish-Soviet War continued, forcing the family to move again. At one point during the conflict, Polish soldiers fired at Mi\u0142osz and his mother, an episode he recounted in \"Native Realm.\" The family returned to Wilno after the war ended in 1921.\nDespite the interruptions of wartime wanderings, Mi\u0142osz proved to be an exceptional student with a facility for languages. He ultimately learned Polish, Lithuanian, Russian, English, French, and Hebrew. After graduation from Sigismund Augustus Gymnasium in Wilno, he entered Stefan Batory University in 1929 as a law student. While at university, Mi\u0142osz joined a student group called Academic Club of Wilno Wanderers and Intellectuals and a student poetry group called \u017bagary, along with the young poets Jerzy Zag\u00f3rski, Teodor Bujnicki, Aleksander Rymkiewicz, Jerzy Putrament, and J\u00f3zef Ma\u015bli\u0144ski. His first published poems appeared in the university's student magazine in 1930.\nIn 1931, he visited Paris, where he first met his distant cousin, Oscar Milosz, a French-language poet of Lithuanian descent who had become a Swedenborgian. Oscar became a mentor and inspiration. Returning to Wilno, Mi\u0142osz's early awareness of class difference and sympathy for those less fortunate than himself inspired his defense of Jewish students at the university who were being harassed by an anti-Semitic mob. Stepping between the mob and the Jewish students, Mi\u0142osz fended off attacks. One student was killed when a rock was thrown at his head.\nMi\u0142osz's first volume of poetry, \"A Poem on Frozen Time\", was published in Polish in 1933. In the same year, he publicly read his poetry at an anti-racist \"Poetry of Protest\" event in Wilno, occasioned by Hitler's rise to power in Germany. In 1934, he graduated with a law degree, and the poetry group \u017bagary disbanded. Mi\u0142osz relocated to Paris on a scholarship to study for one year and write articles for a newspaper back in Wilno. In Paris, he frequently met with his cousin Oscar.\nBy 1936, he had returned to Wilno, where he worked on literary programs at Polish Radio Wilno. His second poetry collection, \"Three Winters\", was published that same year, eliciting from one critic a comparison to Adam Mickiewicz. After only one year at Radio Wilno, Mi\u0142osz was dismissed due to an accusation that he was a left-wing sympathizer: as a student, he had adopted socialist views from which, by then, he had publicly distanced himself, and he and his boss, Tadeusz Byrski, had produced programming that included performances by Jews and Byelorussians, which angered right-wing nationalists. After Byrski made a trip to the Soviet Union, an anonymous complaint was lodged with the management of Radio Wilno that the station housed a communist cell, and Byrski and Mi\u0142osz were dismissed. In summer 1937, Mi\u0142osz moved to Warsaw, where he found work at Polish Radio and met his future wife, Janina (n\u00e9e D\u0142uska; 1909\u20131986), who was at the time married to another man.\nWorld War II.\nMi\u0142osz was in Warsaw when it was bombarded as part of the German invasion of Poland in September 1939. Along with colleagues from Polish Radio, he escaped the city, making his way to Lw\u00f3w. But when he learned that Janina had remained in Warsaw with her parents, he looked for a way back. The Soviet invasion of Poland thwarted his plans, and, to avoid the incoming Red Army, he fled to Bucharest. There he obtained a Lithuanian identity document and Soviet visa that allowed him to travel by train to Kyiv and then Wilno. After the Red Army invaded Lithuania, he procured fake documents that he used to enter the part of German-occupied Poland the Germans had dubbed the \"General Government\". It was a difficult journey, mostly on foot, that ended in summer 1940. Finally back in Warsaw, he reunited with Janina.\nLike many Poles at the time, to evade notice by German authorities, Mi\u0142osz participated in underground activities. For example, with higher education officially forbidden to Poles, he attended underground lectures by W\u0142adys\u0142aw Tatarkiewicz, the Polish philosopher and historian of philosophy and aesthetics. He translated Shakespeare's \"As You Like It\" and T. S. Eliot's \"The Waste Land\" into Polish. Along with his friend the novelist Jerzy Andrzejewski, he also arranged for the publication of his third volume of poetry, \"Poems\", under a pseudonym in September 1940. The pseudonym was \"Jan Syru\u0107\" and the title page said the volume had been published by a fictional press in Lw\u00f3w in 1939; in fact, it may have been the first clandestine book published in occupied Warsaw. In 1942, Mi\u0142osz arranged for the publication of an anthology of Polish poets, \"Invincible Song: Polish Poetry of War Time\", by an underground press.\nMi\u0142osz's riskiest underground wartime activity was aiding Jews in Warsaw, which he did through an underground socialist organization called Freedom. His brother, Andrzej, was also active in helping Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland; in 1943, Andrzej transported the Polish Jew Seweryn Tross and his wife from Vilnius to Warsaw. Mi\u0142osz took in the Trosses, found them a hiding place, and supported them financially. The Trosses ultimately died during the Warsaw Uprising. Mi\u0142osz helped at least three other Jews in similar ways: Felicja Wo\u0142komi\u0144ska and her brother and sister.\nDespite his willingness to engage in underground activity and vehement opposition to the Nazis, Mi\u0142osz did not join the Polish Home Army. In later years, he explained that this was partly out of an instinct for self-preservation and partly because he saw its leadership as right-wing and dictatorial. He also did not participate in the planning or execution of the Warsaw Uprising. According to Polish literary historian Irena Grudzi\u0144ska-Gross, he saw the uprising as a \"doomed military effort\" and lacked the \"patriotic elation\" for it. He called the uprising \"a blameworthy, lightheaded enterprise\", but later criticized the Red Army for failing to support it when it had the opportunity to do so.\nAs German troops began torching Warsaw buildings in August 1944, Mi\u0142osz was captured and held in a prisoner transit camp; he was later rescued by a Catholic nun\u2014a stranger to him\u2014who pleaded with the Germans on his behalf. Once freed, he and Janina escaped the city, ultimately settling in a village outside Krak\u00f3w, where they were staying when the Red Army swept through Poland in January 1945, after Warsaw had been largely destroyed.\nIn the preface to his 1953 book \"The Captive Mind\", Mi\u0142osz wrote, \"I do not regret those years in Warsaw, which was, I believe, the most agonizing spot in the whole of terrorized Europe. Had I then chosen emigration, my life would certainly have followed a very different course. But my knowledge of the crimes which Europe has witnessed in the twentieth century would be less direct, less concrete than it is\". Immediately after the war, Mi\u0142osz published his fourth poetry collection, \"Rescue\"; it focused on his wartime experiences and contains some of his most critically praised work, including the 20-poem cycle \"The World,\" composed like a primer for na\u00efve schoolchildren, and the cycle \"Voices of Poor People\". The volume also contains some of his most frequently anthologized poems, including \"A Song on the End of the World\", \"Campo dei Fiori\", and \"A Poor Christian Looks at the Ghetto\".\nDiplomatic career.\nFrom 1945 to 1951, Mi\u0142osz served as a cultural attach\u00e9 for the newly formed People's Republic of Poland. It was in this capacity that he first met Jane Zielonko, the future translator of \"The Captive Mind\", with whom he had a brief relationship. He moved from New York City to Washington, D.C., and finally to Paris, organizing and promoting Polish cultural occasions such as musical concerts, art exhibitions, and literary and cinematic events. Although he was a representative of Poland, which had become a Soviet satellite country behind the Iron Curtain, he was not a member of any communist party. In \"The Captive Mind\", he explained his reasons for accepting the role:My mother tongue, work in my mother tongue, is for me the most important thing in life. And my country, where what I wrote could be printed and could reach the public, lay within the Eastern Empire. My aim and purpose was to keep alive freedom of thought in my own special field; I sought in full knowledge and conscience to subordinate my conduct to the fulfillment of that aim. I served abroad because I was thus relieved from direct pressure and, in the material which I sent to my publishers, could be bolder than my colleagues at home. I did not want to become an \u00e9migr\u00e9 and so give up all chance of taking a hand in what was going on in my own country.Mi\u0142osz did not publish a book while he was a representative of the Polish government. Instead, he wrote articles for various Polish periodicals introducing readers to British and American writers like Eliot, William Faulkner, Ernest Hemingway, Norman Mailer, Robert Lowell, and W. H. Auden. He also translated into Polish Shakespeare's \"Othello\" and the work of Walt Whitman, Carl Sandburg, Pablo Neruda, and others.\nIn 1947, Mi\u0142osz's son, Anthony, was born in Washington, D.C.\nIn 1948, Mi\u0142osz arranged for the Polish government to fund a Department of Polish Studies at Columbia University. Named for Adam Mickiewicz, the department featured lectures by Manfred Kridl, Mi\u0142osz's friend who was then on the faculty of Smith College, and produced a scholarly book about Mickiewicz. Mickiewicz's granddaughter wrote a letter to Dwight D. Eisenhower, then the president of Columbia University, to express her approval, but the Polish American Congress, an influential group of Polish \u00e9migr\u00e9s, denounced the arrangement in a letter to Eisenhower that they shared with the press, which alleged a communist infiltration at Columbia. Students picketed and called for boycotts. One faculty member resigned in protest. Despite the controversy, the department was established, the lectures took place, and the book was produced, but the department was discontinued in 1954 when funding from Poland ceased.\nIn 1949, Mi\u0142osz visited Poland for the first time since joining its diplomatic corps and was appalled by the conditions he saw, including an atmosphere of pervasive fear of the government. After returning to the U.S., he began to look for a way to leave his post, even soliciting advice from Albert Einstein, whom he met in the course of his duties.\nAs the Polish government, influenced by Joseph Stalin, became more oppressive, his superiors began to view Mi\u0142osz as a threat: he was outspoken in his reports to Warsaw and met with people not approved by his superiors. Consequently, his superiors called him \"an individual who ideologically is totally alien\". Toward the end of 1950, when Janina was pregnant with their second child, Mi\u0142osz was recalled to Warsaw, where in December 1950 his passport was confiscated, ostensibly until it could be determined that he did not plan to defect. After intervention by Poland's foreign minister, Zygmunt Modzelewski, Mi\u0142osz's passport was returned. Realizing that he was in danger if he remained in Poland, Mi\u0142osz left for Paris in January 1951.\nAsylum in France.\nUpon arriving in Paris, Mi\u0142osz went into hiding, aided by the staff of the Polish \u00e9migr\u00e9 magazine \"Kultura.\" With his wife and son still in the United States, he applied to enter the U.S. and was denied. At the time, the U.S. was in the grip of McCarthyism, and influential Polish \u00e9migr\u00e9s had convinced American officials that Mi\u0142osz was a communist. Unable to leave France, Mi\u0142osz was not present for the birth of his second son, John Peter, in Washington, D.C., in 1951.\nWith the United States closed to him, Mi\u0142osz requested\u2014and was granted\u2014political asylum in France. After three months in hiding, he announced his defection at a press conference and in a \"Kultura\" article, \"No\", that explained his refusal to live in Poland or continue working for the Polish regime. He was the first artist of note from a communist country to make public his reasons for breaking ties with his government. His case attracted attention in Poland, where his work was banned and he was attacked in the press, and in the West, where prominent individuals voiced criticism and support. For example, the future Nobel laureate Pablo Neruda, then a supporter of the Soviet Union, attacked him in a communist newspaper as \"The Man Who Ran Away\". On the other hand, Albert Camus, another future Nobel laureate, visited Mi\u0142osz and offered his support. Another supporter during this period was the Swiss philosopher Jeanne Hersch, with whom Mi\u0142osz had a brief romantic affair.\nMi\u0142osz was finally reunited with his family in 1953, when Janina and the children joined him in France. That same year saw the publication of \"The Captive Mind\", a nonfiction work that uses case studies to dissect the methods and consequences of Soviet communism, which at the time had prominent admirers in the West. The book brought Mi\u0142osz his first readership in the United States, where it was credited by some on the political left (such as Susan Sontag) with helping to change perceptions about communism. The German philosopher Karl Jaspers described it as a \"significant historical document\". It became a staple of political science courses and is considered a classic work in the study of totalitarianism.\nMi\u0142osz's years in France were productive. In addition to \"The Captive Mind\", he published two poetry collections (\"Daylight\" (1954) and \"A Treatise on Poetry\" (1957)), two novels (\"The Seizure of Power\" (1955) and \"The Issa Valley\" (1955)), and a memoir (\"Native Realm\" (1959)). All were published in Polish by an \u00e9migr\u00e9 press in Paris.\nAndrzej Franaszek has called \"A Treatise on Poetry\" Mi\u0142osz's magnum opus, while the scholar Helen Vendler compared it to \"The Waste Land\", a work \"so powerful that it bursts the bounds in which it was written\u2014the bounds of language, geography, epoch\". A long poem divided into four sections, \"A Treatise on Poetry\" surveys Polish history, recounts Mi\u0142osz's experience of war, and explores the relationship between art and history.\nIn 1956, Mi\u0142osz and Janina were married.\nLife in the United States.\nUniversity of California, Berkeley.\nIn 1960, Mi\u0142osz was offered a position as a visiting lecturer at the University of California, Berkeley. With this offer, and with the climate of McCarthyism abated, he was able to move to the United States. He proved to be an adept and popular teacher, and was offered tenure after only two months. The rarity of this, and the degree to which he had impressed his colleagues, are underscored by the fact that Mi\u0142osz lacked a PhD and teaching experience. Yet his deep learning was obvious, and after years of working administrative jobs that he found stifling, he told friends that he was in his element in a classroom. With stable employment as a tenured professor of Slavic languages and literatures, Mi\u0142osz was able to secure American citizenship and purchase a home in Berkeley.\nMi\u0142osz began to publish scholarly articles in English and Polish on a variety of authors, including Fyodor Dostoevsky. But despite his successful transition to the U.S., he described his early years at Berkeley as frustrating, as he was isolated from friends and viewed as a political figure rather than a great poet. (In fact, some of his Berkeley faculty colleagues, unaware of his creative output, expressed astonishment when he won the Nobel Prize.) His poetry was not available in English, and he was not able to publish in Poland.\nAs part of an effort to introduce American readers to his poetry, as well as to his fellow Polish poets' work, Mi\u0142osz conceived and edited the anthology \"Postwar Polish Poetry\", which was published in English in 1965. American poets like W.S. Merwin, and American scholars like Clare Cavanagh, have credited it with a profound impact. It was many English-language readers' first exposure to Mi\u0142osz's poetry, as well as that of Polish poets like Wis\u0142awa Szymborska, Zbigniew Herbert, and Tadeusz R\u00f3\u017cewicz. (In the same year, Mi\u0142osz's poetry also appeared in the first issue of \"Modern Poetry in Translation,\" an English-language journal founded by prominent literary figures Ted Hughes and Daniel Weissbort. The issue also featured Miroslav Holub, Yehuda Amichai, Ivan Lali\u0107, Vasko Popa, Zbigniew Herbert, and Andrei Voznesensky.) In 1969, Mi\u0142osz's textbook \"The History of Polish Literature\" was published in English. He followed this with a volume of his own work, \"Selected Poems\" (1973), some of which he translated into English himself. This was his first anthology of poetry published in English language.\nAt the same time, Mi\u0142osz continued to publish in Polish with an \u00e9migr\u00e9 press in Paris. His poetry collections from this period include \"King Popiel and Other Poems\" (1962), \"Bobo\u2019s Metamorphosis\" (1965), \"City Without a Name\" (1969), and \"From the Rising of the Sun\" (1974).\nDuring Mi\u0142osz's time at Berkeley, the campus became a hotbed of student protest, notably as the home of the Free Speech Movement, which has been credited with helping to \"define a generation of student activism\" across the United States. Mi\u0142osz's relationship to student protesters was sometimes antagonistic: he called them \"spoiled children of the bourgeoisie\" and their political zeal na\u00efve. At one campus event in 1970, he mocked protesters who claimed to be demonstrating for peace and love: \"Talk to me about love when they come into your cell one morning, line you all up, and say 'You and you, step forward\u2014it\u2019s your time to die\u2014unless any of your friends loves you so much he wants to take your place!'\" Comments like these were in keeping with his stance toward American counterculture of the 1960s in general. For example, in 1968, when Mi\u0142osz was listed as a signatory of an open letter of protest written by poet and counterculture figure Allen Ginsberg and published in \"The New York Review of Books\", Mi\u0142osz responded by calling the letter \"dangerous nonsense\" and insisting that he had not signed it.\nAfter 18 years, Mi\u0142osz retired from teaching in 1978. To mark the occasion, he was awarded a \"Berkeley Citation\", the University of California's equivalent of an honorary doctorate. But when his wife, Janina, fell ill and required expensive medical treatment, Mi\u0142osz returned to teaching seminars. The year 1978 also marked the publication of his second English-language poetry anthology, \"Bells in Winter\".\nNobel laureate.\nOn 9 October 1980, the Swedish Academy announced that Mi\u0142osz had won the Nobel Prize in Literature. The award catapulted him to global fame. On the day the prize was announced, Mi\u0142osz held a brief press conference and then left to teach a class on Dostoevsky. In his Nobel lecture, Mi\u0142osz described his view of the role of the poet, lamented the tragedies of the 20th century, and paid tribute to his cousin Oscar.\nMany Poles became aware of Mi\u0142osz for the first time when he won the Nobel Prize. After a 30-year ban in Poland, his writing was finally published there in limited selections. He was also able to visit Poland for the first time since fleeing in 1951 and was greeted by crowds with a hero's welcome. He met with leading Polish figures like Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa and Pope John Paul II. At the same time, his early work, until then only available in Polish, began to be translated into English and many other languages.\nIn 1981, Mi\u0142osz was appointed the Norton Professor of Poetry at Harvard University, where he was invited to deliver the Charles Eliot Norton Lectures. He used the opportunity, as he had before becoming a Nobel laureate, to draw attention to writers who had been unjustly imprisoned or persecuted. The lectures were published as \"The Witness of Poetry\" (1983).\nMi\u0142osz continued to publish work in Polish through his longtime publisher in Paris, including the poetry collections \"Hymn of the Pearl\" (1981) and \"Unattainable Earth\" (1986), and the essay collection \"Beginning with My Streets\" (1986).\nIn 1986, Mi\u0142osz's wife, Janina, died.\nIn 1988, Mi\u0142osz's \"Collected Poems\" appeared in English; it was the first of several attempts to collect all his poetry into a single volume. After the fall of communism in Poland, he split his time between Berkeley and Krak\u00f3w, and he began to publish his writing in Polish with a publisher based in Krak\u00f3w. When Lithuania broke free from the Soviet Union in 1991, Mi\u0142osz visited for the first time since 1939. In 2000, he moved to Krak\u00f3w.\nIn 1992, Mi\u0142osz married Carol Thigpen, an academic at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia. They remained married until her death in 2002. His work from the 1990s includes the poetry collections \"Facing the River\" (1994) and \"Roadside Dog\" (1997), and the collection of short prose \"Mi\u0142osz\u2019s ABC\u2019s\" (1997). Mi\u0142osz's last stand-alone volumes of poetry were \"This\" (2000), and \"The Second Space\" (2002). Uncollected poems written afterward appeared in English in \"New and Selected Poems\" (2004) and, posthumously, in \"Selected and Last Poems\" (2011).\nDeath.\nCzes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz died on 14 August 2004, at his Krak\u00f3w home, aged 93. He was given a state funeral at the historic Mariacki Church in Krak\u00f3w. Polish Prime Minister Marek Belka attended, as did the former president of Poland, Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa. Thousands of people lined the streets to witness his coffin moved by military escort to his final resting place at Ska\u0142ka Roman Catholic Church, where he was one of the last to be commemorated. In front of that church, the poets Seamus Heaney, Adam Zagajewski, and Robert Hass read Mi\u0142osz's poem \"In Szetejnie\" in Polish, French, English, Russian, Lithuanian, and Hebrew\u2014all the languages Mi\u0142osz knew. Media from around the world covered the funeral.\nProtesters threatened to disrupt the proceedings on the grounds that Mi\u0142osz was anti-Polish, anti-Catholic, and had signed a petition supporting gay and lesbian freedom of speech and assembly. Pope John Paul II, along with Mi\u0142osz's confessor, issued public messages confirming that Mi\u0142osz had received the sacraments, which quelled the protest.\nFamily.\nMi\u0142osz's brother, Andrzej Mi\u0142osz (1917\u20132002), was a Polish journalist, translator, and documentary film producer. His work included Polish documentaries about his brother.\nMi\u0142osz's son, Anthony, is a composer and software designer. He studied linguistics, anthropology, and chemistry at the University of California at Berkeley, and neuroscience at the University of California, San Francisco Medical Center. In addition to releasing recordings of his own compositions, he has translated some of his father's poems into English.\nHonors.\nIn addition to the Nobel Prize in Literature, Mi\u0142osz received the following awards:\nMi\u0142osz was named a distinguished visiting professor or fellow at many institutions, including the University of Michigan and University of Oklahoma, where he was a Puterbaugh Fellow in 1999. He was an elected member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Letters, and the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts. He received honorary doctorates from Harvard University, the University of Michigan, the University of California at Berkeley, Jagiellonian University, Catholic University of Lublin, and Vytautas Magnus University in Lithuania. Vytautas Magnus University and Jagiellonian University have academic centers named for Mi\u0142osz.\nIn 1992, Mi\u0142osz was made an honorary citizen of Lithuania, where his birthplace was made into a museum and conference center. In 1993, he was made an honorary citizen of Krak\u00f3w.\nHis books also received awards. His first, \"A Poem on Frozen Time\", won an award from the Union of Polish Writers in Wilno. \"The Seizure of Power\" received the Prix Litt\u00e9raire Europ\u00e9en (European Literary Prize). The collection \"Roadside Dog\" received a Nike Award in Poland.\nIn 1989, Mi\u0142osz was named one of the \"Righteous Among the Nations\" at Israel's Yad Vashem memorial to the Holocaust, in recognition of his efforts to save Jews in Warsaw during World War II.\nMi\u0142osz has also been honored posthumously. The Polish Parliament declared 2011, the centennial of his birth, the \"Year of Mi\u0142osz\". It was marked by conferences and tributes throughout Poland, as well as in New York City, at Yale University, and at the Dublin Writers Festival, among many other locations. The same year, he was featured on a Lithuanian postage stamp. Streets are named for him near Paris, Vilnius, and in the Polish cities of Krak\u00f3w, Pozna\u0144, Gda\u0144sk, Bia\u0142ystok, and Wroc\u0142aw. In Gda\u0144sk there is a Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz Square. In 2013, a primary school in Vilnius was named for Mi\u0142osz, joining schools in Mierzecice, Poland, and Schaumburg, Illinois, that bear his name.\nLegacy.\nCultural impact.\nIn 1978, the Russian-American poet Joseph Brodsky called Mi\u0142osz \"one of the great poets of our time; perhaps the greatest\". Mi\u0142osz has been cited as an influence by numerous writers\u2014contemporaries and succeeding generations. For example, scholars have written about Mi\u0142osz's influence on the writing of Seamus Heaney, and Clare Cavanagh has identified the following poets as having benefited from Mi\u0142osz's influence: Robert Pinsky, Edward Hirsch, Rosanna Warren, Robert Hass, Charles Simic, Mary Karr, Carolyn Forch\u00e9, Mark Strand, Ted Hughes, Joseph Brodsky, and Derek Walcott.\nBy being smuggled into Poland, Mi\u0142osz's writing was a source of inspiration to the anti-communist Solidarity movement there in the early 1980s. Lines from his poem \"You Who Wronged\" are inscribed on the Monument to the Fallen Shipyard Workers of 1970 in Gda\u0144sk, where Solidarity originated.\nOf the effect of Mi\u0142osz's edited volume \"Postwar Polish Poetry\" on English-language poets, Merwin wrote, \"Mi\u0142osz\u2019s book had been a talisman and had made most of the literary bickering among the various ideological encampments, then most audible in the poetic doctrines in English, seem frivolous and silly\". Similarly, the British poet and scholar Donald Davie argued that, for many English-language writers, Mi\u0142osz's work encouraged an expansion of poetry to include multiple viewpoints and an engagement with subjects of intellectual and historical importance: \"I have suggested, going for support to the writings of Mi\u0142osz, that no concerned and ambitious poet of the present day, aware of the enormities of twentieth-century history, can for long remain content with the privileged irresponsibility allowed to, or imposed on, the lyric poet\".\nMi\u0142osz's writing continues to be the subject of academic study, conferences, and cultural events. His papers, including manuscripts, correspondence, and other materials, are housed at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University.\nFrom May 2024, Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz's Nobel Prize medal, Nobel Prize notebook of Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz and a fair copy of his poem \"Rays of Dazzling Light\" (Polish: \"Jasno\u015bci promieniste\") are presented at a permanent exhibition in the Palace of the Commonwealth in Warsaw.\nControversies.\nNationality.\nMi\u0142osz's birth in a time and place of shifting borders and overlapping cultures, and his later naturalization as an American citizen, have led to competing claims about his nationality. Although his family identified as Polish and Polish was his primary language, and although he frequently spoke of Poland as his country, he also publicly identified himself as one of the last citizens of the multi-ethnic Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Writing in a Polish newspaper in 2000, he claimed, \"I was born in the very center of Lithuania and so have a greater right than my great forebear, Mickiewicz, to write 'O Lithuania, my country.'\" But in his Nobel lecture, he said, \"My family in the 16th century already spoke Polish, just as many families in Finland spoke Swedish and in Ireland English, so I am a Polish, not a Lithuanian, poet\". Public statements such as these, and numerous others, inspired discussion about his nationality, including a claim that he was \"arguably the greatest spokesman and representative of a Lithuania that, in Mi\u0142osz\u2019s mind, was bigger than its present incarnation\". Others have viewed Mi\u0142osz as an American author, hosting exhibitions and writing about him from that perspective and including his work in anthologies of American poetry.\nBut in \"The New York Review of Books\" in 1981, the critic John Bayley wrote, \"nationality is not a thing [Mi\u0142osz] can take seriously; it would be hard to imagine a greater writer more emancipated from even its most subtle pretensions\". Echoing this notion, the scholar and diplomat Piotr Wilczek argued that, even when he was greeted as a national hero in Poland, Mi\u0142osz \"made a distinct effort to remain a universal thinker\". Speaking at a ceremony to celebrate his birth centenary in 2011, Lithuanian President Dalia Grybauskait\u0117 stressed that Mi\u0142osz's works \"unite the Lithuanian and Polish people and reveal how close and how fruitful the ties between our people can be\".\nCatholicism.\nThough raised Catholic, Mi\u0142osz as a young man came to adopt a \"scientific, atheistic position mostly\", though he later returned to the Catholic faith. He translated parts of the Bible into Polish, and allusions to Catholicism pervade his poetry, culminating in a long 2001 poem, \"A Theological Treatise\". For some critics, Mi\u0142osz's belief that literature should provide spiritual fortification was outdated: Franaszek suggests that Mi\u0142osz's belief was evidence of a \"beautiful na\u00efvet\u00e9\", while David Orr, citing Mi\u0142osz's dismissal of \"poetry which does not save nations or people\", accused him of \"pompous nonsense\".\nMi\u0142osz expressed some criticism of both Catholicism and Poland (a majority-Catholic country), causing furor in some quarters when it was announced that he would be interred in Krak\u00f3w's historic Ska\u0142ka church. Cynthia Haven writes that, to some readers, Mi\u0142osz's embrace of Catholicism can seem surprising and complicates the understanding of him and his work.\nWork.\nForm.\nWhile Mi\u0142osz is best known for his poetry, his body of work spans multiple other literary genres: fiction (particularly the novel), memoir, criticism, personal essay, and lectures. His letters are also of interest to scholars and lay readers; for example, his correspondence with writers such as Jerzy Andrzejewski, Witold Gombrowicz, and Thomas Merton have been published.\nAt the outset of his career, Mi\u0142osz was known as a \"catastrophist\" poet\u2014a label critics applied to him and other poets from the \u017bagary poetry group to describe their use of surreal imagery and formal inventiveness in reaction to a Europe beset by extremist ideologies and war. While Mi\u0142osz evolved away from the apocalyptic view of catastrophist poetry, he continued to pursue formal inventiveness throughout his career. As a result, his poetry demonstrates a wide-ranging mastery of form, from long or epic poems (e.g., \"A Treatise on Poetry\") to poems of just two lines (e.g., \"On the Death of a Poet\" from the collection \"This\"), and from prose poems and free verse to classic forms such as the ode or elegy. Some of his poems use rhyme, but many do not. In numerous cases, Mi\u0142osz used form to illuminate meaning in his poetry; for example, by juxtaposing variable stanzas to accentuate ideas or voices that challenge each other.\nThemes.\nMi\u0142osz's work is known for its complexity; according to the scholars Leonard Nathan and Arthur J. Quinn, Mi\u0142osz \"prided himself on being an esoteric writer accessible to a mere handful of readers\". Nevertheless, some common themes are readily apparent throughout his body of work.\nThe poet, critic, and frequent Mi\u0142osz translator Robert Hass has described Mi\u0142osz as \"a poet of great inclusiveness\", with a fidelity to capturing life in all of its sensuousness and multiplicities. According to Hass, Mi\u0142osz's poems can be viewed as \"dwelling in contradiction\", where one idea or voice is presented only to be immediately challenged or changed. According to English poet Donald Davie, this allowance for contradictory voices\u2014a shift from the solo lyric voice to a chorus\u2014is among the most important aspects of Mi\u0142osz's work.\nThe poetic chorus is deployed not just to highlight the complexity of the modern world but also to search for morality, another of Mi\u0142osz's recurrent themes. Nathan and Quinn write, \"Mi\u0142osz\u2019s work is devoted to unmasking man\u2019s fundamental duality; he wants to make his readers admit the contradictory nature of their own experience\" because doing so \"forces us to assert our preferences as preferences\". That is, it forces readers to make conscious choices, which is the arena of morality. At times, Mi\u0142osz's exploration of morality was explicit and concrete, such as when, in \"The Captive Mind\", he ponders the right way to respond to three Lithuanian women who were forcibly moved to a Russian communal farm and wrote to him for help, or when, in the poems \"Campo Dei Fiori\" and \"A Poor Christian Looks at the Ghetto\", he addresses survivor's guilt and the morality of writing about another's suffering.\nMi\u0142osz's exploration of morality takes place in the context of history, and confrontation with history is another of his major themes. Vendler wrote, \"for Mi\u0142osz, the person is irrevocably a person in history, and the interchange between external event and the individual life is the matrix of poetry\". Having experienced both Nazism and Stalinism, Mi\u0142osz was particularly concerned with the notion of \"historical necessity\", which, in the 20th century, was used to justify human suffering on a previously unheard-of scale. Yet Mi\u0142osz did not reject the concept entirely. Nathan and Quinn summarize Mi\u0142osz's appraisal of historical necessity as it appears in his essay collection \"Views from San Francisco Bay\": \"Some species rise, others fall, as do human families, nations, and whole civilizations. There may well be an internal logic to these transformations, a logic that when viewed from sufficient distance has its own elegance, harmony, and grace. Our reason tempts us to be enthralled by this superhuman splendor; but when so enthralled we find it difficult to remember, except perhaps as an element in an abstract calculus, the millions of individuals, the millions upon millions, who unwillingly paid for this splendor with pain and blood\".\nMi\u0142osz's willingness to accept a form of logic in history points to another recurrent aspect of his writing: his capacity for wonder, amazement, and, ultimately, faith\u2014not always religious faith, but \"faith in the objective reality of a world to be known by the human mind but not constituted by that mind\". At other times, Mi\u0142osz was more explicitly religious in his work. According to scholar and translator Michael Parker, \"crucial to any understanding of Mi\u0142osz\u2019s work is his complex relationship to Catholicism\". His writing is filled with allusions to Christian figures, symbols, and theological ideas, though Mi\u0142osz was closer to Gnosticism, or what he called Manichaeism, in his personal beliefs, viewing the universe as ruled by an evil whose influence human beings must try to escape. From this perspective, \"he can at once admit that the world is ruled by necessity, by evil, and yet still find hope and sustenance in the beauty of the world. History reveals the pointlessness of human striving, the instability of human things; but time also is the moving image of eternity\". According to Hass, this viewpoint left Mi\u0142osz \"with the task of those heretical Christians\u2026to suffer time, to contemplate being, and to live in the hope of the redemption of the world\".\nInfluences.\nMi\u0142osz had numerous literary and intellectual influences, although scholars of his work\u2014and Mi\u0142osz himself, in his writings\u2014have identified the following as significant: Oscar Mi\u0142osz (who inspired Mi\u0142osz's interest in the metaphysical) and, through him, Emanuel Swedenborg; Lev Shestov; Simone Weil (whose work Mi\u0142osz translated into Polish); Dostoevsky; William Blake (whose concept of \"Ulro\" Mi\u0142osz borrowed for his book \"The Land of Ulro\"), and Eliot.\nSelected bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6543", "revid": "473822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6543", "title": "Carnivore", "text": "Organism that eats mostly or exclusively animal tissue\nA carnivore , or meat-eater (Latin, \"caro\", genitive \"carnis\", meaning meat or flesh and \"vorare\" meaning \"to devour\"), is an animal or plant whose nutrition and energy requirements are met by consumption of animal tissues (mainly muscle, fat and other soft tissues) as food, whether through predation or scavenging.\nNomenclature.\nMammal order.\nThe technical term for mammals in the order Carnivora is \"carnivoran\", and they are so-named because most member species in the group have a carnivorous diet, but the similarity of the name of the order and the name of the diet causes confusion.\nMany but not all carnivorans are meat eaters; a few, such as the large and small cats (Felidae) are \"obligate\" carnivores whose diet requires nutrients found only in animal flesh. Other classes of carnivore are highly variable. The ursids (bears), for example: while the Arctic polar bear eats meat almost exclusively (more than 90% of its diet is meat), almost all other bear species are omnivorous, and one species, the giant panda, is nearly exclusively herbivorous.\nDietary carnivory is not a distinguishing trait of the order. Many mammals with highly carnivorous diets are \"not\" members of the order Carnivora. Cetaceans, for example, all eat other animals, but are paradoxically members of the almost exclusively plant-eating hooved mammals.\nCarnivorous diet.\nAnimals that depend solely on animal flesh for their nutrient requirements in nature are called \"hypercarnivores\" or \"obligate carnivores\", whilst those that also consume non-animal food are called \"mesocarnivores\", or \"facultative carnivores\", or \"omnivores\" (there are no clear distinctions). A carnivore at the top of the food chain (adults not preyed upon by other animals) is termed an apex predator, regardless of whether it is an \"obligate\" or \"facultative\" carnivore. In captivity or domestic settings, obligate carnivores like cats and crocodiles can, in principle, get all their required nutrients from processed food made from plant and synthetic sources.\nOutside the animal kingdom, there are several genera containing carnivorous plants (predominantly insectivores), several phyla containing carnivorous fungi (preying mostly on microscopic invertebrates, such as nematodes, amoebae, and springtails) and carnivorous protists.\nSubcategories of carnivory.\nCarnivores are sometimes characterized by their type of prey. For example, animals that eat mainly insects and similar terrestrial arthropods are called \"insectivores\", while those that eat mainly soft-bodied invertebrates are called \"vermivores\". Those that eat mainly fish are called \"piscivores\".\nCarnivores may alternatively be classified according to the percentage of meat in their diet. The diet of a hypercarnivore consists of more than 70% meat, that of a mesocarnivore 30\u201370%, and that of a hypocarnivore less than 30%, with the balance consisting of non-animal foods, such as fruit, other plant material, or fungi.\nOmnivores also consume both animal and non-animal food, and apart from their more general definition, there is no clearly defined ratio of plant vs. animal material that distinguishes a \"facultative carnivore\" from an \"omnivore\".\nObligate carnivores.\nObligate or \"true\" carnivores are those whose diet in the wild requires nutrients found only in animal flesh. While obligate carnivores might be able to ingest small amounts of plant matter, they lack the necessary physiology required to fully digest it. Some obligate carnivorous mammals will ingest vegetation as an emetic, a food that upsets their stomachs, to self-induce vomiting.\nObligate carnivores are diverse. The amphibian axolotl consumes mainly worms and larvae in its environment, but if necessary will consume algae. All wild felids, including domestic cats, require a diet of primarily animal flesh and organs. Specifically, cats have high protein requirements and their metabolisms appear unable to synthesize essential nutrients such as retinol, arginine, taurine, and arachidonic acid; thus, in nature, they must consume flesh to supply these nutrients.\nCharacteristics of carnivores.\nCharacteristics commonly associated with carnivores include strength, speed, and keen senses for hunting, as well as teeth and claws for capturing and tearing prey. However, some carnivores do not hunt and are scavengers, lacking the physical characteristics to bring down prey; in addition, most hunting carnivores will scavenge when the opportunity arises. Carnivores have comparatively short digestive systems, as they are not required to break down the tough cellulose found in plants.\nMany hunting animals have evolved eyes facing forward, enabling depth perception. This is almost universal among mammalian predators, while most reptile and amphibian predators have eyes facing sideways.\nSome carnivores use powerful venom to immobilize and kill prey. Such animals include snakes, spiders, scorpions, and some wasps.\nPrehistory of carnivory.\n\"Predation\" (the eating of one living organism by another for nutrition) predates the rise of commonly recognized carnivores by hundreds of millions (perhaps billions) of years. It began with single-celled organisms that phagocytozed and digested other cells, and later evolved into multicellular organisms with specialized cells that were dedicated to breaking down other organisms. Incomplete digestion of the prey organisms, some of which survived inside the predators in a form of endosymbiosis, might have led to symbiogenesis that gave rise to eukaryotes and eukaryotic autotrophs such as green and red algae.\nProterozoic origin.\nThe earliest predators were microorganisms, which engulfed and \"swallowed\" other smaller cells (i.e. phagocytosis) and digested them internally. Because the earliest fossil record is poor, these first predators could date back anywhere between 1 and over 2.7\u00a0bya (billion years ago).\nThe rise of eukaryotic cells at around 2.7\u00a0bya, the rise of multicellular organisms at about 2\u00a0bya, and the rise of motile predators (around 600\u00a0Mya \u2013 2\u00a0bya, probably around 1\u00a0bya) have all been attributed to early predatory behavior, and many very early remains show evidence of boreholes or other markings attributed to small predator species.\nThe sudden disappearance of the precambrian Ediacaran biota at the end-Ediacaran extinction, who were mostly bottom-dwelling filter feeders and grazers, has been hypothetized to be partly caused by increased predation by newer animals with hardened skeleton and mouthparts.\nPaleozoic.\nThe degradation of seafloor microbial mats due to the Cambrian substrate revolution led to increased active predation among animals, likely triggering various evolutionary arms races that contributed to the rapid diversification during the Cambrian explosion. Radiodont arthropods, which produced the first apex predators such as \"Anomalocaris\", quickly became the dominant carnivores of the Cambrian sea. After their decline due to the Cambrian-Ordovician extinction event, the niches of large carnivores were taken over by nautiloid cephalopods such as \"Cameroceras\" and later eurypterids such as \"Jaekelopterus\" during the Ordovician and Silurian periods.\nThe first vertebrate carnivores appeared after the evolution of jawed fish, especially armored placoderms such as the massive \"Dunkleosteus\". The dominance of placoderms in the Devonian ocean forced other fish to venture into other niches, and one clade of bony fish, the lobe-finned fish, became the dominant carnivores of freshwater wetlands formed by early land plants. Some of these fish became better adapted for breathing air and eventually giving rise to amphibian tetrapods. These early tetrapods were large semi-aquatic piscivores and riparian ambush predators that hunt terrestrial arthropods (mainly arachnids and myriopods), and one group in particular, the temnospondyls, became terrestrial apex predators that hunt other tetrapods.\nThe dominance of temnospondyls around the wetland habitats throughout the Carboniferous forced other amphibians to evolve into amniotes that had adaptations that allowed them to live farther away from water bodies. These amniotes began to evolve both carnivory, which was a natural transition from insectivory requiring minimal adaptation; and herbivory, which took advantage of the abundance of coal forest foliage but in contrast required a complex set of adaptations that was necessary for digesting on the cellulose- and lignin-rich plant materials. After the Carboniferous rainforest collapse, both synapsid and sauropsid amniotes quickly gained dominance as the top terrestrial animals during the subsequent Permian period. Some scientists assert that sphenacodontoid synapsids such as \"Dimetrodon\" \"were the first terrestrial vertebrate to develop the curved, serrated teeth that enable a predator to eat prey much larger than itself\".\nMesozoic.\nIn the Mesozoic, some theropod dinosaurs such as \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" are thought probably to have been obligate carnivores.\nThough the theropods were the larger carnivores, several carnivorous mammal groups were already present. Most notable are the gobiconodontids, the triconodontid \"Jugulator\", the deltatheroidans and \"Cimolestes\". Many of these, such as \"Repenomamus\", \"Jugulator\" and \"Cimolestes\", were among the largest mammals in their faunal assemblages, capable of attacking dinosaurs.\nCenozoic.\nIn the early-to-mid-Cenozoic, the dominant predator forms were mammals: hyaenodonts, oxyaenids, entelodonts, ptolemaiidans, arctocyonids and mesonychians, representing a great diversity of eutherian carnivores in the northern continents and Africa. In South America, sparassodonts were dominant, while Australia saw the presence of several marsupial predators, such as the dasyuromorphs and thylacoleonids. From the Miocene to the present, the dominant carnivorous mammals have been carnivoramorphs.\nMost carnivorous mammals, from dogs to \"deltatheridiums\", share several dental adaptations, such as carnassial teeth, long canines and even similar tooth replacement patterns. Most aberrant are thylacoleonids, with a diprodontan dentition completely unlike that of any other mammal; and eutriconodonts like gobiconodontids and \"Jugulator\", with a three-cusp anatomy which nevertheless functioned similarly to carnassials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6546", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6546", "title": "Celts", "text": "Collection of indo-European peoples sharing Celtic languages and cultural practices\nThe Celts ( , see pronunciation for different usages) or Celtic peoples ( ) were a collection of Indo-European peoples in Europe and Anatolia, identified by their use of Celtic languages and other cultural similarities. Major Celtic groups included the Gauls; the Celtiberians and Gallaeci of Iberia; the Britons, Picts, and Gaels of Britain and Ireland; the Boii; and the Galatians. The interrelationships of ethnicity, language and culture in the Celtic world are unclear and debated; for example over the ways in which the Iron Age people of Britain and Ireland should be called Celts. In current scholarship, 'Celt' primarily refers to 'speakers of Celtic languages' rather than to a single ethnic group.\nThe history of pre-Celtic Europe and Celtic origins is debated. The traditional \"Celtic from the East\" theory, says the proto-Celtic language arose in the late Bronze Age Urnfield culture of central Europe, named after grave sites in southern Germany, which flourished from around 1200 BC. This theory links the Celts with the Iron Age Hallstatt culture which followed it (c.\u20091200\u2013500 BC), named for the rich grave finds in Hallstatt, Austria, and with the following La T\u00e8ne culture (c.\u2009450 BC onward), named after the La T\u00e8ne site in Switzerland. It proposes that Celtic culture spread westward and southward from these areas by diffusion or migration. A newer theory, \"Celtic from the West\", suggests proto-Celtic arose earlier, was a \"lingua franca\" in the Atlantic Bronze Age coastal zone, and spread eastward. Another newer theory, \"Celtic from the Centre\", suggests proto-Celtic arose between these two zones, in Bronze Age Gaul, then spread in various directions. After the Celtic settlement of Southeast Europe in the 3rd century BC, Celtic culture reached as far east as central Anatolia, Turkey.\nThe earliest undisputed examples of Celtic language are the Lepontic inscriptions from the 6th century BC. Continental Celtic languages are attested almost exclusively through inscriptions and place-names. Insular Celtic languages are attested from the 4th century AD in Ogham inscriptions, though they were being spoken much earlier. Celtic literary tradition begins with Old Irish texts around the 8th century AD. Elements of Celtic mythology are recorded in early Irish and early Welsh literature. Most written evidence of the early Celts comes from Greco-Roman writers, who often grouped the Celts as barbarian tribes. They followed an ancient Celtic religion overseen by druids.\nThe Celts were often in conflict with the Romans, such as in the Roman\u2013Gallic wars, the Celtiberian Wars, the conquest of Gaul and conquest of Britain. By the 1st century AD, most Celtic territories had become part of the Roman Empire. By c. 500, due to Romanisation and the migration of Germanic tribes, Celtic culture had mostly become restricted to Ireland, western and northern Britain, and Brittany. Between the 5th and 8th centuries, the Celtic-speaking communities in these Atlantic regions emerged as a reasonably cohesive cultural entity. They had a common linguistic, religious and artistic heritage that distinguished them from surrounding cultures.\nInsular Celtic culture diversified into that of the Gaels (Irish, Scots and Manx) and the Celtic Britons (Welsh, Cornish, and Bretons) of the medieval and modern periods. A modern Celtic identity was constructed as part of the Romanticist Celtic Revival in Britain, Ireland, and other European territories such as Galicia. Today, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh, and Breton are still spoken in parts of their former territories, while Cornish and Manx are undergoing a revival.\nNames and terminology.\nAncient.\nThe first recorded use of the name 'Celts' \u2013 as \"\" () in Ancient Greek \u2013 was by Greek geographer Hecataeus of Miletus in 517 BC, when writing about a people living near Massilia (modern Marseille), southern Gaul. In the fifth century BC, Herodotus referred to living around the source of the Danube and in the far west of Europe. The etymology of is unclear. Possible roots include Indo-European *\"k\u02b2el\" 'to hide' (seen also in Old Irish , and Modern Welsh ), *\"k\u02b2el\" 'to heat' or *\"kel\" 'to impel'. It may come from the Celtic language. Linguist Kim McCone supports this view and notes that \"Celt-\" is found in the names of several ancient Gauls such as Celtillus, father of Vercingetorix. He suggests it meant the people or descendants of \"the hidden one\", noting the Gauls claimed descent from an underworld god (according to \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\"), and linking it with the Germanic \"Hel\". Others view it as a name coined by Greeks; among them linguist Patrizia de Bernardo Stempel, who suggests it meant \"the tall ones\".\nIn the first century BC, Roman leader Julius Caesar reported that the Gauls called themselves 'Celts', , in their own tongue. Thus whether it was given to them by others or not, it was used by the Celts themselves. Greek geographer Strabo, writing about Gaul towards the end of the first century BC, refers to the \"race which is now called both \"Gallic\" and \"Galatic\"\", though he also uses \"Celtica\" as another name for Gaul. He reports Celtic peoples in Iberia too, calling them \"Celtiberi\" and \"Celtici\". Pliny the Elder noted the use of \"Celtici\" in Lusitania as a tribal surname, which epigraphic findings have confirmed.\nA Latin name for the Gauls, \" (pl.), may come from a Celtic ethnic name, perhaps borrowed into Latin during the Celtic expansion into Italy from the early fifth century BC. Its root may be Proto-Celtic \"*galno\", meaning \"power, strength\" (whence Old Irish \"gal\" \"boldness, ferocity\", Welsh \"gallu\" \"to be able, power\"). The Greek name \"\u0393\u03b1\u03bb\u03ac\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9\" (, Latinized \"Galatae\") most likely has the same origin, referring to the Gauls who invaded southeast Europe and settled in Galatia. The suffix \"-atai\" might be a Greek inflection. Linguist Kim McCone suggests it comes from Proto-Celtic \"*galatis\" (\"ferocious, furious\"), and was not originally an ethnic name but a name for young warrior bands. He says \"If the Gauls' initial impact on the Mediterranean world was primarily a military one typically involving fierce young \"*galat\u012bs\", it would have been natural for the Greeks to apply this name for the type of \"Keltoi\" that they usually encountered\".\nBecause Classical writers did not call the inhabitants of Britain and Ireland () or , some scholars prefer not to use the term for the Iron Age inhabitants of those islands. However, they spoke Celtic languages, shared other cultural traits, and Roman historian Tacitus says the Britons resembled the Gauls in customs and religion.\nModern.\nFor at least 1,000 years, the ethnonym \"Celt\" was not used at all. No ethnic group called themselves Celts or Celtic until about 1700. After the word 'Celtic' was rediscovered in classical texts, it was applied for the first time to the distinctive culture, history, traditions, and language of the modern Celtic nations \u2013 Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Cornwall, Brittany, and the Isle of Man. 'Celt' is a modern English word, first attested in 1707 in the writing of Edward Lhuyd, whose work, along with that of other late 17th-century scholars, brought academic attention to the languages and history of the early Celtic inhabitants of Great Britain. The English words \"Gaul\", \"Gauls\" (pl.) and \"Gaulish\" (first recorded in the 16\u201317th centuries) come from French and , a borrowing from Frankish *, 'Roman-land' &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;, the root of which is Proto-Germanic , 'foreigner, Roman, Celt', whence the English word \"Welsh\" (Old English ). Proto-Germanic comes from the name of the Volcae, a Celtic tribe who lived first in southern Germany and central Europe, then migrated to Gaul. This means that English \"Gaul\", despite its superficial similarity, is not actually derived from Latin (which should have produced * in French), though it does refer to the same ancient region.\n\"Celtic\" refers to a language family and, more generally, means 'of the Celts' or 'in the style of the Celts'. Several archaeological cultures are considered Celtic, based on unique sets of artefacts. The link between language and artefact is aided by the presence of inscriptions. The modern idea of a Celtic cultural identity or \"Celticity\" focuses on similarities among languages, works of art, and classical texts, and sometimes also among material artefacts, social organisation, homeland and mythology. Earlier theories held that these similarities suggest a common \"racial\" (race is now a contested concept) origin for the various Celtic peoples, but more recent theories hold that they reflect a common cultural and linguistic heritage more than a genetic one. Celtic cultures seem to have been diverse, with the use of a Celtic language being the main thing they had in common.\nToday, the term 'Celtic' generally refers to the languages and cultures of Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Cornwall, the Isle of Man, and Brittany; also called the Celtic nations. These are the regions where Celtic languages are still spoken to some extent. The four are Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Welsh, and Breton; plus two recent revivals, Cornish (a Brittonic language) and Manx (a Goidelic language). There are also attempts to reconstruct Cumbric, a Brittonic language of northern Britain. Celtic regions of mainland Europe are those whose residents claim a Celtic heritage, but where no Celtic language survives; these include western Iberia, i.e. Portugal and north-central Spain (Galicia, Asturias, Cantabria, Castile and Le\u00f3n, Extremadura).\nContinental Celts are the Celtic-speaking people of mainland Europe and Insular Celts are the Celtic-speaking people of the British and Irish islands, and their descendants. The Celts of Brittany derive their language from migrating Insular Celts from Britain and so are grouped accordingly.\nOrigins.\nThe Celtic languages are a branch of the Indo-European languages. By the time Celts are first mentioned in written records around 400 BC, they were already split into several language groups, and spread over much of western mainland Europe, the Iberian Peninsula, Ireland and Britain. The languages developed into Celtiberian, Goidelic and Brittonic branches, among others.\nUrnfield-Hallstatt theory.\nThe mainstream view during most of the twentieth century is that the Celts and the proto-Celtic language arose out of the Urnfield culture of central Europe around 1000 BC, spreading westward and southward over the following few hundred years. The Urnfield culture was preeminent in central Europe during the late Bronze Age, circa 1200 BC to 700 BC. The spread of iron-working led to the Hallstatt culture (c. 800 to 500 BC) developing out of the Urnfield culture in a wide region north of the Alps. The Hallstatt culture developed into the La T\u00e8ne culture from about 450 BC, which came to be identified with Celtic art.\nIn 1846, Johann Georg Ramsauer unearthed an ancient grave field with distinctive grave goods at Hallstatt, Austria. Because the burials \"dated to roughly the time when Celts are mentioned near the Danube by Herodotus, Ramsauer concluded that the graves were Celtic\". Similar sites and artifacts were found over a wide area, which were named the 'Hallstatt culture'. In 1857, the archaeological site of La T\u00e8ne was discovered in Switzerland. The huge collection of artifacts had a distinctive style. Artifacts of this 'La T\u00e8ne style' were found elsewhere in Europe, \"particularly in places where people called Celts were known to have lived and early Celtic languages are attested. As a result, these items quickly became associated with the Celts, so much so that by the 1870s scholars began to regard finds of the La T\u00e8ne as 'the archaeological expression of the Celts'\". This cultural network was overrun by the Roman Empire, though traces of La T\u00e8ne style were still seen in Gallo-Roman artifacts. In Britain and Ireland, the La T\u00e8ne style survived precariously to re-emerge in Insular art.\nThe Urnfield-Hallstatt theory began to be challenged in the latter 20th century, when it was accepted that the oldest known Celtic-language inscriptions were those of Lepontic from the 6th century BC and Celtiberian from the 2nd century BC. These were found in northern Italy and Iberia, neither of which were part of the 'Hallstatt' nor 'La T\u00e8ne' cultures at the time. The Urnfield-Hallstatt theory was partly based on ancient Greco-Roman writings, such as the \"Histories\" of Herodotus, which placed the Celts at the source of the Danube. However, Stephen Oppenheimer shows that Herodotus seemed to believe the Danube rose near the Pyrenees, which would place the Ancient Celts in a region which is more in agreement with later classical writers and historians (i.e. in Gaul and Iberia). The theory was also partly based on the abundance of inscriptions bearing Celtic personal names in the Eastern Hallstatt region (Noricum). However, Patrick Sims-Williams notes that these date to the later Roman era, and says they suggest \"relatively late settlement by a Celtic-speaking elite\".\n'Celtic from the West' theory.\nIn the late 20th century, the Urnfield-Hallstatt theory began to fall out of favour with some scholars, which was influenced by new archaeological finds. 'Celtic' began to refer primarily to 'speakers of Celtic languages' rather than to a single culture or ethnic group. A new theory suggested that Celtic languages arose earlier, along the Atlantic coast (including Britain, Ireland, Armorica and Iberia), long before evidence of 'Celtic' culture is found in archaeology. Myles Dillon and Nora Kershaw Chadwick argued that \"Celtic settlement of the British Isles\" might date to the Bell Beaker culture of the Copper and Bronze Age (from c. 2750 BC). Mart\u00edn Almagro Gorbea (2001) also proposed that Celtic arose in the 3rd millennium BC, suggesting that the spread of the Bell Beaker culture explained the wide dispersion of the Celts throughout western Europe, as well as the variability of the Celtic peoples.\nJohn T. Koch and Barry Cunliffe have developed this 'Celtic from the West' theory. It proposes that the proto-Celtic language arose along the Atlantic coast and was the \"lingua franca\" of the Atlantic Bronze Age cultural network, later spreading inland and eastward. More recently, Cunliffe proposes that proto-Celtic had arisen in the Atlantic zone even earlier, by 3000 BC, and spread eastwards with the Bell Beaker culture over the following millennium. His theory is partly based on glottochronology, the spread of ancient Celtic-looking placenames, and thesis that the Tartessian language was Celtic. However, the proposal that Tartessian was Celtic is widely rejected by linguists, many of whom regard it as unclassified.\n'Celtic from the Centre' theory.\nCelticist Patrick Sims-Williams (2020) notes that in current scholarship, 'Celt' is primarily a linguistic label. In his 'Celtic from the Centre' theory, he argues that the proto-Celtic language did not originate in central Europe nor the Atlantic, but in-between these two regions. He suggests that it \"emerged as a distinct Indo-European dialect around the second millennium BC, probably somewhere in Gaul [centered in modern France] ... whence it spread in various directions and at various speeds in the first millennium BC\". Sims-Williams says this avoids the problematic idea \"that Celtic was spoken over a vast area for a very long time yet somehow avoided major dialectal splits\", and \"it keeps Celtic fairly close to Italy, which suits the view that Italic and Celtic were in some way linked\".\nLinguistic evidence.\nThe Proto-Celtic language is usually dated to the Late Bronze Age. The earliest records of a Celtic language are the Lepontic inscriptions of Cisalpine Gaul (Northern Italy), the oldest of which pre-date the La T\u00e8ne period. Other early inscriptions, appearing from the early La T\u00e8ne period in the area of Massilia, are in Gaulish, which was written in the Greek alphabet until the Roman conquest. Celtiberian inscriptions, using their own Iberian script, appear later, after about 200 BC. Evidence of Insular Celtic is available only from about 400 AD, in the form of Primitive Irish Ogham inscriptions.\nBesides epigraphic evidence, an important source of information on early Celtic is toponymy (place names).\nGenetic evidence.\nArnaiz-Villena et al. (2017) demonstrated that Celtic-related populations of the European Atlantic (Orkney Islands, Scottish, Irish, British, Bretons, Portuguese, Basques, Galicians) shared a common HLA system.\nOther genetic research does not support the notion of a significant genetic link between these populations, beyond the fact that they are all West Europeans. Early European Farmers did settle Britain (and all of Northern Europe) in the Neolithic; however, recent genetics research has found that, between 2400 and 2000 BC, over 90% of British DNA was overturned by European Steppe Herders in a migration that brought large amounts of Steppe DNA (including the R1b haplogroup) to western Europe. Modern autosomal genetic clustering is testament to this fact, as both modern and Iron Age British and Irish samples cluster genetically very closely with other North Europeans, and less so with Galicians, Basques or those from the south of France.\nArchaeological evidence.\nThe concept that the Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne cultures could be seen not just as chronological periods but as \"Culture Groups\", entities composed of people of the same ethnicity and language, had started to grow by the end of the 19th century. At the beginning of the 20th century the belief that these \"Culture Groups\" could be thought of in racial or ethnic terms was held by Gordon Childe, whose theory was influenced by the writings of Gustaf Kossinna. As the 20th century progressed, the ethnic interpretation of La T\u00e8ne culture became more strongly rooted, and any findings of La T\u00e8ne culture and flat inhumation cemeteries were linked to the Celts and the Celtic language.\nIn various academic disciplines, the Celts were considered a Central European Iron Age phenomenon, through the cultures of Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne. However, archaeological finds from the Halstatt and La T\u00e8ne culture were rare in Iberia, southwestern France, northern and western Britain, southern Ireland and Galatia and did not provide enough evidence for a culture like that of Central Europe. It is equally difficult to maintain that the origin of the Iberian Celts can be linked to the preceding Urnfield culture. This has resulted in a newer theory that introduces a 'proto-Celtic' substratum and a process of Celticisation, having its initial roots in the Bronze Age Bell Beaker culture.\nThe La T\u00e8ne culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age (from 450 BC to the Roman conquest in the 1st century BC) in eastern France, Switzerland, Austria, southwest Germany, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary. It developed out of the Hallstatt culture without any definite cultural break, under the impetus of considerable Mediterranean influence from Greek, and later Etruscan civilisations. A shift of settlement centres took place in the 4th century. The western La T\u00e8ne culture corresponds to historical Celtic Gaul. Whether this means that the whole of La T\u00e8ne culture can be attributed to a unified Celtic people is difficult to assess; archaeologists have repeatedly concluded that language and material culture do not necessarily run parallel. Frey notes that in the 5th century, \"burial customs in the Celtic world were not uniform; rather, localised groups had their own beliefs, which, in consequence, also gave rise to distinct artistic expressions\". Thus, while the La T\u00e8ne culture is certainly associated with the Gauls, the presence of La T\u00e8ne artefacts may be due to cultural contact and does not imply the permanent presence of Celtic speakers.\nHistorical evidence.\nThe Greek historian Ephorus of Cyme in Asia Minor, writing in the 4th century BC, believed the Celts came from the islands off the mouth of the Rhine and were \"driven from their homes by the frequency of wars and the violent rising of the sea\". Polybius published a history of Rome about 150 BC in which he describes the Gauls of Italy and their conflict with Rome. Pausanias in the 2nd century AD says that the Gauls \"originally called Celts\", \"live on the remotest region of Europe on the coast of an enormous tidal sea\". Posidonius described the southern Gauls about 100 BC. Though his original work is lost, later writers such as Strabo used it. The latter, writing in the early 1st century AD, deals with Britain and Gaul as well as Hispania, Italy, and Galatia. Caesar wrote extensively about his Gallic Wars in 58\u201351 BC. Diodorus Siculus wrote about the Celts of Gaul and Britain in his 1st-century history.\nDiodorus Siculus and Strabo both suggest that the heartland of the people they call Celts was in southern Gaul. The former says that the Gauls were to the north of the Celts, but that the Romans referred to both as Gauls (linguistically the Gauls were certainly Celts). Before the discoveries at Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne, it was generally considered that the Celtic heartland was southern Gaul, see Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica for 1813.\nDistribution.\nContinental.\nGaul.\nThe Romans knew the Celts then living in present-day France as Gauls. The territory of these peoples probably included the Low Countries, the Alps and present-day northern Italy. Julius Caesar in his \"Gallic Wars\" described the 1st-century BC descendants of those Gauls.\nEastern Gaul became the centre of the western La T\u00e8ne culture. In later Iron Age Gaul, the social organisation resembled that of the Romans, with large towns. From the 3rd century BC the Gauls adopted coinage. Texts with Greek characters from southern Gaul have survived from the 2nd century BC.\nGreek traders founded Massalia about 600 BC, with some objects (mostly drinking ceramic vessels) being traded up the Rh\u00f4ne valley. But trade became disrupted soon after 500 BC and re-oriented over the Alps to the Po valley in the Italian peninsula. The Romans arrived in the Rhone valley in the 2nd century BC and encountered a mostly Celtic-speaking Gaul. Rome wanted land communications with its Iberian provinces and fought a major battle with the Saluvii at Entremont in 124\u2013123 BC. Gradually Roman control extended, and the Roman province of Gallia Transalpina developed along the Mediterranean coast. The Romans knew the remainder of Gaul as , 'Long-haired Gaul'.\nIn 58 BC, the Helvetii planned to migrate westward but Julius Caesar forced them back. He then became involved in fighting the various tribes in Gaul, and by 55 BC had overrun most of Gaul. In 52 BC, Vercingetorix led a revolt against Roman occupation but was defeated at the Battle of Alesia and surrendered.\nFollowing the Gallic Wars of 58\u201351 BC, Caesar's \"Celtica\" formed the main part of Roman Gaul, becoming the province of Gallia Lugdunensis. This territory of the Celtic tribes was bounded on the south by the Garonne and on the north by the Seine and the Marne. The Romans attached large swathes of this region to neighbouring provinces Belgica and Aquitania, particularly under Augustus.\nPlace- and personal-name analysis and inscriptions suggest that Gaulish was spoken over most of what is now France.\nIberia.\nUntil the end of the 19th century, traditional scholarship dealing with the Celts did acknowledge their presence in the Iberian Peninsula as a material culture relatable to the Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne cultures. However, since according to the definition of the Iron Age in the 19th century Celtic populations were supposedly rare in Iberia and did not provide a cultural scenario that could easily be linked to that of Central Europe, the presence of Celtic culture in that region was generally not fully recognised. Modern scholarship, however, has proven that Celtic presence and influences were most substantial in what is today Spain and Portugal (with perhaps the highest settlement saturation in Western Europe), particularly in the central, western and northern regions.\nIn addition to Gauls infiltrating from the north of the Pyrenees, the Roman and Greek sources mention Celtic populations in three parts of the Iberian Peninsula: the eastern part of the \"Meseta\" (inhabited by the Celtiberians), the southwest (Celtici, in modern-day Alentejo) and the northwest (Gallaecia and Asturias). A modern scholarly review found several archaeological groups of Celts in Spain:\nThe origins of the Celtiberians might provide a key to understanding the Celticisation process in the rest of the Peninsula. The process of Celticisation of the southwestern area of the peninsula by the Keltoi and of the northwestern area is, however, not a simple Celtiberian question. Recent investigations about the Callaici and Bracari in northwestern Portugal are providing new approaches to understanding Celtic culture (language, art and religion) in western Iberia.\nJohn T. Koch of Aberystwyth University suggested that Tartessian inscriptions of the 8th century BC might be classified as Celtic. This would mean that Tartessian is the earliest attested trace of Celtic by a margin of more than a century.\nGermany, Alps and Italy.\nIn Germany by the late Bronze Age, the Urnfield culture (c.\u20091300 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009750 BC) had replaced the Bell Beaker, Unetice and Tumulus cultures in central Europe, whilst the Nordic Bronze Age had developed in Scandinavia and northern Germany. The Hallstatt culture, which had developed from the Urnfield culture, was the predominant Western and Central European culture from the 12th to 8th centuries BC and during the early Iron Age (8th to 6th centuries BC). It was followed by the La T\u00e8ne culture (5th to 1st centuries BC).\nThe people who had adopted these cultural characteristics in central and southern Germany are regarded as Celts. Celtic cultural centres developed in central Europe during the late Bronze Age (c.\u20091200 BC until 700 BC). Some, like the Heuneburg, the oldest city north of the Alps, grew to become important cultural centres of the Iron Age in Central Europe, that maintained trade routes to the Mediterranean. In the 5th century BC the Greek historian Herodotus mentioned a Celtic city at the Danube \u2013 \"Pyrene\", that historians attribute to the Heuneburg. Beginning around 700 BC (or later), Germanic peoples (Germanic tribes) from southern Scandinavia and northern Germany expanded south and gradually replaced the Celtic peoples in Central Europe.\nThe Canegrate culture represented the first migratory wave of the proto-Celtic population from the northwest part of the Alps that, through the Alpine passes, had already penetrated and settled in the western Po valley between Lake Maggiore and Lake Como (Scamozzina culture). It has also been proposed that a more ancient proto-Celtic presence can be traced back to the beginning of the Middle Bronze Age, when North Westwern Italy appears closely linked regarding the production of bronze artefacts, including ornaments, to the western groups of the Tumulus culture. La T\u00e8ne cultural material appeared over a large area of mainland Italy, the southernmost example being the Celtic helmet from Canosa di Puglia.\nItaly is home to Lepontic, the oldest attested Celtic language (from the 6th century BC). Anciently spoken in Switzerland and in Northern-Central Italy, from the Alps to Umbria. According to the \"Recueil des Inscriptions Gauloises\", more than 760 Gaulish inscriptions have been found throughout present-day France \u2013 with the notable exception of Aquitaine \u2013 and in Italy, which testifies the importance of Celtic heritage in the peninsula.\nIn 391 BC, Celts \"who had their homes beyond the Alps streamed through the passes in great strength and seized the territory that lay between the Apennine Mountains and the Alps\" according to Diodorus Siculus. The Po Valley and the rest of northern Italy (known to the Romans as Cisalpine Gaul) was inhabited by Celtic-speakers who founded cities such as Milan. Later the Roman army was routed at the battle of Allia and Rome was sacked in 390 BC by the Senones.\nAt the battle of Telamon in 225 BC, a large Celtic army was trapped between two Roman forces; the Celtic army was crushed.\nThe defeat of the combined Samnite, Celtic and Etruscan alliance by the Romans in the Third Samnite War sounded the beginning of the end of the Celtic domination in mainland Europe, but it was not until 192 BC that the Roman armies conquered the last remaining independent Celtic kingdoms in Italy.\nExpansion east and south.\nThe Celts also expanded down the Danube river and its tributaries. One of the most influential tribes, the Scordisci, established their capital at Singidunum (present-day Belgrade, Serbia) in the 3rd century BC. The concentration of hill-forts and cemeteries shows a dense population in the Tisza valley of modern-day Vojvodina, Serbia, Hungary and into Ukraine. Expansion into Romania was however blocked by the Dacians.\nThe Serdi were a Celtic tribe inhabiting Thrace. They were located around and founded Serdika (, , ), now Sofia in Bulgaria, which reflects their ethnonym. They would have established themselves in this area during the Celtic migrations at the end of the 4th century BC, though there is no evidence for their existence before the 1st century BC. \"Serdi\" are among traditional tribal names reported into the Roman era. They were gradually Thracianized over the centuries but retained their Celtic character in material culture up to a late date. According to other sources they may have been simply of Thracian origin, according to others they may have become of mixed Thraco-Celtic origin. Further south, Celts settled in Thrace (Bulgaria), which they ruled for over a century, and Anatolia, where they settled as the Galatians \"(see also: Gallic Invasion of Greece)\". Despite their geographical isolation from the rest of the Celtic world, the Galatians maintained their Celtic language for at least 700 years. St Jerome, who visited Ancyra (modern-day Ankara) in 373 AD, likened their language to that of the Treveri of northern Gaul.\nFor Venceslas Kruta, Galatia in central Turkey was an area of dense Celtic settlement.\nThe Boii tribe gave their name to Bohemia, Bologna and possibly Bavaria, and Celtic artefacts and cemeteries have been discovered further east in what is now Poland and Slovakia. A Celtic coin (Biatec) from Bratislava's mint was displayed on the old Slovak 5-crown coin.\nAs there is no archaeological evidence for large-scale invasions in some of the other areas, one current school of thought holds that Celtic language and culture spread to those areas by contact rather than invasion. However, the Celtic invasions of Italy and the expedition in Greece and western Anatolia, are well documented in Greek and Latin history.\nThere are records of Celtic mercenaries in Egypt serving the Ptolemies. Thousands were employed in 283\u2013246 BC and they were also in service around 186 BC. They attempted to overthrow Ptolemy II.\nInsular.\nAll living Celtic languages today belong to the Insular Celtic languages, derived from the Celtic languages spoken in Iron Age Britain and Ireland. They separated into a Goidelic and a Brittonic branch early on. By the time of the Roman conquest of Britain in the 1st century AD, the Insular Celts were made up of the Celtic Britons, the Gaels (or Scoti), and the Picts (or Caledonians). The renown of insular Celts has caused a popular belief that Celtic clans only lived in the British Isles.\nLinguists have debated whether a Celtic language came to the British Isles and then split, or whether the two branches arrived separately. The older view was that Celtic influence in the Isles was the result of successive migrations or invasions from the European mainland by diverse Celtic-speaking peoples over several centuries, accounting for the P-Celtic vs. Q-Celtic isogloss. This view has been challenged by the hypothesis that the islands' Celtic languages form an Insular Celtic dialect group. In the 19th and 20th centuries, scholars often dated the \"arrival\" of Celtic culture in Britain (via an invasion model) to the 6th century BC, corresponding to archaeological evidence of Hallstatt influence and the appearance of chariot burials in what is now England. Cunliffe and Koch propose in their newer 'Celtic from the West' theory that Celtic languages reached the Isles earlier, with the Bell Beaker culture c.2500 BC, or even before this. More recently, a major archaeogenetics study uncovered a migration into southern Britain in the Bronze Age from 1300 to 800 BC. The newcomers were genetically most similar to ancient individuals from Gaul. From 1000 BC, their genetic marker swiftly spread through southern Britain, but not northern Britain. The authors see this as a \"plausible vector for the spread of early Celtic languages into Britain\". There was much less immigration during the Iron Age, so it is likely that Celtic reached Britain before then. Cunliffe suggests that a branch of Celtic was already spoken in Britain, and the Bronze Age migration introduced the Brittonic branch.\nLike many Celtic peoples on the mainland, the Insular Celts followed an Ancient Celtic religion overseen by druids. Some of the southern British tribes had strong links with Gaul and Belgica, and minted their own coins. During the Roman occupation of Britain, a Romano-British culture emerged in the southeast. The Britons and Picts in the north, and the Gaels of Ireland, remained outside the empire. During the end of Roman rule in Britain in the 400s AD, there was significant Anglo-Saxon settlement of eastern and southern Britain, and some Gaelic settlement of its western coast. During this time, some Britons migrated to the Armorican peninsula, where their culture became dominant. Meanwhile, much of northern Britain (Scotland) became Gaelic. By the 10th century AD, the Insular Celtic peoples had diversified into the Brittonic-speaking Welsh (in Wales), Cornish (in Cornwall), Bretons (in Brittany) and Cumbrians (in the Old North); and the Gaelic-speaking Irish (in Ireland), Scots (in Scotland) and Manx (on the Isle of Man).\nClassical writers did not call the inhabitants of Britain and Ireland or \"\" (), leading some scholars to question the use of the term 'Celt' for the Iron Age inhabitants of those islands. The first historical account of the islands was by the Greek geographer Pytheas, who sailed around what he called the \"Pretannikai nesoi\" (the \"Pretannic isles\") around 310\u2013306 BC. In general, classical writers referred to the Britons as \"Pretannoi\" (in Greek) or \"Britanni\" (in Latin). Strabo, writing in Roman times, distinguished between the Celts and Britons. However, Roman historian Tacitus says the Britons resembled the Celts of Gaul in customs and religion.\nRomanisation.\nUnder Caesar, the Romans conquered Celtic Gaul, and from Claudius onward the Roman empire absorbed parts of Britain. Roman local government of these regions closely mirrored pre-Roman tribal boundaries, and archaeological finds suggest native involvement in local government.\nThe native peoples under Roman rule became Romanised and keen to adopt Roman ways. Celtic art had already incorporated classical influences, and surviving Gallo-Roman pieces interpret classical subjects or keep faith with old traditions despite a Roman overlay.\nThe Roman occupation of Gaul, and to a lesser extent of Britain, led to Roman-Celtic syncretism. In the case of the continental Celts, this eventually resulted in a language shift to Vulgar Latin, while the Insular Celts retained their language.\nThere was also considerable cultural influence exerted by Gaul on Rome, particularly in military matters and horsemanship, as the Gauls often served in the Roman cavalry. The Romans adopted the Celtic cavalry sword, the spatha, and Epona, the Celtic horse goddess.\nSociety.\nTo the extent that sources are available, they depict a pre-Christian Iron Age Celtic social structure based formally on class and kingship, although this may only have been a particular late phase of organisation in Celtic societies. Patron-client relationships similar to those of Roman society are also described by Caesar and others in the Gaul of the 1st century BC.\nIn the main, the evidence is of tribes being led by kings, although some argue that there is also evidence of oligarchical republican forms of government eventually emerging in areas which had close contact with Rome. Most descriptions of Celtic societies portray them as being divided into three groups: a warrior aristocracy; an intellectual class including professions such as druid, poet, and jurist; and everyone else. In historical times, the offices of high and low kings in Ireland and Scotland were filled by election under the system of tanistry, which eventually came into conflict with the feudal principle of primogeniture in which succession goes to the first-born son.\nLittle is known of family structure among the Celts. Patterns of settlement varied from decentralised to urban. The popular stereotype of non-urbanised societies settled in hillforts and duns, drawn from Britain and Ireland (there are about 3,000 hill forts known in Britain) contrasts with the urban settlements present in the core Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne areas, with the many significant \"oppida\" of Gaul late in the first millennium BC, and with the towns of Gallia Cisalpina.\nSlavery, as practised by the Celts, was very likely similar to the better documented practice in ancient Greece and Rome. Slaves were acquired from war, raids, and penal and debt servitude. Slavery was hereditary, though manumission was possible. The Old Irish and Welsh words for 'slave', \"cacht\" and \"caeth\" respectively, are cognate with Latin \"captus\" 'captive' suggesting that the slave trade was an early means of contact between Latin and Celtic societies. In the Middle Ages, slavery was especially prevalent in the Celtic countries. Manumissions were discouraged by law and the word for 'female slave', \"cumal\", was used as a general unit of value in Ireland.\nThere are only very limited records from pre-Christian times written in Celtic languages. These are mostly inscriptions in the Roman and sometimes Greek alphabets. The ogham script, an Early Medieval alphabet, was mostly used in early Christian times in Ireland and Scotland (but also in Wales and England), and was only used for ceremonial purposes such as inscriptions on gravestones. The available evidence is of a strong oral tradition, such as that preserved by bards in Ireland, and eventually recorded by monasteries. Celtic art also produced a great deal of intricate and beautiful metalwork, examples of which have been preserved by their distinctive burial rites.\nIn some regards the Atlantic Celts were conservative: for example, they still used chariots in combat long after they had been reduced to ceremonial roles by the Greeks and Romans. However, despite being outdated, Celtic chariot tactics were able to repel the invasions of Britain attempted by Julius Caesar.\nAccording to Diodorus Siculus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Gauls are tall of body with rippling muscles and white of skin and their hair is blond, and not only naturally so for they also make it their practice by artificial means to increase the distinguishing colour which nature has given it. For they are always washing their hair in limewater and they pull it back from the forehead to the nape of the neck, with the result that their appearance is like that of Satyrs and Pans since the treatment of their hair makes it so heavy and coarse that it differs in no respect from the mane of horses. Some of them shave the beard but others let it grow a little; and the nobles shave their cheeks but they let the moustache grow until it covers the mouth.\nClothing.\nDuring the later Iron Age, the Gauls generally wore long-sleeved shirts or tunics and long trousers (called \"braccae\" by the Romans). Clothes were made of wool or linen, with some silk being used by the rich. Cloaks were worn in the winter. Brooches and armlets were used, but the most famous item of jewellery was the torc, a neck collar of metal, sometimes gold. The horned Waterloo Helmet in the British Museum, which long set the standard for modern images of Celtic warriors, is in fact a unique survival; it may have been a piece for ceremonial rather than military wear.\nTrade and coinage.\nArchaeological evidence suggests that the pre-Roman Celtic societies were linked to the network of overland trade routes that spanned Eurasia. Archaeologists have discovered large prehistoric trackways crossing bogs in Ireland and Germany. Due to their substantial nature, these are believed to have been created for wheeled transport as part of an extensive roadway system that facilitated trade. The territory held by the Celts contained tin, lead, iron, silver and gold. Celtic smiths and metalworkers created weapons and jewellery for international trade, particularly with the Romans.\nThe myth that the Celtic monetary system consisted of wholly barter is a common one, but is in part false. The monetary system was complex and is still not understood (much like the late Roman coinages), and due to the absence of large numbers of coin items, it is assumed that \"proto-money\" was used. This included bronze items made from the early La T\u00e8ne period and onwards, which were often in the shape of axeheads, rings, or bells. Due to the large number of these present in some burials, it is thought they had a relatively high monetary value, and could be used for \"day to day\" purchases. Low-value coinages of potin, a bronze alloy with high tin content, were minted in most Celtic areas of the continent and in South-East Britain prior to the Roman conquest of these lands. Higher-value coinages, suitable for use in trade, were minted in gold, silver, and high-quality bronze. Gold coinage was much more common than silver coinage, despite being worth substantially more, as while there were around 100 mines in Southern Britain and Central France, silver was more rarely mined. This was due partly to the relative sparsity of mines and the amount of effort needed for extraction compared to the profit gained. As the Roman civilisation grew in importance and expanded its trade with the Celtic world, silver and bronze coinage became more common. This coincided with a major increase in gold production in Celtic areas to meet the Roman demand, due to the high value Romans put on the metal. The large number of gold mines in France is thought to be a major reason why Caesar invaded.\nGender and sexual norms.\nVery few reliable sources exist regarding Celtic views on gender roles, though some archaeological evidence suggests their views may have differed from those of the Greco-Roman world, which tended to be less egalitarian. Some Iron Age burials in northeastern Gaul suggest women may have had roles in warfare during the earlier \"La T\u00e8ne\" period, but the evidence is far from conclusive. Celtic individuals buried with both female jewellery and weaponry have been found, such as the Vix Grave in northeastern Gaul, and there are questions about the gender of some individuals buried with weaponry. However, it has been suggested that the weapons indicate high social rank rather than masculinity.\nMost written accounts of the Ancient Celts are from the Romans and Greeks, though it is not clear how accurate these are. Roman historians Ammianus Marcellinus and Tacitus mentioned Celtic women inciting, participating in, and leading battles. Plutarch reports that Celtic women acted as ambassadors to avoid a war among Celtic chiefdoms in the Po valley during the 4th century BC. Posidonius' anthropological comments on the Celts had common themes, primarily primitivism, extreme ferocity, cruel sacrificial practices, and the strength and courage of their women. Cassius Dio suggests there was great sexual freedom among women in Celtic Britain:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0a very witty remark is reported to have been made by the wife of Argentocoxus, a Caledonian, to Julia Augusta. When the empress was jesting with her, after the treaty, about the free intercourse of her sex with men in Britain, she replied: \"We fulfill the demands of nature in a much better way than do you Roman women; for we consort openly with the best men, whereas you let yourselves be debauched in secret by the vilest\". Such was the retort of the British woman.\nBarry Cunliffe writes that such references are \"likely to be ill-observed\" and meant to portray the Celts as outlandish \"barbarians\". Historian Lisa Bitel argues the descriptions of Celtic women warriors are not credible. She says some Roman and Greek writers wanted to show that the barbarian Celts lived in \"an upside-down world\u00a0... and a standard ingredient in such a world was the manly warrior woman\".\nThe Greek philosopher Aristotle wrote in his \"Politics\" that the Celts of southeastern Europe approved of male homosexuality. Greek historian Diodorus Siculus wrote in his \"Bibliotheca historica\" that although Gaulish women were beautiful, the men had \"little to do with them\" and it was a custom for men to sleep on animal skins with two younger males. He further claimed that \"the young men will offer themselves to strangers and are insulted if the offer is refused\". His claim was later repeated by Greco-Roman writers Athenaeus and Ammianus. H. David Rankin, in \"Celts and the Classical World\", suggests some of these claims refer to bonding rituals in warrior groups, which required abstinence from women at certain times, and says it probably reflects \"the warlike character of early contacts between the Celts and the Greeks\".\nUnder Brehon Law, which was written down in early Medieval Ireland after conversion to Christianity, a woman had the right to divorce her husband and gain his property if he was unable to perform his marital duties due to impotence, obesity, homosexual inclination or preference for other women.\nCeltic art.\nCeltic art is generally used by art historians to refer to art of the La T\u00e8ne period across Europe, while the Early Medieval art of Britain and Ireland, that is what \"Celtic art\" evokes for much of the general public, is called Insular art in art history. Both styles absorbed considerable influences from non-Celtic sources, but retained a preference for geometrical decoration over figurative subjects, which are often extremely stylised when they do appear; narrative scenes only appear under outside influence. Energetic circular forms, triskeles and spirals are characteristic. Much of the surviving material is in precious metal, which no doubt gives a very unrepresentative picture, but apart from Pictish stones and the Insular high crosses, large monumental sculpture, even with decorative carving, is very rare; possibly it was originally common in wood. Celts were also able to create developed musical instruments such as the carnyces, these famous war trumpets used before the battle to frighten the enemy, as the best preserved found in Tintignac (Gaul) in 2004 and which were decorated with a boar head or a snake head.\nThe interlace patterns that are often regarded as typical of \"Celtic art\" were characteristic of the whole of the British Isles, a style referred to as Insular art, or Hiberno-Saxon art. This artistic style incorporated elements of La T\u00e8ne, Late Roman, and, most importantly, animal Style II of Germanic Migration Period art. The style was taken up with great skill and enthusiasm by Celtic artists in metalwork and illuminated manuscripts. Equally, the forms used for the finest Insular art were all adopted from the Roman world: Gospel books like the Book of Kells and Book of Lindisfarne, chalices like the Ardagh Chalice and Derrynaflan Chalice, and penannular brooches like the Tara Brooch and Roscrea Brooch. These works are from the period of peak achievement of Insular art, which lasted from the 7th to the 9th centuries, before the Viking attacks sharply set back cultural life.\nIn contrast the less well known but often spectacular art of the richest earlier Continental Celts, before they were conquered by the Romans, often adopted elements of Roman, Greek and other \"foreign\" styles (and possibly used imported craftsmen) to decorate objects that were distinctively Celtic. After the Roman conquests, some Celtic elements remained in popular art, especially Ancient Roman pottery, of which Gaul was actually the largest producer, mostly in Italian styles, but also producing work in local taste, including figurines of deities and wares painted with animals and other subjects in highly formalised styles. Roman Britain also took more interest in enamel than most of the Empire, and its development of champlev\u00e9 technique was probably important to the later Medieval art of the whole of Europe, of which the energy and freedom of Insular decoration was an important element. Rising nationalism brought Celtic revivals from the 19th century.\nGallic calendar.\nThe Coligny calendar, which was found in 1897 in Coligny, Ain, was engraved on a bronze tablet, preserved in 73 fragments, that originally was wide and high (Lambert p.\u00a0111). Based on the style of lettering and the accompanying objects, it probably dates to the end of the 2nd century. It is written in Latin inscriptional capitals, and is in Gaulish. The restored tablet contains 16 vertical columns, with 62 months distributed over 5 years.\nFrench archaeologist J. Monard speculated that it was recorded by druids wishing to preserve their tradition of timekeeping in a time when the Julian calendar was imposed throughout the Roman Empire. However, the general form of the calendar suggests the public peg calendars (or \"parapegmata\") found throughout the Greek and Roman world.\nWarfare and weapons.\nTribal warfare appears to have been a regular feature of Celtic societies. While epic literature depicts this as more of a sport focused on raids and hunting rather than organised territorial conquest, the historical record is more of tribes using warfare to exert political control and harass rivals, for economic advantage, and in some instances to conquer territory.\nThe Celts were described by classical writers such as Strabo, Livy, Pausanias, and Florus as fighting like \"wild beasts\", and as hordes. Dionysius said that their:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;manner of fighting, being in large measure that of wild beasts and frenzied, was an erratic procedure, quite lacking in military science. Thus, at one moment they would raise their swords aloft and smite after the manner of wild boars, throwing the whole weight of their bodies into the blow like hewers of wood or men digging with mattocks, and again they would deliver crosswise blows aimed at no target, as if they intended to cut to pieces the entire bodies of their adversaries, protective armour and all.\nPolybius (2.33) indicates that the principal Celtic weapon was a long bladed sword which was used for hacking edgewise rather than stabbing. Celtic warriors are described by Polybius and Plutarch as frequently having to cease fighting in order to straighten their sword blades. This claim has been questioned by some archaeologists, who note that Noric steel, steel produced in Celtic Noricum, was famous in the Roman Empire period and was used to equip the Roman military. However, Radomir Pleiner, in \"The Celtic Sword\" (1993) argues that \"the metallographic evidence shows that Polybius was right up to a point\", as around one third of surviving swords from the period might well have behaved as he describes. In addition to these long bladed slashing swords, spears and specialized javelins were also used.\nPolybius also asserts that certain of the Celts fought naked: \"The appearance of these naked warriors was a terrifying spectacle, for they were all men of splendid physique and in the prime of life.\" According to Livy, this was also true of the Celts of Asia Minor.\nHead hunting.\nCelts had a reputation as head hunters. Paul Jacobsthal says: \"Amongst the Celts the human head was venerated above all else, since the head was to the Celt the soul, centre of the emotions as well as of life itself, a symbol of divinity and of the powers of the other-world.\" Writing in the first century BC, Greek historians Posidonius and Diodorus Siculus said Celtic warriors cut off the heads of enemies slain in battle, hung them from the necks of their horses, then nailed them up outside their homes. Strabo wrote in the same century that Celts embalmed the heads of their most esteemed enemies in cedar oil and put them on display. Roman historian Livy wrote that the Boii beheaded a defeated Roman general after the Battle of Silva Litana, covered his skull in gold, and used it as a ritual cup. Archaeologists have found evidence that heads were embalmed and displayed by the southern Gauls.\nIn another example, at the southern Gaulish site of Entremont, there stood a pillar carved with skulls, within which were niches where human skulls were kept, nailed into position. Roquepertuse nearby has similar carved heads and skull niches. Many lone carved heads have been found in Celtic regions, some with two or three faces. Examples include the M\u0161eck\u00e9 \u017dehrovice Head and the Corleck Head.\nSevered heads are a common motif in Insular Celtic myths, and there are many tales in which 'living heads' preside over feasts or speak prophecies. The beheading game is a motif in Irish myth and Arthurian legend, most famously in the tale \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\", where the Green Knight picks up his own severed head after Gawain has struck it off. There are also many legends in Celtic regions of saints who carry their own severed heads. In Irish myth, the severed heads of warriors are called the mast or nuts of the goddess Macha.\nReligion and mythology.\nAncient Celtic religion.\nLike other European Iron Age societies, the Celts practised a polytheistic religion and believed in an afterlife. Celtic religion varied by region and over time, but had \"broad structural similarities\", and there was \"a basic religious homogeneity\" among the Celtic peoples. Because the ancient Celts did not have writing, evidence about their religion is gleaned from archaeology, Greco-Roman accounts, and literature from the early Christian period.\nThe names of over two hundred Celtic deities have survived (see list of Celtic deities), although it is likely that many of these were alternative names, regional names or titles for the same deity. Some deities were venerated only in one region, but others were more widely known. According to Miranda Aldhouse-Green, the Celts were also animists, believing that every part of the natural world had a spirit.\nThe Celts seem to have had a father god, who was often a god of the tribe and of the dead (Toutatis probably being one name for him); and a mother goddess who was associated with the land, earth and fertility (Dea Matrona probably being one name for her). The mother goddess could also take the form of a war goddess as protectress of her tribe and its land. There also seems to have been a male celestial god\u2014identified with Taranis\u2014associated with thunder, the wheel, and the bull. There were gods of skill and craft, such as the pan-regional god Lugus, and the smith god Gobannos. Celtic healing deities were often associated with sacred springs, such as Sirona and Borvo. Other pan-regional deities include the horned god Cernunnos, the horse and fertility goddess Epona, the divine son Maponos, as well as Belenos, Ogmios, and Sucellos. Caesar says the Gauls believed they all descended from a god of the dead and underworld. Triplicity is a common theme in Celtic cosmology, and a number of deities were seen as threefold, for example the Three Mothers.\nCeltic religious ceremonies were overseen by priests known as druids, who also served as judges, teachers, and lore-keepers. Other classes of druids performed sacrifices for the perceived benefit of the community. There is evidence that ancient Celtic peoples sacrificed animals, almost always livestock or working animals. It appears some were offered wholly to the gods (by burying or burning), while some were shared between gods and humans (part eaten and part offered). There is also some evidence that ancient Celts sacrificed humans, and some Greco-Roman sources claim the Gauls sacrificed criminals by burning them in a wicker man.\nThe Romans said the Celts held ceremonies in sacred groves and other natural shrines, called nemetons. Some Celtic peoples built temples or ritual enclosures of varying shapes (such as the Romano-Celtic temple and viereckschanze), though they also maintained shrines at natural sites. Celtic peoples often made votive offerings: treasured items deposited in water and wetlands, or in ritual shafts and wells, often in the same place over generations. Modern clootie wells might be a continuation of this.\nInsular Celtic mythology.\nMost surviving Celtic mythology belongs to the Insular Celtic peoples: Irish mythology has the largest written body of myths, followed by Welsh mythology. These were written down in the early Middle Ages, mainly by Christian scribes.\nThe supernatural race called the Tuatha D\u00e9 Danann are believed to represent the main Celtic gods of Ireland. Their traditional rivals are the Fom\u00f3ire, whom they defeat in the \"Battle of Mag Tuired\". Barry Cunliffe says the underlying structure in Irish myth was a dualism between the male tribal god and the female goddess of the land. The Dagda seems to have been the chief god and the Morr\u00edgan his consort, each of whom had other names. One common motif is the sovereignty goddess, who represents the land and bestows sovereignty on a king by marrying him. The goddess Brigid was linked with nature as well as poetry, healing and smithing.\nSome figures in medieval Insular Celtic myth have ancient continental parallels: Irish Lugh and Welsh Lleu are cognate with Lugus, Goibniu and Gofannon with Gobannos, Mac\u00e1n and Mabon with Maponos, while Macha and Rhiannon may be counterparts of Epona.\nIn Insular Celtic myth, the Otherworld is a parallel realm where the gods dwell. Some mythical heroes visit it by entering ancient burial mounds or caves, by going under water or across the western sea, or after being offered a silver apple branch by an Otherworld resident. Irish myth says that the spirits of the dead travel to the house of Donn (\"Tech Duinn\"), a legendary ancestor; this echoes Caesar's comment that the Gauls believed they all descended from a god of the dead and underworld.\nInsular Celtic peoples celebrated four seasonal festivals, known to the Gaels as Beltaine (1 May), Lughnasa (1 August), Samhain (1 November) and Imbolc (1 February).\nRoman influence.\nThe Roman invasion of Gaul brought a great deal of Celtic peoples into the Roman Empire. Roman culture had a profound effect on the Celtic tribes which came under the empire's control. Roman influence led to many changes in Celtic religion, the most noticeable of which was the weakening of the druid class, especially religiously; the druids were to eventually disappear altogether. Romano-Celtic deities also began to appear: these deities often had both Roman and Celtic attributes, combined the names of Roman and Celtic deities, or included couples with one Roman and one Celtic deity. Other changes included the adaptation of the Jupiter Column, a sacred column set up in many Celtic regions of the empire, primarily in northern and eastern Gaul. Another major change in religious practice was the use of stone monuments to represent gods and goddesses. The Celts had probably only created wooden cult images (including monuments carved into trees, which were known as sacred poles) before the Roman conquest.\nCeltic Christianity.\nWhile the regions under Roman rule adopted Christianity along with the rest of the Roman empire, unconquered areas of Ireland and Scotland began to move from Celtic polytheism to Christianity in the 5th century. Ireland was converted by missionaries from Britain, such as Saint Patrick. Later missionaries from Ireland were a major source of missionary work in Scotland, Anglo-Saxon parts of Britain, and central Europe (see Hiberno-Scottish mission). Celtic Christianity, the forms of Christianity that took hold in Britain and Ireland at this time, had for some centuries only limited and intermittent contact with Rome and continental Christianity, as well as some contacts with Coptic Christianity. Some elements of Celtic Christianity developed, or retained, features that made them distinct from the rest of Western Christianity, most famously their conservative method of calculating the date of Easter. In 664, the Synod of Whitby began to resolve these differences, mostly by adopting the current Roman practices, which the Gregorian Mission from Rome had introduced to Anglo-Saxon England.\nGenetics.\nGenetic studies on the limited amount of material available suggest continuity between Iron Age people from areas considered Celtic and the earlier Bell Beaker culture of Bronze Age Western Europe. Like the Bell Beakers, ancient Celts carried a substantial amount of Western Steppe Herders ancestry, which is derived from Yamnaya pastoralists who expanded westwards from the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe during the late Neolithic and the early Bronze Age and associated with the initial spread of Indo-European languages. This ancestry was particularly prevalent among Celts of Northwest Europe. Examined individuals overwhelmingly carry types of the paternal haplogroup R-M269, while the maternal haplogroups H and U are frequent. These lineages are associated with steppe ancestry. The spread of Celts into Iberia and the emergence of the Celtiberians is associated with an increase in north-central European ancestry in Iberia, and may be connected to the expansion of the Urnfield culture. The paternal haplogroup haplogroup I2a1a1a has been detected among Celtiberians. There appears to have been significant gene flow among Celtic peoples of Western Europe during the Iron Age. While the Gauls of southern France display genetic links with the Celtiberians, the Gauls of northern France display links with Great Britain and Sweden. Modern populations of Western Europe, particularly those who still speak Celtic languages, display substantial genetic continuity with the Iron Age populations of the same areas.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeography\nOrganisations"}
{"id": "6547", "revid": "50865968", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6547", "title": "Conductor", "text": "Conductor or conduction may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "6548", "revid": "49214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6548", "title": "Claude Monet", "text": "French painter (1840\u20131926)\nOscar-Claude Monet (, ; ; 14 November 1840\u00a0\u2013 5 December 1926) was a French painter and founder of Impressionism who is seen as a key precursor to modernism, especially in his attempts to paint nature as he perceived it. During his long career, he was the most consistent and prolific practitioner of Impressionism's philosophy of expressing one's perceptions of nature, especially as applied to \"plein air\" (outdoor) landscape painting. The term \"Impressionism\" is derived from the title of his painting \"Impression, Sunrise\" (\"Impression, soleil levant\"), which was exhibited in 1874 at the First Impressionist Exhibition, initiated by Monet and a number of like-minded artists as an alternative to the Salon.\nMonet was raised in Le Havre, Normandy, and became interested in the outdoors and drawing from an early age. Although his mother, Louise-Justine Aubr\u00e9e Monet, supported his ambitions to be a painter, his father, Claude-Adolphe, disapproved and wanted him to pursue a career in business. He was very close to his mother, but she died in January 1857 when he was sixteen years old, and he was sent to live with his childless, widowed but wealthy aunt, Marie-Jeanne Lecadre. He went on to study at the Acad\u00e9mie Suisse, and under the academic history painter Charles Gleyre, where he was a classmate of Auguste Renoir. His early works include landscapes, seascapes, and portraits, but attracted little attention. A key early influence was Eug\u00e8ne Boudin, who introduced him to the concept of \"plein air\" painting. From 1883, Monet lived in Giverny, also in northern France, where he purchased a house and property and began a vast landscaping project, including a water-lily pond.\nMonet's ambition to document the French countryside led to a method of painting the same scene many times so as to capture the changing of light and the passing of the seasons. Among the best-known examples are his series of haystacks (1890\u20131891), paintings of Rouen Cathedral (1892\u20131894), and the paintings of water lilies in his garden in Giverny, which occupied him for the last 20 years of his life. Frequently exhibited and successful during his lifetime, Monet's fame and popularity soared in the second half of the 20th century when he became one of the world's most famous painters and a source of inspiration for a burgeoning group of artists.\nBiography.\nBirth and childhood.\nClaude Monet was born on 14 November 1840, on the fifth floor of 45 rue Laffitte in the 9th arrondissement of Paris. He was the second son of Claude Adolphe Monet (1800\u20131871) and Louise Justine Aubr\u00e9e Monet (1805\u20131857), both of them second-generation Parisians. On 20 May 1841, he was baptised in the local Paris church, Notre-Dame-de-Lorette, as Oscar-Claude, but his parents called him simply Oscar. Although baptised Catholic, Monet later became an atheist. In 1845, his family moved to Le Havre in Normandy. His father, a wholesale merchant, wanted him to go into the family's ship-chandling and grocery business, but Monet wanted to become an artist. His mother was a singer, and supported Monet's desire for a career in art.\nOn 1 April 1851, he entered Le Havre secondary school of the arts. He was an apathetic student who, after showing skill in art from a young age, began drawing caricatures and portraits of acquaintances at age 15 for money. He began his first drawing lessons from Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Ochard, a former student of Jacques-Louis David. In around 1858, he met fellow artist Eug\u00e8ne Boudin, who would encourage Monet to develop his techniques, teach him the \"en plein air\" (outdoor) techniques for painting and take Monet on painting excursions. Monet thought of Boudin as his master, whom \"he owed everything to\" for his later success. In 1857, his mother died. He lived with his father and aunt, Marie-Jeanne Lecadre; Lecadre would be a source of support for Monet in his early art career.\nFirst stay in Paris (1859-1860).\nClaude Monet arrived in Paris in April 1859 and settled into the H\u00f4tel du Nouveau Monde, Place du Havre. He immediately visited the salon which had just opened. Then he was welcomed by Armand Gautier, a friend of his aunt Jeanne Lecadre. The latter paid him a regular pension and managed his savings of around 2,000 francs which he had accumulated through the sale of his drawings. They would be precious to him because his father had applied for a grant from the city of Le Havre, on 6 August 1858, but he was refused. He also visited Charles Lhuillier, Charles Monginot and Constant Troyon. The latter two advised him to enter the studio of Thomas Couture, who was preparing for the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts. However, the latter refused the young Monet. At the beginning of 1860, probably in February, he entered the Acad\u00e9mie Suisse, located on the \u00cele de la Cit\u00e9 , which was directed by Charles Suisse. There he met Camille Pissarro in particular. At the Salon that year, he particularly admired the works of Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix, the previous year it was Charles-Fran\u00e7ois Daubigny who had attracted his attention. This first stay was not, however, devoted only to work. Indeed, Claude spent a significant part of his time in Parisian caf\u00e9s and more particularly at the Brasserie des Martyrs, then a popular meeting place for authors and artists.\nOn 2 March 1861, the 20-year-old Monet was drawn at Le Havre to be conscripted into the army. Certainly, his family could have paid the cost of 2,500 francs for a substitute, but while initially Monet claimed in 1900 that they required in return that he renounce his artistic career to take over the family business, by the 1920s he had changed this to him having to become a \u201cselon la norme\u201d (normal artist). Monet refused and so enlisted for seven years with the 1st Regiment of Chasseurs d'Afrique Chasseurs d'Afrique on 29 April 1861. The army records described him as being in good health, , with brown hair and chestnut eyes. In June 1861, he crossed Algeria to join his regiment in Mustapha. Prior to this he had never been further from Normandy than Paris and had never ridden a horse. In the spring of 1862, he contracted typhoid fever and was allowed to return to Le Havre during the summer to recuperate with his aunt, Jeanne Lecadre in Sainte-Adresse, Normandy. While there he met Eug\u00e8ne Boudin again. His aunt agreed to discharge him from the army and pay the 3,025 francs.\nWhile painting during the summer of 1862, near Cap de la H\u00e9ve he was introduced to and became friends with the Dutch painter Johan Jongkind, who together with Boudin was an important mentor to Monet. He received his good conduct discharge on 21 November 1862. Despite the experiences that Monet had in Algeria, which may have seemed unpleasant, he generally remembered it well. His time in Algeria had a powerful effect on Monet, who later said that the light and vivid colours of North Africa \"contained the gem of my future researches\". He also told Gustave Geffroy: \"It did me the greatest good in every way and put some lead in my head. I thought only of painting, intoxicated as I was by this admirable country, and I now had the full approval of my family who saw me so full of ardor.\u201d\nReturn to Paris.\nMonet returned to Paris in December 1862, where he enrolled in Charles Gleyre studio, the \u00c9cole imp\u00e9riale des beaux-arts de Paris at 70 rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs due to the recommendations of his cousin by marriage Auguste Toulmouche. However he ended up leaving Gleyre's studio, as they disagreed on the method of presenting nature. While here he met Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bazille. Bazille eventually became his closest friend. In search of motifs, they traveled to Honfleur where Monet painted several \"studies\" of the harbor and the mouth of the Seine. Monet often painted alongside Renoir and Alfred Sisley, both of whom shared his desire to articulate new standards of beauty in conventional subjects.\nDuring this time he painted \"Women in Garden\", his first successful large-scale painting, and , the \"most important painting of Monet's early period\". Having debuted at the Salon in 1865 with \"La Pointe de la H\u00e8ve at Low Tide\" and \"Mouth of the Seine at Honfleur\" to large praise, he hoped would help him break through into the Salon of 1866. He could not finish it in a timely manner and instead submitted \"The Woman in the Green Dress\" and \"Pav\u00e9 de Chailly\" to acceptance. Thereafter, he submitted works to the Salon annually until 1870, but they were accepted by the juries only twice, in 1866 and 1868. He sent no more works to the Salon until his single, final attempt in 1880. His work was considered radical, \"discouraged at all official levels\".\nIn 1867 his then-mistress, Camille Doncieux\u2014whom he had met two years earlier as a model for his paintings\u2014gave birth to their first child, Jean. Monet had a strong relationship with Jean, claiming that Camille was his lawful wife so Jean would be considered legitimate. Monet's father stopped financially supporting him as a result of the relationship. Earlier in the year Monet had been forced to move to his aunt's house in Sainte-Adresse. There he immersed himself in his work, although a temporary problem with his eyesight, probably related to stress, prevented him from working in sunlight. Monet loved his family dearly, painting many portraits of them such as \"Child With a Cup, a Portrait of Jean Monet\". This painting in particular shows the first signs of Monets' later famous impressionistic work.\nWith help from the art collector Louis-Joachim Gaudibert, he reunited with Camille and moved to \u00c9tretat the following year. Around this time, he was trying to establish himself as a figure painter who depicted the \"explicitly contemporary, bourgeois\", an intention that continued into the 1870s. He did evolve his painting technique and integrate stylistic experimentation in his plein-air style\u2014as evidenced by \"The Beach at Sainte-Adresse\" and \"On the Bank of the Seine\" respectively, the former being his \"first sustained campaign of painting that involved tourism\".\nSeveral of his paintings had been purchased by Gaudibert, who commissioned a painting of his wife, alongside other projects; the Gaudiberts were for two years \"the most supportive of Monet's hometown patrons\". Monet would later be financially supported by the artist and art collector Gustave Caillebotte, Bazille and perhaps Gustave Courbet, although creditors still pursued him.\nExile and Argenteuil.\nHe married Camille on 28 June 1870, just before the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War. During the war, he and his family lived in London and the Netherlands to avoid conscription. Monet and Charles-Fran\u00e7ois Daubigny lived in self-imposed exile. While living in London, Monet met his old friend Pissarro and the American painter James Abbott McNeill Whistler, and befriended his first and primary art dealer, Paul Durand-Ruel, an encounter that would be decisive for his career. There he saw and admired the works of John Constable and J. M. W. Turner and was impressed by Turner's treatment of light, especially in the works depicting the fog on the Thames. He repeatedly painted the Thames, Hyde Park and Green Park. In the spring of 1871, his works were refused authorisation for inclusion in the Royal Academy exhibition and police suspected him of revolutionary activities. That same year he learned of his father's death.\nThe family moved to Argenteuil in 1871, where he, influenced by his time with Dutch painters, mostly painted the Seine's surrounding area. He acquired a sailboat to paint on the river. In 1874, he signed a six-and-a-half year lease and moved into a newly built \"rose-colored house with green shutters\" in Argenteuil, where he painted fifteen paintings of his garden from a panoramic perspective. Paintings such as \"Gladioli\" marked what was likely the first time Monet had cultivated a garden for the purpose of his art. The house and garden became the \"single most important\" motif of his final years in Argenteuil. For the next four years, he painted mostly in Argenteuil and took an interest in the colour theories of chemist Michel Eug\u00e8ne Chevreul. For three years of the decade, he rented a large villa in Saint-Denis for a thousand francs per year. \"Camille Monet on a Garden Bench\" displays the garden of the villa, and what some have argued to be Camille's grief upon learning of her father's death.\nMonet and Camille were often in financial straits during this period\u2014they were unable to pay their hotel bill during the summer of 1870 and likely lived on the outskirts of London as a result of insufficient funds. An inheritance from his father, together with sales of his paintings, did, however, enable them to hire two servants and a gardener by 1872. Following the successful exhibition of some maritime paintings and the winning of a silver medal at Le Havre, Monet's paintings were seized by creditors, from whom they were bought back by a shipping merchant, Gaudibert, who was also a patron of Boudin.\nImpressionism.\nWhen Durand-Ruel's previous support of Monet and his peers began to decline, Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Sisley, Paul C\u00e9zanne, Edgar Degas, and Berthe Morisot exhibited their work independently; they did so under the name the Anonymous Society of Painters, Sculptors and Engravers for which Monet was a leading figure in its formation. He was inspired by the style and subject matter of his slightly older contemporaries, Pissarro and \u00c9douard Manet. The group, whose title was chosen to avoid association with any style or movement, were unified in their independence from the Salon and rejection of the prevailing academicism. Monet gained a reputation as the foremost landscape painter of the group.\nAt the first exhibition, in 1874, Monet displayed, among others, \"Impression, Sunrise\", \"The Luncheon\" and \"Boulevard des Capucines\". The art critic Louis Leroy wrote a hostile review. Taking particular notice of \"Impression, Sunrise\" (1872), a hazy depiction of Le Havre port and stylistic detour, he coined the term \"Impressionism\". Conservative critics and the public derided the group, with the term initially being ironic and denoting the painting as unfinished. More progressive critics praised the depiction of modern life\u2014Louis Edmond Duranty called their style a \"revolution in painting\". Leroy later regretted inspiring the name, as he believed that they were a group \"whose majority had nothing impressionist\".\nThe total attendance is estimated at 3,500. Monet priced \"Impression: Sunrise\" at 1,000 francs, but failed to sell it. The exhibition was open to anyone prepared to pay 60 francs and gave artists the opportunity to show their work without the interference of a jury. Another exhibition was held in 1876, again in opposition to the Salon. Monet displayed 18 paintings, including \"The Beach at Sainte-Adresse\" which showcased multiple Impressionist characteristics.\nFor the third exhibition, on 5 April 1877, he selected seven paintings from the dozen he had made of Gare Saint-Lazare in the past three months, the first time he had \"synced as many paintings of the same site, carefully coordinating their scenes and temporalities\". The paintings were well received by critics, who especially praised the way he captured the arrival and departures of the trains. By the fourth exhibition, his involvement was by means of negotiation on Caillebotte's part. His last time exhibiting with the Impressionists was in 1882\u2014four years before the final Impressionist exhibition.\nMonet, Renoir, Pissarro, Morisot, C\u00e9zanne and Sisley proceeded to experiment with new methods of depicting reality. They rejected the dark, contrasting lighting of romantic and realist paintings, in favour of the pale tones of their peers' paintings such as those by Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot and Boudin. After developing methods for painting transient effects, Monet would go on to seek more demanding subjects, new patrons and collectors; his paintings produced in the early 1870s left a lasting impact on the movement and his peers\u2014many of whom moved to Argenteuil as a result of admiring his depiction.\nDeath of Camille and V\u00e9theuil.\nIn 1875, Monet returned to figure painting with \"Woman with a Parasol - Madame Monet and Her Son,\" after effectively abandoning it with \"The Luncheon\". His interest in the figure continued for the next four years\u2014reaching its crest in 1877 and concluding altogether in 1890. In an \"unusually revealing\" letter to Th\u00e9odore Duret, Monet discussed his revitalised interest: \"I am working like never before on a new endeavour figures in plein air, as I understand them. This is an old dream, one that has always obsessed me and that I would like to master once and for all. But it is all so difficult! I am working very hard, almost to the point of making myself ill\".\nIn 1876, Camille Monet became seriously ill. Their second son, Michel, was born in 1878, after which Camille's health deteriorated further. In the autumn of that year, they moved to the village of V\u00e9theuil where they shared a house with the family of Ernest Hosched\u00e9, a wealthy department store owner and patron of the arts who had commissioned four paintings from Monet. In 1878, Camille was diagnosed with uterine cancer. She died the next year. Her death, alongside financial difficulties\u2014once having to leave his house to avoid creditors\u2014afflicted Monet's career; Hosched\u00e9 had recently purchased several paintings but soon went bankrupt, leaving for Paris in hopes of regaining his fortune, as interest in the Impressionists dwindled.\n \nMonet made a study in oils of his dead wife. Many years later, he confessed to his friend Georges Clemenceau that his need to analyse colours was both a joy and a torment to him. He explained: \"I one day found myself looking at my beloved wife's dead face and just systematically noting the colours according to an automatic reflex\". John Berger describes the work as \"a blizzard of white, grey, purplish paint\u00a0... a terrible blizzard of loss which will forever efface her features. In fact there can be very few death-bed paintings which have been so intensely felt or subjectively expressive.\"\nMonet's study of the Seine continued. He submitted two paintings to the Salon in 1880, one of which was accepted. He began to abandon Impressionist techniques as his paintings utilised darker tones and displayed environments, such as the Seine River, in harsh weather. For the rest of the decade, he focused on the elemental aspect of nature. The major event of the winter of 1881 was without any doubt that he again sold his paintings to Durand-Ruel. Because of Monet's continual difficulty in paying his rent, the landlady at V\u00e9theuil refused to extend his tenancy, and in December 1881 Monet moved with Alice and her children to Poissy. In addition to the debts he had accumulated, there was also the problem of finding a suitable school for his son Jean. The stay in Poissy would not last very long. In December 1882 the Seine had overflowed its banks and there was a danger of flooding the Monet residence.\nHis personal life influenced his distancing from the Impressionists. In January 1883 he returned to \u00c9tretat and expressed in letters to Alice Hosched\u00e9\u2014who he would marry in 1892, following her husband's death the preceding year\u2014a desire to die. At this time Monet was afraid of losing Alice to her husband, who was suddenly speaking of taking her back. On 21 February, Monet and Alice Hosched\u00e9 finally met again at Poissy, and there was no more doubt that she would now stay by his side. Alice's third daughter, Suzanne, would become Monet's \"preferred model\", after Camille.\nIn April 1883 Monet informed Durand-Ruel that he was searching for a house around Vernon, a city he had frequently passed through while traveling between Paris and Normandy. On 29 April he moved into a rented house in Giverny near Vernon with some of his children, followed by Alice Hosched\u00e9 the day after. This house subsequently became the permanent home of the Monet family. That same year his first major retrospective show was held.\nBordighera and a turn to prosperity.\nIn December 1883 Claude Monet and Auguste Renoir left Paris by train for a short painting trip to Italy, along the Italian Riviera and to Genoa.\nOn the way back, Monet and Renoir stopped briefly at l\u00b4Estaque, near Marseille, to visit C\u00e9zanne, before returning to Giverny late December. During this trip Monet discovered the small town of Bordighera which he found particularly attractive: in a letter to Durand-Ruel on 12 January 1884, he described it as \u201cone of the most beautiful places we saw on our trip\u201d.\nIn the years leading up to 1883, Bordighera, with its mild climate and stunning coastal views, had become widely popular as a winter destination for tourists, particularly among the European elite as well as artists and intellectuals. One of the town's main attractions were the Moreno Gardens which, in tourist guidebooks of that time, were described not only as one of the most attractive and delightful locations of the Mediterranean, but also as some of the most beautiful and renowned gardens in Europe. Earlier in 1883 the famous architect Charles Garnier wrote a piece in a travel book called Artistic features of Bordighera. In the first chapter, he claims that \u201cin truth, Bordighera is far less Italy than Palestine\u2026\u201d referring to the old town, the free growing palm trees and the exotic gardens. In his text Garnier recommends eight point of views which he finds most interesting for any artist to paint.\nSoon after his return to Giverny, Monet wrote to his art dealer Paul Durand-Ruel expressing his desire to go back to Italy and Bordighera for a longer stay. He put forward his desire to go on his own and asked Durand-Ruel not to mention his wish to anyone, especially not to Renoir. Monet initially intended to spend three weeks in the Ligurian town but ended up staying for a period of almost three months, from 18 January to 5 April, during which he produced thirty-eight paintings with Bordighera motifs. Monet was deeply affected by the beauty of Bordighera and its surroundings, which he described as magic \u2014 a fairy tale country. The unique light and luxuriant vegetation presented themselves as a completely new challenge. In a letter to Alice Horsched\u00e9, he wrote \u201cThese palm trees are exasperating, and also the motifs are extremely difficult to render, to put down on canvas, everything is so lush\u201d.\nDuring his sojourn in Bordighera Monet had initially intended to paint \u201corange and lemon trees against the blue sea\u201d but he could not find any that really pleased him therefore he only produced one painting with a citrus tree motif, \"Under the Lemon Trees\". During his stay in Bordighera, Monet went to nearby Dolceaqua where he painted the bridge which he called \u201ca little gem of elegance\u201d.\nSome of the most notable compositions from his stay in Bordighera are \"View of Bordighera\", \"Olive Trees\", \"Villas at Bordighera\", \"The Moreno Garden\", \"Valley of Sasso\" and \"Dolceacqua\".\nThe Bordighera paintings are not so well known to the public as some of his work. One explanation presented is that following the Paris Stock market crash of 1882 Monet's art dealer Durand-Ruels suffered a severe financial loss and consequently, he had to pawn several of Monet's Bordighera paintings as soon as he had received them. Monet, who had been eager to hear what critics would say about his latest work, was devastated when he found out that they would never be exhibited. Eventually, after Durand-Ruel left for the United States in 1886, Monet could only express his utter frustration by writing letters where he accused the dealer of being \u201conly concerned with the United States while we (the Impressionists) are being forgotten in France\u201d.\nFinally leaving Bordighera, Monet stopped in Menton to paint the Cap Martin and Monte Carlo before embarking on the 24 hour trip back to Giverny.\nIn a letter sent to Monet in 1884, Paul Durand-Ruel mentions Monet's financial worries, and tells him that both the stockbroker Theodore-Charles Gadala and Georges Clemenceau have purchased paintings. Monet's struggles with creditors ended following his prosperous trips; to Bordighera in 1884, and to the Netherlands in 1886 to paint the tulips. He soon met and became friends with Gustave Geffroy, who published an article on Monet. Despite his qualms, Monet's paintings were sold in America and contributed towards his financial security. In contrast to the last two decades of his career, Monet favoured working alone\u2014and felt that he was always better when he did, having regularly \"long[ed] for solitude, away from crowded tourist resorts and sophisticated urban settings\". Such a desire was recurrent in his letters to Alice.\nGiverny.\nIn 1883, Monet and his family rented a house and gardens in Giverny, which provided him with the domestic stability he had not, up to that time, enjoyed. The house was situated near the main road between the towns of Vernon and Gasny at Giverny. There was a barn that doubled as a painting studio, orchards and a small garden. The house was close enough to the local schools for the children to attend, and the surrounding landscape provided numerous natural areas for Monet to paint.\nTwo days after his arrival at Giverny Monet received the news that \u00c9douard Manet had died. As he had no money for the train fare to the funeral nor mourning attire, he was forced to petition Durand-Ruel for the necessary money. Besides Monet, among the other pallbearers were Philippe Burty, Th\u00e9odore Duret, Antonin Proust and \u00c9mile Zola.\nAt Giverny the family worked and built up the gardens, and Monet's fortunes began to change for the better as Durand-Ruel had increasing success in selling his paintings. The gardens were Monet's greatest source of inspiration for 40 years. In 1890, Monet purchased the house. During the 1890s, Monet built a greenhouse and a second studio, a spacious building well lit with skylights.\nMonet wrote daily instructions to his gardener, precise designs and layouts for plantings, and invoices for his floral purchases and his collection of botany books. As Monet's wealth grew, his garden evolved. He remained its architect, even after he hired seven gardeners. Monet purchased additional land with a water meadow. White water lilies local to France were planted along with imported cultivars from South America and Egypt, resulting in a range of colours including yellow, blue and white lilies that turned pink with age. In 1902, he increased the size of his water garden by nearly 4000 square metres; the pond was enlarged in 1901 and 1910 with easels installed all around to allow different perspectives to be captured.\nDissatisfied with the limitations of Impressionism, Monet began to work on series of paintings displaying single subjects\u2014haystacks, poplars and the Rouen Cathedral\u2014to resolve his frustration. These series of paintings provided widespread critical and financial success; in 1898, 61 paintings were exhibited at the Petit Gallery. He also began a series of \"Mornings on the Seine\", which portrayed the dawn hours of the river. In 1887 and 1889 he displayed a series of paintings of Belle \u00cele to rave reviews by critics. Monet chose the location in the hope of finding a \"new aesthetic language that bypassed learned formulas, one that would be both true to nature and unique to him as an individual, not like anyone else.\"\nLondon.\nMonet, who had already visited London in 1870\u20131871, made a first six-week stay in London in September 1899, accompanied by Alice and Germaine Hosched\u00e9, with the aim of both painting and visiting his son Michel, who had been living there since the spring. They stayed in a suite on the 6th floor of the prestigious Savoy Hotel, which offered spectacular views of the Thames and south London. Monet was invigorated by this visit, commenting, \u201cI so love London! But I love it only in winter, for without the fog London wouldn\u2019t be a beautiful city. It\u2019s the fog that gives it its magnificent breadth.\u201d\nDuring their stay the Monets and Alice in particular became friends with English hostess and patron of the arts Mary Hunter (1857\u20131933). She introduced the Monets to her social circle including her sister Ethel Smyth. Monet returned to the same hotel for two more stays, in February and March 1900 and from January to March 1901. The latter visit was ended by pleurisy, which forced Monet to spend three weeks in his hotel room without being able to paint. During his stays, he painted Waterloo Bridge early in the morning at sunrise, then Charing Cross Bridge in the afternoon. It was during his second stay that he began to paint the Houses of Parliament, from St Thomas' Hospital in the late afternoon and at sunset. Through a doctor based at St Thomas, Mary Hunter had been able to facilitate Monet's access to a suitable vantage point at the hospital. Into total Monet produced a series that included 41 paintings of Waterloo bridge, 34 of Charing Cross bridge and 19 of the House of Parliament. The paintings continued to be retouched in the studio until 1904. The series \"Views of the Thames in London \u2014 1900 to 1904\" was exhibited in May and June 1904.\nWater lilies.\nIn 1899, he began painting the water lilies that would occupy him continually for the next 20 years of his life, being his last and \"most ambitious\" sequence of paintings. He had exhibited this first group of pictures of the garden, devoted primarily to his Japanese bridge, in 1900.\nDepictions of the water lilies, with alternating light and mirror-like reflections, became an integral part of his work. By the mid-1910s Monet had achieved \"a completely new, fluid, and somewhat audacious style of painting in which the water-lily pond became the point of departure for an almost abstract art\". Claude Roger-Marx noted in a review of Monet's successful 1909 exhibition of the first \"Water Lilies\" series that he had \"reached the ultimate degree of abstraction and imagination joined to the real\". This exhibition, \"Waterlilies, a Series of Waterscape,\" consisted of 42 canvases, his \"largest and most unified series to date\". He would ultimately make over 250 paintings of the \"Waterlilies\".\nAt his house, Monet met with artists, writers, intellectuals and politicians from France, England, Japan and the US. In the summer of 1887, he met John Singer Sargent whose experimentation with figure painting out of doors intrigued him; the pair went on to frequently influence each other.\nVenice.\nIn the autumn of 1908 Alice took up the offer made by her friend Mary Hunter for the Monets to stay with her in the Palazzo Barbaro in Venice which she had rented for the season. Initially Monet was not keen on visiting Venice, as Alice recorded in a letter to her daughter Germaine: \"Monet very sad \u2026 to leave, he can\u2019t bring himself to give up his pond and his flowers. I\u2019ve heard this so much that, really, it spoils the pleasure of the journey.\" The Monets arrived in Italy on 1 October. The Monets stayed with Hunter for the last two weeks on her tenancy before the couple relocated to the Hotel Britannia, which was chosen for its views.\nInitially Monet only tentatively began painting images of the city but Alice was of the opinion expressed in a letter to Germaine, that Venice \"is so beautiful and so created to tempt you, but who can render those marvelous effects. I see only my Monet who can do it.\" Monet was soon enchanted, writing, \"what misfortune not to have come here when I was younger, when I had all the boldness. Still\u2026 I\u2019ve spent delicious moments here, almost forgetting that I was the old man I am.\" Each day the couple set out by gondola before eight in the morning to explore and paint the city, and after a break for lunch would continue until seven. As they stayed longer and the days became colder Alice hunted for warm clothing to allow Monet to continue painting outside and even managed to obtain a fur coat for him from the young artist Louis Aston Knight. Their three-month stay resulted in Monet creating 37 paintings of Venice, usually in series depicting the same motif at different times of the day, including the \"Le Grand Canal\" and five more depicting the same theme, as well as \"The Doge's Palace Seen from San Giorgio Maggiore\", and \"San Giorgio Maggiore at Dusk\". On the way home in December the couple broke their journey for what turned into a four-day stay with Renoir at Cagnes. Once back in Giverny and while not finished Monet sold all of his Venice paintings on 12 December 1908 to the Bernheim-Jeune brothers for 12,000 francs each.\nFailing sight.\nMonet's second wife, Alice, died in 1911, and his oldest son, Jean, who had married Alice's daughter, Blanche, Monet's particular favourite, died in 1914. Their deaths left Monet depressed, as Blanche cared for him. It was during this time that Monet began to develop the first signs of possible cataracts. In 1913, Monet travelled to London to consult the German ophthalmologist Richard Liebreich. He was prescribed new glasses and rejected cataract surgery for the right eye. The next year, Monet, encouraged by Clemenceau, made plans to construct a new, large studio that he could use to create a \"decorative cycle of paintings devoted to the water garden\".\nIn the following years, his perception of colour suffered; his broad strokes were broader and his paintings were increasingly darker. To achieve his desired outcome, he began to label his tubes of paint, kept a strict order on his palette and wore a straw hat to negate glare. He approached painting by formulating the ideas and features in his mind, taking the \"motif in large masses\" and transcribing them through memory and imagination. This was due to him being \"insensitive\" to the \"finer shades of tonalities and colors seen close up\".\nMonet's output decreased as he became withdrawn, although he did produce several panel paintings for the French Government, from 1914 to 1918 to great financial success and he would later create works for the state. His work on the \"cycle of paintings\" mostly occurred around 1916 to 1921. Cataract surgery was once again recommended, this time by Clemenceau. Monet\u2014who was apprehensive, following Honor\u00e9 Daumier and Mary Cassatt's botched surgeries\u2014stated that he would rather have poor sight and perhaps abandon painting than forego \"a little of these things that I love\". In 1919, Monet began a series of landscape paintings, \"in full force\" although he was not pleased with the outcome. By October, the weather caused Monet to cease plein air painting and the next month he sold four of the eleven \"Water Lilies\" paintings, despite his then-reluctance to relinquish his work. The series inspired praise from his peers; his later works were well received by dealers and collectors, and he received 200,000 francs from one collector.\nIn 1922 a prescription of mydriatics provided short-lived relief. He eventually underwent cataract surgery in 1923. Persistent cyanopsia and aphakic spectacles proved to be a struggle. Now \"able to see the real colours\", he began to destroy canvases from his pre-operative period. Upon receiving tinted Zeiss lenses, Monet was laudatory, although his left eye soon had to be entirely covered by a black lens. By 1925, his visual impairment was improved and he began to retouch some of his pre-operative works, with bluer water lilies than before.\nDuring World War I, in which his younger son, Michel, served, Monet painted a \"Weeping Willow\" series as homage to the French fallen soldiers. He became deeply dedicated to the decorations of his garden during the war.\nMethod.\nMonet has been described as \"the driving force behind Impressionism\". Crucial to the art of the Impressionist painters was the understanding of the effects of light on the local colour of objects, and the effects of the juxtaposition of colours with each other. His free flowing style and use of colour have been described as \"almost ethereal\" and the \"[epitome] of impressionist style\"; \"Impression, Sunrise\" is an example of the \"fundamental\" Impressionist principle of depicting only that which is purely visible. Monet was fascinated with the effects of light, and painting en plein air\u2014he believed that his only \"merit lies in having painted directly in front of nature, seeking to render my impressions of the most fleeting effects\" Wanting to \"paint the air\", he often combined modern life subjects in outdoor light.\nMonet made light the central focus of his paintings. To capture its variations, he would sometimes complete a painting in one sitting, often without preparation. He wished to demonstrate how light altered colour and perception of reality. His interest in light and reflection began in the late 1860s and lasted throughout his career. During his first time in London, he developed an admiration for the relationship between the artist and motifs\u2014for what he deemed the \"envelope\". He utilised pencil drawings to quickly note subjects and motifs for future reference.\nMonet's portrayal of landscapes emphasised industrial elements such as railways and factories; his early seascapes featured brooding nature depicted with muted colours and local residents. Critic, and friend of Monet, Th\u00e9odore Duret noted, in 1874, that he was \"little attracted by rustic scenes...He [felt] particularly drawn towards nature when it is embellished and towards urban scenes and for preference he paint[ed] flowery gardens, parks and groves.\" When depicting figures and landscapes in tandem, Monet wished for the landscape to not be a mere backdrop and the figures not to dominate the composition. His dedication to such a portrayal of landscapes resulted in Monet reprimanding Renoir for defying it. He often depicted the suburban and rural leisure activities of Paris and as a young artist experimented with still lifes. From the 1870s onwards, he gradually moved away from suburban and urban landscapes\u2014when they were depicted it was to further his study of light. Contemporary critics\u2014and later academics\u2014felt that with his choice of showcasing Belle \u00cele, he had indicated a desire to move away from the modern culture of Impressionist paintings and instead towards primitive nature.\nAfter meeting Boudin, Monet dedicated himself to searching for new and improved methods of painterly expression. To this end, as a young man, he visited the Salon and familiarised himself with the works of older painters, and made friends with other young artists. The five years that he spent at Argenteuil, spending much time on the River Seine in a little floating studio, were formative in his study of the effects of light and reflections. He began to think in terms of colours and shapes rather than scenes and objects. He used bright colours in dabs and dashes and squiggles of paint. Having rejected the academic teachings of Gleyre's studio, he freed himself from theory, saying \"I like to paint as a bird sings.\" Boudin, Daubigny, Jongkind, Courbet, and Corot were among Monet's influences and he would often work in accordance with developments in avant-garde art.\nIn 1877 a series of paintings at St-Lazare Station had Monet looking at smoke and steam and the way that they affected colour and visibility, being sometimes opaque and sometimes translucent. He was to further use this study in the painting of the effects of mist and rain on the landscape. The study of the effects of atmosphere was to evolve into a number of series of paintings in which Monet repeatedly painted the same subject (such as his water lilies series) in different lights, at different hours of the day, and through the changes of weather and season. This process began in the 1880s and continued until the end of his life in 1926. In his later career, Monet \"transcended\" the Impressionist style and begun to push the boundaries of art.\nMonet refined his palette in the 1870s, consciously minimising the use of darker tones and favouring pastel colours. This coincided with his softer approach, using smaller and more varied brush strokes. His palette would again undergo change in the 1880s, with more emphasis than before on harmony between warm and cold hues. Following his optical operation in 1923, Monet returned to his style from before a decade ago. He forwent garish colours or \"coarse application\" for emphasised colour schemes of blue and green. Whilst suffering from cataracts, his paintings were more broad and abstract\u2014from the late 1880s onwards, he had simplified his compositions and sought subjects that could offer broad colour and tone. He increasingly used red and yellow tones, a trend that first started following his trip to Venice. Monet often travelled alone at this time\u2014from France to Normandy to London; to the Rivera and Rouen\u2014in search of new and more challenging subjects.The stylistic change was likely a by-product of the disorder and not an intentional choice. Monet would often work on large canvases due to the deterioration of his eyesight and by 1920 he admitted that he had grown too accustomed to broad painting to return to small canvases. The influence of his cataracts on his output has been a topic of discussion among academics; Lane et al. (1997) argues the occurrence of a deterioration from the late 1860s onwards led to a diminishing of sharp lines. Gardens were a focus throughout his art, becoming prominent in his later work, especially during the last decade of his life. Daniel Wildenstein noted a \"seamless\" continuity in his paintings that was \"enriched by innovation\".\nFrom the 1880s onwards\u2014and particularly in the 1890s\u2014Monet's series of paintings of specific subjects sought to document the different conditions of light and weather. As light and weather changed throughout the day, he switched between canvases\u2014sometimes working on as many as eight at one time\u2014usually spending an hour on each. In 1895, he exhibited 20 paintings of \"Rouen Cathedral\", showcasing the fa\u00e7ade in different conditions of light, weather and atmosphere. The paintings do not focus on the grand Medieval building, but on the play of light and shade across its surface, transforming the solid masonry. For this series, he experimented with creating his own frames.\nHis first series exhibited was of haystacks, painted from different points of view and at different times of the day. Fifteen of the paintings were exhibited at the Galerie Durand-Ruel in 1891. In 1892 he produced twenty-six views of \"Rouen Cathedral\". Between 1883 and 1908, Monet travelled to the Mediterranean, where he painted landmarks, landscapes, and seascapes, including a series of paintings in Venice. In London he painted four series: \"the Houses of Parliament, London\", \"Charing Cross Bridge\", \"Waterloo Bridge\", and \"Views of Westminster Bridge\". Helen Gardner writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWater lilies.\nFollowing his return from London, Monet painted mostly from nature, in his own garden; its water lilies, its pond and its bridge. From 22 November to 15 December 1900, another exhibition dedicated to him was held at the Durand-Ruel gallery, with around ten versions of the \"Water Lilies\" exhibited. This same exhibition was organized in February 1901 in New York City, where it was met with great success.\nIn 1901, Monet enlarged the pond of his home by buying a meadow located on the other side of the Ru, the local watercourse. He then divided his time between work on nature and work in his studio.\nThe canvases dedicated to the water lilies evolved with the changes made to his garden. In addition, around 1905, Monet gradually modified his aesthetics by abandoning the perimeter of the body of water and therefore modifying his perspective. He also changed the shape and size of his canvases by moving from rectangular stretchers to square and then circular stretchers.\nThese canvases were created with great difficulty: Monet spent a significant amount of time reworking them in order to find the perfect effects and impressions. When he deemed them unsuccessful he did not hesitate to destroy them. He continually postponed the Durand-Ruel exhibition until he was satisfied with the works. After several postponements dating back to 1906, the exhibition \"Les Nymph\u00e9as\" opened on 6 May 1909. Comprising 48 paintings dating from 1903 to 1908, representing a series of landscapes and water lily scenes, the exhibition was again a success.\nDeath.\nMonet died of lung cancer on 5 December 1926 at the age of 86 and is buried in the Giverny church cemetery. Monet had insisted that the occasion be simple; thus, only about fifty people attended the ceremony. At his funeral, Clemenceau removed the black cloth draped over the coffin, stating: \"No black for Monet!\" and replaced it with a flower-patterned cloth. At the time of his death, \"Waterlilies\" was \"technically unfinished\".\nMonet's home, garden, and water lily pond were bequeathed by Michel to the French Academy of Fine Arts (part of the Institut de France) in 1966. Through the Fondation Claude Monet, the house and gardens were opened for visits in 1980, following restoration. In addition to souvenirs of Monet and other objects of his life, the house contains his collection of Japanese woodcut prints, which had a pronounced influence on his art. The house and garden, along with the Museum of Impressionism, are major attractions in Giverny, which hosts tourists from all over the world.\nLegacy.\nSpeaking of Monet's body of work, Wildenstein said that it is \"so extensive that its very ambition and diversity challenges our understanding of its importance\". His paintings produced at Giverny and under the influence of cataracts have been said to create a link between Impressionism and twentieth-century art and modern abstract art, respectively. His later works were a \"major\" inspiration to Objective abstraction. Ellsworth Kelly, following a formative experience at Giverny, paid homage to Monet's works created there with \"Tableau Vert\" (1952). Monet has been called an \"intermediary\" between tradition and modernism\u2014his work has been examined in relation to postmodernism and influenced Bazille, Sisley, Renoir, and Pissarro. Monet is now the most famous of the Impressionists; as a result of his contributions to the movement, he \"exerted a huge influence on late 19th-century art\".\nIn May 1927, 27 panel paintings were displayed in the Mus\u00e9e de l'Orangerie, following lengthy negotiations with the French government. Because his later works were ignored by artists, art historians, critics, and the public, few attended the showing. In the 1950s, Monet's later works were \"rediscovered\" by the Abstract Expressionists, who used similar canvases and were uninterested in the blunt and ideological art of the war. A 1952 essay by Andr\u00e9 Masson helped change the perception of the paintings and inspired an appreciation that began to take shape in 1956\u20131957. The next year, a fire in the Museum of Modern Art would see the \"Water Lilies\" paintings it had acquired burn. The large-scale nature of Monet's later paintings proved to be difficult for some museums, which resulted in their altering the framing.\nIn 1978, Monet's garden in Giverny\u2014which had grown decrepit over 50 years\u2014was restored and opened to the public. In 2004, \"London, the Parliament, Effects of Sun in the Fog\" (\"Londres, le Parlement, trou\u00e9e de soleil dans le brouillard\"; 1904), sold for US$20.1\u00a0million. In 2006, the journal \"Proceedings of the Royal Society\" published a paper providing evidence that these were painted in situ at St. Thomas' Hospital over the river Thames. In 1981, Ronald Pickvance noted that Monet's works after 1880 were increasingly receiving scholarly attention.\n\"Falaises pr\u00e8s de Dieppe\" (\"Cliffs Near Dieppe\") has been stolen on two occasions, once in 1998 (in which the museum's curator was convicted of the theft and jailed for five years and two months, along with two accomplices) and again in August 2007. It was recovered in June 2008.\nOn 14 November 2001, a Google Doodle was made for Claude Monet's 161st birthday, depicting the Google logo in Monet's signature style. It was the first Google Doodle made for someone's birthday.\nMonet's \"Le Pont du chemin de fer \u00e0 Argenteuil\", an 1873 painting of a railway bridge spanning the Seine near Paris, was bought by an anonymous telephone bidder for a record $41.4\u00a0million at Christie's auction in New York on 6 May 2008. The previous record for a Monet painting stood at $36.5\u00a0million. A few weeks later, \"Le bassin aux nymph\u00e9as\" (from the water lilies series) sold at Christie's 24 June 2008 auction in London for \u00a340,921,250 ($80,451,178), nearly doubling the record for the artist. This purchase represented one of the top 20 highest prices paid for a painting at the time.\nIn October 2013, Monet's paintings \"L'Eglise de V\u00e9theuil\" and \"Le Bassin aux Nympheas\" became subjects of a legal case in New York against New York-based Vilma Bautista, one-time aide to Imelda Marcos, wife of dictator Ferdinand Marcos, after she sold \"Le Bassin aux Nympheas\" for US$32\u00a0million to a Swiss buyer. The said Monet paintings, along with two others, were acquired by Imelda during her husband's presidency and allegedly bought using the nation's funds. Bautista's lawyer claimed that the aide sold the painting for Imelda but did not have a chance to give her the money. The Philippine government has sought the return of the painting. \"Le Bassin aux Nympheas\", also known as \"Japanese Footbridge over the Water-Lily Pond at Giverny\", is part of Monet's famed Water Lilies series.\nA sympathetic portrait of Claude Monet can be found in R. W. Meek's historical fiction novel series \"The Dream Collector\", both in \"Book I\" and \"Book II\". Monet's documented attack of hysterical blindness is reimagined and cured through hypnosis by the dream collector, Julie Forette.\nNazi looting.\nUnder the Nazi regime, both in Germany from 1933 and in German-occupied countries until 1945, Jewish art collectors of Monet were robbed by Nazis and their agents. Several of the stolen artworks have been returned to their rightful owners, while others have been the object of court battles. In 2014, during the spectacular discovery of a hidden trove of art in Munich, a Monet that had belonged to a Jewish retail magnate was found in the suitcase of Cornelius Gurlitt, the son of one of Adolf Hitler's official dealers of looted art, Hildebrand Gurlitt.\nExamples of Nazi-looted Monet works include:\nMonet's \"Le Palais Ducal\", and his 1880 work \"Poppy Field near V\u00e9theuil\", formerly in the collection of Max Emden, have been the object of restitution claims. \"La Mare, Snow Effect\" (\"La Mare, effect de neige\") was the object of a settlement with the heirs of Richard Semmel.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6553", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6553", "title": "Context free grammars", "text": ""}
{"id": "6554", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6554", "title": "Computer Painting", "text": ""}
{"id": "6555", "revid": "390477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6555", "title": "Carthage", "text": "Archaeological site in Tunisia\nCarthage (, \"\") was an ancient city in Northern Africa, on the eastern side of the Lake of Tunis in what is now Tunisia. Carthage was one of the most important trading hubs of the Ancient Mediterranean and one of the most affluent cities of the classical world. It became the capital city of the civilization of Ancient Carthage and later Roman Carthage.\nThe city developed from a Phoenician colony into the capital of a Punic empire which dominated large parts of the Southwest Mediterranean during the first millennium BC. The legendary Queen Elissa, Alyssa or Dido, originally from Tyre, is regarded as the founder of the city, though her historicity has been questioned. In the myth, Dido asked for land from a local tribe, which told her that she could get as much land as an oxhide could cover. She cut the oxhide into strips and laid out the perimeter of the new city. As Carthage prospered at home, the polity sent colonists abroad as well as magistrates to rule the colonies.\nThe ancient city was destroyed in the nearly three year siege of Carthage by the Roman Republic during the Third Punic War in 146\u00a0BC. It was re-developed a century later as Roman Carthage, which became the major city of the Roman Empire in the province of Africa. The question of Carthaginian decline and demise has remained a subject of literary, political, artistic, and philosophical debates in both ancient and modern histories.\nLate antique and medieval Carthage continued to play an important cultural and economic role in the Byzantine period. The city was sacked and destroyed by Umayyad forces after the Battle of Carthage in 698 to prevent it from being reconquered by the Byzantine Empire. It remained occupied during the Muslim period and was used as a fort by the Muslims until the Hafsid period when it was taken by the Crusaders with its inhabitants massacred during the Eighth Crusade. The Hafsids decided to destroy its defenses so it could not be used as a base by a hostile power again. It also continued to function as an episcopal see.\nThe regional power shifted to Kairouan and the Medina of Tunis in the medieval period, until the early 20th century, when it began to develop into a coastal suburb of Tunis, incorporated as Carthage municipality in 1919. The archaeological site was first surveyed in 1830, by Danish consul Christian Tuxen Falbe. Excavations were performed in the second half of the 19th century by Charles Ernest Beul\u00e9 and by Alfred Louis Delattre. The Carthage National Museum was founded in 1875 by Cardinal Charles Lavigerie. Excavations performed by French archaeologists in the 1920s first attracted attention because of the evidence they produced for child sacrifice. There has been considerable disagreement among scholars concerning whether child sacrifice was practiced by ancient Carthage. The open-air Carthage Paleo-Christian Museum has exhibits excavated under the auspices of UNESCO from 1975 to 1984. The site of the ruins is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Carthage\" ( ) is the Early Modern anglicisation of Middle French , from Latin and (cf. Greek (), as well as (), and Etruscan ) from the Punic \"new city\", implying it was a \"new Tyre\". The Latin adjective , meaning \"Phoenician\", is reflected in English in some borrowings from Latin\u00a0\u2013 notably the Punic Wars and the Punic language.\nThe Modern Standard Arabic form \"\" () is an adoption of French , replacing an older local toponym reported as \"Cartagenna\" that directly continued the Latin name. It also traces back to the Punic name \"Qart-\u1e25ada\u0161t\", meaning \"new city\".\nTopography, layout, and society.\nOverview.\nCarthage was built on a promontory with sea inlets to the north and the south. The city's location made it master of the Mediterranean's maritime trade. All ships crossing the sea had to pass between Sicily and the coast of Tunisia, where Carthage was built, affording it great power and influence. Two large, artificial harbors were built within the city, one for harboring the city's prodigious navy of 220 warships and the other for mercantile trade. A walled tower overlooked both harbors. The city had massive walls, long, which was longer than the walls of comparable cities. Most of the walls were on the shore and so could be less impressive, as Carthaginian control of the sea made attack from that direction difficult. The of wall on the isthmus to the west were truly massive and were never penetrated.\nCarthage was one of the largest cities of the Hellenistic period and was among the largest cities in preindustrial history. Whereas by AD 14, Rome had at least 750,000 inhabitants and in the following century may have reached 1\u00a0million, the cities of Alexandria and Antioch numbered only a few hundred thousand or less. According to the history of Herodian, Carthage rivaled Alexandria for second place in the Roman empire.\nLayout.\nThe Punic Carthage was divided into four equally sized residential areas with the same layout. It had religious areas, market places, a council house, towers, a theatre, and a huge necropolis; roughly in the middle of the city stood a high citadel called the Byrsa. Surrounding Carthage were walls \"of great strength\" said in places to rise above 13 m, being nearly 10 m thick, according to ancient authors. To the west, three parallel walls were built. The walls altogether ran for about to encircle the city. The heights of the Byrsa were additionally fortified; this area being the last to succumb to the Romans in 146\u00a0BC. Originally the Romans had landed their army on the strip of land extending southward from the city.\nOutside the city walls of Carthage is the \"Chora\" or farm lands of Carthage. \"Chora\" encompassed a limited area: the north coastal \"tell\", the lower Bagradas river valley (inland from Utica), Cape Bon, and the adjacent \"sahel\" on the east coast. Punic culture here achieved the introduction of agricultural sciences first developed for lands of the eastern Mediterranean, and their adaptation to local African conditions.\nThe \"urban landscape\" of Carthage is known in part from ancient authors, augmented by modern digs and surveys conducted by archeologists. The \"first urban nucleus\" dating to the seventh century, in area about , was apparently located on low-lying lands along the coast (north of the later harbours). As confirmed by archaeological excavations, Carthage was a \"creation \"ex nihilo\"\", built on 'virgin' land, and situated at what was then the end of a peninsula. Here among \"mud brick walls and beaten clay floors\" (recently uncovered) were also found extensive cemeteries, which yielded evocative grave goods like clay masks. \"Thanks to this burial archaeology we know more about archaic Carthage than about any other contemporary city in the western Mediterranean.\" Already in the eighth century, fabric dyeing operations had been established, evident from crushed shells of murex (from which the 'Phoenician purple' was derived). Nonetheless, only a \"meager picture\" of the cultural life of the earliest pioneers in the city can be conjectured, and not much about housing, monuments, or defenses. The Roman poet Virgil (70\u201319 BC) imagined early Carthage, when his legendary character Aeneas had arrived there:\n\"Aeneas found, where lately huts had been,\nmarvelous buildings, gateways, cobbled ways,\nand din of wagons. There the Tyrians\nwere hard at work: laying courses for walls,\nrolling up stones to build the citadel,\nwhile others picked out building sites and plowed\na boundary furrow. Laws were being enacted,\nmagistrates and a sacred senate chosen.\nHere men were dredging harbors, there they laid\nthe deep foundations of a theatre,\nand quarried massive pillars... .\"\nThe two inner harbors, named \"cothon\" in Punic, were located in the southeast; one being commercial, and the other for war. Their definite functions are not entirely known, probably for the construction, outfitting, or repair of ships, perhaps also loading and unloading cargo. Larger anchorages existed to the north and south of the city. North and west of the \"cothon\" were located several industrial areas, e.g., metalworking and pottery (e.g., for amphora), which could serve both inner harbors, and ships anchored to the south of the city.\nConsidering the importance of the Byrsa, the citadel area to the north, our knowledge of it is patchy. Its prominent heights were the scene of fierce combat during the fiery destruction of the city in 146\u00a0BC. The Byrsa was the reported site of the Temple of Eshmun (the healing god), at the top of a stairway of sixty steps. A temple of Tanit (the city's queen goddess) was likely situated on the slope of the 'lesser Byrsa' immediately to the east, which runs down toward the sea. Also situated on the Byrsa were luxury homes.\nSouth of the citadel, near the \"cothon\" was the \"tophet\", a special and very old cemetery, which when begun lay outside the city's boundaries. Here the \"Salammb\u00f4\" was located, the \"Sanctuary of Tanit\", not a temple but an enclosure for placing stone stelae. These were mostly short and upright, carved for funeral purposes. The presence of infant skeletons from here may indicate the occurrence of child sacrifice, as claimed in the Bible and Greco-Roman sources, although there has been considerable doubt among archeologists as to this interpretation and many consider it simply a cemetery devoted to infants. Probably the \"tophet\" burial fields were \"dedicated at an early date, perhaps by the first settlers.\" Recent studies, on the other hand, indicate that child sacrifice was practiced by the Carthaginians. According to K.L. Noll, many scholars believe that child sacrifice took place in Carthage.\nBetween the sea-filled \"cothon\" for shipping and the Byrsa heights lay the \"agora\" [Greek: \"market\"], the city-state's central marketplace for business and commerce. The \"agora\" was also an area of public squares and plazas, where the people might formally assemble, or gather for festivals. It was the site of religious shrines, and the location of whatever were the major municipal buildings of Carthage. Here beat the heart of civic life. In this district of Carthage, more probably, the ruling suffets presided, the council of elders convened, the tribunal of the 104 met, and justice was dispensed at trials in the open air.\nEarly residential districts wrapped around the Byrsa from the south to the north east. Houses usually were whitewashed and blank to the street, but within were courtyards open to the sky. In these neighborhoods multistory construction later became common, some up to six stories tall according to an ancient Greek author. Several architectural floorplans of homes have been revealed by recent excavations, as well as the general layout of several city blocks. Stone stairs were set in the streets, and drainage was planned, e.g., in the form of soakaways leaching into the sandy soil. Along the Byrsa's southern slope were located not only fine old homes, but also many of the earliest grave-sites, juxtaposed in small areas, interspersed with daily life.\nArtisan workshops were located in the city at sites north and west of the harbours. The location of three metal workshops (implied from iron slag and other vestiges of such activity) were found adjacent to the naval and commercial harbours, and another two were further up the hill toward the Byrsa citadel. Sites of pottery kilns have been identified, between the \"agora\" and the harbours, and further north. Earthenware often used Greek models. A fuller's shop for preparing woolen cloth (shrink and thicken) was evidently situated further to the west and south, then by the edge of the city. Carthage also produced objects of rare refinement. During the 4th and 3rd centuries, the sculptures of the sarcophagi became works of art. \"Bronze engraving and stone-carving reached their zenith.\"\nThe elevation of the land at the promontory on the seashore to the north-east (now called Sidi Bou Sa\u00efd), was twice as high above sea level as that at the Byrsa (100 m and 50 m). In between runs a ridge, several times reaching 50 m; it continues northwestward along the seashore, and forms the edge of a plateau-like area between the Byrsa and the sea. Newer urban developments lay here in these northern districts.\nDue to the Roman's leveling of the city, the original Punic urban landscape of Carthage was largely lost. Since 1982, French archaeologist Serge Lancel excavated a residential area of the Punic Carthage on top of Byrsa hill near the Forum of the Roman Carthage. The neighborhood can be dated back to early second century BC, and with its houses, shops, and private spaces, is significant for what it reveals about daily life of the Punic Carthage.\nThe remains have been preserved under embankments, the substructures of the later Roman forum, whose foundation piles dot the district. The housing blocks are separated by a grid of straight streets about wide, with a roadway consisting of clay; \"in situ\" stairs compensate for the slope of the hill. Construction of this type presupposes organization and political will, and has inspired the name of the neighborhood, \"Hannibal district\", referring to the legendary Punic general or sufet (consul) at the beginning of the second century BC. The habitat is typical, even stereotypical. The street was often used as a storefront/shopfront; cisterns were installed in basements to collect water for domestic use, and a long corridor on the right side of each residence led to a courtyard containing a sump, around which various other elements may be found. In some places, the ground is covered with mosaics called punica pavement, sometimes using a characteristic red mortar.\nSociety and local economy.\nPunic culture and agricultural sciences, after arriving at Carthage from the eastern Mediterranean, gradually adapted to the local conditions. The merchant harbor at Carthage was developed after settlement of the nearby Punic town of Utica, and eventually the surrounding African countryside was brought into the orbit of the Punic urban centers, first commercially, then politically. Direct management over cultivation of neighbouring lands by Punic owners followed. A 28-volume work on agriculture written in Punic by Mago, a retired army general (c.\u2009300), was translated into Latin and later into Greek. The original and both translations have been lost; however, some of Mago's text has survived in other Latin works. Olive trees (e.g., grafting), fruit trees (pomegranate, almond, fig, date palm), viniculture, bees, cattle, sheep, poultry, implements, and farm management were among the ancient topics which Mago discussed. As well, Mago addresses the wine-maker's art (here a type of sherry).\nIn Punic farming society, according to Mago, the small estate owners were the chief producers. They were, two modern historians write, not absent landlords. Rather, the likely reader of Mago was \"the master of a relatively modest estate, from which, by great personal exertion, he extracted the maximum yield.\" Mago counselled the rural landowner, for the sake of their own 'utilitarian' interests, to treat carefully and well their managers and farm workers, or their overseers and slaves. Yet elsewhere these writers suggest that rural land ownership provided also a new power base among the city's nobility, for those resident in their country villas. By many, farming was viewed as an alternative endeavour to an urban business. Another modern historian opines that more often it was the urban merchant of Carthage who owned rural farming land to some profit, and also to retire there during the heat of summer. It may seem that Mago anticipated such an opinion, and instead issued this contrary advice (as quoted by the Roman writer Columella):\nThe man who acquires an estate must sell his house, lest he prefer to live in the town rather than in the country. Anyone who prefers to live in a town has no need of an estate in the country.\" \"One who has bought land should sell his town house, so that he will have no desire to worship the household gods of the city rather than those of the country; the man who takes greater delight in his city residence will have no need of a country estate.\nThe issues involved in rural land management also reveal underlying features of Punic society, its structure and stratification. The hired workers might be considered 'rural proletariat', drawn from the local Berbers. Whether there remained Berber landowners next to Punic-run farms is unclear. Some Berbers became sharecroppers. Slaves acquired for farm work were often prisoners of war. In lands outside Punic political control, independent Berbers cultivated grain and raised horses on their lands. Yet within the Punic domain that surrounded the city-state of Carthage, there were ethnic divisions in addition to the usual quasi feudal distinctions between lord and peasant, or master and serf. This inherent instability in the countryside drew the unwanted attention of potential invaders. Yet for long periods Carthage was able to manage these social difficulties.\nThe many amphorae with Punic markings subsequently found about ancient Mediterranean coastal settlements testify to Carthaginian trade in locally made olive oil and wine. Carthage's agricultural production was held in high regard by the ancients, and rivaled that of Rome\u00a0\u2013 they were once competitors, e.g., over their olive harvests. Under Roman rule, however, grain production (wheat and barley) for export increased dramatically in 'Africa'; yet these later fell with the rise in Roman Egypt's grain exports. Thereafter olive groves and vineyards were re-established around Carthage. Visitors to the several growing regions that surrounded the city wrote admiringly of the lush green gardens, orchards, fields, irrigation channels, hedgerows (as boundaries), as well as the many prosperous farming towns located across the rural landscape.\nAccordingly, the Greek author and compiler Diodorus Siculus (fl. 1st century BC), who enjoyed access to ancient writings later lost, and on which he based most of his writings, described agricultural land near the city of Carthage c. 310 BC:\nIt was divided into market gardens and orchards of all sorts of fruit trees, with many streams of water flowing in channels irrigating every part. There were country homes everywhere, lavishly built and covered with stucco. ... Part of the land was planted with vines, part with olives and other productive trees. Beyond these, cattle and sheep were pastured on the plains, and there were meadows with grazing horses.\nAncient history.\nGreek cities contested with Carthage for the Western Mediterranean culminating in the Sicilian Wars and the Pyrrhic War over Sicily, while the Romans fought three wars against Carthage, known as the Punic Wars, from the Latin \"Punicus\" meaning \"Phoenician\", as Carthage was a Phoenician colony grown into an empire.\nPunic Republic.\nThe Carthaginian republic was one of the longest-lived and largest states in the ancient Mediterranean. Reports relay several wars with Syracuse and finally, Rome, which eventually resulted in the defeat and destruction of Carthage in the Third Punic War. The Carthaginians were Phoenician settlers of primarily Southern Mediterranean and Southern European ancestry. Phoenicians had originated in the Mediterranean coast of the Levant. They spoke Canaanite, a Semitic language, and followed a local variety of the ancient Canaanite religion, the Punic religion. The Carthaginians travelled widely across the seas and set up numerous colonies. Unlike Greek, Phoenician, and Tyrian colonizers who \"only required colonies to pay due respect for their home-cities\", Carthage is said to have \"sent its own magistrates to govern overseas settlements\".\nThe fall of Carthage came at the end of the Third Punic War in 146\u00a0BC at the Battle of Carthage. Despite initial devastating Roman naval losses and Hannibal's 15-year occupation of much of Roman Italy, who was on the brink of defeat but managed to recover, the end of the series of wars resulted in the end of Carthaginian power and the complete destruction of the city by Scipio Aemilianus. The Romans pulled the Phoenician warships out into the harbor and burned them before the city, and went from house to house, capturing and enslaving the people. About 50,000 Carthaginians were sold into slavery. The city was set ablaze and razed to the ground, leaving only ruins and rubble. After the fall of Carthage, Rome annexed the majority of the Carthaginian colonies, including other North African locations such as Volubilis, Lixus, and Chellah. Today a \"Carthaginian peace\" can refer to any brutal peace treaty demanding total subjugation of the defeated side.\nSalting legend.\nSince at least 1863, it has been claimed that Carthage was sown with salt after being razed, but there is no evidence for this.\nRoman Carthage.\nWhen Carthage fell, its nearby rival Utica, a Roman ally, was made capital of the region and replaced Carthage as the leading center of Punic trade and leadership. It had the advantageous position of being situated on the outlet of the Medjerda River, Tunisia's only river that flowed all year long. However, grain cultivation in the Tunisian mountains caused large amounts of silt to erode into the river. This silt accumulated in the harbor until it became useless, and Rome was forced to rebuild Carthage.\nBy 122\u00a0BC, Gaius Gracchus founded a short-lived colony, called \"Colonia Iunonia\", after the Latin name for the Punic goddess Tanit, \"Iuno Caelestis\". The purpose was to obtain arable lands for impoverished farmers. The Senate abolished the colony some time later, to undermine Gracchus' power.\nAfter this ill-fated effort, a new city of Carthage was built on the same land by Julius Caesar in the period from 49 to 44\u00a0BC, and by the first century, it had grown to be the second-largest city in the western half of the Roman Empire, with a peak population of 500,000. It was the center of the province of Africa, which was a major breadbasket of the Empire. Among its major monuments was an amphitheater.\nCarthage also became a center of early Christianity (see Carthage (episcopal see)). In the first of a string of rather poorly reported councils at Carthage a few years later, no fewer than 70 bishops attended. Tertullian later broke with the mainstream that was increasingly represented in the West by the primacy of the Bishop of Rome, but a more serious rift among Christians was the Donatist controversy, against which Augustine of Hippo spent much time and parchment arguing. At the Council of Carthage (397), the biblical canon for the western Church was confirmed. The Christians at Carthage conducted persecutions against the pagans, during which the pagan temples, notably the famous Temple of Juno Caelesti, were destroyed.\nThe Vandals under Gaiseric invaded Africa in 429. They relinquished the facade of their allied status to Rome and defeated the Roman general Bonifacius to seize Carthage, the once most treasured province of Rome. The 5th-century Roman bishop Victor Vitensis mentions in his \"Historia Persecutionis Africanae Provincia\" that the Vandals destroyed parts of Carthage, including various buildings and churches. Once the Vandals were in power, the ecclesiastical authorities were persecuted, the locals were aggressively taxed, and naval raids were routinely launched on Romans in the Mediterranean.\nAfter a failed attempt to recapture the city in the fifth century, the Eastern Roman Empire finally subdued the Vandals in the Vandalic War in 533\u2013534 and made Carthage capital of Byzantine North Africa. Thereafter, the city became the seat of the praetorian prefecture of Africa, which was made into an exarchate during the emperor Maurice's reign, as was Ravenna on the Italian Peninsula. These two exarchates were the western bulwarks of the Byzantine Empire, all that remained of its power in the West. In the early seventh century Heraclius the Elder, the exarch of Carthage, overthrew the Byzantine emperor Phocas, whereupon his son Heraclius succeeded to the imperial throne.\nIslamic period.\nThe Roman Exarchate of Africa was not able to withstand the seventh-century Muslim conquest of the Maghreb. The Umayyad Caliphate under Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan in 686 sent a force led by Zuhayr ibn Qays, who won a battle over the Romans and Berbers led by King Kusaila of the Kingdom of Altava on the plain of Kairouan, but he could not follow that up. In 695, Hassan ibn al-Nu'man captured Carthage and advanced into the Atlas Mountains. An imperial fleet arrived and retook Carthage, but in 698, Hasan ibn al-Nu'man returned and defeated Emperor Tiberios III at the 698 Battle of Carthage. Roman imperial forces withdrew from all of Africa except Ceuta. Fearing that the Byzantine Empire might reconquer it, they decided to destroy Roman Carthage in a scorched earth policy and establish their headquarters somewhere else. Its walls were torn down, the water supply from its aqueducts cut off, the agricultural land was ravaged and its harbors made unusable.\nThe destruction of the Exarchate of Africa marked a permanent end to the Byzantine Empire's influence in the region.\nIt is clear from archaeological evidence that the town of Carthage continued to be occupied, as did the neighborhood of Bjordi Djedid. The Baths of Antoninus continued to function in the Arab period and the eleventh-century historian Al-Bakri stated that they were still in good condition at that time. They also had production centers nearby. It is difficult to determine whether the continued habitation of some other buildings belonged to Late Byzantine or Early Arab period. The Bir Ftouha church may have continued to remain in use although it is not clear when it became uninhabited. Constantine the African was born in Carthage.\nThe Medina of Tunis, originally a Berber settlement, was established as the new regional center under the Umayyad Caliphate in the early 8th century. Under the Aghlabids, the people of Tunis revolted numerous times, but the city profited from economic improvements and quickly became the second most important in the kingdom. It was briefly the national capital, from the end of the reign of Ibrahim II in 902, until 909, when the Shi'ite Berbers took over Ifriqiya and founded the Fatimid Caliphate.\nCarthage remained a residential see until the high medieval period, and is mentioned in two letters of Pope Leo IX dated 1053, written in reply to consultations regarding a conflict between the bishops of Carthage and Gummi. In each of the two letters, Pope Leo declares that, after the Bishop of Rome, the first archbishop and chief metropolitan of the whole of Africa is the bishop of Carthage. Later, an archbishop of Carthage named Cyriacus was imprisoned by the Arab rulers because of an accusation by some Christians. Pope Gregory VII wrote Cyriacus a letter of consolation, repeating the hopeful assurances of the primacy of the Church of Carthage, \"whether the Church of Carthage should still lie desolate or rise again in glory\". By 1076, Cyriacus was set free, but there was only one other bishop in the province. These are the last of whom there is mention in that period of the history of the see.\nThe fortress of Carthage was used by the Muslims until Hafsid era and was captured by the Crusaders during the Eighth Crusade. The inhabitants of Carthage were slaughtered by the Crusaders after they took it, and it was used as a base of operations against the Hafsids. After repelling them, Muhammad I al-Mustansir decided to raze Cathage's defenses in order to prevent a repeat.\nModern history.\nCarthage is some east-northeast of Tunis; the settlements nearest to Carthage were the town of Sidi Bou Said to the north and the village of Le Kram to the south. Sidi Bou Said was a village which had grown around the tomb of the eponymous sufi saint (d. 1231), which had been developed into a town under Ottoman rule in the 18th century. Le Kram was developed in the late 19th century under French administration as a settlement close to the port of La Goulette.\nIn 1881, Tunisia became a French protectorate, and in the same year Charles Lavigerie, who was archbishop of Algiers, became apostolic administrator of the vicariate of Tunis. In the following year, Lavigerie became a cardinal. He \"saw himself as the reviver of the ancient Christian Church of Africa, the Church of Cyprian of Carthage\", and, on 10 November 1884, was successful in his great ambition of having the metropolitan see of Carthage restored, with himself as its first archbishop. In line with the declaration of Pope Leo IX in 1053, Pope Leo XIII acknowledged the revived Archdiocese of Carthage as the primatial see of Africa and Lavigerie as primate.\nThe Acropolium of Carthage (Saint Louis Cathedral of Carthage) was erected on Byrsa hill in 1884.\nArchaeological sites.\nThe Danish consul Christian Tuxen Falbe conducted a first survey of the topography of the archaeological site (published in 1833).\nAntiquarian interest was intensified following the publication of Flaubert's \"Salammb\u00f4\" in 1858. Charles Ernest Beul\u00e9 performed some preliminary excavations of Roman remains on Byrsa hill in 1860. In 1866, Muhammad Khaznadar, the son of the Prime Minister of Tunisia, carried out the first locally led excavations. A more systematic survey of both Punic and Roman-era remains is due to Alfred Louis Delattre, who was sent to Tunis by cardinal Charles Lavigerie in 1875 on both an apostolic and an archaeological mission.\nAudollent cites Delattre and Lavigerie to the effect that in the 1880s, locals still knew the area of the ancient city under the name of \"Cartagenna\" (i.e. reflecting the Latin \"n\"-stem \"Carth\u0101gine\").\nAuguste Audollent divided the area of Roman Carthage into four quarters, \"Cartagenna\", \"Derm\u00e8che\", \"Byrsa\" and \"La Malga\". Cartagenna and Derm\u00e8che correspond with the lower city, including the site of Punic Carthage; Byrsa is associated with the upper city, which in Punic times was a walled citadel above the harbour; and \"La Malga\" is linked with the more remote parts of the upper city in Roman times.\nFrench-led excavations at Carthage began in 1921, and from 1923 reported finds of a large quantity of urns containing a mixture of animal and children's bones. Ren\u00e9 Dussaud identified a 4th-century BC stela found in Carthage as depicting a child sacrifice.\nA temple at Amman (1400\u20131250 BC) excavated and reported upon by J.B. Hennessy in 1966, shows the possibility of bestial and human sacrifice by fire. While evidence of child sacrifice in Canaan was the object of academic disagreement, with some scholars arguing that merely children's cemeteries had been unearthed in Carthage, the mixture of children's with animal bones as well as associated epigraphic evidence involving mention of \"mlk\" led some to believe that, at least in Carthage, child sacrifice was indeed common practice. However, though the animals were surely sacrificed, this does not entirely indicate that the infants were, and in fact the bones indicate the opposite. Rather, the animal sacrifice was likely done to, in some way, honour the deceased.\nA study conducted in 1970 by M. Chabeuf, the then Doctor of Science from the University of Paris, showed little difference between 17 modern Tunisians, and 68 Punic remains. An analysis the following year on 42 North-West African skulls dating back to Roman times concluded that they were overall similar to modern Berbers and other Mediterranean populations, especially eastern Iberians. They also noted the presence of one outlier in Tunisia who appears to have inherited mechtoid traits, which led them to hypothesize the persistence of such affinities well into the Punic and Roman era.\nM. C. Chamla and D Ferembach (1988) in their entry dealing with the craniometric conclusions of Protohistorical Algerians and Punics in the region of Tunisia, found strong sexual dimorphism with male skulls being robust. Mediterranean elements were dominant, but Mechtoid features, as well as 'Negroid' traits were present in some of the samples. Overall, Punic burials showed affinities with Algerians, Roman Era skulls from Tarragona (Spain), Guanches, and to a lesser extent Abydos (XVIIIth dynasty), Etruscans, Bronze Age Syrians (Euphrates) and skulls from Lozere (France). The anthropological position of the Algerian and Punic people when it comes to populations of the Mediterranean Basin agreed quite well with the geographical situation.\nJehan Desanges stated that \"In the Punic burial grounds, negroid remains were not rare and there were black auxiliaries in the Carthaginian army who were certainly not Nilotics\".\nIn 1990, Shomarka Keita, a biological anthropologist, had conducted a craniometric study which featured a set of remains from Northern Africa. He examined a sample of 49 Maghreban crania which included skulls from pre-Roman Carthage and concluded that, although they were heterogeneous, many of them showed physical similarities to crania from equatorial Africa, ancient Egypt, and Kush; with most having traits conforming to the northern (Lower) Egyptian pattern. S.O.Y. Keita's later report in 2018, found the pre-Roman Carthaginian series to be intermediate between the Phoenician and Maghreban. He noted the findings are consistent with an interpretation that it reflects both local and Levantine ancestry due to specific interactions in the ancient period.\nJoel. D. Irish, when measuring for dental affinities in 2001, found strong similarities and very small distances between the Canary Islanders and Punic Carthaginians (who originated in West Asia), suggesting a particularly close affinity, despite the geographic distance between these two populations. This result according to Irish, may reflect Berber/Carthaginian admixture. Overall, the findings discovered that \"the Canary Island sample is most similar to the four samples from Northwest Africa: the Shawia Berbers, Kabyle Berbers, Bedouin Arabs and Carthaginians, less similar to the three Egyptian samples and least like the three Nubian samples.\"\nIn 2016, an ancient Carthaginian individual, who was excavated from a Punic tomb in Byrsa Hill, was found to belong to the rare U5b2c1 maternal haplogroup. The Young Man of Byrsa specimen dates from the late 6th century BC, and his lineage is believed to represent early gene flow from Iberia to the Maghreb. Craniometric analysis of the young man indicated likely Mediterranean/European ancestry as opposed to African or Asian.\nCommune.\nThe commune of Carthage was created by a decree of the Bey of Tunis on 15 June 1919, during the rule of Naceur Bey.\nIn 1920, the first seaplane base was built on the Lake of Tunis for the seaplanes of Compagnie A\u00e9ronavale. The Tunis Airfield opened in 1938, serving around 5,800 passengers annually on the Paris-Tunis route.\nDuring World War II, the airport was used by the United States Army Air Force Twelfth Air Force as a headquarters and command control base for the Italian Campaign of 1943.\nConstruction on the Tunis-Carthage Airport, which was fully funded by France, began in 1944, and in 1948 the airport become the main hub for Tunisair.\nIn the 1950s the Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais de Carthage was established to serve French families in Carthage. In 1961 it was given to the Tunisian government as part of the Independence of Tunisia, so the nearby Coll\u00e8ge Maurice Cailloux in La Marsa, previously an annex of the Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais de Carthage, was renamed to the Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais de La Marsa and began serving the \"lyc\u00e9e\" level. It is currently the Lyc\u00e9e Gustave Flaubert.\nAfter Tunisian independence in 1956, the Tunis conurbation gradually extended around the airport, and Carthage (\u0642\u0631\u0637\u0627\u062c \"Qar\u1e6d\u0101j\") is now a suburb of Tunis, covering the area between Sidi Bou Said and Le Kram. Its population as of January 2013 was estimated at 21,276,\nmostly attracting the more wealthy residents. If Carthage is not the capital, it tends to be the political pole, a \"place of emblematic power\" according to Sophie Bessis, leaving to Tunis the economic and administrative roles. The Carthage Palace (the Tunisian presidential palace) is located in the coast.\nThe suburb has six train stations of the TGM line between Le Kram and Sidi Bou Said:\nCarthage Salammbo (named for the ancient children's cemetery where it stands), Carthage Byrsa (named for Byrsa hill), Carthage Dermech (\"Derm\u00e8che\"), Carthage Hannibal (named for Hannibal), Carthage Pr\u00e9sidence (named for the Presidential Palace) and Carthage Amilcar (named for Hamilcar).\nTrade and business.\nThe merchants of Carthage were in part heirs of the Mediterranean trade developed by Phoenicia, and so also heirs of the rivalry with Greek merchants. Business activity was accordingly both stimulated and challenged. Cyprus had been an early site of such commercial contests. The Phoenicians then had ventured into the western Mediterranean, founding trading posts, including Utica and Carthage. The Greeks followed, entering the western seas where the commercial rivalry continued. Eventually it would lead, especially in Sicily, to several centuries of intermittent war. Although Greek-made merchandise was generally considered superior in design, Carthage also produced trade goods in abundance. That Carthage came to function as a manufacturing colossus was shown during the Third Punic War with Rome. Carthage, which had previously disarmed, then was made to face the fatal Roman siege. The city \"suddenly organised the manufacture of arms\" with great skill and effectiveness. According to Strabo (63 BC \u2013 AD 21) in his \"Geographica\":\n[Carthage] each day produced one hundred and forty finished shields, three hundred swords, five hundred spears, and one thousand missiles for the catapults... . Furthermore, [Carthage although surrounded by the Romans] built one hundred and twenty decked ships in two months... for old timber had been stored away in readiness, and a large number of skilled workmen, maintained at public expense.\nThe textile industry in Carthage probably started in private homes, but the existence of professional weavers indicates that a sort of factory system later developed. Products included embroidery, carpets, and use of the purple murex dye (for which the Carthaginian isle of Djerba was famous). Metalworkers developed specialized skills, i.e., making various weapons for the armed forces, as well as domestic articles, such as knives, forks, scissors, mirrors, and razors (all articles found in tombs). Artwork in metals included vases and lamps in bronze, also bowls, and plates. Other products came from such crafts as the potters, the glassmakers, and the goldsmiths. Inscriptions on votive stele indicate that many were not slaves but 'free citizens'.\nPhoenician and Punic merchant ventures were often run as a family enterprise, putting to work its members and its subordinate clients. Such family-run businesses might perform a variety of tasks: own and maintain the ships, providing the captain and crew; do the negotiations overseas, either by barter or buying and selling, of their own manufactured commodities and trade goods, and native products (metals, foodstuffs, etc.) to carry and trade elsewhere; and send their agents to stay at distant outposts in order to make lasting local contacts, and later to establish a warehouse of shipped goods for exchange, and eventually perhaps a settlement. Over generations, such activity might result in the creation of a wide-ranging network of trading operations. Ancillary would be the growth of reciprocity between different family firms, foreign and domestic.\nState protection was extended to its sea traders by the Phoenician city of Tyre and later likewise by the daughter city-state of Carthage. St\u00e9phane Gsell, the well-regarded French historian of ancient North Africa, summarized the major principles guiding the civic rulers of Carthage with regard to its policies for trade and commerce:\nBoth the Phoenicians and the Carthaginians were well known in antiquity for their secrecy in general, and especially pertaining to commercial contacts and trade routes. Both cultures excelled in commercial dealings. Strabo (63 BC\u00a0\u2013 AD 21), the Greek geographer, wrote that before its fall (in 146\u00a0BC) Carthage enjoyed a population of 700,000 and directed an alliance of 300 cities. The Greek historian Polybius (c.\u2009203\u2013120) referred to Carthage as \"the wealthiest city in the world\".\nConstitution of state.\nA \"suffet\" (possibly two) was elected by the citizens, and held office with no military power for a one-year term. Carthaginian generals marshalled mercenary armies and were separately elected. From about 550 to 450 the Magonid family monopolized the top military position; later the Barcid family acted similarly. Eventually it came to be that, after a war, the commanding general had to testify justifying his actions before a court of 104 judges.\nAristotle (384\u2013322) discusses Carthage in his work, \"Politica\"; he begins: \"The Carthaginians are also considered to have an excellent form of government.\" He briefly describes the city as a \"mixed constitution\", a political arrangement with cohabiting elements of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy, i.e., a king (Gk: basileus), a council of elders (Gk: gerusia), and the people (Gk: demos). Later Polybius of Megalopolis (c.\u2009204\u2013122, Greek) in his \"Histories\" would describe the Roman Republic in more detail as a mixed constitution in which the Consuls were the monarchy, the Senate the aristocracy, and the Assemblies the democracy.\nEvidently Carthage also had an institution of elders who advised the Suffets, similar to a Greek \"\" or the Roman Senate. We do not have a Punic name for this body. At times its members would travel with an army general on campaign. Members also formed permanent committees. The institution had several hundred members drawn from the wealthiest class who held office for life. Vacancies were probably filled by recruitment from among the elite, i.e., by co-option. From among its members were selected the 104 Judges mentioned above. Later the 104 would come to evaluate not only army generals but other office holders as well. Aristotle regarded the 104 as most important; he compared it to the ephorate of Sparta with regard to control over security. In Hannibal's time, such a Judge held office for life. At some stage there also came to be independent self-perpetuating boards of five who filled vacancies and supervised (non-military) government administration.\nPopular assemblies also existed at Carthage. When deadlocked the Suffets and the quasi-senatorial institution of elders might request the assembly to vote; also, assembly votes were requested in very crucial matters in order to achieve political consensus and popular coherence. The assembly members had no \"legal\" wealth or birth qualification. How its members were selected is unknown, e.g., whether by festival group or urban ward or another method.\nThe Greeks were favourably impressed by the constitution of Carthage; Aristotle had a separate study of it made, which is lost. In his \"Politica\" he states: \"The government of Carthage is oligarchical, but they successfully escape the evils of oligarchy by enriching one portion of the people after another by sending them to their colonies.\" \"[T]heir policy is to send some [poorer citizens] to their dependent towns, where they grow rich.\" Yet Aristotle continues, \"[I]f any misfortune occurred, and the bulk of the subjects revolted, there would be no way of restoring peace by legal means.\" Aristotle remarked also:\nMany of the Carthaginian institutions are excellent. The superiority of their constitution is proved by the fact that the common people remain loyal to the constitution; the Carthaginians have never had any rebellion worth speaking of, and have never been under the rule of a tyrant.\nThe city-state of Carthage, whose citizens were mainly \"Libyphoenicians\" (of Phoenician ancestry born in Africa), dominated and exploited an agricultural countryside composed mainly of native Berber sharecroppers and farmworkers, whose affiliations to Carthage were open to divergent possibilities. Beyond these more settled Berbers and the Punic farming towns and rural manors, lived the independent Berber tribes, who were mostly pastoralists.\nIn the brief, uneven review of government at Carthage found in his \"Politica\" Aristotle mentions several faults. Thus, \"that the same person should hold many offices, which is a favorite practice among the Carthaginians.\" Aristotle disapproves, mentioning the flute-player and the shoemaker. Also, that \"magistrates should be chosen not only for their merit but for their wealth.\" Aristotle's opinion is that focus on pursuit of wealth will lead to oligarchy and its evils.\n[S]urely it is a bad thing that the greatest offices... should be bought. The law which allows this abuse makes wealth of more account than virtue, and the whole state becomes avaricious. For, whenever the chiefs of the state deem anything honorable, the other citizens are sure to follow their example; and, where virtue has not the first place, their aristocracy cannot be firmly established.\nIn Carthage the people seemed politically satisfied and submissive, according to the historian Warmington. They in their assemblies only rarely exercised the few opportunities given them to assent to state decisions. Popular influence over government appears not to have been an issue at Carthage. Being a commercial republic fielding a mercenary army, the people were not conscripted for military service, an experience which can foster the feel for popular political action. But perhaps this misunderstands the society; perhaps the people, whose values were based on small-group loyalty, felt themselves sufficiently connected to their city's leadership by the very integrity of the person-to-person linkage within their social fabric. Carthage was very stable; there were few openings for tyrants. Only after defeat by Rome devastated Punic imperial ambitions did the people of Carthage seem to question their governance and to show interest in political reform.\nIn 196, following the Second Punic War (218\u2013201), Hannibal, still greatly admired as a Barcid military leader, was elected suffet. When his reforms were blocked by a financial official about to become a judge for life, Hannibal rallied the populace against the 104 judges. He proposed a one-year term for the 104, as part of a major civic overhaul. Additionally, the reform included a restructuring of the city's revenues, and the fostering of trade and agriculture. The changes rather quickly resulted in a noticeable increase in prosperity. Yet his incorrigible political opponents cravenly went to Rome, to charge Hannibal with conspiracy, namely, plotting war against Rome in league with Antiochus the Hellenic ruler of Syria. Although the Roman Scipio Africanus resisted such manoeuvre, eventually intervention by Rome forced Hannibal to leave Carthage. Thus, corrupt city officials efficiently blocked Hannibal in his efforts to reform the government of Carthage.\nMago (6th century) was King of Carthage; the head of state, war leader, and religious figurehead. His family was considered to possess a sacred quality. Mago's office was somewhat similar to that of a pharaoh, but although kept in a family it was not hereditary, it was limited by legal consent. Picard, accordingly, believes that the council of elders and the popular assembly are late institutions. Carthage was founded by the king of Tyre who had a royal monopoly on this trading venture. Thus it was the royal authority stemming from this traditional source of power that the King of Carthage possessed. Later, as other Phoenician ship companies entered the trading region, and so associated with the city-state, the King of Carthage had to keep order among a rich variety of powerful merchants in their negotiations among themselves and over risky commerce across the Mediterranean. Under these circumstance, the office of king began to be transformed. Yet it was not until the aristocrats of Carthage became wealthy owners of agricultural lands in Africa that a council of elders was institutionalized at Carthage.\nContemporary sources.\nMost ancient literature concerning Carthage comes from Greek and Roman sources as Carthage's own documents were destroyed by the Romans. Apart from inscriptions, hardly any Punic literature has survived, and none in its own language and script. A brief catalogue would include:\n\"[F]rom the Greek author Plutarch [(c. 46 \u2013 c. 120)] we learn of the 'sacred books' in Punic safeguarded by the city's temples. Few Punic texts survive, however.\" Once \"the City Archives, the Annals, and the scribal lists of \"Suffets\"\" existed, but evidently these were destroyed in the horrific fires during the Roman capture of the city in 146\u00a0BC.\nYet some Punic books (Latin: \"libri punici\") from the libraries of Carthage reportedly did survive the fires. These works were apparently given by Roman authorities to the newly augmented Berber rulers. Over a century after the fall of Carthage, the Roman politician-turned-author Gaius Sallustius Crispus or Sallust (86\u201334) reported his having seen volumes written in Punic, which books were said to be once possessed by the Berber king, Hiempsal II (r. 88\u201381). By way of Berber informants and Punic translators, Sallust had used these surviving books to write his brief sketch of Berber affairs.\nProbably some of Hiempsal II's \"libri punici\", that had escaped the fires that consumed Carthage in 146\u00a0BC, wound up later in the large royal library of his grandson Juba II (r. 25 BC\u2013AD 24). Juba II not only was a Berber king, and husband of Cleopatra's daughter, but also a scholar and author in Greek of no less than nine works. He wrote for the Mediterranean-wide audience then enjoying classical literature. The \"libri punici\" inherited from his grandfather surely became useful to him when composing his \"Libyka\", a work on North Africa written in Greek. Only fragments of \"Libyka\" survive, mostly from quotations made by other ancient authors. It may have been Juba II who 'discovered' the five-centuries-old 'log book' of Hanno the Navigator, called the \"Periplus\", among library documents saved from fallen Carthage.\nIn the end, however, most Punic writings that survived the destruction of Carthage \"did not escape the immense wreckage in which so many of Antiquity's literary works perished.\" Accordingly, the long and continuous interactions between Punic citizens of Carthage and the Berber communities that surrounded the city have no local historian. Their political arrangements and periodic crises, their economic and work life, the cultural ties and social relations established and nourished (infrequently as kin), are not known to us directly from ancient Punic authors in written accounts. Neither side has left us their stories about life in Punic-era Carthage.\nRegarding \"Phoenician\" writings, few remain and these seldom refer to Carthage. The more ancient and most informative are cuneiform tablets, c. 1600\u20131185, from ancient Ugarit, located to the north of Phoenicia on the Syrian coast; it was a Canaanite city politically affiliated with the Hittites. The clay tablets tell of myths, epics, rituals, medical and administrative matters, and also correspondence. The highly valued works of Sanchuniathon, an ancient priest of Beirut, who reportedly wrote on Phoenician religion and the origins of civilization, are themselves completely lost, but some little content endures twice removed. Sanchuniathon was said to have lived in the 11th century, which is considered doubtful. Much later a \"Phoenician History\" by Philo of Byblos (64\u2013141) reportedly existed, written in Greek, but only fragments of this work survive. An explanation proffered for why so few Phoenician works endured: early on (11th century) archives and records began to be kept on papyrus, which does not long survive in a moist coastal climate. Also, both Phoenicians and Carthaginians were well known for their secrecy.\nThus, of their ancient writings we have little of major interest left to us by Carthage, or by Phoenicia the country of origin of the city founders. \"Of the various Phoenician and Punic compositions alluded to by the ancient classical authors, not a single work or even fragment has survived in its original idiom.\" \"Indeed, not a single Phoenician manuscript has survived in the original [language] or in translation.\" We cannot therefore access directly the line of thought or the contour of their worldview as expressed in their own words, in their own voice. Ironically, it was the Phoenicians who \"invented or at least perfected and transmitted a form of writing [the alphabet] that has influenced dozens of cultures including our own.\"\nAs noted, the celebrated ancient books on agriculture written by Mago of Carthage survives only via quotations in Latin from several later Roman works.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6556", "revid": "4180502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6556", "title": "Coprime integers", "text": "Two numbers without shared prime factors\nIn number theory, two integers a and b are coprime, relatively prime or mutually prime if the only positive integer that is a divisor of both of them is 1. Consequently, any prime number that divides a does not divide b, and vice versa. This is equivalent to their greatest common divisor (GCD) being 1. One says also a \"is prime to\" b or a \"is coprime with\" b.\nThe numbers 8 and 9 are coprime, despite the fact that neither\u2014considered individually\u2014is a prime number, since 1 is their only common divisor. On the other hand, 6 and 9 are not coprime, because they are both divisible by 3. The numerator and denominator of a reduced fraction are coprime, by definition.\nNotation and testing.\nWhen the integers a and b are coprime, the standard way of expressing this fact in mathematical notation is to indicate that their greatest common divisor is one, by the formula gcd(\"a\", \"b\") = 1 or (\"a\", \"b\") = 1. In their 1989 textbook \"Concrete Mathematics\", Ronald Graham, Donald Knuth, and Oren Patashnik proposed an alternative notation formula_1 to indicate that a and b are relatively prime and that the term \"prime\" be used instead of coprime (as in a is \"prime\" to b).\nA fast way to determine whether two numbers are coprime is given by the Euclidean algorithm and its faster variants such as binary GCD algorithm or Lehmer's GCD algorithm.\nThe number of integers coprime with a positive integer n, between 1 and n, is given by Euler's totient function, also known as Euler's phi function, \"\u03c6\"(\"n\").\nA set of integers can also be called coprime if its elements share no common positive factor except 1. A stronger condition on a set of integers is pairwise coprime, which means that a and b are coprime for every pair (\"a\", \"b\") of different integers in the set. The set {2, 3, 4} is coprime, but it is not pairwise coprime since 2 and 4 are not relatively prime.\nProperties.\nThe numbers 1 and \u22121 are the only integers coprime with every integer, and they are the only integers that are coprime with 0.\nA number of conditions are equivalent to a and b being coprime:\nAs a consequence of the third point, if a and b are coprime and \"br\" \u2261 \"bs\" (mod \"a\"), then \"r\" \u2261 \"s\" (mod \"a\"). That is, we may \"divide by b\" when working modulo a. Furthermore, if \"b\"1, \"b\"2 are both coprime with a, then so is their product \"b\"1\"b\"2 (i.e., modulo a it is a product of invertible elements, and therefore invertible); this also follows from the first point by Euclid's lemma, which states that if a prime number p divides a product bc, then p divides at least one of the factors b, c.\nAs a consequence of the first point, if a and b are coprime, then so are any powers ak and bm.\nIf a and b are coprime and a divides the product bc, then a divides c. This can be viewed as a generalization of Euclid's lemma.\nThe two integers a and b are coprime if and only if the point with coordinates (\"a\", \"b\") in a Cartesian coordinate system would be \"visible\" via an unobstructed line of sight from the origin (0, 0), in the sense that there is no point with integer coordinates anywhere on the line segment between the origin and (\"a\", \"b\"). (See figure 1.)\nIn a sense that can be made precise, the probability that two randomly chosen integers are coprime is 6/\"\u03c0\"2, which is about 61% (see , below).\nTwo natural numbers a and b are coprime if and only if the numbers 2\"a\" \u2212 1 and 2\"b\" \u2212 1 are coprime. As a generalization of this, following easily from the Euclidean algorithm in base \"n\" &gt; 1:\n formula_2\nCoprimality in sets.\nA set of integers formula_3 can also be called \"coprime\" or \"setwise coprime\" if the greatest common divisor of all the elements of the set is 1. For example, the integers 6, 10, 15 are coprime because 1 is the only positive integer that divides all of them.\nIf every pair in a set of integers is coprime, then the set is said to be \"pairwise coprime\" (or \"pairwise relatively prime\", \"mutually coprime\" or \"mutually relatively prime\"). Pairwise coprimality is a stronger condition than setwise coprimality; every pairwise coprime finite set is also setwise coprime, but the reverse is not true. For example, the integers 4, 5, 6 are (setwise) coprime (because the only positive integer dividing \"all\" of them is 1), but they are not \"pairwise\" coprime (because gcd(4, 6) = 2).\nThe concept of pairwise coprimality is important as a hypothesis in many results in number theory, such as the Chinese remainder theorem.\nIt is possible for an infinite set of integers to be pairwise coprime. Notable examples include the set of all prime numbers, the set of elements in Sylvester's sequence, and the set of all Fermat numbers.\nProbability of coprimality.\nGiven two randomly chosen integers a and b, it is reasonable to ask how likely it is that a and b are coprime. In this determination, it is convenient to use the characterization that a and b are coprime if and only if no prime number divides both of them (see Fundamental theorem of arithmetic).\nInformally, the probability that any number is divisible by a prime (or in fact any integer) p is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for example, every 7th integer is divisible by 7. Hence the probability that two numbers are both divisible by p is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the probability that at least one of them is not is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; Any finite collection of divisibility events associated to distinct primes is mutually independent. For example, in the case of two events, a number is divisible by primes p and q if and only if it is divisible by pq; the latter event has probability &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; If one makes the heuristic assumption that such reasoning can be extended to infinitely many divisibility events, one is led to guess that the probability that two numbers are coprime is given by a product over all primes,\n formula_4\nHere \u03b6 refers to the Riemann zeta function, the identity relating the product over primes to \"\u03b6\"(2) is an example of an Euler product, and the evaluation of \"\u03b6\"(2) as \"\u03c0\"2/6 is the Basel problem, solved by Leonhard Euler in 1735.\nThere is no way to choose a positive integer at random so that each positive integer occurs with equal probability, but statements about \"randomly chosen integers\" such as the ones above can be formalized by using the notion of \"natural density\". For each positive integer N, let PN be the probability that two randomly chosen numbers in formula_5 are coprime. Although PN will never equal 6/\"\u03c0\"2 exactly, with work one can show that in the limit as formula_6 the probability PN approaches 6/\"\u03c0\"2.\nMore generally, the probability of k randomly chosen integers being setwise coprime is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; \nGenerating all coprime pairs.\nAll pairs of positive coprime numbers (\"m\", \"n\") (with \"m\" &gt; \"n\") can be arranged in two disjoint complete ternary trees, one tree starting from (2, 1) (for even\u2013odd and odd\u2013even pairs), and the other tree starting from (3, 1) (for odd\u2013odd pairs). The children of each vertex (\"m\", \"n\") are generated as follows:\nThis scheme is exhaustive and non-redundant with no invalid members. This can be proved by remarking that, if formula_10 is a coprime pair with formula_11 then \nIn all cases formula_19 is a \"smaller\" coprime pair with formula_20 This process of \"computing the father\" can stop only if either formula_21 or formula_22 In these cases, coprimality, implies that the pair is either formula_23 or formula_24\nAnother (much simpler) way to generate a tree of positive coprime pairs (\"m\", \"n\") (with \"m\" &gt; \"n\") is by means of two generators formula_25 and formula_26, starting with the root formula_23. The resulting binary tree, the Calkin\u2013Wilf tree, is exhaustive and non-redundant, which can be seen as follows. Given a coprime pair one recursively applies formula_28 or formula_29 depending on which of them yields a positive coprime pair with \"m\" &gt; \"n\". Since only one does, the tree is non-redundant. Since by this procedure one is bound to arrive at the root, the tree is exhaustive.\nApplications.\nIn machine design, an even, uniform gear wear is achieved by choosing the tooth counts of the two gears meshing together to be relatively prime. When a 1:1 gear ratio is desired, a gear relatively prime to the two equal-size gears may be inserted between them.\nIn pre-computer cryptography, some Vernam cipher machines combined several loops of key tape of different lengths. Many rotor machines combine rotors of different numbers of teeth. Such combinations work best when the entire set of lengths are pairwise coprime.\nGeneralizations.\nThis concept can be extended to other algebraic structures than &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for example, polynomials whose greatest common divisor is 1 are called coprime polynomials.\nCoprimality in ring ideals.\nTwo ideals A and B in a commutative ring R are called coprime (or \"comaximal\") if formula_30 This generalizes B\u00e9zout's identity: with this definition, two principal ideals (a) and (b) in the ring of integers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are coprime if and only if a and b are coprime. If the ideals A and B of R are coprime, then formula_31 furthermore, if C is a third ideal such that A contains BC, then A contains C. The Chinese remainder theorem can be generalized to any commutative ring, using coprime ideals.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6557", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6557", "title": "Control unit", "text": "Component of a computer's CPU\nThe control unit (CU) is a component of a computer's central processing unit (CPU) that directs the operation of the processor. A CU typically uses a binary decoder to convert coded instructions into timing and control signals that direct the operation of the other units (memory, arithmetic logic unit and input and output devices, etc.).\nMost computer resources are managed by the CU. It directs the flow of data between the CPU and the other devices. John von Neumann included the control unit as part of the von Neumann architecture. In modern computer designs, the control unit is typically an internal part of the CPU with its overall role and operation unchanged since its introduction.\nMulticycle control units.\nThe simplest computers use a multicycle microarchitecture. These were the earliest designs. They are still popular in the very smallest computers, such as the embedded systems that operate machinery.\nIn a computer, the control unit often steps through the instruction cycle successively. This consists of fetching the instruction, fetching the operands, decoding the instruction, executing the instruction, and then writing the results back to memory. When the next instruction is placed in the control unit, it changes the behavior of the control unit to complete the instruction correctly. So, the bits of the instruction directly control the control unit, which in turn controls the computer.\nThe control unit may include a binary counter to tell the control unit's logic what step it should do.\nMulticycle control units typically use both the rising and falling edges of their square-wave timing clock. They operate a step of their operation on each edge of the timing clock, so that a four-step operation completes in two clock cycles. This doubles the speed of the computer, given the same logic family.\nMany computers have two different types of unexpected events. An interrupt occurs because some type of input or output needs software attention in order to operate correctly. An exception is caused by the computer's operation. One crucial difference is that the timing of an interrupt cannot be predicted. Another is that some exceptions (e.g. a memory-not-available exception) can be caused by an instruction that needs to be restarted.\nControl units can be designed to handle interrupts in one of two typical ways. If a quick response is most important, a control unit is designed to abandon work to handle the interrupt. In this case, the work in process will be restarted after the last completed instruction. If the computer is to be very inexpensive, very simple, very reliable, or to get more work done, the control unit will finish the work in process before handling the interrupt. Finishing the work is inexpensive, because it needs no register to record the last finished instruction. It is simple and reliable because it has the fewest states. It also wastes the least amount of work.\nExceptions can be made to operate like interrupts in very simple computers. If virtual memory is required, then a memory-not-available exception must retry the failing instruction.\nIt is common for multicycle computers to use more cycles. Sometimes it takes longer to take a conditional jump, because the program counter has to be reloaded. Sometimes they do multiplication or division instructions by a process, something like binary long multiplication and division. Very small computers might do arithmetic, one or a few bits at a time. Some other computers have very complex instructions that take many steps.\nPipelined control units.\nMany medium-complexity computers pipeline instructions. This design is popular because of its economy and speed.\nIn a pipelined computer, instructions flow through the computer. This design has several stages. For example, it might have one stage for each step of the Von Neumann cycle. A pipelined computer usually has \"pipeline registers\" after each stage. These store the bits calculated by a stage so that the logic gates of the next stage can use the bits to do the next step.\nIt is common for even numbered stages to operate on one edge of the square-wave clock, while odd-numbered stages operate on the other edge. This speeds the computer by a factor of two compared to single-edge designs.\nIn a pipelined computer, the control unit arranges for the flow to start, continue, and stop as a program commands. The instruction data is usually passed in pipeline registers from one stage to the next, with a somewhat separated piece of control logic for each stage. The control unit also assures that the instruction in each stage does not harm the operation of instructions in other stages. For example, if two stages must use the same piece of data, the control logic assures that the uses are done in the correct sequence.\nWhen operating efficiently, a pipelined computer will have an instruction in each stage. It is then working on all of those instructions at the same time. It can finish about one instruction for each cycle of its clock. When a program makes a decision, and switches to a different sequence of instructions, the pipeline sometimes must discard the data in process and restart. This is called a \"stall\". When two instructions could interfere, sometimes the control unit must stop processing a later instruction until an earlier instruction completes. This is called a \"pipeline bubble\" because a part of the pipeline is not processing instructions. Pipeline bubbles can occur when two instructions operate on the same register.\nInterrupts and unexpected exceptions also stall the pipeline. If a pipelined computer abandons work for an interrupt, more work is lost than in a multicycle computer. Predictable exceptions do not need to stall. For example, if an exception instruction is used to enter the operating system, it does not cause a stall.\nFor the same speed of electronic logic, a pipelined computer can execute more instructions per second than a multicycle computer. Also, even though the electronic logic has a fixed maximum speed, a pipelined computer can be made faster or slower by varying the number of stages in the pipeline. With more stages, each stage does less work, and so the stage has fewer delays from the logic gates.\nA pipelined model of a computer often has less logic gates per instruction per second than multicycle and out-of-order computers. This is because the average stage is less complex than a multicycle computer. An out-of-order computer usually has large amounts of idle logic at any given instant. Similar calculations usually show that a pipelined computer uses less energy per instruction.\nHowever, a pipelined computer is usually more complex and more costly than a comparable multicycle computer. It typically has more logic gates, registers and a more complex control unit. In a like way, it might use more total energy, while using less energy per instruction. Out-of-order CPUs can usually do more instructions per second because they can do several instructions at once.\nPreventing stalls.\nControl units use many methods to keep a pipeline full and avoid stalls. For example, even simple control units can assume that a backwards branch, to a lower-numbered, earlier instruction, is a loop, and will be repeated. So, a control unit with this design will always fill the pipeline with the backwards branch path. If a compiler can detect the most frequently-taken direction of a branch, the compiler can just produce instructions so that the most frequently taken branch is the preferred direction of branch. In a like way, a control unit might get hints from the compiler: Some computers have instructions that can encode hints from the compiler about the direction of branch.\nSome control units do branch prediction: A control unit keeps an electronic list of the recent branches, encoded by the address of the branch instruction. This list has a few bits for each branch to remember the direction that was taken most recently.\nSome control units can do speculative execution, in which a computer might have two or more pipelines, calculate both directions of a branch, and then discard the calculations of the unused direction.\nResults from memory can become available at unpredictable times because very fast computers cache memory. That is, they copy limited amounts of memory data into very fast memory. The CPU must be designed to process at the very fast speed of the cache memory. Therefore, the CPU might stall when it must access main memory directly. In modern PCs, main memory is as much as three hundred times slower than cache.\nTo help this, out-of-order CPUs and control units were developed to process data as it becomes available. (See next section)\nBut what if all the calculations are complete, but the CPU is still stalled, waiting for main memory? Then, a control unit can switch to an alternative thread of execution whose data has been fetched while the thread was idle. A thread has its own program counter, a stream of instructions and a separate set of registers. Designers vary the number of threads depending on current memory technologies and the type of computer. Typical computers such as PCs and smart phones usually have control units with a few threads, just enough to keep busy with affordable memory systems. Database computers often have about twice as many threads, to keep their much larger memories busy. Graphic processing units (GPUs) usually have hundreds or thousands of threads, because they have hundreds or thousands of execution units doing repetitive graphic calculations.\nWhen a control unit permits threads, the software also has to be designed to handle them. In general-purpose CPUs like PCs and smartphones, the threads are usually made to look very like normal time-sliced processes. At most, the operating system might need some awareness of them. In GPUs, the thread scheduling usually cannot be hidden from the application software, and is often controlled with a specialized subroutine library.\nOut of order control units.\nA control unit can be designed to finish what it can. If several instructions can be completed at the same time, the control unit will arrange it. So, the fastest computers can process instructions in a sequence that can vary somewhat, depending on when the operands or instruction destinations become available. Most supercomputers and many PC CPUs use this method. The exact organization of this type of control unit depends on the slowest part of the computer.\nWhen the execution of calculations is the slowest, instructions flow from memory into pieces of electronics called \"issue units\". An issue unit holds an instruction until both its operands and an execution unit are available. Then, the instruction and its operands are \"issued\" to an execution unit. The execution unit does the instruction. Then the resulting data is moved into a queue of data to be written back to memory or registers. If the computer has multiple execution units, it can usually do several instructions per clock cycle.\nIt is common to have specialized execution units. For example, a modestly priced computer might have only one floating-point execution unit, because floating point units are expensive. The same computer might have several integer units, because these are relatively inexpensive, and can do the bulk of instructions.\nOne kind of control unit for issuing uses an array of electronic logic, a \"scoreboard\" that detects when an instruction can be issued. The \"height\" of the array is the number of execution units, and the \"length\" and \"width\" are each the number of sources of operands. When all the items come together, the signals from the operands and execution unit will cross. The logic at this intersection detects that the instruction can work, so the instruction is \"issued\" to the free execution unit. An alternative style of issuing control unit implements the Tomasulo algorithm, which reorders a hardware queue of instructions. In some sense, both styles utilize a queue. The scoreboard is an alternative way to encode and reorder a queue of instructions, and some designers call it a queue table.\nWith some additional logic, a scoreboard can compactly combine execution reordering, register renaming and precise exceptions and interrupts. Further it can do this without the power-hungry, complex content-addressable memory used by the Tomasulo algorithm.\nIf the execution is slower than writing the results, the memory write-back queue always has free entries. But what if the memory writes slowly? Or what if the destination register will be used by an \"earlier\" instruction that has not yet issued? Then the write-back step of the instruction might need to be scheduled. This is sometimes called \"retiring\" an instruction. In this case, there must be scheduling logic on the back end of execution units. It schedules access to the registers or memory that will get the results.\nRetiring logic can also be designed into an issuing scoreboard or a Tomasulo queue, by including memory or register access in the issuing logic.\nOut of order controllers require special design features to handle interrupts. When there are several instructions in progress, it is not clear where in the instruction stream an interrupt occurs. For input and output interrupts, almost any solution works. However, when a computer has virtual memory, an interrupt occurs to indicate that a memory access failed. This memory access must be associated with an exact instruction and an exact processor state, so that the processor's state can be saved and restored by the interrupt. A usual solution preserves copies of registers until a memory access completes.\nAlso, out of order CPUs have even more problems with stalls from branching, because they can complete several instructions per clock cycle, and usually have many instructions in various stages of progress. So, these control units might use all of the solutions used by pipelined processors.\nTranslating control units.\nSome computers translate each single instruction into a sequence of simpler instructions. The advantage is that an out of order computer can be simpler in the bulk of its logic, while handling complex multi-step instructions. x86 Intel CPUs since the Pentium Pro translate complex CISC x86 instructions to more RISC-like internal micro-operations.\nIn these, the \"front\" of the control unit manages the translation of instructions. Operands are not translated. The \"back\" of the CU is an out-of-order CPU that issues the micro-operations and operands to the execution units and data paths.\nControl units for low-powered computers.\nMany modern computers have controls that minimize power usage. In battery-powered computers, such as those in cell-phones, the advantage is longer battery life. In computers with utility power, the justification is to reduce the cost of power, cooling or noise.\nMost modern computers use CMOS logic. CMOS wastes power in two common ways: By changing state, i.e. \"active power\", and by unintended leakage. The active power of a computer can be reduced by turning off control signals. Leakage current can be reduced by reducing the electrical pressure, the voltage, making the transistors with larger depletion regions or turning off the logic completely.\nActive power is easier to reduce because data stored in the logic is not affected. The usual method reduces the CPU's clock rate. Most computer systems use this method. It is common for a CPU to idle during the transition to avoid side-effects from the changing clock.\nMost computers also have a \"halt\" instruction. This was invented to stop non-interrupt code so that interrupt code has reliable timing. However, designers soon noticed that a halt instruction was also a good time to turn off a CPU's clock completely, reducing the CPU's active power to zero. The interrupt controller might continue to need a clock, but that usually uses much less power than the CPU.\nThese methods are relatively easy to design, and became so common that others were invented for commercial advantage. Many modern low-power CMOS CPUs stop and start specialized execution units and bus interfaces depending on the needed instruction. Some computers even arrange the CPU's microarchitecture to use transfer-triggered multiplexers so that each instruction only utilises the exact pieces of logic needed.\nOne common method is to spread the load to many CPUs, and turn off unused CPUs as the load reduces. The operating system's task switching logic saves the CPUs' data to memory. In some cases, one of the CPUs can be simpler and smaller, literally with fewer logic gates. So, it has low leakage, and it is the last to be turned off, and the first to be turned on. Also it then is the only CPU that requires special low-power features. A similar method is used in most PCs, which usually have an auxiliary embedded CPU that manages the power system. However, in PCs, the software is usually in the BIOS, not the operating system.\nTheoretically, computers at lower clock speeds could also reduce leakage by reducing the voltage of the power supply. This affects the reliability of the computer in many ways, so the engineering is expensive, and it is uncommon except in relatively expensive computers such as PCs or cellphones.\nSome designs can use very low leakage transistors, but these usually add cost. The depletion barriers of the transistors can be made larger to have less leakage, but this makes the transistor larger and thus both slower and more expensive. Some vendors use this technique in selected portions of an IC by constructing low leakage logic from large transistors that some processes provide for analog circuits. Some processes place the transistors above the surface of the silicon, in \"fin fets\", but these processes have more steps, so are more expensive. Special transistor doping materials (e.g. hafnium) can also reduce leakage, but this adds steps to the processing, making it more expensive. Some semiconductors have a larger band-gap than silicon. However, these materials and processes are currently (2020) more expensive than silicon.\nManaging leakage is more difficult, because before the logic can be turned-off, the data in it must be moved to some type of low-leakage storage.\nSome CPUs make use of a special type of flip-flop (to store a bit) that couples a fast, high-leakage storage cell to a slow, large (expensive) low-leakage cell. These two cells have separated power supplies. When the CPU enters a power saving mode (e.g. because of a halt that waits for an interrupt), data is transferred to the low-leakage cells, and the others are turned off. When the CPU leaves a low-leakage mode (e.g. because of an interrupt), the process is reversed.\nOlder designs would copy the CPU state to memory, or even disk, sometimes with specialized software. Very simple embedded systems sometimes just restart.\nIntegrating with the computer.\nAll modern CPUs have control logic to attach the CPU to the rest of the computer. In modern computers, this is usually a bus controller. When an instruction reads or writes memory, the control unit either controls the bus directly, or controls a bus controller. Many modern computers use the same bus interface for memory, input and output. This is called \"memory-mapped I/O\". To a programmer, the registers of the I/O devices appear as numbers at specific memory addresses. x86 PCs use an older method, a separate I/O bus accessed by I/O instructions.\nA modern CPU also tends to include an interrupt controller. It handles interrupt signals from the system bus. The control unit is the part of the computer that responds to the interrupts.\nThere is often a cache controller to cache memory. The cache controller and the associated cache memory is often the largest physical part of a modern, higher-performance CPU. When the memory, bus or cache is shared with other CPUs, the control logic must communicate with them to assure that no computer ever gets out-of-date old data.\nMany historic computers built some type of input and output directly into the control unit. For example, many historic computers had a front panel with switches and lights directly controlled by the control unit. These let a programmer directly enter a program and debug it. In later production computers, the most common use of a front panel was to enter a small bootstrap program to read the operating system from disk. This was annoying. So, front panels were replaced by bootstrap programs in read-only memory.\nMost PDP-8 models had a data bus designed to let I/O devices borrow the control unit's memory read and write logic. This reduced the complexity and expense of high speed I/O controllers, e.g. for disk.\nThe Xerox Alto had a multitasking microprogrammable control unit that performed almost all I/O. This design provided most of the features of a modern PC with only a tiny fraction of the electronic logic. The dual-thread computer was run by the two lowest-priority microthreads. These performed calculations whenever I/O was not required. High priority microthreads provided (in decreasing priority) video, network, disk, a periodic timer, mouse, and keyboard. The microprogram did the complex logic of the I/O device, as well as the logic to integrate the device with the computer. For the actual hardware I/O, the microprogram read and wrote shift registers for most I/O, sometimes with resistor networks and transistors to shift output voltage levels (e.g. for video). To handle outside events, the microcontroller had microinterrupts to switch threads at the end of a thread's cycle, e.g. at the end of an instruction, or after a shift-register was accessed. The microprogram could be rewritten and reinstalled, which was very useful for a research computer.\nFunctions of the control unit.\nThus a program of instructions in memory will cause the CU to configure a CPU's data flows to manipulate the data correctly between instructions. This results in a computer that could run a complete program and require no human intervention to make hardware changes between instructions (as had to be done when using only punch cards for computations before stored programmed computers with CUs were invented).\nHardwired control unit.\nHardwired control units are implemented through use of combinational logic units, featuring a finite number of gates that can generate specific results based on the instructions that were used to invoke those responses. Hardwired control units are generally faster than the microprogrammed designs.\nThis design uses a fixed architecture\u2014it requires changes in the wiring if the instruction set is modified or changed. It can be convenient for simple, fast computers.\nA controller that uses this approach can operate at high speed; however, it has little flexibility. A complex instruction set can overwhelm a designer who uses ad hoc logic design.\nThe hardwired approach has become less popular as computers have evolved. Previously, control units for CPUs used ad hoc logic, and they were difficult to design.\nMicroprogram control unit.\nThe idea of microprogramming was introduced by Maurice Wilkes in 1951 as an intermediate level to execute computer program instructions. Microprograms were organized as a sequence of \"microinstructions\" and stored in special control memory. The algorithm for the microprogram control unit, unlike the hardwired control unit, is usually specified by flowchart description. The main advantage of a microprogrammed control unit is the simplicity of its structure. Outputs from the controller are by microinstructions. The microprogram can be debugged and replaced similarly to software.\nCombination methods of design.\nA popular variation on microcode is to debug the microcode using a software simulator. Then, the microcode is a table of bits. This is a logical truth table, that translates a microcode address into the control unit outputs. This truth table can be fed to a computer program that produces optimized electronic logic. The resulting control unit is almost as easy to design as microprogramming, but it has the fast speed and low number of logic elements of a hard wired control unit. The practical result resembles a Mealy machine or Richards controller.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6558", "revid": "16849003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6558", "title": "Cello", "text": "Bowed string instrument\nThe violoncello ( , ), commonly abbreviated as cello ( ), is a medium-low pitched bowed (sometimes plucked and occasionally hit) string instrument of the violin family. Its four strings are usually tuned in perfect fifths: from low to high, C2, G2, D3 and A3. The viola's four strings are each an octave higher. Music for the cello is generally written in the bass clef; the tenor clef and treble clef are used for higher-range passages.\nPlayed by a \"cellist\" or \"violoncellist\", it enjoys a large solo repertoire with and without accompaniment, as well as numerous concerti. As a solo instrument, the cello uses its whole range, from bass to soprano, and in chamber music, such as string quartets and the orchestra's string section, it often plays the bass part, where it may be reinforced an octave lower by the double basses. Figured bass music of the Baroque era typically assumes a cello, viola da gamba or bassoon as part of the basso continuo group alongside chordal instruments such as organ, harpsichord, lute, or theorbo. Cellos are found in many other ensembles, from modern Chinese orchestras to cello rock bands.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"cello\" is derived from the ending of the Italian \"violoncello\", which means \"little violone\". Violone (\"big viola\") was a large-sized member of viol (viola da gamba) family or the violin (viola da braccio) family. The term \"violone\" today usually refers to the lowest-pitched instrument of the viols, a family of stringed instruments that went out of fashion around the end of the 17th century in most countries except England and, especially, France, where they survived another half-century before the louder violin family came into greater favour in that country as well. \nIn modern symphony orchestras, it is the second largest stringed instrument (the double bass is the largest). Thus, the name \"violoncello\" contained both the augmentative \"-one\" (\"big\") and the diminutive \"-cello\" (\"little\"). By the turn of the 20th century, it had become common to shorten the name to 'cello, with the apostrophe indicating the missing stem. It is now customary to use \"cello\" without apostrophe as the full designation. \"Viol\" is derived from the root \"viola\", which was derived from Medieval Latin , meaning stringed instrument. \nGeneral description.\nTuning.\nCellos are tuned in fifths, starting with C2 (two octaves below middle C), followed by G2, D3, and then A3. It is tuned in the exact same intervals and strings as the viola, but an octave lower. Similar to the double bass, the cello has an endpin that rests on the floor to support the instrument's weight. The cello is most closely associated with European classical music. The instrument is a part of the standard orchestra, as part of the string section, and is the bass voice of the string quartet (although many composers give it a melodic role as well), as well as being part of many other chamber groups.\nWorks.\nAmong the most well-known Baroque works for the cello are Johann Sebastian Bach's six unaccompanied Suites. Other significant works include Sonatas and Concertos by Antonio Vivaldi, and solo sonatas by Francesco Geminiani and Giovanni Bononcini. Domenico Gabrielli was one of the first composers to treat the cello as a solo instrument. As a basso continuo instrument the cello may have been used in works by Francesca Caccini (1587\u20131641), Barbara Strozzi (1619\u20131677) with pieces such as \"Il primo libro di madrigali, per 2\u20135 voci e basso continuo, op. 1\" and Elisabeth Jacquet de La Guerre (1665\u20131729), who wrote six sonatas for violin and basso continuo. Francesco Supriani's \"Principij da imparare a suonare il violoncello e con 12 Toccate a solo\" (before 1753), an early manual for learning the cello, dates from this era. As the title of the work suggests, it contains 12 toccatas for solo cello, which along with Johann Sebastian Bach's Cello Suites, are some of the first works of that type.\nFrom the Classical era, the two concertos by Joseph Haydn in C major and D major stand out, as do the five sonatas for cello and pianoforte of Ludwig van Beethoven, which span the important three periods of his compositional evolution. Other outstanding examples include the three Concerti by Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, Capricci by dall'Abaco, and Sonatas by Flackton, Boismortier, and Luigi Boccherini. A \"Divertimento for Piano, Clarinet, Viola and Cello\" is among the surviving works by Duchess Anna Amalia of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel (1739\u20131807). Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart supposedly wrote a Cello Concerto in F major, K. 206a in 1775, but this has since been lost. His Sinfonia Concertante in A major, K. 320e includes a solo part for cello, along with the violin and viola, although this work is incomplete and only exists in fragments, therefore it is given an Anhang number (Anh. 104).\nWell-known works of the Romantic era include the Robert Schumann Concerto, the Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k Concerto, the first Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns Concerto, as well as the two sonatas and the Double Concerto by Johannes Brahms. A review of compositions for cello in the Romantic era must include the German composer Fanny Mendelssohn (1805\u20131847), who wrote Fantasia in G Minor for cello and piano and a Capriccio in A-flat for cello.\nCompositions from the late 19th and early 20th century include three cello sonatas (including the Cello Sonata in C Minor written in 1880) by Dame Ethel Smyth (1858\u20131944), Edward Elgar's Cello Concerto in E minor, Claude Debussy's Sonata for Cello and Piano, and unaccompanied cello sonatas by Zolt\u00e1n Kod\u00e1ly and Paul Hindemith. Pieces including cello were written by American Music Center founder Marion Bauer (1882\u20131955) (two trio sonatas for flute, cello, and piano) and Ruth Crawford Seeger (1901\u20131953) (Diaphonic suite No. 2 for bassoon and cello).\nThe cello's versatility made it popular with many composers in this era, such as Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich, Benjamin Britten, Gy\u00f6rgy Ligeti, Witold Lutoslawski and Henri Dutilleux. Polish composer Gra\u017cyna Bacewicz (1909\u20131969) was writing for cello in the mid 20th century with Concerto No. 1 for Cello and Orchestra (1951), Concerto No. 2 for Cello and Orchestra (1963) and in 1964 composed her Quartet for four cellos.\nToday it is sometimes featured in pop and rock recordings, examples of which are noted later in this article. The cello has also appeared in major hip-hop and R &amp; B performances, such as singers Rihanna and Ne-Yo's 2007 performance at the American Music Awards. The instrument has also been modified for Indian classical music by Nancy Lesh and Saskia Rao-de Haas.[5]\nHistory.\nThe violin family, including cello-sized instruments, emerged c.\u20091500 as a family of instruments distinct from the viola da gamba family. The earliest depictions of the violin family, from Italy c.\u20091530, show three sizes of instruments, roughly corresponding to what we now call violins, violas, and cellos. Contrary to a popular misconception, the cello did not evolve from the viola da gamba, but existed alongside it for about two and a half centuries. The violin family is also known as the viola da braccio (meaning viola for the arm) family, a reference to the primary way the members of the family are held. This is to distinguish it from the viola da gamba (meaning viola for the leg) family, in which all the members are all held with the legs. The likely predecessors of the violin family include the lira da braccio and the rebec. The earliest surviving cellos are made by Andrea Amati, the first known member of the celebrated Amati family of luthiers.\nThe direct ancestor to the violoncello was the bass violin.[\"unt. library\"] Monteverdi referred to the instrument as \"basso de viola da braccio\" in \"Orfeo\" (1607). Although the first bass violin, possibly invented as early as 1538, was most likely inspired by the viol, it was created to be used in consort with the violin. The bass violin was actually often referred to as a \"violone\", or \"large viola\", as were the viols of the same period. Instruments that share features with both the bass violin and the \"viola da gamba\" appear in Italian art of the early 16th century.\nAround 1700, Italian players popularized the cello in northern Europe, although the bass violin (basse de violon) continued to be used for another two decades in France. Many existing bass violins were literally cut down in size to convert them into cellos according to the smaller pattern developed by Stradivarius, who also made a number of old pattern large cellos (the 'Servais'). The sizes, names, and tunings of the cello varied widely by geography and time. The size was not standardized until c.\u20091750.\nDespite similarities to the viola da gamba, the cello is actually part of the viola da braccio family, meaning \"viol of the arm\", which includes, among others, the violin and viola. Though paintings like Bruegel's \"The Rustic Wedding\", and Jambe de Fer in his \"Epitome Musical\" suggest that the bass violin had alternate playing positions, these were short-lived and the more practical and ergonomic \"a gamba\" position eventually replaced them entirely.\nBaroque-era cellos differed from the modern instrument in several ways. The neck has a different form and angle, which matches the baroque bass-bar and stringing. The fingerboard is usually shorter than that of the modern cello, as the highest notes are not often called for in baroque music. Modern cellos have an endpin at the bottom to support the instrument (and transmit some of the sound through the floor), while Baroque cellos are held only by the calves of the player. Modern bows curve in and are held at the frog; Baroque bows curve out and are held closer to the bow's point of balance. Modern strings are normally flatwound with a metal (or synthetic) core; Baroque strings are made of gut, with the G and C strings wire-wound. Modern cellos often have fine tuners connecting the strings to the tailpiece, which makes it much easier to tune the instrument, but such pins are rendered ineffective by the flexibility of the gut strings used on Baroque cellos. Overall, the modern instrument has much higher string tension than the Baroque cello, resulting in a louder, more projecting tone, with fewer overtones. In addition, the instrument was less standardized in size and number of strings; a smaller, five-string variant (the violoncello piccolo) was commonly used as a solo instrument and five-string instruments are occasionally specified in the Baroque repertoire. BWV 1012 (Bach's 6th Cello Suite) was written for 5-string cello. The additional high E string on the five-string cello is an octave below the same string on the Violin, so anything written for the violin can be played on the 5 string cello, sounding an octave lower than written.\nFew educational works specifically devoted to the cello existed before the 18th century and those that do exist contain little value to the performer beyond simple accounts of instrumental technique. One of the earliest cello manuals is Michel Corrette's \"M\u00e9thode, th\u00e8orique et pratique pour apprendre en peu de temps le violoncelle dans sa perfection\" (Paris, 1741).\nModern use.\nOrchestral.\nCellos are part of the standard symphony orchestra, which usually includes eight to twelve cellists. The cello section, in standard orchestral seating, is located on stage left (the audience's right) in the front, opposite the first violin section. However, some orchestras and conductors prefer switching the positioning of the viola and cello sections. The \"principal\" cellist is the section leader, determining bowings for the section in conjunction with other string principals, playing solos, and leading entrances (when the section begins to play its part). Principal players always sit closest to the audience.\nThe cellos are a critical part of orchestral music; all symphonic works involve the cello section, and many pieces require cello soli or solos. Much of the time, cellos provide part of the low-register harmony for the orchestra. Often, the cello section plays the melody for a brief period, before returning to the harmony role. There are also cello concertos, which are orchestral pieces that feature a solo cellist accompanied by an entire orchestra.\nSolo.\nThere are numerous cello concertos \u2013 where a solo cello is accompanied by an orchestra \u2013 notably 25 by Vivaldi, 12 by Boccherini, at least three by Haydn, three by C.\u00a0P.\u00a0E. Bach, two by Saint-Sa\u00ebns, two by Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, and one each by Robert Schumann, Lalo, and Elgar. There were also some composers who, while not otherwise cellists, did write cello-specific repertoire, such as Nikolaus Kraft, who wrote six cello concertos. Beethoven's Triple Concerto for Cello, Violin and Piano and Brahms' Double Concerto for Cello and Violin are also part of the concertante repertoire, although in both cases the cello shares solo duties with at least one other instrument. Moreover, several composers wrote large-scale pieces for cello and orchestra, which are concertos in all but name. Some familiar \"concertos\" are Richard Strauss' tone poem \"Don Quixote\", Tchaikovsky's \"Variations on a Rococo Theme\", Bloch's \"Schelomo\" and Bruch's \"Kol Nidrei\".\nIn the 20th century, the cello repertoire grew immensely. This was partly due to the influence of virtuoso cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, who inspired, commissioned, and premiered dozens of new works. Among these, Prokofiev's \"Symphony-Concerto\", Britten's \"Cello Symphony\", the concertos of Shostakovich and Lutos\u0142awski as well as Dutilleux's \"Tout un monde lointain...\" have already become part of the standard repertoire. Other major composers who wrote concertante works for him include Messiaen, Jolivet, Berio, and Penderecki. In addition, Arnold, Barber, Glass, Hindemith, Honegger, Ligeti, Myaskovsky, Penderecki, Rodrigo, Villa-Lobos and Walton wrote major concertos for other cellists, notably for Gaspar Cassad\u00f3, Aldo Parisot, Gregor Piatigorsky, Siegfried Palm and Julian Lloyd Webber.\nThere are also many sonatas for cello and piano. Those written by Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Chopin, Brahms, Grieg, Rachmaninoff, Debussy, Faur\u00e9, Shostakovich, Prokofiev, Poulenc, Carter, and Britten are particularly well known.\nOther important pieces for cello and piano include Schumann's five \"St\u00fccke im Volkston\" and transcriptions like Schubert's \"Arpeggione Sonata\" (originally for arpeggione and piano), C\u00e9sar Franck's Cello Sonata (originally a violin sonata, transcribed by Jules Delsart with the composer's approval), Stravinsky's \"Suite italienne\" (transcribed by the composer \u2013 with Gregor Piatigorsky \u2013 from his ballet \"Pulcinella\") and Bart\u00f3k's first rhapsody (also transcribed by the composer, originally for violin and piano).\nThere are pieces for cello solo, Johann Sebastian Bach's six Suites for Cello (which are among the best-known solo cello pieces), Kod\u00e1ly's Sonata for Solo Cello and Britten's three Cello Suites. Other notable examples include Hindemith's and Ysa\u00ffe's Sonatas for Solo Cello, Dutilleux's \"Trois Strophes sur le Nom de Sacher\", Berio's \"Les Mots Sont All\u00e9s\", Cassad\u00f3's Suite for Solo Cello, Ligeti's Solo Sonata, Carter's two \"Figment\"s and Xenakis' \"Nomos Alpha\" and \"Kottos\".\nThere are also modern solo pieces written for cello, such as Julie-O by Mark Summer.\nQuartets and other ensembles.\nThe cello is a member of the traditional string quartet as well as string quintets, sextet or trios and other mixed ensembles.\nThere are also pieces written for two, three, four, or more cellos; this type of ensemble is also called a \"cello choir\" and its sound is familiar from the introduction to Rossini's William Tell Overture as well as Zaccharia's prayer scene in Verdi's Nabucco. Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture also starts with a cello ensemble, with four cellos playing the top lines and two violas playing the bass lines. As a self-sufficient ensemble, its most famous repertoire is Heitor Villa-Lobos' first of his Bachianas Brasileiras for cello ensemble (the fifth is for soprano and 8 cellos). Other examples are Offenbach's cello duets, quartet, and sextet, P\u00e4rt's Fratres for eight cellos and Boulez' \"Messagesquisse\" for seven cellos, or even Villa-Lobos' rarely played \"Fantasia Concertante\" (1958) for 32 cellos. The 12 cellists of the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra (or \"the Twelve\" as they have since taken to being called) specialize in this repertoire and have commissioned many works, including arrangements of well-known popular songs.\nPopular music, jazz, world music and neoclassical.\nThe cello is less common in popular music than in classical music. Several bands feature a cello in their standard line-up, including Hoppy Jones of the Ink Spots and Joe Kwon of the Avett Brothers. The more common use in pop and rock is to bring the instrument in for a particular song. In the 1960s, artists such as the Beatles and Cher used the cello in popular music, in songs such as The Beatles' \"Yesterday\", \"Eleanor Rigby\" and \"Strawberry Fields Forever\", and Cher's \"Bang Bang (My Baby Shot Me Down)\". \"Good Vibrations\" by the Beach Boys includes the cello in its instrumental ensemble, which includes a number of instruments unusual for this sort of music. Bass guitarist Jack Bruce, who had originally studied music on a performance scholarship for cello, played a prominent cello part in \"As You Said\" on Cream's \"Wheels of Fire\" studio album (1968).\nIn the 1970s, the Electric Light Orchestra enjoyed great commercial success taking inspiration from so-called \"Beatlesque\" arrangements, adding the cello (and violin) to the standard rock combo line-up and in 1978 the UK-based rock band Colosseum II collaborated with cellist Julian Lloyd Webber on the recording \"Variations\". Most notably, Pink Floyd included a cello solo in their 1970 epic instrumental \"Atom Heart Mother\". Bass guitarist Mike Rutherford of Genesis was originally a cellist and included some cello parts in their \"Foxtrot\" album.\nEstablished non-traditional cello groups include Apocalyptica, a group of Finnish cellists best known for their versions of Metallica songs; Rasputina, a group of cellists committed to an intricate cello style intermingled with Gothic music; the Massive Violins, an ensemble of seven singing cellists known for their arrangements of rock, pop and classical hits; Von Cello, a cello-fronted rock power trio; Break of Reality, who mix elements of classical music with the more modern rock and metal genre; Cello Fury, a cello rock band that performs original rock/classical crossover music; and Jelloslave, a Minneapolis-based cello duo with two percussionists. These groups are examples of a style that has become known as cello rock. The crossover string quartet Bond also includes a cellist. Silenzium and Cellissimo Quartet are Russian (Novosibirsk) groups playing rock and metal and having more and more popularity in Siberia. Cold Fairyland from Shanghai, China is using a cello along with a pipa as the main solo instrument to create East meets West progressive (folk) rock.\nMore recent bands who have used the cello include Clean Bandit, Aerosmith, The Auteurs, Nirvana, Oasis, Ra Ra Riot, Smashing Pumpkins, James, Talk Talk, Phillip Phillips, OneRepublic, Electric Light Orchestra and the baroque rock band Arcade Fire. An Atlanta-based trio, King Richard's Sunday Best, also uses a cellist in their lineup. So-called \"chamber pop\" artists like Kronos Quartet, The Vitamin String Quartet and Margot and the Nuclear So and So's have also recently made cello common in modern alternative rock. Heavy metal band System of a Down has also made use of the cello's rich sound. The indie rock band The Stiletto Formal are known for using a cello as a major staple of their sound; similarly, the indie rock band Canada employs two cello players in their lineup. The orch-rock group The Polyphonic Spree, which has pioneered the use of stringed and symphonic instruments, employs the cello in creative ways for many of their \"psychedelic-esque\" melodies. The first-wave screamo band I Would Set Myself On Fire For You featured a cello as well as a viola to create a more folk-oriented sound. The band Panic! at the Disco uses a cello in their song \"Build God, Then We'll Talk\", with lead vocalist Brendon Urie recording the cello solo himself. The Lumineers added cellist Nela Pekarek to the band in 2010. Radiohead makes frequent use of cello in their music, notably for the songs \"Burn The Witch\" and \"Glass Eyes\" in 2016.\nIn jazz, bassists Oscar Pettiford and Harry Babasin were among the first to use the cello as a solo instrument; both tuned their instruments in fourths, an octave above the double bass. Fred Katz (who was not a bassist) was one of the first notable jazz cellists to use the instrument's standard tuning and arco technique. Contemporary jazz cellists include Abdul Wadud, Diedre Murray, Ron Carter, Dave Holland, David Darling, Lucio Amanti, Akua Dixon, Ernst Reijseger, Fred Lonberg-Holm, Tom Cora and Erik Friedlander. Modern musical theatre pieces like Jason Robert Brown's \"The Last Five Years\", Duncan Sheik's \"Spring Awakening\", Adam Guettel's \"Floyd Collins\", and Ricky Ian Gordon's \"My Life with Albertine\" use small string ensembles (including solo cellos) to a prominent extent.\nIn Indian classical music, Saskia Rao-de Haas is a well-established soloist as well as playing duets with her sitarist husband, Pt. Shubhendra Rao. Other cellists performing Indian classical music are Nancy Lesh (Dhrupad) and Anup Biswas. Both Rao and Lesh play the cello sitting cross-legged on the floor.\nThe cello can also be used in bluegrass and folk music, with notable players including Ben Sollee of the Sparrow Quartet and the \"Cajun cellist\" Sean Grissom, as well as Vyvienne Long, who, in addition to her own projects, has played for those of Damien Rice. Cellists such as Natalie Haas, Abby Newton, and Liz Davis Maxfield have contributed significantly to the use of cello playing in Celtic folk music, often with the cello featured as a primary melodic instrument and employing the skills and techniques of traditional fiddle playing. Lindsay Mac is becoming well known for playing the cello like a guitar, with her cover of The Beatles' \"Blackbird\".\nCanadian electronic music producer Aaron Funk (Venetian Snares), in the piece Szam\u00e1r Mad\u00e1r (on his 2005 album Rossz Csillag Alatt Sz\u00fcletett), extensively samples Edward Elgar's Cello Concerto in E minor, Op. 85.\nConstruction.\nThe cello is typically made from carved wood, although other materials such as carbon fiber or aluminum may be used. A traditional cello has a spruce top, with maple for the back, sides, and neck. Other woods, such as poplar or willow, are sometimes used for the back and sides. Less expensive cellos frequently have tops and backs made of laminated wood. Laminated cellos are widely used in elementary and secondary school orchestras and youth orchestras, because they are much more durable than carved wood cellos (i.e., they are less likely to crack if bumped or dropped) and they are much less expensive.\nThe top and back are traditionally hand-carved, though less expensive cellos are often machine-produced. The sides, or ribs, are made by heating the wood and bending it around forms. The cello body has a wide top bout, narrow middle formed by two C-bouts, and wide bottom bout, with the bridge and F holes just below the middle. The top and back of the cello have a decorative border inlay known as purfling. While purfling is attractive, it is also functional: if the instrument is struck, the purfling can prevent cracking of the wood. A crack may form at the rim of the instrument but spreads no further. Without purfling, cracks can spread up or down the top or back. Playing, traveling and the weather all affect the cello and can increase a crack if purfling is not in place.\nThe fingerboard and pegs on a cello are generally made from ebony, as it is strong and does not wear out easily.\nAlternative materials.\nIn the late 1920s and early 1930s, the Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa) as well as German luthier G.A. Pfretzschner produced an unknown number of aluminum cellos (in addition to aluminum double basses and violins). Cello manufacturer Luis &amp; Clark constructs cellos from carbon fibre. Carbon fibre instruments are particularly suitable for outdoor playing because of the strength of the material and its resistance to humidity and temperature fluctuations. Luis &amp; Clark has produced over 1,000 cellos, some of which are owned by cellists such as Yo-Yo Ma and Josephine van Lier.\nNeck, fingerboard, pegbox, and scroll.\nAbove the main body is the carved neck. The neck has a curved cross-section on its underside, which is where the player's thumb runs along the neck during playing. The neck leads to a pegbox and the scroll, which are all normally carved out of a single piece of wood, usually maple. The fingerboard is glued to the neck and extends over the body of the instrument. The fingerboard is given a curved shape, matching the curve on the bridge. Both the fingerboard and bridge need to be curved so that the performer can bow individual strings. If the cello were to have a flat fingerboard and bridge, as with a typical guitar, the performer would only be able to bow the leftmost and rightmost two strings or bow all the strings. The performer would not be able to play the inner two strings alone.\nThe nut is a raised piece of wood, fitted where the fingerboard meets the pegbox, in which the strings rest in shallow slots or grooves to keep them the correct distance apart. The pegbox houses four tapered tuning pegs, one for each string. The pegs are used to tune the cello by either tightening or loosening the string. The pegs are called \"friction pegs\", because they maintain their position by friction. The scroll is a traditional ornamental part of the cello and a feature of all other members of the violin family. Ebony is usually used for the tuning pegs, fingerboard, and nut, but other hardwoods, such as boxwood or rosewood, can be used. Black fittings on low-cost instruments are often made from inexpensive wood that has been blackened or \"ebonized\" to look like ebony, which is much harder and more expensive. Ebonized parts such as tuning pegs may crack or split, and the black surface of the fingerboard will eventually wear down to reveal the lighter wood underneath.\nStrings.\nHistorically, cello strings had cores made out of catgut, which, despite its name, is made from sheep or goat intestines. Most modern strings used in the 2010s are wound with metallic materials like aluminum, titanium and chromium. Cellists may mix different types of strings on their instruments. The pitches of the open strings are C, G, D, and A (black note heads in the playing range figure above), unless alternative tuning (scordatura) is specified by the composer. Some composers (e.g. Ottorino Respighi in the final movement of \"The Pines of Rome\") ask that the low C be tuned down to a B-flat so that the performer can play a different low note on the lowest open string.\nTailpiece and endpin.\nThe tailpiece and endpin are found in the lower part of the cello. The tailpiece is the part of the cello to which the \"ball ends\" of the strings are attached by passing them through holes. The tailpiece is attached to the bottom of the cello. The tailpiece is traditionally made of ebony or another hardwood, but can also be made of plastic or steel on lower-cost instruments. It attaches the strings to the lower end of the cello and can have one or more fine tuners. The fine tuners are used to make smaller adjustments to the pitch of the string. The fine tuners can increase the tension of each string (raising the pitch) or decrease the tension of the string (lowering the pitch). When the performer is putting on a new string, the fine tuner for that string is normally reset to a middle position, and then the peg is turned to bring the string up to pitch. The fine turners are used for subtle, minor adjustments to pitch, such as tuning a cello to the oboe's 440\u00a0Hz A note or tuning the cello to a piano.\nThe endpin or spike is made of wood, metal, or rigid carbon fiber and supports the cello in playing position. The endpin can be retracted into the hollow body of the instrument when the cello is being transported in its case. This makes the cello easier to move about. When the performer wishes to play the cello, the endpin is pulled out to lengthen it. The endpin is locked into the player's preferred length with a screw mechanism. The adjustable nature of endpins enables performers of different ages and body sizes to adjust the endpin length to suit them. In the Baroque period, the cello was held between the calves, as there was no endpin at that time. The endpin was \"introduced by Adrien Servais c. 1845 to give the instrument greater stability\". Modern endpins are retractable and adjustable; older ones were removed when not in use. (The word \"endpin\" sometimes also refers to the button of wood located at this place in all instruments in the violin family, but this is usually called \"tailpin\".) The sharp tip of the cello's endpin is sometimes capped with a rubber tip that protects the tip from dulling and prevents the cello from slipping on the floor. Many cellists use a rubber pad with a metal cup to keep the tip from slipping on the floor. A number of accessories exist to keep the endpin from slipping; these include ropes that attach to the chair leg and other devices.\nBridge and f-holes.\nThe bridge holds the strings above the cello and transfers their vibrations to the top of the instrument and the soundpost inside (see below). The bridge is not glued but rather held in place by the tension of the strings. The bridge is usually positioned by the cross point of the \"f-hole\" (i.e., where the horizontal line occurs in the \"f\"). The f-holes, named for their shape, are located on either side of the bridge and allow air to move in and out of the instrument as part of the sound-production process. The f-holes also act as access points to the interior of the cello for repairs or maintenance. Sometimes a small length of rubber hose containing a water-soaked sponge, called a Dampit, is inserted through the f-holes and serves as a humidifier. This keeps the wood components of the cello from drying out.\nInternal features.\nInternally, the cello has two important features: a bass bar, which is glued to the underside of the top of the instrument, and a round wooden sound post, a solid wooden cylinder which is wedged between the top and bottom plates. The bass bar, found under the bass foot of the bridge, serves to support the cello's top and distribute the vibrations from the strings to the body of the instrument. The soundpost, found under the treble side of the bridge, connects the back and front of the cello. Like the bridge, the soundpost is not glued but is kept in place by the tensions of the bridge and strings. Together, the bass bar and sound post transfer the strings' vibrations to the top (front) of the instrument (and to a lesser extent the back), acting as a diaphragm to produce the instrument's sound.\nGlue.\nCellos are constructed and repaired using hide glue, which is strong but reversible, allowing for disassembly when needed. Tops may be glued on with diluted glue since some repairs call for the removal of the top. Theoretically, hide glue is weaker than the body's wood, so as the top or back shrinks side-to-side, the glue holding it lets go and the plate does not crack. Cellists repairing cracks in their cello do not use regular wood glue, because it cannot be steamed open when a repair has to be made by a luthier.\nBow.\nTraditionally, bows are made from pernambuco or brazilwood. Both come from the same species of tree (\"Caesalpinia echinata\"), but Pernambuco, used for higher-quality bows, is the heartwood of the tree and is darker in color than brazilwood (which is sometimes stained to compensate). Pernambuco is a heavy, resinous wood with great elasticity, which makes it an ideal wood for instrument bows. Horsehair is stretched out between the two ends of the bow. The taut horsehair is drawn over the strings, while being held roughly parallel to the bridge and perpendicular to the strings, to produce sound. A small knob is twisted to increase or decrease the tension of the horsehair. The tension on the bow is released when the instrument is not being used. The amount of tension a cellist puts on the bow hair depends on the preferences of the player, the style of music being played, and for students, the preferences of their teacher.\nBows are also made from other materials, such as carbon fibre\u2014stronger than wood\u2014and fiberglass (often used to make inexpensive, lower-quality student bows). An average cello bow is long (shorter than a violin or viola bow) high (from the frog to the stick) and wide. The frog of a cello bow typically has a rounded corner like that of a viola bow, but is wider. A cello bow is roughly heavier than a viola bow, which in turn is roughly heavier than a violin bow. \nBow hair is traditionally horsehair, though synthetic hair, in varying colors, is also used. Prior to playing, the musician tightens the bow by turning a screw to pull the frog (the part of the bow under the hand) back and increase the tension of the hair. Rosin is applied by the player to make the hair sticky. Bows need to be re-haired periodically. Baroque-style (1600\u20131750) cello bows were much thicker and were formed with a larger outward arch than modern cello bows. The inward arch of a modern cello bow produces greater tension, which in turn produces a louder sound.\nThe cello bow has also been used to play electric guitars. Jimmy Page pioneered its application on tracks such as \"Dazed and Confused\". The post-rock Icelandic band Sigur R\u00f3s's lead singer often plays guitar using a cello bow.\nIn 1989, the German cellist Michael Bach began developing a curved bow, encouraged by John Cage, Dieter Schnebel, Mstislav Rostropovich and Luigi Colani: and since then many pieces have been composed especially for it. This curved bow (\"BACH.Bow\") is a convex curved bow which, unlike the ordinary bow, renders possible polyphonic playing on the various strings of the instrument. The BACH.Bow is particularly well-suited to the solo repertoire for violin and cello by J. S. Bach; which requires both polyphonic and monophonic playing. \nPhysics.\nPhysical aspects.\nWhen a string is bowed or plucked, it vibrates and moves the air around it, producing sound waves. Because the string is quite thin, not much air is moved by the string itself, and consequently, if the string was not mounted on a hollow body, the sound would be weak. In acoustic stringed instruments such as the cello, this lack of volume is solved by mounting the vibrating string on a larger hollow wooden body. The vibrations are transmitted to the larger body, which can move more air and produce a louder sound. Different designs of the instrument produce variations in the instrument's vibrational patterns and thus change the character of the sound produced. A string's fundamental pitch can be adjusted by changing its stiffness, which depends on tension and length. Tightening a string stiffens it by increasing both the outward forces along its length and the net forces it experiences during a distortion. A cello can be tuned by adjusting the tension of its strings, by turning the tuning pegs mounted on its pegbox and tension adjusters (fine tuners) on the tailpiece.\nA string's length also affects its fundamental pitch. Shortening a string stiffens it by increasing its curvature during a distortion and subjecting it to larger net forces. Shortening the string also reduces its mass, but does not alter the mass per unit length, and it is the latter ratio rather than the total mass which governs the frequency. The string vibrates in a standing wave whose speed of propagation is given by formula_1, where T is the tension and m is the mass per unit length; there is a node at either end of the vibrating length, and thus the vibrating length l is half a wavelength. Since the frequency of any wave is equal to the speed divided by the wavelength, we have formula_2. (Some writers, including Muncaster (cited below), use the Greek letter \u03bc in place of m.) Thus shortening a string increases the frequency, and thus the pitch. Because of this effect, you can raise and change the pitch of a string by pressing it against the fingerboard in the cello's neck and effectively shortening it. Likewise strings with less mass per unit length, if under the same tension, will have a higher frequency and thus higher pitch than more massive strings. This is a prime reason the different strings on all string instruments have different fundamental pitches, with the lightest strings having the highest pitches.\nA played note of E or F\u266f has a frequency that is often very close to the natural resonating frequency of the body of the instrument, and if the problem is not addressed this can set the body into near resonance. This may cause an unpleasant sudden amplification of this pitch, and additionally a loud beating sound results from the interference produced between these nearby frequencies; this is known as the \"wolf tone\" because it is an unpleasant growling sound. The wood resonance appears to be split into two frequencies by the driving force of the sounding string. These two periodic resonances beat with each other. This wolf tone must be eliminated or significantly reduced for the cello to play the nearby notes with a pleasant tone. This can be accomplished by modifying the cello front plate, attaching a wolf eliminator (a metal cylinder or a rubber cylinder encased in metal), or moving the soundpost.\nWhen a string is bowed or plucked to produce a note, the fundamental note is accompanied by higher frequency overtones. Each sound has a particular recipe of frequencies that combine to make the total sound.\nPlaying technique.\nPlaying the cello is done while seated with the instrument supported on the floor by the endpin. The right hand bows (or sometimes plucks) the strings to sound the notes. The left-hand fingertips stop the strings along their length, determining the pitch of each fingered note. Stopping the string closer to the bridge results in a higher-pitched sound because the vibrating string length has been shortened. On the contrary, a string stopped closer to the tuning pegs produces a lower sound. In the \"neck\" positions (which use just less than half of the fingerboard, nearest the top of the instrument), the thumb rests on the back of the neck, some people use their thumb as a marker of their position; in \"thumb position\" (a general name for notes on the remainder of the fingerboard) the thumb usually rests alongside the fingers on the string. Then, the side of the thumb is used to play notes. The fingers are normally held curved with each knuckle bent, with the fingertips in contact with the string. If a finger is required on two (or more) strings at once to play perfect fifths (in double stops or chords), it is used flat. The contact point can move slightly away from the nail to the finger's pad in slower or more expressive playing, allowing a fuller vibrato.\nVibrato is a small oscillation in the pitch of a note, usually considered an expressive technique. The closer towards the bridge the note is, the smaller the oscillation needed to create the effect. Harmonics played on the cello fall into two classes; natural and artificial. Natural harmonics are produced by lightly touching (but not depressing) the string at certain places and then bowing (or, rarely, plucking) the string. For example, the halfway point of the string will produce a harmonic that is one octave above the unfingered (open) string. Natural harmonics only produce notes that are part of the harmonic series on a particular string. Artificial harmonics (also called false harmonics or stopped harmonics), in which the player depresses the string fully with one finger while touching the same string lightly with another finger, can produce any note above middle C. \nGlissando (Italian for \"sliding\") is an effect achieved by sliding the finger up or down the fingerboard without releasing the string. This causes the pitch to rise and fall smoothly, without separate, discernible steps.\nIn cello playing, the bow is much like the breath of a wind instrument player. Arguably, it is a major factor in the expressiveness of the playing. The right hand holds the bow and controls the duration and character of the notes. In general, the bow is drawn across the strings roughly halfway between the end of the fingerboard and the bridge, in a direction perpendicular to the strings; however, the player may wish to move the bow's point of contact higher or lower depending on the desired sound. The bow is held and manipulated with all five fingers of the right hand, with the thumb opposite the fingers and closer to the cellist's body. Tone production and volume of sound depend on a combination of several factors. The four most important ones are \"weight\" applied to the string, the \"angle\" of the bow on the string, bow \"speed\", and the \"point of contact\" of the bow hair with the string (sometimes abbreviated WASP).\nDouble stops involve the playing of two notes simultaneously. Two strings are fingered at once, and the bow is drawn to sound them both. Often, in pizzicato playing, the string is plucked directly with the fingers or thumb of the right hand. However, the strings may be plucked with a finger of the left hand in certain advanced pieces, either so that the cellist can play bowed notes on another string along with pizzicato notes or because the speed of the piece would not allow the player sufficient time to pluck with the right hand. In musical notation, pizzicato is often abbreviated as \"pizz.\" The position of the hand in pizzicato is commonly slightly over the fingerboard and away from the bridge.\nA player using the col legno technique strikes or rubs the strings with the wood of the bow rather than the hair. In spiccato playing, the bow still moves in a horizontal motion on the string but is allowed to bounce, generating a lighter, somewhat more percussive sound. In staccato, the player moves the bow a small distance and stops it on the string, making a short sound, the rest of the written duration being taken up by silence. \nLegato is a technique in which notes are smoothly connected without breaks. It is indicated by a slur (curved line) above or below \u2013 depending on their position on the staff \u2013 the notes of the passage that is to be played legato.\n\"Sul ponticello\" (\"on the bridge\") refers to bowing closer to (or nearly on) the bridge, while \"sul tasto\" (\"on the fingerboard\") calls for bowing nearer to (or over) the end of the fingerboard. At its extreme, sul ponticello produces a harsh, shrill sound with emphasis on overtones and high harmonics. In contrast, sul tasto produces a more flute-like sound that emphasizes the note's fundamental frequency and produces softened overtones. Composers have used both techniques, particularly in an orchestral setting, for special sounds and effects.\nSizes.\nStandard-sized cellos are referred to as \"full-size\" or \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20444\" but are also made in smaller (fractional) sizes, including &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;15\u204416, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20448, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20444, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204410, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u204416. The fractions refer to volume rather than length, so a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 size cello is much longer than half the length of a full size. The smaller cellos are identical to standard cellos in construction, range, and usage, but are simply scaled-down for the benefit of children and shorter adults.\nCellos in sizes larger than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20444 do exist, and cellists with unusually large hands may require such a non-standard instrument. Cellos made before c.\u20091700 tended to be considerably larger than those made and commonly played today. Around 1680, changes in string-making technology made it possible to play lower-pitched notes on shorter strings. The cellos of Stradivari, for example, can be clearly divided into two models: the style made before 1702, characterized by larger instruments (of which only three exist in their original size and configuration), and the style made during and after 1707, when Stradivari began making smaller cellos. This later model is the design most commonly used by modern luthiers. The scale length of a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4\u20444 cello is about . The new size offered fuller tonal projection and a greater range of expression. The instrument in this form was able to contribute to more pieces musically and offered the possibility of greater physical dexterity for the player to develop technique.\nAccessories.\nThere are many accessories for the cello.\nInstrument makers.\nCellos are made by luthiers, specialists in building and repairing stringed instruments, ranging from guitars to violins. The following luthiers are notable for the cellos they have produced:\nCellists.\nA person who plays the cello is called a \"cellist\". For a list of notable cellists, see the list of cellists and .\nFamous instruments.\nSpecific instruments are famous (or become famous) for a variety of reasons. An instrument's notability may arise from its age, the fame of its maker, its physical appearance, its acoustic properties, and its use by notable performers. The most famous instruments are generally known for all of these things. The most highly prized instruments are now collector's items and are priced beyond the reach of most musicians. These instruments are typically owned by some kind of organization or investment group, which may loan the instrument to a notable performer. For example, the Davidov Stradivarius, which is currently in the possession of one of the most widely known living cellists, Yo-Yo Ma, is actually owned by the Vuitton Foundation.\nSome notable cellos:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6559", "revid": "122189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6559", "title": "Control store", "text": "A control store is the part of a CPU's control unit that stores the CPU's microprogram. It is usually accessed by a microsequencer. A control store implementation whose contents are unalterable is known as a Read Only Memory (ROM) or Read Only Storage (ROS); one whose contents are alterable is known as a Writable Control Store (WCS).\nImplementation.\nEarly use.\nEarly control stores were implemented as a diode-array accessed via address decoders, a form of read-only memory. This tradition dates back to the \"program timing matrix\" on the MIT Whirlwind, first described in 1947. Modern VLSI processors instead use matrices of field-effect transistors to build the ROM and/or PLA structures used to control the processor as well as its internal sequencer in a microcoded implementation. IBM System/360 used a variety of techniques: CCROS (Card Capacitor Read-Only Storage) on the Model 30, TROS (Transformer Read-Only Storage) on the Model 40, and BCROS (Balanced Capacitor Read-Only Storage) on Models 50, 65 and 67.\nWritable stores.\nSome computers are built using \"writable microcode\" \u2014 rather than storing the microcode in ROM or hard-wired logic, the microcode is stored in a RAM called a \"writable control store\" or \"WCS\". Such a computer is sometimes called a \"Writable Instruction Set Computer\" or \"WISC\". Many of these machines were experimental laboratory prototypes, such as the WISC CPU/16 and the RTX 32P.\nThe original System/360 models have read-only control store, but later System/360, System/370 and successor models load part or all of their microprograms from floppy disks or other DASD into a writable control store consisting of ultra-high speed random-access read\u2013write memory. The System/370 architecture includes a facility called Initial-Microprogram Load (IML or IMPL) that can be invoked from the console, as part of Power On Reset (POR) or from another processor in a tightly coupled multiprocessor complex. This permitted IBM to easily repair microprogramming defects in the field. Even when the majority of the control store is stored in ROM, computer vendors would often sell writable control store as an option, allowing the customers to customize the machine's microprogram. Other vendors, e.g., IBM, use the WCS to run microcode for emulator features and hardware diagnostics.\nOther commercial machines that use writable microcode include the Burroughs Small Systems (1970s and 1980s), the Xerox processors in their Lisp machines and Xerox Star workstations, the DEC VAX 8800 (\"Nautilus\") family, and the Symbolics L- and G-machines (1980s). Some DEC PDP-10 machines store their microcode in SRAM chips (about 80 bits wide x 2 Kwords), which is typically loaded on power-on through some other front-end CPU. Many more machines offer user-programmable writable control stores as an option (including the HP 2100, DEC PDP-11/60 and Varian Data Machines V-70 series minicomputers).\nThe Mentec M11 and Mentec M1 store its microcode in SRAM chips, loaded on power-on through another CPU.\nThe Data General Eclipse MV/8000 (\"Eagle\") has a SRAM writable control store, loaded on power-on through another CPU.\nWCS offers several advantages including the ease of patching the microprogram and, for certain hardware generations, faster access than ROMs could provide. User-programmable WCS allow the user to optimize the machine for specific purposes. However, it also had the disadvantage of making it harder to debug programs, and making it possible for malicious users to negatively affect the system and data.\nThe Burroughs Small Systems, the Rekursiv processor, and the Imsys Cjip supported loading different microcode for programs in different programming languages, with the microcode for a particular language implementing an instruction set tailored for the language.\nSeveral Intel CPUs in the x86 architecture family have writable microcode, starting with the Pentium Pro in 1995.\nThis has allowed bugs in the Intel Core 2 microcode and Intel Xeon microcode to be fixed in software, rather than requiring the entire chip to be replaced.\nSuch fixes can be installed by Linux, FreeBSD, Microsoft Windows, or the motherboard BIOS.\nTiming, latching and avoiding a race condition.\nThe control store usually has a register on its outputs. The outputs that go back into the sequencer to determine the next address have to go through some sort of register to prevent the creation of a race condition.\nIn most designs all of the other bits also go through a register. This is because the machine will work faster if the execution of the next microinstruction is delayed by one cycle. This register is known as a pipeline register. Very often the execution of the next microinstruction is dependent on the result of the current microinstruction, which will not be stable until the end of the current microcycle. It can be seen that either way, all of the outputs of the control store go into one big register. Historically it used to be possible to buy EPROMs with these register bits on the same chip.\nThe clock signal determining the clock rate, which is the cycle time of the system, primarily clocks this register.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6561", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6561", "title": "Columba", "text": "Irish missionary monk, one of Ireland's three patron saints\nColumba () or Colmcille (7 December 521 \u2013 9 June 597 AD) was an Irish abbot and missionary evangelist credited with spreading Christianity in what is today Scotland at the start of the Hiberno-Scottish mission. He founded the important abbey on Iona, which became a dominant religious and political institution in the region for centuries. He is the patron saint of Derry. He was highly regarded by both the Gaels of D\u00e1l Riata and the Picts, and is remembered today as a Catholic saint and one of the Twelve Apostles of Ireland.\nColumba studied under some of Ireland's most prominent church figures and founded several monasteries in the country. Around 563 AD he and his twelve companions crossed to Dunaverty near Southend, Argyll, in Kintyre before settling in Iona in Scotland, then part of the Ulster kingdom of D\u00e1l Riata, where they founded a new abbey as a base for spreading Christianity among the pagan Northern Pictish kingdoms. He remained active in Irish politics, though he spent most of the remainder of his life in Scotland. Three surviving early-medieval Latin hymns are attributed to him.\nEarly life in Ireland.\nColumba was born to Fedlimid and Eithne of the \"Cen\u00e9l Conaill\" in Gartan, a district beside Lough Gartan, in T\u00edr Chonaill (mainly modern County Donegal) in what is now Ulster, the northern province in Ireland. On his father's side, he is claimed as being the great-great-grandson of Niall of the Nine Hostages, a pseudo-historical Irish high king of the 5th century. Tradition holds that he was born in Gartan. One tradition holds that he was born on a flagstone called \"Leac na Cumha\" in the townland of Lacknacoo. He was baptised in Temple-Douglas, in the County Donegal parish of Conwal (midway between Gartan and Letterkenny), by his teacher and foster-uncle Cruithnech\u00e1n.\nColumba lived in the remote district of what is now Glencolmcille for roughly five years, which was named after him. It is not known for sure if his name at birth was Colmcille or if he adopted this name later in life; Adomn\u00e1n (Eunan) of Iona thought it was his birth name but other Irish sources have claimed his name at birth was Crimthann (meaning 'fox'). In the Irish language his name means 'dove', which is the same name as the Prophet Jonah (Jonah in Hebrew is also 'dove'), which Adomn\u00e1n of Iona, as well as other early Irish writers, were aware of, although it is not clear if he was deliberately named after Jonah or not. \"Columba\" is also Latin for dove, and the name of the bird genus.\nWhen sufficiently advanced in letters he entered the monastic school of Movilla, at Newtownards, under Finnian of Movilla who had studied at Ninian's \"Magnum Monasterium\" on the shores of Galloway. He was about twenty, and a deacon when, having completed his training at Movilla, he travelled southwards into Leinster, where he became a pupil of an aged bard named Gemman. On leaving him, Columba entered the monastery of Clonard, governed at that time by Finnian, noted for sanctity and learning. Here he imbibed the traditions of the Welsh Church, for Finnian had been trained in the schools of David.\nThe study of Latin learning and Christian theology in monasteries flourished. Columba became a pupil at the monastic school at Clonard Abbey, situated on the River Boyne in modern County Meath. During the sixth century, some of the most significant names in the history of Insular Christianity studied at the Clonard monastery. The average number of scholars under instruction at Clonard was said to be 300. Columba was one of twelve students of Finnian of Clonard who became known as the Twelve Apostles of Ireland. He became a monk and eventually was ordained a priest.\nAnother preceptor of Columba was Mobh\u00ed Cl\u00e1rainech, whose monastery at Glasnevin was frequented by such famous men as Cainnech of Aghaboe, Comgall, and Ciar\u00e1n. A pestilence which devastated Ireland in 544 caused the dispersion of Mobhi's disciples, and Columba returned to Ulster, the land of his kindred.\nThe foundation of several important monasteries marked the following years: Derry, at the southern edge of Inishowen; Durrow, County Offaly; Kells, County Meath; and Swords, County Dublin. While at Derry it is said that he planned a pilgrimage to Rome and Jerusalem, but did not proceed farther than Tours. From Tours, he brought a copy of those gospels that had lain on the bosom of Martin for 100 years. This relic was deposited in Derry. St Colmcille is also believed to have established a Church on Inishkea North, County Mayo which is named St Colmcille's Church.\nSome traditions assert that sometime around 560 Columba became involved in a quarrel with Finnian of Moville of Movilla Abbey over a psalter. Columba copied the manuscript at the scriptorium under Finnian, intending to keep the copy. Finnian disputed his right to keep it. There is a suggestion that this conflict resulted in the Battle of C\u00fal Dreimhne in Cairbre Drom Cliabh (now in County Sligo) in 561, during which many men were killed. Richard Sharpe, translator of Adomn\u00e1n's Life of St. Columba (referenced in the bibliography below) makes a stern caution at this point against accepting the many references that link the battle and Columba's leaving of Ireland, even though there is evidence in the annals that Columba supported his own king against the high king. Political conflicts that had existed for some time resulted in the clan Neill's battle against King Diarmait at Cooldrevny in 561. An issue, for example, was the king's violation of the right of sanctuary belonging to Columba's person as a monk on the occasion of the murder of Prince Curnan, Columba's kinsman.\nPrince Curnan of Connacht, who had fatally injured a rival in a hurling match and had taken refuge with Columba, was dragged from his protector's arms and slain by Diarmaid's men, in defiance of the rights of sanctuary.\nA synod of clerics and scholars threatened to excommunicate him for these deaths, but Brendan of Birr spoke on his behalf. Eventually, the process was deemed a miscarriage of justice. Columba's own conscience was uneasy, and on the advice of an aged hermit, Molaise, he resolved to expiate his sense of offence by departing Ireland. The term \"exile\" is used in some references. This, too, can be disputed, for the term \"pilgrimage\" is used more frequently in the literature about him. A marker at Stroove Beach on the Inishowen Peninsula commemorates the place where Columba set sail for Scotland. He left Ireland, but through the following years, he returned several times to visit the communities he had founded there.\nColumba's copy of the psalter has been traditionally associated with the Cathach of St. Columba. In 574/575, during his return for the Synod of Drum Ceat, he founded the monastery of Drumcliff in Cairbre, now County Sligo.\nScotland.\nIn 563, he travelled to Scotland with twelve companions (said to include Odran of Iona) in a wicker currach covered with leather. According to legend he first landed on the Kintyre Peninsula, near Southend. However, being still in sight of Ulster, he moved farther north up the west coast of Scotland. The island of Iona was made over to him by his kinsman Conall mac Comgaill King of D\u00e1l Riata, who perhaps had invited him to come to Scotland in the first place. However, there is a sense in which he was not leaving his native people, as the Ulster Gaels had been inhabiting the west coast of Scotland for the previous couple of centuries. Aside from the services he provided guiding the only centre of literacy in the region, his reputation as a holy man led to his role as a diplomat among the tribes.\nThere are also many stories of miracles which he performed during his work to convert the Picts, the most famous being his encounter with an unidentified animal that some have equated with the Loch Ness Monster in 565. It is said that he banished a ferocious \"water beast\" to the depths of the River Ness after it had killed a Pict and then tried to attack Columba's disciple, Lugne (see Vita Columbae Book 2 below). He visited the pagan King Bridei, King of Fortriu, at his base in Inverness, winning Bridei's respect, although not his conversion. He subsequently played a major role in the politics of the country.\nHe was also very energetic in his work as a missionary, and, in addition to founding several churches in the Hebrides, he worked to turn his monastery at Iona into a school for missionaries. He was a renowned man of letters, having written several hymns and being credited with having transcribed 300 books. One of the few, if not the only, times he left Scotland was towards the end of his life, when he returned to Ireland to found the monastery at Durrow.\nAccording to traditional sources, Columba died in Iona on Sunday, 9 June 597, and was buried by his monks in the abbey he created. However, Dr. Daniel P. Mc Carthy disputes this and assigns a date of 593 to Columba's death. The Annals record the first raid made upon Iona in 795, with further raids occurring in 802, 806 and 825. Columba's relics were finally removed in 849 and divided between Scotland and Ireland.\nLegacy.\nIreland.\nIn Ireland, the saint is commonly known as Colmcille.\nColmcille is one of the three patron saints of Ireland, after Patrick and Brigid of Kildare.\nColmcille is the patron saint of the city of Derry, where he founded a monastic settlement in c. 540. The name of the city in Irish is \"Doire Cholm Cille\" and is derived from the native oak trees in the area and the city's association with Colmcille. The Catholic Church of Saint Colmcille's Long Tower, and the Church of Ireland St Augustine's Church both claim to stand at the spot of this original settlement. The Church of Ireland Cathedral, St. Columb's Cathedral, and the largest park in the city, St. Columb's Park, are named in his honour. The Catholic Boys' Grammar School, St. Columb's College, has him as Patron and namesake.\nSt. Columba's National School in Drumcondra is a girls' school named after the saint.\nSt. Colmcille's Primary School and St. Colmcille's Community School are two schools in Knocklyon, Dublin, named after him, with the former having an annual day dedicated to the saint on 9 June.\nThe town of Swords, County Dublin was reputedly founded by Colmcille in 560 AD. St. Colmcille's Boys' National School and St. Colmcille's Girls' National School, both located in the town of Swords, are also named after the Saint as is one of the local gaelic teams, Naomh Colmcille.\nThe Columba Press, a religious and spiritual book company based in Dublin, is named after Colmcille.\nAer Lingus, Ireland's national flag carrier has named one of its Airbus A330 aircraft in commemoration of the saint (reg: EI-DUO).\nAs of June 2025, a new Public Holiday in honour of Saint Colmcille/Columba is pending approval from the Irish Government after having been proposed by Donegal County Council.\nScotland.\nColumba is credited as being a leading figure in the revitalisation of monasticism. The Clan Malcolm/Clan McCallum claims its name from Columba and was reputedly founded by the descendants of his original followers. It is also said that Clan Robertson Clan Donnachaidh / Duncan and Clan Dundas are heirs of Columba. This being derived from male descent from Crinan lay abbot of Dunkeld. Clan MacKinnon may also have some claim to being spiritual descendants of St Columba. Sir Iain Moncreiffe of that Ilk speculated that Clan MacKinnon belonged to the kindred of Columba, noting the MacKinnon Arms bore the hand of Columba holding the Cross, and the several Mackinnon abbots of Iona. The MacKinnons included Green Abbots who were never priests and who were corrupt. The Macdonald Lords of the Isles dealt with them, imprisoning one who was convicted of treachery since Iona was the spiritual seat of Clan Donald.\nThe cathedral of the Catholic Diocese of Argyll and the Isles is placed under the patronage of Saint Columba, as are numerous Catholic schools and parishes throughout the nation. The Scottish Episcopal Church, the Church of Scotland, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of England also have parishes dedicated to him. The village of Kilmacolm in Renfrewshire is also derived from Colmcille's name.\nSt Columba's Hospice, a prominent hospice in Edinburgh, is named after the saint.\nPoetry.\nColumba currently has two poems attributed to him: \"Adiutor Laborantium\" and \"Altus Prosator\". Both poems are examples of Abecedarian hymns in Latin written while Columba was at the Iona Abbey.\nThe shorter of the two poems, \"Adiutor Laborantium\" consists of twenty-seven lines of eight syllables each, with each line following the format of an Abecedarian hymn using the Classical Latin alphabet save for lines 10\u201311 and 25\u201327. The content of the poem addresses God as a helper, ruler, guard, defender and lifter for those who are good and an enemy of sinners whom he will punish.\n\"Altus Prosator\" consists of twenty-three stanzas sixteen syllables long, with the first containing seven lines and six lines in each subsequent stanza. It uses the same format and alphabet as \"Adiutor Laborantium\" except with each stanza starting with a different letter rather than each line. The poem tells a story over three parts split into the beginning of time, the history of Creation, and the Apocalypse or end of time.\nOther.\nColumba is honoured in the Anglican communion, including the Church of England and the Episcopal Church, on 9 June. The Church of St. Columba in Ottawa is part of the Anglican Diocese of Ottawa. St. Columba Anglican Church is located in Tofino, British Columbia.\nSt. Columba's Episcopal Church is in Washington, D.C. There is a St. Columba's Presbyterian Church in Peppermint Grove, Washington. The Saint-Columba Presbyterian Church in Palmerstone, Vacoas-Phoenix is part of the Presbyterian Church in Mauritius.\nColumba is the patron saint of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Youngstown, Ohio. The Cathedral there is named for him. Iona University, in New Rochelle, New York, is named after the island on which Columba established his first monastery in Scotland, as is Iona College in Windsor, Ontario, Iona Presentation College, Perth, and Iona College Geelong in Charlemont, Victoria.\nIn Bangor, Pennsylvania, there is a megalith park called Columcille, which is open to the public.\nThere are at least four pipe bands named for him; one each from Tullamore, Ireland, from Derry, Northern Ireland, from Kearny, New Jersey, and from Cape Cod, Massachusetts.\nSt. Columba's School, one of the most prominent English-Medium schools in India, run by the Irish Christian Brothers, is also named after the saint.\nThe Munich GAA is named M\u00fcnchen Colmcilles.\nSaint Columba's Feast Day, 9 June, has been designated as International Celtic Art Day. The Book of Kells and the Book of Durrow, great medieval masterpieces of Celtic art, are associated with Columba.\nBenjamin Britten composed \"A Hymn of St Columba\" for choir and organ in 1962, setting a poem by the saint, on the occasion of the 1,400th anniversary of his voyage to Iona.\nPrimary sources.\nThe main source of information about Columba's life is the \"Life of Columba\" (), a hagiography written by Adomn\u00e1n, one of Columba's successors at Iona, in the style of \"saints' lives\" narratives that had become widespread throughout medieval Europe. Both the \"Life of Columba\" and Bede (672/673\u2013735) record Columba's visit to Bridei. Whereas Adomn\u00e1n just tells us that Columba visited Bridei, Bede relates a later, perhaps Pictish tradition, whereby Columba actually converts the Pictish king. Another early source is a poem in praise of Columba, most probably commissioned by Columba's kinsman, the King of the U\u00ed N\u00e9ill clan. It was almost certainly written within three or four years of Columba's death and is the earliest vernacular poem in European history. It consists of twenty-five stanzas of four verses of seven syllables each, called the Amra Coluim Chille.\nThrough the reputation of its venerable founder and its position as a major European centre of learning, Columba's Iona became a place of pilgrimage. Columba is historically revered as a warrior saint and was often invoked for victory in battle. Some of his relics were removed in 849 and divided between Alba and Ireland. Relics of Columba were carried before Scottish armies in the reliquary made at Iona in the mid-8th century called the Brecbennoch. Legend has it that the Brecbennoch was carried to the Battle of Bannockburn (24 June 1314) by the vastly outnumbered Scots army and the intercession of Columba helped them to victory. Since the 19th century the \"Brecbennoch of St. Columba\" has been identified with the Monymusk Reliquary, although this is now doubted by scholars.\nIn the Antiphoner of Inchcolm Abbey, the \"Iona of the East\" (situated on an island in the Firth of Forth), a 14th-century prayer begins \"O Columba spes Scotorum...\" \"O Columba, hope of the Scots\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6562", "revid": "9813438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6562", "title": "Conditional proof", "text": "Formal proof\nA conditional proof is a proof that takes the form of asserting a conditional, and proving that the antecedent of the conditional necessarily leads to the consequent.\nOverview.\nThe assumed antecedent of a conditional proof is called the conditional proof assumption (CPA). Thus, the goal of a conditional proof is to demonstrate that if the CPA were true, then the desired conclusion necessarily follows. The validity of a conditional proof does not require that the CPA be true, only that \"if it were true\" it would lead to the consequent.\nConditional proofs are of great importance in mathematics. Conditional proofs exist linking several otherwise unproven conjectures, so that a proof of one conjecture may immediately imply the validity of several others. It can be much easier to show a proposition's truth to follow from another proposition than to prove it independently.\nA famous network of conditional proofs is the NP-complete class of complexity theory. There is a large number of interesting tasks (see \"List of NP-complete problems\"), and while it is not known if a polynomial-time solution exists for any of them, it is known that if such a solution exists for some of them, one exists for all of them. Similarly, the Riemann hypothesis has many consequences already proven.\nSymbolic logic.\nAs an example of a conditional proof in symbolic logic, suppose we want to prove A \u2192 C (if A, then C) from the first two premises below:"}
{"id": "6563", "revid": "37442177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6563", "title": "Conjunction introduction", "text": "Rule of inference in propositional logic\nConjunction introduction (often abbreviated simply as conjunction and also called and introduction or adjunction) is a valid rule of inference of propositional logic. The rule makes it possible to introduce a conjunction into a logical proof. It is the inference that if the proposition formula_1 is true, and the proposition formula_2 is true, then the logical conjunction of the two propositions formula_1 and formula_2 is true. For example, if it is true that \"it is raining\", and it is true that \"the cat is inside\", then it is true that \"it is raining and the cat is inside\". The rule can be stated:\nformula_5\nwhere the rule is that wherever an instance of \"formula_1\" and \"formula_2\" appear on lines of a proof, a \"formula_8\" can be placed on a subsequent line.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"conjunction introduction\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\n formula_9\nwhere formula_1 and formula_2 are propositions expressed in some formal system, and formula_12 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_8 is a syntactic consequence if formula_1 and formula_2 are each on lines of a proof in some logical system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6564", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6564", "title": "Conjunction elimination (propositional logic)", "text": ""}
{"id": "6566", "revid": "50521773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6566", "title": "English in the Commonwealth of Nations", "text": " The use of the English language in current and former countries of the Commonwealth was largely inherited from British colonisation, with some exceptions. English forms part of the Commonwealth's common culture and serves as the medium of inter-Commonwealth relations.\nCommonwealth English refers to English as practised in the Commonwealth; the term is most often interchangeable with \"British English\", but is also used to distinguish between British English and that in the rest of the Commonwealth. English in the Commonwealth is diverse, and many regions have developed their own local varieties of the language. The official status of English varies; in Bangladesh, it lacks any but is widely used, and likewise in Cyprus, it is not official but is used as the .\nWritten English in current and former Commonwealth countries generally favours British English spelling as opposed to that of American English, with some exceptions, particularly in Canada, where there are strong influences from neighbouring American English.\nNative varieties.\nSouthern Hemisphere native varieties of English began to develop during the 18th century, with the colonisation of Australasia and South Africa. Australian English and New Zealand English are closely related to each other and share some similarities with South African English. Nonetheless, South African English has unique influences from indigenous African languages, and Dutch influences inherited alongside the evolution of Afrikaans, while New Zealand English has a lot of influences from the M\u0101ori language.\nCanadian English contains elements of British English and American English, as well as many Canadianisms and some French influences. It is the product of several waves of immigration and settlement, from Britain, Ireland, France, the United States, and around the world, over a period of more than two centuries.\nIn many Commonwealth countries, there exists a relatively small native Anglophone minority amongst a larger population who speak English as a second language; Anglo-Indians speak English as their mother tongue, but it is not the first language of most Indians.\nAfrica.\nIn addition to South Africa, a number of Commonwealth countries in Africa have native varieties of English. A community of native English speakers exists in Zimbabwe; the country's dialect bears features of British English, South African English and other Southern Hemisphere varieties of Commonwealth English. Also in Southern Africa and with historical influence from South Africa, Namibia and Botswana have their own dialects, with smaller native English-speaking populations. The same is true of Kenya and Uganda in East Africa.\nCaribbean.\nCaribbean English is drawn from British English and West African languages. It is influenced by constant contact with English-based Creoles. There is considerable influence from Hindustani and other South Asian languages in countries with language Indian populations, including Trinidad and Tobago, and Guyana. Jamaican English and Barbadian English bear influences of Irish English.\nNon-native varieties.\nSecond-language varieties of English in Africa and Asia have often undergone \"indigenisation\"; that is, each English-speaking community has developed (or is in the process of developing) its own standards of usage, often under the influence of local languages. These dialects are sometimes referred to as \"New Englishes\" (McArthur, p.\u00a036); most of them inherited non-rhoticity from Southern British English.\nAfrica.\nSeveral dialects of West African English exist, with considerable regional variation, though there is a set of common tendencies of pronunciation. Nigerian and Ghanaian English are the varieties with the largest number of speakers; English also holds official or national status in Sierra Leone, Cameroon\u2019s Anglophone provinces, the Gambia, and Saint Helena, a British territory. It also holds official status in Liberia, which is not a Commonwealth country but rather has a history connected to the United States of America.\nNational varieties of English are also spoken in Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania.\nPrior to Togo's admission at the 2022 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Togolese Foreign Minister Robert Dussey said that he expected Commonwealth membership to provide opportunities for Togolese citizens to learn English, and remarked that the country sought closer ties with the Anglophone world.\nAsia.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong ceased to be part of the Commonwealth by virtue of being a British territory in 1997. Nonetheless, the English language there still enjoys official status.\nIndian subcontinent.\nEnglish was introduced to the subcontinent by the British Raj. India has the largest English-speaking population in the Commonwealth, although comparatively very few speakers of Indian English are first-language speakers. The same is true of English spoken in other parts of South Asia, including Maldivian English, Pakistani English, Sri Lankan English, Bangladeshi English and Myanmar English; though Myanmar or Burma is not a Commonwealth country, English is the mother tongue of the Anglo-Burmese population. South Asian English is fairly homogeneous across the subcontinent, though there are some differences based on various regional factors.\nMalay Archipelago.\nSoutheast Asian English includes Singapore English, Malaysian English, and Brunei English as well as other varieties in non-Commonwealth countries; it is not only the result of British colonisation but also American colonisation (as in the case of the Philippines) and globalisation. It has interacted with diverse local ecologies, shaping its form, function and status in the region.\nSee also.\nOther languages:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6569", "revid": "4321602", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6569", "title": "Charles McCarry", "text": "American writer (1930\u20132019)\nCharles McCarry (June 14, 1930 \u2013 February 26, 2019) was an American writer, primarily of spy fiction, and a former undercover operative for the Central Intelligence Agency.\nBiography.\nMcCarry's family came from The Berkshires area of western Massachusetts. He was born in Pittsfield, and lived in Virginia. He graduated from Dalton High School.\nMcCarry began his writing career in the United States Army as a correspondent for \"Stars and Stripes\". He served from 1948 to 1951 and achieved the rank of sergeant. He received initial training at Fort Benning, Georgia, and was stationed in Germany for almost two years and at Camp Pickett, Virginia for about a year.\nAfter his army service, he was a speechwriter in the early Administration of President Dwight D. Eisenhower. In 1958, at the invitation of Cord Meyer, he accepted a post with the CIA, for whom he traveled the globe as a deep cover operative. He took a leave of absence to work for the 1960 Nixon campaign, writing for vice-presidential candidate Henry Cabot Lodge. He left the CIA for the last time in 1967, becoming a writer of spy novels.\nMcCarry was also an editor-at-large for \"National Geographic\" and contributed pieces to \"The New York Times\", \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"The Washington Post\", the \"Saturday Evening Post\", and other national publications.\nApproach to writing.\nMcCarry believed that \"the best novels are about ordinary things: love, betrayal, death, trust, loneliness, marriage, fatherhood.\" In 1988 McCarry described the themes of his novels to date as \"ordinary things \u2013 love, death, betrayal and the American dream.\"\nMcCarry wrote that: \"After I resigned [from the CIA], intending to spend the rest of my life writing fiction and knowing what tricks the mind can play when the gates are thrown wide open, as they are by the act of writing, between the imagination and that part of the brain in which information is stored, I took the precaution of writing a closely remembered narrative of my clandestine experiences. After correcting the manuscript, I burned it. What I kept for my own use was the atmosphere of secret life: How it worked on the five senses and what it did to the heart and mind. All the rest went up in flames, setting me free henceforth to make it all up. In all important matters, such as the creation of characters and the invention of plots, with rare and minor exceptions, that is what I have done. And, as might be expected, when I have been weak enough to use something that really happened as an episode in a novel, it is that piece of scrap, buried in a landfill of the imaginary, readers invariably refuse to believe.\"\nMcCarry was an admirer of the work of Eric Ambler and W. Somerset Maugham, especially the latter's stories. He was also an admirer of Richard Condon, author of \"The Manchurian Candidate\" (1959).\nPaul Christopher series.\nTen of McCarry's novels involve the life story of a fictional character named Paul Christopher, who grew up in pre-Nazi Germany, and later served in the Marines and became an operative for a U.S. government entity known as \"the Outfit\", meant to represent the Central Intelligence Agency.\nThese books are, in order of publication:\nAlternately, in chronological order of events depicted:\nReception.\n\"The Wall Street Journal\" described McCarry in 2013 as \"the dean of American spy writers\". \"The New Republic\" magazine called him \"poet laureate of the CIA\"; and Otto Penzler described him as \"the greatest espionage writer that America has ever produced.\" Jonathan Yardley, Pulitzer Prize-winning critic for the \"Washington Post\", calls him a \"'serious' novelist\" whose work may include \"the best novel ever written about life in high-stakes Washington, D.C.\" In 2004 P. J. O'Rourke called him \"the best modern writer on the subject of intrigue.\"\nAdaptations.\nThe film \"Wrong is Right\" (1982), starring Sean Connery, was loosely based on McCarry's novel, \"The Better Angels\" (1979).\nOther books and publications.\nCollections including McCarry's work.\nOtto Penzler, editor:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6571", "revid": "1308462468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6571", "title": "Cimbri", "text": "Ancient tribe in Central Europe\nThe Cimbri (, ; ) were an ancient tribe in Europe. Ancient authors described them variously as a Celtic-Gaulish, Germanic, or even Cimmerian people. Several ancient sources indicate that they lived in Jutland, which in some classical texts was called the Cimbrian peninsula. There is no direct evidence for the language they spoke, though some scholars argue that it was a Germanic language, while others argue that it was Celtic.\nTogether with the Teutones and the Ambrones, they fought the Roman Republic between 113 and 101 BC during the Cimbrian War. The Cimbri were initially successful, particularly at the Battle of Arausio, in which a large Roman army was routed. They then raided large areas in Gaul and Hispania. In 101 BC, during an attempted invasion of the Italian peninsula, the Cimbri were decisively defeated at the Battle of Vercellae by Gaius Marius, and their king, Boiorix, was killed. Some of the surviving captives are reported to have been among the rebellious gladiators in the Third Servile War.\nName.\nThe origin of the name \"Cimbri\" is unknown. One etymology is , from \"home\" (English \"home\"), itself a derivation from \"live\" (, ); then, the Germanic finds an exact cognate in Slavic \"s\u0119br\u044a\" \"farmer\" (Croatian, Serbian \"sebar\", Belarusian \u0441\u044f\u0431\u0430\u0440 \"sj\u00e1bar\").\nThe name has also been related to the word \"kimme\" meaning \"rim\", i.e., \"the people of the coast\". Finally, since Antiquity, the name has been related to that of the Cimmerians.\nThe name of the Danish region Himmerland (Old Danish \"Himbersysel\") has been proposed to be a derivative of their name. According to such proposals, the word \"Cimbri\" with a \"c\" would be an older form before Grimm's law (PIE \"k\" &gt; Germanic \"h\"). Alternatively, Latin \"c-\" represents an attempt to render the unfamiliar Proto-Germanic \"h\" = (Latin \"h\" was but was becoming silent in common speech at the time), perhaps due to Celtic-speaking interpreters (a Celtic intermediary could also explain why one proposed etymology for the Teutons, Germanic \"*\u00deeu\u00f0an\u014dz\", became Latin \"Teutones\").\nBecause of the similarity of the names, the Cimbri have been at times associated with Cymry, the Welsh name for themselves. However, \"Cymry\" is derived from Brittonic \"*Kombrogi\" (cf. Allobroges), meaning \"compatriots\", and is linguistically unrelated to Cimbri.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nScholars generally see the Cimbri as originating in Jutland, but archaeologists have found no clear indications of any mass migration from Jutland in the early Iron Age. The Gundestrup Cauldron, which was deposited in a bog in Himmerland in the 2nd or 1st century BC, shows that there was some sort of contact with southeastern Europe, but it is uncertain if this contact can be associated with the Cimbrian militia expeditions against Rome of the 1st Century BC. It is known that the peoples of Northern Europe and the British Isles participated in annual winter migrations southward to what is now central Iberia and southern France where goods and resources were traded and cross-culture marriages were arranged.\nAdvocates for a northern homeland point to Greek and Roman sources that associate the Cimbri with the Jutland peninsula. According to the \"Res gestae\" (ch. 26) of Augustus, the Cimbri were still found in the area around the turn of the 1st century AD:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My fleet sailed from the mouth of the Rhine eastward as far as the lands of the Cimbri, to which, up to that time, no Roman had ever penetrated either by land or by sea, and the Cimbri and Charydes and Semnones and other peoples of the Germans of that same region through their envoys sought my friendship and that of the Roman people.\nThe contemporary Greek geographer Strabo testified that the Cimbri still existed as a Germanic tribe, presumably in the \"Cimbric peninsula\" (since they are said to live by the North Sea and to have paid tribute to Augustus):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As for the Cimbri, some things that are told about them are incorrect and others are extremely improbable. For instance, one could not accept such a reason for their having become a wandering and piratical folk as this that while they were dwelling on a Peninsula they were driven out of their habitations by a great flood-tide; for in fact they still hold the country which they held in earlier times; and they sent as a present to Augustus the most sacred kettle in their country, with a plea for his friendship and for an amnesty of their earlier offences, and when their petition was granted they set sail for home; and it is ridiculous to suppose that they departed from their homes because they were incensed on account of a phenomenon that is natural and eternal, occurring twice every day. And the assertion that an excessive flood-tide once occurred looks like a fabrication, for when the ocean is affected in this way it is subject to increases and diminutions, but these are regulated and periodical.\u2014\u200a\nOn the map of Ptolemy, the \"Kimbroi\" are placed on the northernmost part of the peninsula of Jutland, i.e., in the modern landscape of Himmerland south of Limfjorden (since Vendsyssel-Thy north of the fjord was at that time a group of islands).\nMigration.\nSome time before 100 BC many of the Cimbri, as well as the Teutons and Ambrones, migrated south-east. After several unsuccessful battles with the Boii and other Celtic tribes, they appeared c. 113 BC in Noricum, where they invaded the lands of one of Rome's allies, the Taurisci.\nOn the request of the Roman consul Gnaeus Papirius Carbo, sent to defend the Taurisci, they retreated, only to find themselves deceived and attacked at the Battle of Noreia, where they defeated the Romans. Only a storm, which separated the combatants, saved the Roman forces from complete annihilation.\nInvading Gaul.\nNow the road to Italy was open, but they turned west towards Gaul. They came into frequent conflict with the Romans, who usually came out the losers. In 109 BC, they defeated a Roman army under the consul Marcus Junius Silanus, who was the commander of Gallia Narbonensis. In 107 BC they defeated another Roman army under the consul Gaius Cassius Longinus, who was killed at the Battle of Burdigala (modern day Bordeaux) against the Tigurini, who were allies of the Cimbri.\nAttacking the Roman Republic.\nIt was not until 105 BC that they planned an attack on the Roman Republic itself. At the Rh\u00f4ne, the Cimbri clashed with the Roman armies. Discord between the Roman commanders, the proconsul Quintus Servilius Caepio and the consul Gnaeus Mallius Maximus, hindered Roman coordination and so the Cimbri succeeded in first defeating the legate Marcus Aurelius Scaurus and later inflicted a devastating defeat on Caepio and Maximus at the Battle of Arausio. The Romans lost as many as 80,000 men, according to Livy; Mommsen (in his \"History of Rome\") thought that excluded auxiliary cavalry and non-combatants who brought the total loss closer to 112,000. Other estimates are much smaller, but by any account a large Roman army was routed.\nRome was in panic, and the \"terror cimbricus\" became proverbial. Everyone expected to soon see the \"new Gauls\" outside of the gates of Rome. Desperate measures were taken: contrary to the Roman constitution, Gaius Marius, who had defeated Jugurtha, was elected consul and supreme commander for five years in a row (104\u2013100 BC).\nDefeat.\nIn 104\u2013103 BC, the Cimbri had turned to the Iberian Peninsula where they pillaged far and wide, until they were confronted by a coalition of Celtiberians. Defeated, the Cimbri returned to Gaul, where they joined their allies, the Teutons. During this time, C. Marius had the time to prepare and, in 102 BC, he was ready to meet the Teutons and the Ambrones at the Rh\u00f4ne. These two tribes intended to pass into Italy through the western passes, while the Cimbri and the Tigurines were to take the northern route across the Rhine and later across the Central Eastern Alps.\nAt the estuary of the Is\u00e8re, the Teutons and the Ambrones met Marius, whose well-defended camp they did not manage to overrun. Instead, they pursued their route, and Marius followed them. At Aquae Sextiae, the Romans won two battles and took the Teuton king Teutobod prisoner.\nThe Cimbri had penetrated through the Alps into northern Italy. The consul Quintus Lutatius Catulus had not dared to fortify the passes, but instead he had retreated behind the river Po, and so the land was open to the invaders. The Cimbri did not hurry, and the victors of Aquae Sextiae had the time to arrive with reinforcements. At the Battle of Vercellae, at the confluence of the river Sesia with the Po, in 101 BC, the long voyage of the Cimbri also came to an end.\nIt was a devastating defeat. Two chieftains, Lugius and Boiorix, died on the field, while the other chieftains Caesorix and Claodicus were captured. The women killed both themselves and their children in order to avoid slavery. The Cimbri were annihilated, although some may have survived to return to the homeland where a population with this name was residing in northern Jutland in the 1st century AD, according to the sources quoted above. Some of the surviving captives may have had sons that joined Spartacus's cause, and been among the rebelling gladiators in the Third Servile War.\nJustin's epitome of Trogus has Mithridates VI send emissaries to the Cimbri to request military aid during the Social War (91-88 BCE). Justin also states that the Cimbri were again in Italy at this time, i.e. over ten years later.\nSupposed descendants.\nAccording to Julius Caesar, the Belgian tribe of the Atuatuci \"was descended from the Cimbri and Teutoni, who, upon their march into our province and Italy, set down such of their stock and stuff as they could not drive or carry with them on the near (i.e. west) side of the Rhine, and left six thousand men of their company there as guard and garrison\" (\"Gall.\" 2.29, trans. Edwards). They founded the city of Atuatuca in the land of the Belgic Eburones, whom they dominated. Thus Ambiorix king of the Eburones paid tribute and gave his son and nephew as hostages to the Atuatuci (\"Gall.\" 6.27). In the first century AD, the Eburones were replaced or absorbed by the Germanic Tungri, and the city was known as Atuatuca Tungrorum, i.e. the modern city of Tongeren.\nThe population of modern-day Himmerland claims to be the heirs of the ancient Cimbri. The adventures of the Cimbri are described by the Danish Nobel Prize\u2013winning author Johannes V. Jensen, himself born in Himmerland, in the novel \"Cimbrernes Tog\" (1922), included in the epic cycle \"Den lange Rejse\" (English \"The Long Journey\", 1923). The so-called Cimbrian bull (\"Cimbrertyren\"), a sculpture by Anders Bundgaard, was erected on 14 April 1937 in a central town square in Aalborg, the capital of the region of North Jutland.\nA German ethnic minority speaking the Cimbrian language, having settled in the mountains between Vicenza, Verona, and Trento in Italy (also known as Seven Communities), is also called the . For hundreds of years this isolated population and its present 4,400 inhabitants have claimed to be the direct descendants of the Cimbri retreating to this area after the Roman victory over their tribe. However, it is more likely that Bavarians settled here in the Middle Ages. Most linguists remain committed to the hypothesis of a medieval (11th to 12th century AD) immigration to explain the presence of small German-speaking communities in the north of Italy. Some genetic studies seem to prove a Celtic, not Germanic, descent for most inhabitants in the region that is reinforced by Gaulish toponyms such as those ending with the suffix \"-ago\" &lt; Celtic \"-*ako(n)\" (e.g. Asiago is clearly the same place name as the numerous variants \u2013 Azay, Aisy, Az\u00e9, Ezy \u2013 in France, all of which derive from \"*Asiacum\" &lt; Gaulish \"*Asi\u0101ko(n)\"). On the other hand, the original place names in the region, from the specifically localized language known as 'Cimbro' are still in use alongside the more modern names today. These indicate a different origin (e.g., Asiago is known also by its original Cimbro name of \"Sleghe\"). The Cimbrian origin myth was popularized by humanists in the 14th century.\nDespite these connections to southern Germany, belief in a Himmerland origin persisted well into modern times. On one occasion in 1709, for instance, Frederick IV of Denmark paid the region's inhabitants a visit and was greeted as their king. The population, which kept its independence during the time of the Venice Republic, was later severely devastated by World War I. As a result, many Cimbri have left this mountainous region of Italy, effectively forming a worldwide diaspora.\nCulture.\nReligion.\nThe Cimbri are depicted as ferocious warriors who did not fear death. The host was followed by women and children on carts. Aged women, priestesses, dressed in white sacrificed the prisoners of war and sprinkled their blood, the nature of which allowed them to see what was to come.\nStrabo gives this vivid description of the Cimbric folklore:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their wives, who would accompany them on their expeditions, were attended by priestesses who were seers; these were grey-haired, clad in white, with flaxen cloaks fastened on with clasps, girt with girdles of bronze, and bare-footed; now sword in hand these priestesses would meet with the prisoners of war throughout the camp, and having first crowned them with wreaths would lead them to a brazen vessel of about twenty amphorae; and they had a raised platform which the priestess would mount, and then, bending over the kettle, would cut the throat of each prisoner after he had been lifted up; and from the blood that poured forth into the vessel some of the priestesses would draw a prophecy, while still others would split open the body and from an inspection of the entrails would utter a prophecy of victory for their own people; and during the battles they would beat on the hides that were stretched over the wicker-bodies of the wagons and in this way produce an unearthly noise.\u2014\u200a\nIf the Cimbri did in fact come from Jutland, evidence that they practiced ritualistic sacrifice may be found in the Haraldsk\u00e6r Woman discovered in Jutland in the year 1835. Noosemarks and skin piercing were evident and she had been thrown into a bog rather than buried or cremated. Furthermore, the Gundestrup cauldron, found in Himmerland, may be a sacrificial vessel like the one described in Strabo's text. In style, the work looks like Thracian silver work, while many of the engravings are Celtic objects.\nLanguage.\nA major problem in determining whether the Cimbri were speaking a Celtic language or a Germanic language is that, at that time, the Greeks and Romans tended to refer to all groups to the north of their sphere of influence as Gauls, Celts, or Germani rather indiscriminately, and not based upon languages. Caesar seems to be one of the first authors to distinguish the \"Celtae\" and \"Germani\", and he had a political motive for doing so, because it was an argument in favour of his push to set the Rhine as a new Roman border. Yet, one cannot always trust Caesar and Tacitus when they ascribe individuals and tribes to one or the other category, although Caesar made clear distinctions between the two cultures. Some ancient sources categorize the Cimbri as a Germanic tribe, but some ancient authors include the Cimbri among the Celts.\nThere are few direct testimonies to the language of the Cimbri: referring to the Northern Ocean (the Baltic or the North Sea), Pliny the Elder states: \"Philemon says that it is called Morimarusa, i.e. the Dead Sea, by the Cimbri, until the promontory of Rubea, and after that Cronium.\" The contemporary Gaulish terms for \"sea\" and \"dead\" appear to have been \"mori\" and \"*maruo-\"; compare their well-attested modern Insular Celtic cognates \"muir\" and \"marbh\" (Irish), \"m\u00f4r\" and \"marw\" (Welsh), and \"mor\" and \"marv\" (Breton). The same word for \"sea\" is also known from Germanic, but with an \"a\" (*\"mari-\"), whereas a cognate of \"*maruo-\" is unknown in all dialects of Germanic. Yet, given that Pliny had not heard the word directly from a native Cimbric speaker, it cannot be ruled out that the word he heard had been translated into Gaulish.\nThe known Cimbri chiefs have Celtic names, including Boiorix (which may mean \"King of the Boii\" or, more literally, \"King of Strikers\"), Gaesorix (which means \"Spear King\"), and Lugius (which may be named after the Celtic god Lugus). Other evidence to the language of the Cimbri is circumstantial: thus, we are told that the Romans enlisted Gaulish Celts to act as spies in the Cimbri camp before the final showdown with the Roman army in 101 BC.\nJean Markale wrote that the Cimbri were associated with the Helvetii, and more especially with the indisputably Celtic Tigurini. These associations may link to a common ancestry, recalled from two hundred years previous, but that is not certain. Henri Hubert states \"All these names are Celtic, and they cannot be anything else\". Some authors take a different perspective.\nCountering the argument of a Celtic origin is the literary evidence that the Cimbri originally came from northern Jutland, an area with no Celtic placenames, instead only Germanic ones. This does not rule out Cimbric Gallicization during the period when they lived in Gaul. Boiorix, who may have had a Celtic if not a Celticized Germanic name, was king of the Cimbri after they moved away from their ancestral home of northern Jutland. Boiorix and his tribe lived around Celtic peoples during his era as J. B. Rives points out in his introduction to Tacitus' \"Germania\"; furthermore, the name \"Boiorix\" can be seen as having either Proto-Germanic or Celtic roots.\nIn fiction.\nThe science fiction story \"Delenda Est\" by Poul Anderson depicts an alternate history in which Hannibal won the Second Punic War and destroyed Rome, but Carthage proved unable to rule Italy \u2013 which fell into utter chaos. Thus, there was no one to stop the Cimbri two hundred years later. They filled the vacuum, conquered Italy, assimilated the local population to their own culture and by the equivalent of the 20th century had made of Italy a flourishing, technologically advanced kingdom speaking a Germanic language. He also wrote an unrelated historical novel \"The Golden Slave\", about a Cimbrian chieftain who is enslaved by the Romans after the Battle of Vercellae.\nCimbri is referenced in Italo Calvino's novel \"If on a Winter's Night a Traveller\" as a fictional country that warred with a similarly fictionalised version of Cimmeria, thus imposing its own written language onto the Cimmerians.\nJeff Hein's historical fiction series The Cimbrian War tells the story of the Cimbri and their migration across Iron-Age Europe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6573", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6573", "title": "Cimbri/Waid", "text": ""}
{"id": "6576", "revid": "49831663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6576", "title": "Cleveland Browns", "text": "National Football League franchise in Cleveland, Ohio\nThe Cleveland Browns are a professional American football team based in Cleveland. The Browns compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) North division. The team is named after original coach and co-founder Paul Brown. They play their home games at Huntington Bank Field, which opened in 1999, with administrative offices and training facilities in Berea, Ohio. The franchise's official club colors are brown, orange, and white. They are unique among the 32 member clubs of the NFL in that they do not have a logo on their helmets.\nThe franchise was founded in 1944 by Brown and businessman Arthur B. McBride as a charter member of the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), and began play in 1946. The Browns dominated the AAFC, compiling a 47\u20134\u20133 record in the league's four seasons and winning its championship in each. When the AAFC folded after the 1949 season, the Browns joined the NFL along with the San Francisco 49ers and the original Baltimore Colts. The Browns won a championship in their inaugural NFL season, as well as in the 1954, 1955, and 1964 seasons, and in a feat unequaled in any of the North American major professional sports, played in their league championship game in each of their first 10 years of existence, winning seven of those games. From 1965 to 1995, they qualified to play in the NFL playoffs 14 times, but did not win another championship or play in the Super Bowl during that period.\nIn 1995, owner Art Modell, who had purchased the Browns in 1961, announced plans to move the team to Baltimore. After threats of legal action from the city of Cleveland and fans, a compromise was reached in early 1996 that allowed Modell to establish the Baltimore Ravens as a new franchise while retaining the contracts of all Browns personnel. The Browns' intellectual property, including team name, logos, training facility, and history, were kept in trust and the franchise was regarded by the NFL as suspended, guaranteed to return no later than the 1999 season, either by moving an existing franchise or an expansion draft. While several franchises considered moving to Cleveland, in 1998 it was confirmed that the NFL would hold an expansion draft and field 31 teams when the Browns resumed play in 1999. Although the 1999 Browns were restocked via an expansion draft, the Browns are not considered to be an expansion franchise.\nSince resuming operations in 1999, the Browns have struggled to find success, especially during the 2010s when they failed to post a winning season throughout the decade. They have had only four winning seasons (2002, 2007, 2020, and 2023), three playoff appearances (2002, 2020, and 2023), and one playoff win (2020), winning less than one third of their games in total, and in 2017 were only the second team in NFL history to have a 0\u201316 season after the 2008 Detroit Lions. The franchise has also been noted for a lack of stability with head coaches (10 full time - including two who were fired after only one season - and two interim since 1999) and quarterbacks (42 different starters since 1999). From 2003 to 2019, the Browns had a 17-season playoff drought, which ended during the 2020 season. They are one of four teams to have never appeared in a Super Bowl. Their lack of recent success has been such that their decades-long rivalry with the Pittsburgh Steelers\u2014a rivalry that at one point the Browns had a 22-game lead in the all-time series\u2014saw the Steelers overtake the Browns in the rivalry in 2007 and currently hold a 17-game edge over the Browns.\nHistory.\nThe Cleveland Browns were founded in 1944 when taxicab magnate Arthur B. \"Mickey\" McBride secured a Cleveland franchise in the newly formed All-America Football Conference (AAFC). Paul Brown was the team's namesake and first coach. The Browns began play in 1946 in the AAFC. The Browns won each of the league's four championship games before the league dissolved in 1949. The team then moved to the more established National Football League (NFL), where it continued to dominate. Between 1950 and 1955, Cleveland reached the NFL championship game every year, winning three times.\nMcBride and his partners sold the team to a group of Cleveland businessmen in 1953 for a then-unheard-of $600,000. Eight years later, the team was sold again, this time to a group led by New York advertising executive Art Modell. Modell fired Brown before the 1963 season, but the team continued to win behind fullback Jim Brown. The Browns won the championship in 1964 and reached the title game the following season, losing to the Green Bay Packers.\nWhen the AFL and NFL merged before the 1970 season, Cleveland became part of the new American Football Conference (AFC). While the Browns made it back to the playoffs in 1971 and 1972, they fell into mediocrity through the mid-1970s. A revival of sorts took place in 1979 and 1980, when quarterback Brian Sipe engineered a series of last-minute wins and the Browns came to be called the \"Kardiac Kids\". Under Sipe, however, the Browns did not make it past the first round of the playoffs. Quarterback Bernie Kosar, whom the Browns drafted in 1985, led the team to three AFC Championship games in the late 1980s, but lost each time to the Denver Broncos.\nIn 1995, Modell announced he was moving the Browns to Baltimore, drawing a mix of outrage and bitterness from Cleveland's dedicated fan base. Negotiations and legal battles led to an agreement where Modell would be allowed to take his personnel to Baltimore as an expansion franchise, called the Baltimore Ravens, but would leave Cleveland the Browns' colors, logos and heritage for a reactivated Browns franchise that would take the field no later than 1999. Before the 1991 season, the Browns hired Bill Belichick to be the head coach. He led the team one winning season in his five years with the team, which occurred in 1994. The 1994 team defeated the New England Patriots 20\u201313 in the Wild Card Round before falling to the Pittsburgh Steelers 29\u20139 in the Divisional Round. After a 5\u201311 season in 1995, the Browns fired Belichick.\nAfter three years of inactivity while Cleveland Stadium was demolished and Huntington Bank Field, then known as Cleveland Browns Stadium was built on its site, the Browns were reactivated and started play again in 1999 under new owner Al Lerner. Under head coach Chris Palmer, the Browns went 2\u201314 in 1999 and 3\u201313 in 2000. The Browns struggled throughout the 2000s and 2010s, posting a record of 101\u2013234\u20131 () since their 1999 return. The Browns have only posted four winning seasons and three playoff appearances (2002, 2020, 2023) since returning to the NFL. The team's struggles have been magnified since 2012, when the Lerner family sold the team to businessman Jimmy Haslam. In six seasons under Haslam's ownership, the Browns went through four head coaches and four general managers, none of whom had found success.\nButch Davis was named head coach before the 2001 season. In his first season, he led the team to a 7\u20139 record in 2001. He led the team to a playoff berth with a 9\u20137 record in 2002. The Browns lost 36\u201333 to the Steelers in the Wild Card Round. The team regressed to a 5\u201311 record in the 2003 season. After a 3\u20138 start to the 2004 season, Davis resigned. Terry Robiskie finished out the season with a 1\u20134 mark. Before the 2005 season, the team hired Romeo Crennel to be their next head coach. He went 6\u201310 in 2005 and 4\u201312 in 2006. He posted a winning 10\u20136 record that did not qualify for the playoffs in the 2007 season. He went 4\u201312 in the 2008 season and was fired after the season. Eric Mangini posted consecutive 5\u201311 seasons as head coach in 2009 and 2010 before getting fired. Pat Shurmur coached the team to a 4\u201312 record in 2011 and a 5\u201311 record in 2012 before getting fired. Rob Chudzinski coached the Browns in the 2013 season. He was fired after a 4\u201312 campaign. Mike Pettine coached the team in 2014 and 2015, going 7\u20139 and 3\u201313 before getting fired. In 2016 and 2017 under head coach Hue Jackson, the Browns went 1\u201331 (, including a winless 0\u201316 season in 2017), the worst two-year stretch in NFL history, and received the number one overall draft pick in both of those years. Those top overall draft picks were used on Myles Garrett and Baker Mayfield.\nBefore the 2019 season, Freddie Kitchens was hired as head coach. Kitchens led the team to a 6\u201310 record and was fired after the season. Before the 2020 season, the Browns hired Kevin Stefanski as their head coach. In 2020, the Browns secured their first playoff berth since 2002 by defeating the Pittsburgh Steelers in week 17 and finishing the season 11\u20135. In the Wild Card Round, they defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 48\u201337 for their first playoff win since 1994. The Browns saw their season end in a 22\u201317 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs in the Divisional Round. The 2021 season saw the Browns go 8\u20139 and miss the postseason. In the following season, the Browns went 7\u201310 and missed the postseason for the 2022 season. In the 2023 season, the Browns returned to the postseason with an 11\u20136 mark. The Browns ended their season with a 45\u201314 loss to the Texans in the Wild Card Round.\nLogos and uniforms.\nLogos.\nThe Browns are the only National Football League team without a helmet logo. As such, the logoless helmet serves as the Browns' official logo. The organization has used several promotional logos throughout the years; players' numbers were painted on the helmets from 1957 to 1960; and an unused \"CB\" logo was created in 1965. But for much of their history, the Browns' helmets have been an unadorned burnt orange color with a top stripe of dark brown (officially called \"seal brown\") divided by a white stripe.\nThe team has had various promotional logos throughout the years, such as the \"Brownie Elf\" mascot or a Brown \"B\" in a white football. While Art Modell did away with the elf in the mid-1960s (believing it to be too childish), its use has been revived since the team's return in 1999. The popularity of the Dawg Pound section at Huntington Bank Field has led to a brown and orange dog being used for various Browns functions. But overall, the orange, logo-less helmet continues as the primary trademark of the Cleveland Browns. The Browns have used special commemorative logos during individual seasons, such as the 1999 logo to celebrate the team's return to the NFL, a 60th-anniversary logo for the 2006 season, and a 75th-anniversary logo in 2021.\nThe current logos and wordmarks were introduced on February 24, 2015, with the helmet design remaining largely as is, the only differences being minor color changes to the shade of orange used on the helmet and the facemask being changed from gray to brown. A new secondary \"dawg\" logo was introduced in 2023. The logo, featuring a bull mastiff dog, was created by graphic designer Houston Mark and was the winning entry of a fan vote. It features numerous small homages to the city of Cleveland, state of Ohio, and the team's history.\nBy virtue of a fan poll, a version of the Brownie elf logo was featured at midfield at Huntington Bank Field from 2022 to 2024. The team reverted to the helmet logo for 2025, though the Brownie elf is still featured on banners around the perimeter of the field.\nUniforms.\nThe designs of the jerseys, pants, and socks remained mostly the same, but the helmets have seen revisions over the years. The Browns uniforms saw their first big change before the 2015 season.\nJerseys:\nPants:\nSocks:\nHelmet: Solid white (1946\u20131949); solid white for day games and solid orange for night games (1950\u20131951); orange with a single white stripe (1952\u20131956); orange with a single white stripe and brown numerals on the sides (1957\u20131959); orange with a brown-white-brown stripe sequence and brown numerals on the sides (1960); orange with a brown-white-brown stripe sequence (1961\u20131995 and 1999\u2013present).\nOver the years, the Browns have had on-and-off periods of wearing white for their home games, particularly in the 1970s and 80s, as well as in the early 2000s after the team returned to the league. Until recently, when more NFL teams have started to wear white at home at least once a season, the Browns were the only non-subtropical team north of the Mason-Dixon line to wear white at home on a regular basis.\nSecondary numerals (called \"TV numbers\") first appeared on the jersey sleeves in 1961. Over the years, there have been minor revisions to the sleeve stripes, the first occurring in 1968 (brown jerseys worn in early season) and 1969 (white and brown jerseys) when stripes began to be silkscreened onto the sleeves and separated from each other to prevent color bleeding. However, the basic five-stripe sequence has remained intact (with the exception of the 1984 season). A recent revision was the addition of the initials \"AL\" to honor team owner Al Lerner who died in 2002; this was removed in 2013 upon Jimmy Haslam assuming ownership of the team.\nOrange pants with a brown-white-brown stripe sequence were worn from 1975 to 1983 and become symbolic of the \"Kardiac Kids\" era. The orange pants were worn again occasionally in 2003 and 2004.\nOther than the helmet, the uniform was completely redesigned for the 1984 season. New striping patterns appeared on the white jerseys, brown jerseys and pants. Solid brown socks were worn with brown jerseys and solid orange socks were worn with white jerseys. Brown numerals on the white jerseys were outlined in orange. White numerals on the brown jerseys were double outlined in brown and orange. (Orange numerals double outlined in brown and white appeared briefly on the brown jerseys in one pre-season game.) However, this particular uniform set was not popular with the fans, and in 1985 the uniform was returned to a look similar to the original design. It remained that way until 1995.\nIn 1999, the expansion Browns adopted the traditional design with two exceptions: first, the TV numbers, previously on the sleeves, were moved to the shoulders; and second, the orange-brown-orange pants stripes were significantly widened.\nExperimentation with the uniform design began in 2002. An alternate orange jersey was introduced that season as the NFL encouraged teams to adopt a third jersey, and a major design change was made when solid brown socks appeared for the first time since 1984 and were used with white, brown and orange jerseys. Other than 1984, striped socks (matching the jersey stripes) had been a signature design element in the team's traditional uniform. The white striped socks appeared occasionally with the white jerseys in 2003\u20132005 and 2007.\nExperimentation continued in 2003 and 2004 when the traditional orange-brown-orange stripes on the white pants were replaced by two variations of a brown-orange-brown sequence, one in which the stripes were joined (worn with white jerseys) and the other in which they were separated by white (worn with brown jerseys). The joined sequence was used exclusively with both jerseys in 2005. In 2006, the traditional orange-brown-orange sequence returned.\nAdditionally in 2006, the team reverted to an older uniform style, featuring gray face masks; the original stripe pattern on the brown jersey sleeves (The white jersey has had that sleeve stripe pattern on a consistent basis since the 1985 season.) and the older, darker shade of brown.\nThe Browns wore brown pants for the first time in team history on August 18, 2008, preseason game against the New York Giants. The pants contain no stripes or markings. The team had the brown pants created as an option for their away uniform when they integrated the gray facemask in 2006. They were not worn again until the Browns \"family\" scrimmage on August 9, 2009, with white-striped socks. The Browns have continued to wear the brown pants throughout the 2009 season. Browns quarterback Brady Quinn supported the team's move to wearing the brown pants full-time, claiming that the striped pattern on the white pants \"prohibit[ed] mobility\".\nHowever, the fans generally did not like the brown pants, and after being used for only one season, the team returned to their white shirt-on-white pants in 2010. Coach Eric Mangini told \"The Plain Dealer\" the Browns won't use the brown pants anymore. \"It wasn't very well-received,\" Mangini said. \"I hope we can get to the point where we can wear fruit on our heads and people wouldn't notice.\" At the time, the brown pants weren't officially dropped by the team, but simply not used.\nThe Browns chose to wear white at home for the 2011 season, and wound up wearing white for all 16 games as when they were on the road, the home team would wear their darker colored uniform.\nThe Browns brought back the brown pants in their home game against the Buffalo Bills on October 3, 2013, on \"Thursday Night Football\", pairing them with the brown jerseys. It marked the first time the team wore an all-brown combination in team history.\nOn April 14, 2015, the Cleveland Browns unveiled their new uniform combinations, consisting of the team's colors of orange, brown and white, but with the slight altering of the orange color to a slightly darker, but more vibrant matte orange (noticeable on the helmet, which featured a seal brown facemask), and seal brown and white, with orange numerals which featured a dropshaw (brown on the white road and orange alternate and white on the home brown jerseys). Above the jersey numerals, the word \"CLEVELAND\" appeared emblazoned in brown (orange on the home brown and white on the orange alternate jerseys) in a custom sans-serif font type.\nThe Browns brought back the all-brown look for the NFL Color Rush program in 2016, minus the white elements. In 2018, despite the Color Rush program being discontinued, the uniform was worn at home three times. For the 2019 season, the Browns promoted this uniform to their primary home uniform and donned it for six home games as well as any away game in which the home team wore white.\nThe club unveiled a new uniform design for the 2020 season. The new uniform design pays homage to the Browns' classic uniform design from years past.\nIn 2023, the Browns introduced new \"White Out\" uniforms, an all-white uniform, featuring a white helmet, that will be worn during select home games. This will mark the first time since 1950 the Browns will have non-orange helmets. The white helmets, which will feature an orange stripe down the middle flanked by two brown stripes (basically inverting the regular helmet's colors), are an homage to the early years of the franchise. The white uniforms themselves were a throwback to the 1946 season, and were first worn in 2021 in celebration of the Browns' 75th anniversary season.\nBefore the 2025 season, the Browns unveiled a second alternate helmet, featuring a matte brown finish with a brown stripe flanked by two orange stripes. This helmet would be worn with the all-brown Color Rush uniform, which was last worn in 2022 and lacked the striping of the regular uniforms.\nRivalries.\nThe Browns have rivalries with all three of their AFC North opponents. In addition, the team has had historical rivalries with the Denver Broncos, Detroit Lions, San Francisco 49ers, and Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans.\nDivisional rivalries.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nOften called the \"Turnpike Rivalry\", the Browns' biggest rival has long been the Pittsburgh Steelers. Former Browns owner Art Modell scheduled home games against the Steelers on Saturday nights from 1964 to 1970 to help fuel the rivalry. The rivalry has also been fueled by the proximity of the two teams, number of championships both teams have won, players and personnel having played and/or coached for both sides, and personal bitterness. The teams have played twice annually since 1950, making it the oldest rivalry in the AFC and the fifth-oldest rivalry in the NFL. Though the Browns dominated this rivalry early in the series (winning the first eight meetings and posting a 31\u20139 record in the 1950s and 1960s), the Steelers went 15\u20135 in the 1970s and 36\u20139\u20131 since the Browns returned to the league in 1999. The Steelers have been particularly dominant in Pittsburgh, posting a 44\u20137 record when hosting the Browns since 1970, including two winning streaks of 16 games (1970\u201385) and 17 games (2004\u201320).\nThe Steelers currently hold a 79\u201361\u20131 lead. The Browns and Steelers met in the playoffs in 1994, 2002, and 2020, with the Steelers holding a 2\u20131 lead in the postseason series. Though the rivalry has cooled in Pittsburgh due to the Modell move as well as the Browns' poor play since 1999, the Steelers still remain the top rival for Cleveland.\nCincinnati Bengals.\nOriginally conceived due to the personal animosity between Paul Brown and Art Modell, the \"Battle of Ohio\" between the Browns and the Cincinnati Bengals has been fueled by the sociocultural differences between Cincinnati and Cleveland, a shared history between the two teams, and similar team colors, as Brown used the exact shade of orange for the Bengals that he used for the Browns. (Though this has changed since then, as the Bengals now use a brighter shade of orange.) Modell, in fact, moved the Browns to the AFC after the AFL\u2013NFL merger in order to have a rivalry with the Bengals. The rivalry has also produced two of the eleven highest-scoring games in NFL history. Cincinnati has the all-time edge 52\u201348. While the Bengals have a 28\u201321 edge since the Browns returned to the NFL in 1999, this series has been more competitive than the Browns' series with their other division rivals, and the Browns have won 9 of the last 11 meetings.\nBaltimore Ravens.\nCreated as a result of the Browns' relocation controversy, the rivalry between the Browns and Baltimore Ravens was more directed at Art Modell than the team itself, and is simply considered a divisional game in Baltimore. This matchup is more bitter for Cleveland than the others due to the fact that the draft picks for 1995 to 1998 resulted in the rosters that won the Super Bowl for the Ravens in 2000. Had Modell not moved the team, these teams, drafted by general manager and former Browns tight end Ozzie Newsome, might have given the Browns a title after a 35-year drought. As of the 2023 season, the Ravens lead the overall series 36\u201314. The two teams have not met in the playoffs.\nOther rivalries.\nDetroit Lions.\nThe Browns' rivalry with the Detroit Lions began in the 1950s, when the Browns and Lions played each other in four NFL Championship Games. The Lions won three of those championships, while the Browns won one. This was arguably one of the NFL's best rivalries in the 1950s. Since the NFL-AFL merger of 1970, the teams have met much less frequently with the Browns' move to the AFC. From 2002 to 2014, the two teams played an annual preseason game known as the \"Great Lakes Classic\". As of the 2023 season, the Lions lead the all-time series 19\u20136.\nDenver Broncos.\nThe Browns had a brief rivalry with the Denver Broncos that arose from three AFC Championship Games from 1986 to 1989. In the 1986 AFC Championship, quarterback John Elway led The Drive to secure a tie in the waning moments at Cleveland Municipal Stadium; the Broncos went on to win in 23\u201320 in overtime. One year later, the two teams met again in the 1987 AFC Championship game at Mile High Stadium. Denver took a 21\u20133 lead, but Browns' quarterback Bernie Kosar threw four touchdown passes to tie the game at 31\u201331 halfway through the 4th quarter. After a long drive, John Elway threw a 20-yard touchdown pass to running back Sammy Winder to give Denver a 38\u201331 lead. Cleveland advanced to Denver's 8-yard line with 1:12 left, but Broncos' safety Jeremiah Castille stripped Browns' running back Earnest Byner of the football at the 2-yard line\u2014a play that has been called The Fumble by Browns' fans. The Broncos recovered it, gave Cleveland an intentional safety, and went on to win 38\u201333. The two teams met yet again in the 1989 AFC Championship at Mile High Stadium, which the Broncos easily won by a score of 37\u201321.\nThis short-lived rivalry also featured a controversial 16\u201313 Browns' win at Cleveland Municipal Stadium in the 1989 regular season. The game was decided by a Matt Bahr 48-yard field goal as time expired - a kick that barely cleared the crossbar. Bahr's field goal came after referee Tom Dooley ordered the teams to switch ends of the field midway through the 4th quarter, thanks to rowdy Dawg Pound fans who pelted the Broncos with dog biscuits, eggs and other debris. The switch gave the Browns a small, timely wind advantage to finish the game.\nMore recently, the rivalry has cooled off as the Broncos won 11 straight meetings from 1991 to 2015 before Cleveland broke that streak with a narrow 17\u201316 win in 2018. As of the 2023 season, Denver leads the overall series, 25\u20137.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThe most competitive team in the AAFC era for the Browns was the San Francisco 49ers. San Francisco finished second to the Browns in each of the four seasons that the league played. Two of the Browns' four losses in that era were to the 49ers (including a loss that ended the Browns' 29-game unbeaten streak); the rivalry did not last into the NFL years, particularly after the teams were placed in opposite conferences in 1970. The rivalry has turned into a friendly relationship as many 49ers personnel helped the Browns relaunch in 1999, specifically former 49ers president and CEO Carmen Policy and vice president/director of football operations Dwight Clark, who were hired by the expansion Browns in the same roles. In addition, 49ers owners John York and Denise DeBartolo York reside in Youngstown, southeast of Cleveland. Long-time Browns placekicker and fan favorite Phil Dawson and backup quarterback Colt McCoy signed with the 49ers in 2014. As of the 2023 season, the Browns lead the all-time series 20\u201310.\nHouston Oilers/Tennessee Titans.\nThe Browns' rivalry with the Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans dates back to the Browns and then-Oilers being placed in the AFC Central after the AFL-NFL merger in 1970. As such, the teams played each other twice annually from 1970 until 2002 when divisional realignment placed the Browns in the AFC North and the now-Titans in the AFC South (excluding 1996-98 when the Browns were inactive). The teams have met much less frequently since 2002. The Browns lead the overall series 37\u201332, and the 69 meetings with the Oilers/Titans are the third-most of any Cleveland opponent, trailing only the Steelers and Bengals.\nThe height of this rivalry was during the 1980s. Oilers head coach Jerry Glanville and Marty Schottenheimer shared several bitter exchanges during the decade and the Browns and Oilers had their only playoff meeting in the , in which the Oilers came away with a narrow 24\u201323 victory. There have been a few memorable games in recent years. In 2014, the Browns erased a 28\u20133 deficit to come away with a 29\u201328 win. In a December 2020 contest with playoff implications for both teams, the Browns jumped to a 38\u20137 halftime lead, setting a franchise record for points in the first half. However, Tennessee rallied in the second half but came up just short as the Browns hung on for a 41\u201335 win.\nFan base.\nA 2006 study conducted by \"Bizjournal\" determined that Browns fans are the most loyal fans in the NFL. The study, while not scientific, was largely based on fan loyalty during winning and losing seasons, attendance at games, and challenges confronting fans (such as inclement weather or long-term poor performance of their team). The study noted that Browns fans filled 99.8% of the seats at Huntington Bank Field during the last seven seasons, despite a combined record of 36\u201376 over that span.\nDawg Pound.\nPerhaps the most visible Browns fans are those that can be found in the Dawg Pound. Originally the name for the bleacher section located in the open (east) end of old Cleveland Municipal Stadium, the current incarnation is likewise located in the east end of Huntington Bank Field and still features hundreds of orange and brown clad fans sporting various canine-related paraphernalia. The fans adopted that name in 1984 after members of the Browns defense used it to describe the team's defense.\nRetired cornerback Hanford Dixon, who played his entire career for the Browns (1981\u20131989), is credited with naming the Cleveland Browns defense 'The Dawgs' in the mid-1980s. Dixon and teammates Frank Minnifield and Eddie Johnson would bark at each other and to the fans in the bleachers at the Cleveland Stadium to fire them up. It was from Dixon's naming that the \"Dawg Pound\" subsequently took its title. The fans adopted that name in the years after. Due to this nickname, since the team's revival the Browns have used a bulldog as an alternate logo.\nBrowns Backers.\nThe most prominent organization of Browns fans is the \"Browns Backers Worldwide\" (BBW). The organization has approximately 305,000 members and Browns Backers clubs can be found in every major city in the United States, and in a number of military bases throughout the world, with the largest club being in Phoenix, Arizona. In addition, the organization has a sizable foreign presence in places as far away as Egypt, Australia, Japan, Sri Lanka, and McMurdo Station in Antarctica. According to The Official Fan Club of the Cleveland Browns, the two largest international fan clubs are in Alon Shvut, West Bank and Niagara, Canada, with Alon Shvut having 129 members and Niagara having 310.\nAfter former Browns owner Randy Lerner's acquisition of English soccer club Aston Villa, official Villa outlets started selling Cleveland Browns goods such as jerseys and NFL footballs. This has raised interest in England and strengthened the link between the two sporting clubs. Aston Villa supporters have set up an organization known as the Aston (Villa) Browns Backers of Birmingham.\nPlayers of note.\nPlayers enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nThe Cleveland Browns have the fourth-largest number of players enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame with a total of 17 enshrined players elected based on their performance with the Browns, and nine more players or coaches elected who spent at least one year with the Browns franchise. No Browns players were inducted in the inaugural induction class of 1963. Otto Graham was the first Browns player to be enshrined as a member of the class of 1965, and the most recent Browns player to be included in the Pro Football Hall of Fame is Joe Thomas, who was a member of the class of 2023, who is the first member inducted that played in the 21st century.\nCleveland Browns legends.\nThe Cleveland Browns legends program honors former Browns who made noteworthy contributions to the history of the franchise. In addition to all the Hall of Famers listed above, the Legends list includes:\nRing of Honor.\nBeginning in 2010, the Browns established a Ring of Honor, honoring the greats from the past by having their names displayed around the upper deck of Huntington Bank Field. The inaugural class in the Browns Ring of Honor was unveiled during the home opener on September 19, 2010, and featured the 16 Hall of Famers listed above who went into the Hall of Fame as Browns. In 2018, Joe Thomas was entered into the Ring of Honor with the number 10,363 \u2013 commemorating his NFL record of consecutive snaps played on offense. In 2019, four-time Pro Bowl linebacker Clay Matthews Jr. was entered into the Ring of Honor.\nStatues.\nNumerous Browns players and staff have had statues made in their honor:\nIn and around Huntington Bank Field\nIn and around Cleveland\nMurals.\nBrowns players featured on murals in downtown Cleveland include:\nFirst-round draft picks.\nAs of the 2023 season, the Browns have had the first overall pick in the NFL draft on five occasions: 1954, 1999, 2000, 2017, and 2018.\nCoaches of note.\nHead coaches.\nThe Browns have had 22 head coaches serve in the capacity.\nMedia.\nRadio\nWKNR (850 AM), WKRK-FM (92.3 FM), and WNCX (98.5 FM) serve as co-flagship stations for the Cleveland Browns Radio Network.\nThe Browns broadcast team includes play-by-play announcer Andrew Siciliano, commentator Nathan Zegura \u2013 who made news when he had to serve an eight-game suspension due to arguing with officials during a game in 2018 when he was sideline reporter, and former NFL player and current WKNR host Je'Rod Cherry, who serves as sideline analyst/reporter. Cherry, WKRK's Ken Carman and Andy Baskin, and Cleveland area native/former NFL player Tyvis Powell host the network pregame show, while WKRK's Jeff Phelps and Powell host the network postgame show.\nSpanish language broadcasts are heard on their own separate network of stations, with WJMO 1300 AM serving as the flagship, with announcers Rafa Hern\u00e1ndez-Brito and Octavio Sequera.\nTV\nCleveland ABC affiliate WEWS-TV 5 serves as the broadcast TV home of the Browns, airing year-round team programming as well as all non-network preseason games, with the broadcast team of Chris Rose (play-by-play), Pro Football Hall of Famer Joe Thomas (analyst), and Aditi Kinkhabwala (sidelines).\nHonors\nThe Browns in-house production team won a pair of Lower Great Lakes Emmy Awards in 2005. One was for a primetime special honoring the 1964 NFL Championship team (\"The 1964 Championship Show\") and one was for a commercial spot (\"The Paperboy\").\nReferences in popular culture.\nThe Browns have (either directly or indirectly) been featured in various movies and TV shows over the years. Notable examples include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "6579", "revid": "48789554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6579", "title": "Carbine", "text": "Shortened version of a standard firearm\nA carbine ( or ) is a long gun that has a barrel shortened from its original length. Most modern carbines are rifles that are compact versions of a longer rifle or are rifles chambered for less powerful cartridges.\nThe smaller size and lighter weight of carbines make them easier to handle. They are typically issued to high-mobility troops such as special operations soldiers and paratroopers, as well as to mounted, artillery, logistics, or other non-infantry personnel whose roles do not require full-sized rifles, although there is a growing tendency for carbines to be issued to front-line soldiers to offset the increasing weight of other issued equipment. An example of this is the M4 carbine, the standard issue carbine of the United States Armed Forces.\nEtymology.\nThe name comes from its first users \u2014 cavalry troopers called \"carabiniers\", from the French \"carabine\", from Old French \"carabin\" (soldier armed with a musket), whose origin is unclear. One theory connects it to an \"ancient engine of war\" called a \"calabre\"; another connects it to Medieval Latin \"Calabrinus\" 'Calabrian'; yet another, less likely, to \"escarrabin\", gravedigger, from the scarab beetle.\nHistory.\nCarbine arquebus and musket.\nThe carbine was originally developed for cavalry. The start of early modern warfare about the 16th century had infantry armed with firearms, prompting cavalry to do the same, even though reloading muzzle loading firearms while moving mounted was highly impractical. Some cavalry, such as the German Reiters, added one or more pistols, while other cavalry, such as harquebusiers, tried various shorter, lightened versions of the infantry arquebus weapons \u2013 the first carbines. But these weapons were still difficult to reload while mounted, and the saber often remained main weapon of such cavalry. Dragoons and other mounted infantry that dismounted for battles usually adopted standard infantry firearms, though some favored versions that were less encumbering when riding \u2013 something that could be arranged to hang clear of the rider's elbows and horse's legs.\nWhile more portable, carbines had the general disadvantages of less accuracy and power than the longer guns of the infantry. During Napoleonic warfare, pistol and carbine-armed cavalry generally transitioned into traditional melee cavalry or dragoons. Carbines found increased use outside of standard cavalry and infantry, such as support and artillery troops, who might need to defend themselves from attack but would be hindered by keeping full-sized weapons with them continuously; a common title for many short rifles in the late 19th century was \"artillery carbine\".\nCarbine rifle.\nAs the rifled musket replaced the smoothbore firearms for infantry in the mid 19th century, carbine versions were also developed; this was often developed separately from the infantry rifles and, in many cases, did not even use the same ammunition, which made for supply difficulties.\nA notable weapon developed towards the end of the American Civil War by the Union was the Spencer carbine, one of the first breechloading, repeating weapons. It had a spring-powered, removable tube magazine in the buttstock which held seven rounds and could be reloaded by inserting spare tubes. It was intended to give the cavalry a replacement weapon which could be fired from horseback without the need for awkward reloading after each shot \u2013 although it saw service mostly with dismounted troopers, as was typical of cavalry weapons during that war.\nIn the late 19th century, it became common for a number of nations to make bolt-action rifles in both full-length and carbine versions. One of the most popular and recognizable carbines was the lever-action Winchester carbines, with several versions available firing revolver cartridges. This made it an ideal choice for cowboys and explorers, as well as other inhabitants of the American West, who could carry a revolver and a carbine, both using the same ammunition.\nThe Lee\u2013Enfield cavalry carbine, a shortened version of the standard British Army infantry rifle was introduced in 1896, although it did not become the standard British cavalry weapon until 1903.\nWorld Wars.\nIn late 1918, France developed the Chauchat-Ribeyrolles for tank crews to defend themselves. Developed from the Fusil Automatique Mod\u00e8le 1917, the stock was replaced with a pistol grip, and the barrel is significantly shorter at resulting in an overall length of .\nIn the decades following World War I, the standard battle rifle used by armies around the world had been growing shorter, either by redesign or by the general issue of carbine versions instead of full-length rifles. This move was initiated by the U.S. Model 1903 Springfield, which was originally produced in 1907 with a short barrel, providing a short rifle that was longer than a carbine but shorter than a typical rifle, so it could be issued to all troops without need for separate versions. Other nations followed suit after World War I, when they learned that their traditional long-barreled rifles provided little benefit in the trenches and merely proved a hindrance to the soldiers. Examples include the Russian Model 1891 rifle, originally with an barrel, later shortened to in 1930, and to in 1938, the German Mauser Gewehr 98 rifles went from in 1898 to in 1935 as the \"Karabiner 98k\" (K98k or Kar98k), or \"short carbine\".\nThe barrel lengths in rifles used by the United States did not change between the bolt-action M1903 rifle of World War I and the World War II M1 Garand rifle, because the barrel on the M1903 was still shorter than even the shortened versions of the Model 1891 and Gewehr 98. The U.S. M1 carbine was more of a traditional carbine in that it was significantly shorter and lighter, with a barrel, than the M1 Garand rifle, and that it was intended for rear-area troops who could not be hindered with full-sized rifles but needed something more powerful and accurate than a Model 1911 pistol (although this did not stop soldiers from using them on the front line). Contrary to popular belief, and even what some books claim, in spite of both being designated \"M1\", the M1 carbine was \"not\" a shorter version of the .30-06 M1 Garand, as is typical for most rifles and carbines, but it was a wholly different design, firing a smaller, less-powerful cartridge. The \"M1\" designates each as the first model in the new U.S. designation system, which no longer used the year of introduction but a sequential series of numbers starting at \"1\": the M1 \"carbine\" and M1 \"rifle\".\nThe United Kingdom developed a \"jungle carbine\" version of their Lee\u2013Enfield service rifle, featuring a shorter barrel, flash suppressor, and manufacturing modifications designed to decrease the rifle's weight Officially titled \"Rifle, No. 5 Mk I\", it was introduced in the closing months of World War II, but it did not see widespread service until the Korean War, the Mau Mau Uprising, and the Malayan Emergency as well as the Vietnam War.\nPost World War II.\nA shorter weapon was more convenient when riding in a truck, armored personnel carrier, helicopter, or aircraft, and also when engaged in close-range combat. Based on the combat experience of World War II, the criteria used for selecting infantry weapons began to change. Unlike previous wars, which were often fought mainly from fixed lines and trenches, World War II was a highly mobile war, often fought in cities, forests, or other areas where mobility and visibility were restricted. In addition, improvements in artillery made moving infantry in open areas even less practical than it had been.\nThe majority of enemy contacts were at ranges of less than , and the enemy was exposed to fire for only short periods of time as they moved from cover to cover. Most rounds fired were not aimed at an enemy combatant but instead fired in the enemy's direction to keep them from moving and from firing back. These situations did not require a heavy rifle, firing full-power rifle bullets with long-range accuracy. A less-powerful weapon would still produce casualties at the shorter ranges encountered in actual combat, and the reduced recoil would allow more shots to be fired in the short amount of time an enemy was visible. The lower-powered round would also weigh less, allowing a soldier to carry more ammunition. With no need of a long barrel to fire full-power ammunition, a shorter barrel could be used. A shorter barrel made the weapon weigh less, was easier to handle in tight spaces, and was easier to shoulder quickly to fire a shot at an unexpected target. Full-automatic fire was also considered a desirable feature, allowing the soldier to fire short bursts of three to five rounds, increasing the probability of a hit on a moving target.\nThe Germans had experimented with selective-fire carbines firing rifle cartridges during the early years of World War II. These were determined to be less than ideal, as the recoil of full-power rifle cartridges caused the weapon to be uncontrollable in full-automatic fire. They then developed an intermediate-power cartridge round, which was accomplished by reducing the power and the length of the standard 7.92\u00d757mm Mauser rifle cartridge to create the 7.92\u00d733mm (short) cartridge. A selective-fire weapon was developed to fire this shorter cartridge, eventually resulting in the Sturmgewehr 44, later translated as \"assault rifle\" (also frequently called \"machine carbines\" by Allied intelligence, a quite accurate assessment, in fact). Very shortly after World War II, the USSR adopted a similar weapon, the ubiquitous AK-47, the first model in the famed Kalashnikov series, which became the standard Soviet infantry weapon and which has been produced and exported in extremely large numbers up through the present day.\nAlthough the United States had developed the M2 carbine, a selective-fire version of the M1 carbine during WW2, the .30 carbine cartridge was closer to a pistol round in power, making it more of a submachine gun than an assault rifle. It was also adopted only in very small numbers and issued to few troops (the semi-automatic M1 carbine was produced in a 10-to-1 ratio to the M2), while the AK47 was produced by the millions and was standard-issue to all Soviet troops, as well as those of many other nations. The U.S. was slow to follow suit, insisting on retaining a full-power, 7.62\u00d751mm NATO rifle, the M14 (although this \"was\" selective fire).\nIn the 1950s, the British developed the .280 British, an intermediate cartridge, and a select-fire bullpup assault rifle to fire it, the EM-2. They pressed for the U.S. to adopt it so it could become a NATO-standard round, but the U.S. insisted on retaining a full-power, .30 caliber round. This forced NATO to adopt the 7.62\u00d751mm NATO round (which in reality is only slightly different ballistically from the .308 Winchester), to maintain commonality. The British eventually adopted the 7.62mm FN FAL, and the U.S. adopted the 7.62mm M14 rifle. These rifles are both what is known as \"battle rifles\" and were a few inches shorter than the standard-issue rifles they replaced ( barrel as opposed to for the M1 Garand), although they were still full-powered rifles, with selective fire capability. These can be compared to the even shorter, less-powerful assault rifle, which might be considered the \"carbine branch of weapons development\", although indeed, there are now carbine variants of many of the assault rifles which had themselves seemed quite small and light when adopted.\nBy the 1960s, after becoming involved in war in Vietnam, the U.S. did an abrupt about-face and decided to standardize on the intermediate 5.56\u00d745mm NATO round (based on the .223 Remington varmint cartridge) fired from the new, lightweight M16 rifle, leaving NATO to hurry and catch up. Many of the NATO countries could not afford to re-equip so soon after the recent 7.62mm standardization, leaving them armed with full-power 7.62mm battle rifles for some decades afterwards, although by this point, the 5.56mm has been adopted by almost all NATO countries and many non-NATO nations as well. This 5.56mm NATO round was even lighter and smaller than the Soviet 7.62\u00d739mm AK-47 cartridge but possessed higher velocity. In U.S. service, the M16 assault rifle replaced the M14 as the standard infantry weapon, although the M14 continued to be used by designated marksmen. Although at , the barrel of the M16 was shorter than that of the M14, it was still designated a \"rifle\" rather than a \"carbine\", and it was still longer than the AK-47, which used a barrel. (The SKS \u2013 an interim, semi-automatic, weapon adopted a few years before the AK-47 was put into service \u2013 was designated a carbine, even though its barrel was significantly longer than the AK series' . This is because of the Kalashnikov's revolutionary nature, which altered the old paradigm. Compared to previous rifles, particularly the Soviets' initial attempts at semi-automatic rifles, such as the SVT-40, the SKS was significantly shorter. The Kalashnikov altered traditional notions and ushered in a change in what was considered a \"rifle\" in military circles.)\nIn 1974, shortly after the introduction of the 5.56mm NATO, the USSR began to issue a new Kalashnikov variant, the AK-74, chambered in the small-bore 5.45\u00d739mm cartridge, which was a standard 7.62\u00d739mm necked down to take a smaller, lighter, faster bullet. It soon became standard issue in Soviet nations, although many of the nations with export Kalashnikovs retained the larger 7.62\u00d739mm round. In 1995, the People's Republic of China adopted a new 5.8\u00d742mm cartridge to match the modern trend in military ammunition, replacing the previous 7.62\u00d739mm and 5.45\u00d739mm round as standard.\nLater, even lighter carbine variants of many of these short-barreled assault rifles came to be adopted as the standard infantry weapon. In much modern tactical thinking, only a certain number of soldiers need to retain longer-range weapons, serving as designated marksmen. The rest can carry lighter, shorter-ranged weapons for close quarters combat and suppressive fire. This is basically a more extreme extension of the idea that brought the original assault rifle. Another factor is that with the increasing weight of technology, sighting systems, ballistic armor, etc., the only way to reduce the burden on the modern soldier was to equip them with a smaller, lighter weapon. Also, modern soldiers rely a great deal on vehicles and helicopters to transport them around the battle area, and a longer weapon can be a serious hindrance to entering and exiting these vehicles. Development of lighter assault rifles continued, matched by developments in even lighter carbines. In spite of the short barrels of the new assault rifles, carbine variants like the 5.45\u00d739mm AKS-74U and Colt Commando were being developed for use when mobility was essential and a submachine gun was not sufficiently powerful. The AKS-74U featured an extremely short barrel which necessitated redesigning and shortening the gas-piston and integrating front sights onto the gas tube; the Colt Commando was a bit longer, at . Neither was adopted as standard issue, although the U.S. did later adopt the somewhat longer M4 carbine, with a barrel.\nModern history.\nContemporary military forces.\nIn 1994, the U.S. had adopted the M4 carbine, a derivative of the M16 family which fired the same 5.56mm cartridge but was lighter and shorter (in overall length and barrel length), resulting in marginally reduced range and power, although offering better mobility and lighter weight to offset the weight of equipment and armor that a modern soldier has to carry.\nIn spite of the benefits of the modern carbine, many armies are experiencing a certain backlash against the universal equipping of soldiers with carbines and lighter rifles in general, and are equipping selected soldiers, usually designated marksmen, with higher-powered rifles. Another problem comes from the loss of muzzle velocity caused by the shorter barrel, which when coupled with the typical small, lightweight bullets, causes effectiveness to be diminished; a 5.56mm gets its lethality from its high velocity, and when fired from the M4 carbine, its power, penetration, and range are diminished. Thus, there has been a move towards adopting a slightly more powerful cartridge tailored for high performance from both long and short barrels. The U.S. has experimented with a new, slightly larger and heavier caliber such as the 6.5mm Grendel or 6.8mm Remington SPC, which are heavier and thus retain more effectiveness at lower muzzle velocities.\nWhile the U.S. Army adopted the M4 carbine in 1994, the U.S. Marine Corps retained their barrel M16A4 rifles long afterwards, citing the increased range and effectiveness over the carbine version; officers were required to carry an M4 carbine rather than an M9 pistol, as Army officers do. Because the Marine Corps emphasizes \"every Marine a rifleman\", the lighter carbine was considered a suitable compromise between a rifle and a pistol. Marines with restricted mobility such as vehicle operators, or a greater need for mobility such as squad leaders, were issued M4 carbines. In 2015, the Marine Corps approved the M4 carbine for standard issue to front-line Marines, replacing the M16A4 rifle. The rifles are issued to support troops while the carbines go to the front-line Marines, in a reversal of the traditional roles of \"rifles for the front line, carbines for the rear\".\nSpecial forces.\nSpecial forces need to perform fast, decisive operations, frequently airborne or boat-mounted. A pistol, though light and quick to operate, is viewed as not having enough power, firepower, or range. A submachine gun has selective fire, but firing a pistol cartridge and having a short barrel and sight radius, it is not accurate or powerful enough at longer ranges. Submachine guns also tend to have poorer armor and cover penetration than rifles and carbines firing rifle ammunition. Consequently, carbines have gained wide acceptance among United States Special Operations Command, United Kingdom Special Forces, and other communities, having relatively light weight, large magazine capacity, selective fire, and much better range and penetration than a submachine gun.\nUsage.\nThe smaller size and relative lighter weight of carbines makes them easier to handle in close-quarter situations such as urban engagements, when deploying from military vehicles, or in any situation where space is confined. The disadvantages of carbines relative to rifles include inferior long-range accuracy and a shorter effective range. These comparisons refer to carbines (short-barreled rifles) of the same power and class as the regular full-sized rifles.\nCompared to submachine guns, carbines have a greater effective range and are capable of penetrating helmets and body armor when used with armor-piercing ammunition. However, submachine guns are still used by military special forces and police SWAT teams for close quarters battle because they are \"a pistol caliber weapon that's easy to control, and less likely to over-penetrate the target.\" Also, carbines are harder to maneuver in tight encounters where superior range and stopping power at distance are not great considerations.\nFiring the same ammunition as standard-issue rifles or pistols gives carbines the advantage of standardization over those personal defense weapons that require proprietary cartridges.\nThe modern usage of the term carbine covers much the same scope as it always had, namely lighter weapons (generally rifles) with barrels up to in length. These weapons can be considered carbines, while rifles with barrels longer than are generally not considered carbines unless specifically named so. Conversely, many rifles have barrels \"shorter\" than 20 inches, yet are not considered carbines. The AK series rifles has an almost universal barrel length of , well within carbine territory, yet has always been considered a rifle, perhaps because it was designed as such and not shortened from a longer weapon. Modern carbines use ammunition ranging from that used in light pistols up to powerful rifle cartridges, with the usual exception of high-velocity magnum cartridges. In the more powerful cartridges, the short barrel of a carbine has significant disadvantages in velocity, and the high residual pressure, and frequently still-burning powder and gases, when the bullet exits the barrel results in substantially greater muzzle blast. Flash suppressors are a common, partial solution to this problem, although even the best flash suppressors are hard put to deal with the excess flash from the still-burning powder leaving the short barrel (and they also add several inches to the length of the barrel, diminishing the purpose of having a short barrel in the first place).\nPistol-caliber carbines.\nThe typical carbine is the pistol-caliber carbine. These first appeared soon after metallic cartridges became common. These were developed as \"companions\" to the popular revolvers of the day, firing the same cartridge but allowing more velocity and accuracy than the revolver. These were carried by cowboys, lawmen, and others in the Old West. The classic combination would be a Winchester lever-action carbine and a Colt Single Action Army revolver in .44-40 or .38-40. During the 20th century, this trend continued with more modern and powerful smokeless revolver cartridges, in the form of Winchester and Marlin lever action carbines chambered in .38 Special/.357 Magnum and .44 Special/.44 Magnum.\nModern equivalents include the Ruger PC carbine, which uses the same magazine as the Ruger pistols of the same caliber, and the (discontinued) Marlin Camp carbine, which, in .45 ACP, used M1911 magazines. The Ruger Model 44 and Ruger Deerfield carbine were both carbines chambered in .44 Magnum. The Beretta Cx4 Storm shares magazines with many Beretta pistols and is designed to be complementary to the Beretta Px4 Storm pistol. The Hi-Point 995TS are popular, economical and reliable alternatives to other pistol caliber carbines in the United States, and their magazines can be used in the Hi-Point C-9 pistol. Another example is the Kel-Tec SUB-2000 series chambered in either 9mm Parabellum or .40 S&amp;W, which can be configured to accept Glock, Beretta, S&amp;W, or SIG pistol magazines. The SUB-2000 also has the somewhat unusual (although not unique) ability to fold in half.\nThe primary advantage of a carbine over a pistol using the same ammunition is controllability. The combination of firing from the shoulder, longer sight-radius, three points of contact (firing hand, support hand, and shoulder), and precision offer a significantly more user-friendly platform. Many carbines have the ability to mount optics, lights and lasers to accessory rails, which make target acquisition and engagement much easier.\nThe longer barrel can offer increased velocity and, with it, greater energy and effective range due to the propellant having more time to burn. However, loss in bullet velocity can happen where the propellant is utilised before the bullet reaches the muzzle, combined with the friction from the barrel on the bullet. As long guns, pistol-caliber carbines may be less legally restricted than handguns in some jurisdictions. Compared to carbines chambered in intermediate or rifle calibers, such as .223 Remington and 7.62\u00d754mmR, pistol-caliber carbines generally experience less of an increase in external ballistic properties as a result of the propellant. The drawback is that one loses the primary benefits of a handgun, i.e. portability and concealability, resulting in a weapon almost the size of, but less accurate than, a long-gun, but not much more powerful than a pistol. The Flint River Armory CSA45 was designed to handle higher pressure large caliber handgun cartridges and uses a gas operation to achieve this.\nAlso widely produced are semi-automatic and typically longer-barreled derivatives of select-fire submachine guns, such as the FN PS90, HK USC, Spectre M4, KRISS Vector, Thompson carbine, CZ Scorpion S1 carbine, and the Uzi carbine. In order to be sold legally in many countries, the barrel must meet a minimum length ( in the United States). So the original submachine gun is given a legal-length barrel and made into a semi-automatic firearm, transforming it into a carbine. Though less common, pistol-caliber conversions of centerfire rifles like the AR-15 are commercially available.\nLand defence pistol.\nDuring the Apartheid era of South Africa and the Rhodesian Bush War/South African Border War, a semi-automatic-only pistol-calibre carbine based on submachine guns existed for civilian personal protection as \"land defence pistol\"s (LDP). Known examples were the Bell &amp; White 84, BHS Rhogun, Cobra Mk1, GM-16, Kommando LDP, Northwood R-76, Paramax, Sanna 77 and TS III.\nShoulder-stocked handgun.\nSome handguns used to come from the factory with mounting lugs for a shoulder stock, notably including the \"Broomhandle\" Mauser C96, Luger P.08, and Browning Hi-Power. In the case of the first two, the pistol could come with a hollow wooden stock that doubled as a holster.\nCarbine conversion kits are commercially available for many other pistols, including M1911, and most Glocks. These can either be simple shoulder stocks fitted to a pistol or full carbine conversion kits, which are at least long and replace the pistol's barrel with one at least long for compliance with the United States law. In the United States, fitting a shoulder stock to a handgun with a barrel less than long possibly turns said firearm into a short-barreled rifle, which may be in violation of the National Firearms Act; this is currently being adjudicated by the courts.\nLegal issues.\nUnited States.\nUnder the National Firearms Act, firearms with shoulder stocks or originally manufactured as a rifle and barrels less than in length are classified as short-barreled rifles. Short-barreled rifles are restricted similarly to short-barreled shotguns, requiring a $200 tax paid prior to manufacture or transfer \u2013 a process which can take several months. Because of this, firearms with barrels of less than and a shoulder stock are uncommon. A list of firearms not covered by the NFA due to their antique status may be found here or due to their \"Curio and Relic\" status may be found here; these lists includes a number of carbines with barrels less than the minimum legal length and firearms that are \"primarily collector's items and are not likely to be used as weapons and, therefore, are excluded from the provisions of the National Firearms Act.\" Machine guns, as their own class of firearm, are not subject to requirements of other class firearms.\nDistinct from simple shoulder stock kits, full carbine conversion kits are not classified as short-barreled rifles. By replacing the pistol barrel with one at least in length and having an overall length of at least , a carbine converted pistol may be treated as a standard rifle under Title I of the Gun Control Act of 1968 (GCA). However, certain \"Broomhandle\" Mauser C96, Luger, and Browning Hi-Power Curio &amp; Relic pistols with their originally issued stock attached only may retain their pistol classification.\nCarbines without a stock and not originally manufactured as a rifle are not classified as rifles or short barreled rifles. A carbine manufactured under in length without a forward vertical grip will be a pistol and, state law notwithstanding, can be carried concealed without creating an unregistered Any Other Weapon. A nearly identical carbine with an overall length of or greater is simply an unclassified firearm under Title I of the Gun Control Act of 1968, as the Any Other Weapon catch-all only applies to firearms under or that have been concealed. However, a modification intending to fire from the shoulder and bypass the regulation of short-barreled rifles is considered the unlawful possession and manufacture of an unregistered short-barreled rifle.\nIn some historical cases, the term \"machine carbine\" was the official title for submachine guns, such as the British Sten and Australian Owen guns. The semiautomatic-only version of the Sterling submachine gun was also officially called a carbine. The original Sterling semi-auto would be classed a short-barrel rifle under the U.S. National Firearms Act, but fully legal long-barrel versions of the Sterling have been made for the U.S. collector market.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6581", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6581", "title": "Concrete music", "text": ""}
{"id": "6583", "revid": "51016564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6583", "title": "Chinese cuisine", "text": "Culinary traditions of China\nChinese cuisine comprises cuisines originating from China, as well as from Chinese people from other parts of the world. Because of the Chinese diaspora and the historical power of the country, Chinese cuisine has profoundly influenced other cuisines in Asia and beyond, with modifications made to cater to local palates. Chinese food staples like rice, soy sauce, noodles, tea, chili oil, and tofu, and utensils such as chopsticks and the wok, can now be found worldwide.\nThe world's earliest eating establishments recognizable as restaurants in the modern sense first emerged in the Song dynasty China during the 11th and 12th centuries. Street food became an integral aspect of Chinese food culture in the 7th century during the Tang dynasty, and the street food culture of much of Southeast Asia was established by workers imported from China during the late 19th century.\nThe preferences for seasoning and cooking techniques in Chinese provinces depend on differences in social class, religion, historical background, and ethnic groups. Geographic features including mountains, rivers, forests, and deserts also have a strong effect on the locally available ingredients, considering that the climate of China varies from tropical in the south to subarctic in the northeast. Imperial royal and noble preferences also play a role in the change of Chinese cuisine. Because of imperial expansion, immigration, and trading, ingredients and cooking techniques from other cultures have been integrated into Chinese cuisines over time and Chinese culinary influences have spread worldwide.\nThere are numerous regional, religious, and ethnic styles of Chinese cuisine found within China and abroad. Chinese cuisine is highly diverse and most frequently categorised into provincial divisions, although these province-level classifications consist of many more styles within themselves. During the Qing dynasty, the most praised Four Great Traditions in Chinese cuisine were Chuan, Lu, Yue, and Huaiyang, representing cuisines of West, North, South, and East China, respectively. In 1980, a modern grouping from Chinese journalist Wang Shaoquan's article published in the \"People's Daily\" newspaper identified the Eight Cuisines of China as Anhui (), Guangdong (), Fujian (), Hunan (), Jiangsu (), Shandong (), Sichuan (), and Zhejiang ().\nChinese cuisine is deeply intertwined with traditional Chinese medicine, such as in the practise of Chinese food therapy. Color, scent and taste are the three traditional aspects used to describe Chinese food, as well as the meaning, appearance, and nutrition of the food. Cooking should be appraised with respect to the ingredients used, knife work, cooking time, and seasoning.\nHistory.\nPre-Tang dynasty.\nChinese society greatly valued gastronomy, and developed an extensive study of the subject based on its traditional medical beliefs. Chinese culture initially centered around the North China Plain. The first domesticated crops seem to have been the foxtail and broomcorn varieties of millet, while rice was cultivated in the south. By 2000 BC, wheat had arrived from western Asia. These grains were typically served as warm noodle soups instead of baked into bread as in Europe. Nobles hunted various wild game and consumed mutton, pork and dog as these animals were domesticated. Grain was stored against famine and flood and meat was preserved with salt, vinegar, curing, and fermenting. The flavor of the meat was enhanced by cooking it in animal fats though this practice was mostly restricted to the wealthy.\nBy the time of Confucius in the late Zhou, gastronomy had become a high art. Confucius discussed the principles of dining: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The rice would never be too white, the meat would never be too finely cut... When it was not cooked right, man would not eat. When it was cooked bad, man would not eat. When the meat was not cut properly, man would not eat. When the food was not prepared with the right sauce, man would not eat. Although there are plenty of meats, they should not be cooked more than staple food. There is no limit for alcohol, before a man gets drunk. The L\u00fcshi chunqiu notes: \"Only if one is chosen as the Son of Heaven will the tastiest delicacies be prepared [for him].\"\nThe Zhaohun (4\u20133rd c. BC) gives some examples: turtle ragout, honey cakes and beer (chilled with ice).\nDuring Shi Huangdi's Qin dynasty, the empire expanded into the south. By the time of the Han dynasty, the different regions and cuisines of China's people were linked by major canals and leading to greater complexity in the different regional cuisines. Not only is food seen as giving \"qi\", energy, but the food is also about maintaining yin and yang. The philosophy behind it was rooted in the \"I Ching\" and Chinese traditional medicine: food was judged for color, aroma, taste, and texture and a good meal was expected to balance the Four Natures ('hot', warm, cool, and 'cold') and the Five Tastes (pungent, sweet, sour, bitter, and salty). Salt was used as a preservative from early times, but in cooking was added in the form of soy sauce, and not at the table.\nBy the Later Han period (2nd century), writers frequently complained of lazy aristocrats who did nothing but sit around all day eating smoked meats and roasts.\nDuring the Han dynasty, the Chinese developed methods of food preservation for military rations during campaigns such as drying meat into jerky and cooking, roasting, and drying grain.\nChinese legends claim that the roasted, flat bread shaobing was brought back from the \"Xiyu\" (the Western Regions, a name for Central Asia) by the Han dynasty General Ban Chao, and that it was originally known as hubing (, lit. \"barbarian bread\"). The shaobing is believed to be descended from the hubing. Shaobing is believed to be related to the Persian \"nan\" and Central Asian \"nan\", as well as the Middle Eastern pita. Foreign westerners made and sold sesame cakes in China during the Tang dynasty.\nDuring the Southern and Northern dynasties non-Han people like the Xianbei of Northern Wei introduced their cuisine to northern China, and these influences continued up to the Tang dynasty, popularizing meat like mutton and dairy products like goat milk, yogurts, and Kumis among even Han people. It was during the Song dynasty that Han Chinese developed an aversion to dairy products and abandoned the dairy foods introduced earlier.\nThe Han Chinese rebel Wang Su who received asylum in the Xianbei Northern Wei after fleeing from Southern Qi, at first could not stand eating dairy products like goat's milk and meat like mutton and had to consume tea and fish instead, but after a few years he was able to eat yogurt and lamb, and the Xianbei Emperor asked him which of the foods of China (Zhongguo) he preferred, fish vs mutton and tea vs yogurt.\nPost-Tang dynasty.\nThe great migration of Chinese people south during the invasions preceding and during the Song dynasty increased the relative importance of southern Chinese staples such as rice and congee. Su Dongpo has improved the red braised pork as Dongpo pork. The dietary and culinary habits also changed greatly during this period, with many ingredients such as soy sauce and Central Asian influenced foods becoming widespread and the creation of important cookbooks such as the \"Shanjia Qinggong\" () and the \"Wushi Zhongkuilu\" () showing the respective esoteric foods and common household cuisine of the time.\nThe Yuan and Qing dynasties introduced Mongolian and Manchu cuisine, warm northern dishes that popularized hot pot cooking. During the Yuan dynasty many Muslim communities emerged in China, who practiced a porkless cuisine now preserved by Hui restaurants throughout the country. Mongolian cuisine specially Mongolian beef, though popular globally, originated outside Mongolia. Mongolian beef was created in Taiwan in the 1950s, inspired by the rise of Mongolian barbecue-style cooking. Mongolian beef is a perfect example of fusion cuisine. Yunnan cuisine is unique in China for its cheeses like Rubing and Rushan cheese made by the Bai people, and its yogurt, the yogurt may have been due to a combination of Mongolian influence during the Yuan dynasty, the Central Asian settlement in Yunnan, and the proximity and influence of India and Tibet on Yunnan.\nAs part of the last leg of the Columbian Exchange, Spanish and Portuguese traders began introducing foods from the New World to China through the port cities of Canton and Macau. Mexican chili peppers became essential ingredients in Sichuan cuisine and calorically dense potatoes and corn became staple foods across the northern plains.\nDuring the Qing dynasty, Chinese gastronomes such as Yuan Mei focused upon the primary goal of extracting the maximum flavour of each ingredient. As noted in his culinary work the \"Suiyuan shidan\", however, the fashions of cuisine at the time were quite varied and in some cases were flamboyantly ostentatious, especially when the display served also a formal ceremonial purpose, as in the case of the Manchu Han Imperial Feast.\nAs the pace of life increases in modern China, fast food like fried noodles, fried rice and \"gaifan\" (dish over rice) become more and more popular.\nRegional cuisines.\nChinese cuisine exhibits an immense amount of regional diversity. A number of different styles contribute to Chinese cuisine but perhaps the best known and most influential are Cantonese cuisine, Shandong cuisine, Jiangsu cuisine (specifically Huaiyang cuisine) and Sichuan cuisine. These styles are distinctive from one another due to factors such as availability of resources, climate, geography, history, cooking techniques and lifestyle.\nOne style may favour the use of garlic and shallots over chili and spices, while another may favour preparing seafood over other meats and fowl. Jiangsu cuisine favours cooking techniques such as braising and stewing, while Sichuan cuisine employs baking. Zhejiang cuisine focuses more on serving fresh food, Fujian cuisine is famous for its seafood and soups and the use of spices, Hunan cuisine is famous for its hot and salty taste, Anhui cuisine incorporates wild ingredients for an unusual taste.\nBased on the raw materials and ingredients used, the method of preparation and cultural differences, a variety of foods with different flavors and textures are prepared in different regions of the country. Many traditional regional cuisines rely on basic methods of preservation such as drying, salting, pickling and fermentation.\nIn addition, the \"rice theory\" attempts to describe cultural differences between north and south China; in the north, noodles are more consumed due to wheat being widely grown whereas in the south, rice is more preferred as it has historically been more cultivated there.\nStaple foods.\nChinese ancestors successfully planted millet, rice, and other grains about 8,000 to 9,000 years ago. Wheat, another staple, took another three or four thousand years. For the first time, grains provided people with a steady supply of food. Because of the lack of various foods, Chinese people had to adapt to new eating habits. Meat was scarce, and so people cooked with small amounts of meat and rice or noodles.\nRice.\nRice was domesticated in the Yangtze River basin in southern China approximately 9,000 years ago and is a primary staple food for people from rice farming areas in southern China. Steamed rice ( ), usually white rice, is the most commonly eaten form. People in South China also like to use rice to make congee as breakfast. Rice is also used to produce beer and vinegar. Glutinous rice (\"sticky rice\") is a variety of rice used in special dishes such as lotus leaf rice and glutinous rice balls.\nWheat.\nIn wheat-farming areas in Northern China, people largely rely on flour-based food, such as noodles, \"bing\" (bread), \"jiaozi\" (a kind of Chinese dumplings), and \"mantou\" (a type of steamed buns). Wheat likely \"appeared in the lower Yellow River around 2600 Before Common Era (BCE), followed by Gansu and Xinjiang around 1900 BCE and finally occurred in the middle Yellow River and Tibet regions by 1600 BCE\".\nNoodles.\nNoodles ( ) were invented in China over 4,000 years ago and have since spread across the world. Chinese noodles come dry or fresh in a variety of sizes, shapes and textures and are often served in soups or fried as toppings. Some varieties, such as Shou Mian (\u5bff\u9762, literally noodles of longevity), is an avatar of long life and good health according to Chinese traditions. Noodles can be served hot or cold with different toppings, with broth, and occasionally dry (as is the case with mi-fen). Noodles are commonly made with rice flour or wheat flour, but other flours such as soybean are also used in minor groups. Some noodles names describe their methods of creation, such as the hand-pulled noodle.\nSoybean products.\nTofu is made of soybeans and is another popular food product that supplies protein. The production process of tofu varies from region to region, resulting in different kinds of tofu with a wide range of texture and taste. Other products such as soy milk, soy paste, soy oil, and fermented soy sauce are also important in Chinese cooking.\nThere are many kinds of soybean products, including tofu skin, smoked tofu, dried tofu, and fried tofu.\nStinky tofu is fermented tofu. Like blue cheese or durian, it has a very distinct, potent and strong smell, and is an acquired taste. Hard stinky tofu is often deep-fried and paired with soy sauce or salty spice. Soft stinky tofu is usually used as a spread on steamed buns.\nDoufuru is another type of fermented tofu that has a salty taste. Doufuru can be pickled together with soy beans, red yeast rice or chili to create different color and flavor. This is more of a pickled type of tofu and is not as strongly scented as stinky tofu. Doufuru has the consistency of slightly soft blue cheese, and a taste similar to Japanese miso paste, but less salty. Doufuru can be used as a spread on steamed buns, or paired with rice congee.\nSufu is one other type of fermented tofu that goes through ageing process. The color (red, white, green) and flavor profile can determine the type of sufu it is. This kind of tofu is usually eaten alongside breakfast rice.\nSoybean milk is soybean-based milk. It is a morning beverage, and it has many benefits to human health.\nVegetables.\nApart from vegetables that can be commonly seen, some unique vegetables used in Chinese cuisine include baby corn, bok choy, snow peas, Chinese eggplant, Chinese broccoli, and straw mushrooms. Other vegetables, including bean sprouts, pea vine tips, watercress, lotus roots, chestnuts, water chestnuts, and bamboo shoots, are also used in different cuisines of China.\nBecause of different climate and soil conditions, cultivars of green beans, peas, and mushrooms can be found in rich variety.\nA variety of dried or pickled vegetables are also processed, especially in drier or colder regions where fresh vegetables were hard to get out of season.\nHerbs and seasonings.\nSeasonings such as fresh ginger root, garlic, scallion, cilantro and sesame are widely used in many regional cuisines. Sichuan peppercorns, star anise, cinnamon, fennel, cloves and white peppers and smart weed are also used in different regions.\nTo add extra flavor to the dishes, many Chinese cuisines also contain dried Chinese mushrooms, dried baby shrimp, dried tangerine peel, and dried Sichuan chillies.\nWhen it comes to sauces, China is home to soy sauce, which is made from fermented soybeans and wheat. A number of sauces are also based on fermented soybeans, including hoisin sauce, ground bean sauce and yellow bean sauce. There are also different sauces preferred by regional cuisines, oyster sauce, fish sauce and furu (fermented tofu) are also widely used. Vinegar also has a variety with different flavors: clear rice vinegar, Chinkiang black rice vinegar, Shanxi vinegar, Henghe vinegar etc.\nMeat.\nThe most commonly consumed meat in China is pork. As of at least 2024, China is the second largest beef consuming market in the world.85 Steakhouses and hot pot restaurants serving beef are becoming increasingly popular in urban China.85 Chinese consumers particularly value freshly slaughtered beef.86\nDesserts and snacks.\nGenerally, seasonal fruits serve as the most common form of dessert consumed after dinner.\nDim sum (\u70b9\u5fc3), originally means a small portion of food, can refer to dessert, or pastries. Later to avoid disambiguation, tian dian (\u751c\u70b9) and gao dian (\u7cd5\u70b9) are used to describe desserts and pastries.\nTraditionally, Chinese desserts are sweet foods and dishes that are served with tea, usually during the meal, or at the end of meals in Chinese cuisine.\nBesides being served as dim sum along with tea, pastries are used for celebration of traditional festivals. The most famous one is moon cake, used to celebrate the Mid-Autumn Festival.\nA wide variety of Chinese desserts are available, mainly including steamed and boiled sweet snacks. Bing is an umbrella term for all breads in Chinese, also including pastries and sweets. These are baked wheat-flour-based confections, with different stuffings including red bean paste, jujube, and a variety of others. Su (\u9165) is another kind of pastry made with more amount of oil, making the confection more friable. Chinese candies and sweets, called \"t\u00e1ng\" (\u7cd6) are usually made with cane sugar, malt sugar, honey, nuts, and fruit. Gao or Guo are rice-based snacks that are typically steamed and may be made from glutinous or normal rice.\nAnother cold dessert is called \"baobing\", which is shaved ice with sweet syrup. Chinese jellies are known collectively in the language as \"ices\". Many jelly desserts are traditionally set with agar and are flavoured with fruits, known as guodong (\u679c\u51bb), though gelatine based jellies are also common in contemporary desserts.\nChinese dessert soups are typically sweet and served hot.\nEuropean pastries are also seen in China, like mille-feuille, cr\u00e8me br\u00fbl\u00e9e, and cheesecake, but they are generally not as popular because the Chinese preference of dessert is mildly sweet and less oily.\nMany types of street foods, which vary from region to region, can be eaten as snacks or light dinner. Prawn crackers are an often-consumed snack in Southeast China.\nDairy products.\nChinese in earlier dynasties evidently drank milk and ate dairy products, although not necessarily from cows, but \"kumis\" (fermented mare's milk) or goat's milk. Kumis was historically consumed in northern China.\nHistorically, many Chinese chefs tried not to use milk, because of the high rate of lactose intolerance among the Chinese population. However, today, dairy products are increasingly used in Chinese cuisine, such as the \"double skin milk\" dessert in Guangdong Province, the Rubing (milk cake) cheese in Yunnan, and yoghurt in Qinghai and Xinjiang. China has a wide variety of dairy desserts that are very popular.\nCold dishes.\nCold dishes are usually served before the main meal. Besides salad and pickles as appetizers, they can range from jelly, beancurd, noodle salad, cooked meat, and sausages to jellyfish or cold soups.\nChinese sausages vary from region to region. The most common sausage is made of pork and pork fat. The flavor is generally salty-sweet in Southern China. In other parts of China, sausages are salted to be preserved. Chinese sausage is prepared in many different ways, including oven-roasting, stir-frying, and steaming.\nSoups.\nIn some part of South China, soups ( ) are served between the cold dishes and the main dishes. In other parts of China, soups are served between the main dish and staple foods, before desserts or fruit salad. There are many traditional Chinese soups, such as wonton soup, herbal chicken soup, hot and sour soup, winter melon soup, and so on.\nDrinks.\nTea ( ) plays an important role in Chinese dining culture. In China, there are two main types of tea, one is made from dried tea leaves, the other one is made by extracts from tea leaves. Baijiu and huangjiu as strong alcoholic beverages are preferred by many people as well. Wine is not so popular as other drinks in China that are consumed whilst dining, although they are usually available in the menu.\nTea.\nAs well as with dim sum, many Chinese drink their tea with snacks such as nuts, plums, dried fruit (in particular jujube), small sweets, melon seeds, and waxberry. China was the earliest country to cultivate and drink tea, which is enjoyed by people from all social classes. Tea processing began after the Qin and Han dynasties.\nThe different types of Chinese tea include red (known as \"black tea\" outside of East Asia), white, green, yellow, oolong, and black (often called \"dark tea\" in English to differentiate it from \"black tea\"). Chinese tea is often classified into several different categories according to the variety of the tea plant from which it is sourced, the region in which it is grown, and the method of production used. \nFlavored and scented teas originated in China. Jasmine, osmanthus, chrysanthemum, and ginseng are popular varieties. \nHistorically, compressed tea dominated and powdered tea known as matcha would be made from it. This was later supplanted by loose-leaf tea. Fermented tea drinks like kombucha originated in China, but kombucha is now better known outside of China than within the country.\nThere are four major tea plantation regions: Jiangbei, Jiangnan, Huanan and the southwestern region. Well known types of green tea include Longjing, Huangshan Maofeng, Bilochun, Putuofeng Cha, and Liu'an Guapian. China is the world's largest exporter of green tea.\nOne of the most ubiquitous accessories in modern China, after a wallet or purse and an umbrella, is a double-walled insulated glass thermos with tea leaves in the top behind a strainer.\nAlcoholic beverages.\nThe importance of \"baijiu\" ( \"white liquor\") in China (99.5% of its alcoholic market) makes it the most-consumed alcoholic spirit in the world. It dates back to the introduction of distilling during the Song dynasty; can be made from wheat, corn, or rice; and is usually around 120 proof (60% ABV). The most ubiquitous brand is the cheap Er guo tou, but Mao Tai is the premium \"baijiu\". Other popular brands include Kang, Lu Zhou Te Qu, and Wu Liang Ye.\n\"Huangjiu\" ( \"yellow liquor\") is not distilled and is a strong rice wine (10\u201315% ABV). Popular brands include Shaoxing Lao Jiu, Shaoxing Hua Diao, and Te Jia Fan.\nWhile fermented grain beverages have been brewed in China for over 9,000 years, it has been long overshadowed by stronger alcohol like Baijiu and Huangjiu.\nIn China, plum wine made from the plum blossom is called \"m\u00e9iji\u01d4\" (\u6885\u9152).\nHerbal drinks.\nChinese herb tea, also known as \"medicinal herbal tea\", is a kind of tea made from Chinese medicinal herbs.\nOther beverages.\nSuanmeitang is a sweet Chinese beverage made from smoked plums. Soy milk, almond milk, walnut milk and coconut milk are also drunk during the meal in different regions. In some parts of China, hawthorn and jujube juice are preferred. A small shot of fruit vinegar is served as an appetizer in Shanxi. \nNai lao or Beijing yogurt is a drinkable yogurt traditional to northern China.\nOutside China.\nWhere there are historical immigrant Chinese populations, the style of food has evolved and been adapted to local tastes and ingredients, and modified by the local cuisine, to greater or lesser extents. This has resulted in a deep Chinese influence on other national cuisines such as Cambodian cuisine, Filipino cuisine, Singaporean cuisine, Thai cuisine and Vietnamese cuisine.\nChinatowns across the world have been instrumental in shaping the national cuisines of their respective countries, such as the introduction of a street food culture to Thailand in Bangkok Chinatown. There are also a large number of forms of fusion cuisine, often popular in the country in question. Some, such as ramen (Japanese Chinese cuisine), which originated in Yokohama Chinatown, have become popular internationally.\nDeep-fried meat combined with sweet and sour sauce as a cooking style receives an enormous preference outside of China. Therefore, many similar international Chinese cuisines are invented based on sweet and sour sauce, including Sweet and sour chicken (Europe and North America), Manchurian chicken (India) or \"tangsuyuk\" (South Korea).\nApart from the host country, the dishes developed in overseas Chinese cuisines are heavily dependent on the cuisines derived from the origin of the Chinese immigrants. In Korean Chinese cuisine, the dishes derive primarily from Shandong cuisine while Filipino Chinese cuisine is strongly influenced by Fujian cuisine. American Chinese cuisine has distinctive dishes (such as chop suey) originally based on Cantonese cuisine, which are more popular among non-Chinese Americans than with Chinese Americans themselves.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* American Chinese cuisine\nDining etiquette.\nYouths should not begin eating before their elders do. When eating from a bowl, one should not hold it with its bottom part, because it resembles the act of begging. Chopsticks are the main eating utensils for Chinese food, which can be used to cut and pick up food. When someone is taking a break from eating at the table, they should not put the chopstick into the rice vertically, because it resembles the Chinese traditional funeral tribute, which involves putting chopsticks inside a bowl of rice vertically. It is considered inappropriate to use knives on the dining table. Chopsticks should not be waved around in the air or played with. Food should first be taken from the plate in front. It is considered impolite to stare at a plate. Watching TV, using mobile phones or doing other activities while eating is considered in poor taste. If an older person puts food in a younger person's bowl, the younger person should thank them.\nChinese culture has guidelines in how and when food are eaten. Chinese people typically eat three meals a day, consisting of breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Breakfast is served around 6\u20139am, lunch is served around 12\u20132pm, and dinner is served around 6\u20139pm. A late night, fourth meal of the day is known as siu yeh and served from 9pm-4am, which is similar to the Western concept of supper. Within the Chinese culture, families do follow different traditions. In some families, the elderly members and youngsters get their meal first, then the mother and father, and then the children and teenagers. Other families have the male and female eat separately at different seating area. Whatever tradition the family decide to follow, it is intended to show respect to members of the family.\nRelation to Chinese philosophy and religion.\nFood plays various roles in social and cultural life. In Chinese folk religion, ancestor veneration is conducted by offering food to ancestors and Chinese festivals involve the consumption and preparation of specific foods which have symbolic meanings attached to them. Specific religions in China have their own cuisines such as the Taoist diet, Buddhist cuisine and Chinese Islamic Cuisine.\nThe Kaifeng Jews in Henan province once had their own Chinese Jewish cuisine but the community has largely died out in the modern era and not much is known about the specifics of their cuisine but they did influence foods eaten in their region and some of their dishes remain. Chinese dishes with purported Kaifeng Jewish roots include Kaifeng xiao long bao, Mayuxing bucket-shaped chicken, Chrysanthemum hot pot, and Four Treasures.\nFood also plays a role in daily life. The formality of the meal setting can signify what kind of relationship people have with one another, and the type of food can indicate ones' social status and their country of origin. In a formal setting, up to sixteen of any combination of hot and cold dishes would be served to respect the guests. On the other hand, in a casual setting, people would eat inexpensive meals such as at food stalls or homemade food. The typical disparity in food in the Chinese society between the wealthy and everyone below that group lies in the rarity and cost of the food or ingredient, such as shark fins and bear paws.\nDepending on whether one chooses to have rice or a meal that is made of wheat flour such as bread or noodles as their main source of food, people within a similar culture or of a different background can make an assumption of the other's country of origin from the south or north of China. Different foods have different symbolic meanings. Mooncakes and dumplings are symbolic of the Mid-autumn festival and the Spring Festival, respectively. Pear symbolizes bad luck due to its similarity in pronunciation of 'away' in the native language and noodle means living a long life for its length.\nIn Chinese philosophy, food frequently conveys a message. A Chinese philosophy \"I Ching\" says, \"Gentlemen use eating as a way to attain happiness. They should be aware of what they say, and refrain from eating too much.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6585", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6585", "title": "Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i", "text": "Romanian sculptor, photographer and painter\nConstantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i (; February 19, 1876\u00a0\u2013 March 16, 1957) was a Romanian sculptor, painter, and photographer who made his career in France. Considered one of the most influential sculptors of the 20th century and a pioneer of modernism, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i is called the patriarch of modern sculpture. As a child, he displayed an aptitude for carving wooden farm tools. Formal studies took him first to Bucharest, then to Munich, then to the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in Paris from 1905 to 1907. His art emphasizes clean geometrical lines that balance forms inherent in his materials with the symbolic allusions of representational art. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i sought inspiration in non-European cultures as a source of primitive exoticism, as did Paul Gauguin, Pablo Picasso, Andr\u00e9 Derain, and others. However, other influences emerge from Romanian folk art traceable through Byzantine and Dionysian traditions.\nEarly years.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i grew up in the village of Hobi\u021ba, Gorj, near T\u00e2rgu Jiu, close to Romania's Carpathian Mountains, an area known for its rich tradition of folk crafts, particularly woodcarving. Geometric patterns of the region are seen in his later works such as the Endless Column created in 1918.\nHis parents Nicolae and Maria Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i were poor peasants who earned a meagre living through back-breaking labor; from the age of seven, Constantin herded the family's flock of sheep. He showed talent for carving objects out of wood and often ran away from home to escape the bullying of his father and older brothers.\nAt the age of nine, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i left the village to work in the nearest large town. At the age of eleven, he went into the service of a grocer in Slatina; and then he became a domestic in a public house in Craiova, where he remained for several years. When he was 18, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i created a violin by hand with materials he found around his workplace. Impressed by Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's talent for carving, an industrialist enrolled him in the Craiova School of Arts and Crafts (\"\u0219coala de arte \u0219i meserii\"), where he pursued his love for woodworking, graduating with honors in 1898.\nHe then enrolled in the Bucharest School of Fine Arts, where he received academic training in sculpture. He worked hard and quickly distinguished himself as talented. One of his earliest surviving works, under the guidance of his anatomy teacher, Dimitrie Gerota, is a masterfully rendered \u00e9corch\u00e9 (statue of a man with skin removed to reveal the muscles underneath) which was exhibited at the Romanian Athenaeum in 1903. Though just an anatomical study, it foreshadowed the sculptor's later efforts to reveal essence rather than merely copy outward appearance.\nWorking in Paris.\nIn 1903, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i traveled to Munich, and from there to Paris. In Paris, he was welcomed by the community of artists and intellectuals brimming with new ideas. He worked for two years in the workshop of Antonin Merci\u00e9 of the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts and was invited to enter the workshop of Auguste Rodin. Even though he admired the eminent Rodin he left the Rodin studio after only two months, saying, \"Nothing can grow under big trees.\"\nAfter leaving Rodin's workshop, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i began developing the revolutionary style for which he is known. His first commissioned work, \"The Prayer\", was part of a gravestone memorial. It depicts a young woman crossing herself as she kneels, and marks the first step toward abstracted, non-literal representation, and shows his drive to depict \"not the outer form but the idea, the essence of things.\" He also began doing more carving, rather than the method popular with his contemporaries, that of modeling in clay or plaster which would be cast in metal, and by 1908 he worked almost exclusively by carving.\nIn the following few years, he made many versions of \"Sleeping Muse\" and \"The Kiss\", further simplifying forms to geometrical and sparse objects.\nHis works became popular in France, Romania, and the United States. Collectors, notably John Quinn, bought his pieces, and reviewers praised his works. In 1913 Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's work was displayed at both the Salon des Ind\u00e9pendants and the first exhibition in the U.S. of modern art, the Armory Show.\nIn 1920, he developed a notorious reputation with the entry of \"Princess X\" in the Salon. The phallic appearance of this large, gleaming bronze piece scandalized the Salon and, despite Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's explanation that it was simply meant to represent the essence of womanhood, it was removed from the exhibition. \"Princess X\" was revealed to be Princess Marie Bonaparte, direct descendant of the younger brother of Napoleon Bonaparte. The sculpture has been interpreted by some as symbolizing her obsession with the penis and her lifelong quest to achieve vaginal orgasm, with the help of Sigmund Freud.\nAround this time, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i began crafting the bases for his sculptures with much care and originality because he considered them important to the works themselves.\nOne of his major groups of sculptures involved the \"Bird in Space\" \u2014 simple abstract shapes representing a bird in flight. The works are based on his earlier \"M\u0103iastra\" series. In Romanian folklore the M\u0103iastra is a beautiful golden bird who foretells the future and cures the blind. Over the following 20 years, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i made multiple versions of \"Bird in Space\" out of marble or bronze. Athena Tacha Spear's book, \"Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's Birds,\" (CAA monographs XXI, NYU Press, New York, 1969), first sorted out the 36 versions and their development, from the early \"M\u0103iastra\", to the \"Golden Bird\" of the late teens, to the \"Bird in Space\", which emerged in the early 1920s and which Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i developed throughout his life.\nOne of these versions caused a major controversy in 1926 when photographer Edward Steichen purchased it and shipped it to the United States. Customs officers did not accept the \"Bird\" as a work of art and assessed customs duty on its import as an industrial item. After protracted court proceedings, this assessment was overturned, thus confirming the Bird's status as a duty-exempt work of art. The verdict was somewhat influenced by the Judge Justice Waite's personal appreciation of the art calling it 'beautiful', 'symmetrical', and 'ornamental'. The ruling also established the important principle that \"art\" does not have to involve a realistic representation of nature, and that it was legitimate for it to simply represent an abstract concept \u2013 in this case \"flight\".\nHis work became increasingly popular in the U.S, where he visited several times during his life. Worldwide fame in 1933 brought him the commission of building a meditation temple, the Temple of Deliverance, in India for the Maharajah of Indore, Yeshwant Rao Holkar. Holkar had commissioned three \"L'Oiseau dans l'Espace\"\u2014in bronze, black and white marble\u2014previously, but when Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i went to India in 1937 to complete the plans and begin construction, the Mahrajah was away and, supposedly, lost interest in the project which was to be an homage to his wife, the Maharani Margaret Holkar, who had died when he returned. Of the three birds, the bronze one is in the collection of the Norton Simon Museum in Pasadena, California, and the two marble birds are currently in the permanent collection of the National Gallery of Australia in Canberra, Australia.\nIn 1938, he finished the World War I monument in T\u00e2rgu-Jiu where he had spent much of his childhood. \"Table of Silence\", \"The Gate of the Kiss\", and \"Endless Column\" commemorate the courage and sacrifice of Romanians who in 1916 defended T\u00e2rgu Jiu from the forces of the Central Powers. The restoration of this ensemble was spearheaded by the World Monuments Fund and was completed in 2004.\nThe T\u00e2rgu Jiu ensemble marks the apex of his artistic career. In his remaining 19 years he created fewer than 15 pieces, mostly reworking earlier themes, and while his fame grew, he withdrew. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i received his first retrospective in 1955 at the Guggenheim Museum in New York. In 1955 \"Life\" magazine reported, \"Wearing white pajamas and a yellow gnome-like cap, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i today hobbles about his studio tenderly caring for and communing with the silent host of fish, birds, heads, and endless columns which he created.\"\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i was cared for in his later years by a Romanian refugee couple. He became a French citizen in 1952 in order to make the caregivers his heirs, and to bequeath his studio and its contents to the Mus\u00e9e National d'Art Moderne in Paris. In 2021, for IRCAM and Centre Pompidou's Festival Manifeste, the intermedial large-scale installation \"Infinite Light Columns / Constellations of The Future, tribute to Constantin Brancusi\" by artists duo Arotin &amp; Serghei has been installed on Renzo Piano's IRCAM Tower on Centre Pompidou Square, on the opposite site to Brancusi's Studio.\nPersonal life.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i dressed simply, reflective of his Romanian peasant background. His studio was reminiscent of the houses of the peasants from his native region: there was a big slab of rock as a table and a primitive fireplace, similar to those found in traditional houses in his native Oltenia, while the rest of the furniture was made by him out of wood. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i would cook his own food, traditional Romanian dishes, with which he would treat his guests.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i held a large spectrum of interests, from science to music, and was known to play the violin. He would sing old Romanian folk songs, often expressing his feelings of homesickness. After the installment of communism, the artist never permanently returned to his native Romania, but did visit eight times.\nHis circle of friends included artists and intellectuals in Paris such as Amedeo Modigliani, Ezra Pound, Henri Pierre Roch\u00e9, Guillaume Apollinaire, Louise Bourgeois, Pablo Picasso, Man Ray, Marcel Duchamp, Henri Rousseau, Peggy Guggenheim, Tristan Tzara, and Fernand L\u00e9ger. He was an old friend of Romany Marie, who was also Romanian, and referred Isamu Noguchi to her caf\u00e9 in Greenwich Village.\nAlthough surrounded by the Parisian avant-garde, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i never lost contact with Romania and had friends from the community of Romanian artists and intellectuals living in Paris, including Benjamin Fondane, George Enescu, Theodor Pallady, Camil Ressu, Nicolae D\u0103r\u0103scu, Panait Istrati, Traian Vuia, Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco, Emil Cioran, Natalia Dumitresco, and Paul Celan. Another Romanian scholar wrote on Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, Mircea Eliade.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i held a particular interest in mythology, especially Romanian mythology, folk tales, and traditional art (which also had a strong influence on his works), but he became interested in African and Mediterranean art as well.\nA talented handyman, he built his own phonograph and made most of his furniture, utensils, and doorways. His worldview valued \"differentiating the essential from the ephemeral,\" with Plato, Lao-Tzu, and Milarepa as influences. Reportedly, he had a copy of the first ever translation from the Tibetan into French of Jacques Bacot's Le poete tibetain Milarepa: ses crimes, ses \u00e9preuves, son Nirvana that he kept by his bedside. He identified closely with Milarepa's mountain existence since Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i himself came from the Carpathian Mountains of Romania and he often thought he was a reincarnation of Milarepa. He was a saint-like idealist and near ascetic, turning his workshop into a place where visitors noted the deep spiritual atmosphere. However, particularly through the 1910s and 1920s, he was known as a pleasure seeker and merrymaker in his bohemian circle. He enjoyed cigarettes, good wine, and the company of women. He had one child, John Moore, with the New Zealand pianist Vera Moore. He never acknowledged his son as his own.\nDeath and legacy.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i died on March 16, 1957, aged 81. He was buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse in Paris. Alexandre Istrati and Natalia Dumitresco were later buried in the same grave. This cemetery also displays statues that Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i carved for deceased artists.\nAt his death, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i left 1200 photographs and 215 sculptures. He bequeathed part of his collection to the French state on condition that his workshop be rebuilt as it was on the day he died. This reconstruction of his studio, adjacent to the Pompidou Centre, is open to the public. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's studio inspired Swedish architect Klas Anshelm's design of the Malm\u00f6 Konsthall, which opened in 1975.\nIn September 1957, African American sculptor Richard Hunt traveled from Chicago to Paris to view Brancusi's studio. Hunt's visit left an enduring impression on the 22-year-old artist, not only because of the artistic influence of Brancusi and exploration of biomorphic abstraction in sculpture but also because of the way which Hunt chose to live the majority of his life. Like Brancusi, Hunt slept in his own studio surrounded by his art and the tools used in his practice for much of his life.\nBrancusi's \"Bird in Space\" sculptures inspired the Modernist poet, Ezra Pound, specifically his late \"Cantos\" which were written in the mid-twentieth century. The literary critic Lucy Jeffery highlights ways in which Brancusi's sculptural form influenced Ezra Pound, analysing Pound's \"Canto CXVII et seq., 815\". Through close textual analysis and with direct reference to Brancusi's comments on his own creative process, Jeffery highlights how Pound's and Brancusi's sculptural process and resulting style is one of ambiguity and tension between: levity and weight, simplicity and complexity, ease and struggle. As Jeffery remarks: 'Despite their drive towards an holistic artwork, neither Brancusi nor Pound could, to borrow [Albert] Boime's phrasing, \"emancipate\" their art from the material or social context to which it belonged.' In the article, Jeffery contextualises Brancusi's work in relation to the sculptor Gaudier-Brzeska, photographer Man Ray, and writers such as Mina Loy, Samuel Beckett, and Peter Russell.\nIn 1962, Georg Olden used Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's \"Bird in Space\" as the inspiration behind his design of the Clio Award statuette.\nIn November 1971, Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i Memorial House was established in his birth village Hobi\u021ba, as a branch of the Gorj County Muzeum.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i was elected posthumously to the Romanian Academy in 1990.\nGoogle commemorated his 135th birthday with a Doodle in 2011 consisting of seven of his works.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i's works are housed in museums around the world: in Romania at the National Museum of Art and Craiova Art Museum, in the US at the Museum of Modern Art (New York City) and the Philadelphia Museum of Art, the former holding the largest collection of Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i sculptures in the United States.\nConstantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i University in T\u00e2rgu Jiu and a metro station in Bucharest are named after him.\nIn 2015, the Romanian Parliament declared February 19 \"The Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i Day\", a working holiday in Romania.\nDirector Mick Davis plans to make a biographical film about Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i called \"The Sculptor\", and British director Peter Greenaway said in 2017 that he is working on a film called \"Walking to Paris\", a film which shows Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i's journey from Bucharest to Paris.\nArt market.\nBr\u00e2ncu\u0219i's piece \"Madame L.R.\" sold for \u20ac29.185 million ($37.2 million) in 2009, setting a record price for a sculpture sold at auction.\nIn May 2018, \"La Jeune Fille Sophistiqu\u00e9e\" (\"Portrait de Nancy Cunard\"), a polished bronze on a carved marble base (1932), sold for US$71 million (with fees) at Christie's New York, setting a world record auction price for the artist.\nSelected works.\nBoth \"Bird in Space\" and \"Sleeping Muse I\" are sculptures of animate objects; however, unlike ones from Ancient Greece or Rome, or those from the High Renaissance period, these works of art are more abstract in style.\n\"Bird in Space\" is a series from the 1920s. One of these, constructed in 1925 using wood, stone, and marble (Richler 178) stands around 72\u00a0inches tall and consists of a narrow feather standing erect on a wooden base. Similar models, but made from materials such as bronze, were also produced by Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i and placed in exhibitions.\n\"Sleeping Muse I\" has different versions as well; one, from 1909 to 1910, is made of marble and measures 6 \u00be in. in height (Adams 549). This is a model of a head, without a body, with markings to show features such as hair, nose, lips, and closed eyes. In \"A History of Western Art\", Adams says that the sculpture has \"an abstract, curvilinear quality and a smooth contour that create an impression of elegance\" (549). The qualities which produce the effect can particularly be seen in the shape of the eyes and in the set of the mouth.\nOther works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn fiction.\nApeirogon by Colum McCann p212\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6586", "revid": "836960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6586", "title": "Claus Sluter", "text": "Dutch then Burgundian sculptor\nClaus Sluter (1340s in Haarlem \u2013 1405 or 1406 in Dijon) was a Dutch sculptor, living in the Duchy of Burgundy from about 1380. He was the most important northern European sculptor of his age and is considered a pioneer of the \"northern realism\" of the Early Netherlandish painting that came into full flower with the work of Jan van Eyck and others in the next generation.\nLife.\nThe name \"Claes de Slutere van Herlam\" is inscribed in the Register of the Corporation of Stonemasons and Sculptors of Brussels around the years 1379/1380. He then moved to the Burgundian capital of Dijon, where from 1385 to 1389 he was the assistant of Jean de Marville, court sculptor to Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy. From 1389 to his death he was court sculptor himself, with the rank of \"valet de chambre\". He was succeeded by his nephew Claus de Werve.\nWork.\nSluter's most significant work is the so-called \"Well of Moses\" (1395\u20131403), or the Great Cross. It was created for the Carthusian monastery of Champmol, which was founded by Philip the Bold right outside Dijon in 1383. For many years, the top portion was thought to have included (along with Christ on a cross), sculptures of the Virgin and John the Evangelist. However it was more likely just Christ, with Mary Magdalene kneeling at the foot of the cross. The cross, and whatever was on the terrace below, was destroyed at some point after 1736 and before 1789, probable because the roof of the building protecting the monument collapsed. Some fragments from the original Cross are preserved in the Mus\u00e9e Arch\u00e9ologique de Dijon. Life-sized figures representing Old Testament prophets and kings (Moses, David, Daniel, Jeremiah, Zachariah, and Isaiah) stand around the base, holding phylacteries and books inscribed with verses from their respective texts, which were interpreted in the Middle Ages as typological prefigurations of the sacrifice of Christ. The work's physical structure, in which the Old Testament figures support those of the New Dispensation, literalizes the typological iconography. The pedestal surmounts a hexagonal fountain. The entire monument is executed in limestone quarried from Tonnerre and Asni\u00e8res.\nThe portal of the former mortuary chapel of Champmol is positioned a few feet away from the Well of Moses. It consists of three sculptural groups by Sluter: a standing Madonna and Child at the trumeau; the duke and St. John, his patron saint, at the left jamb and the duchess and her patron saint, Catherine, at the right one. Sluter was also responsible for the main part of the work on Philip's tomb, which (restored and partly reconstructed) has been moved to the Museum of Fine Arts which is housed in the former ducal palace in Dijon.\nSluter was one of the sculptors of the pleurants, or mourners, which occupy niches below the tombs of Philip the Bold, his wife Margaret, and John the Fearless."}
{"id": "6587", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6587", "title": "Cadillac, Michigan", "text": "Cadillac ( ) is a city in and county seat of Wexford County in the U.S. state of Michigan. The population was 10,371 at the 2020 census, making it the second most-populated city in the Northern Michigan region, after Traverse City.\nCadillac was settled as early as 1871 and formerly known as the village of Clam Lake before incorporating as a city in 1877. The city is located upon the shores of Lake Cadillac, connected by the Clam Lake Canal to Lake Mitchell. The Clam River, which begins in Cadillac, is part of the Muskegon River watershed. Cadillac is the junction of three major highways: US Highway 131, M-55, and M-115. The geographic center of Michigan is approximately north-northwest of Cadillac. Cadillac is the primary city of the Cadillac micropolitan area, which includes all of Wexford County and Missaukee County to the east, and had population of 48,725 at the 2020 census.\nHistory.\nVillage of Clam Lake.\nEuropean explorers and fur traders visited this area from the 18th century, most of them initially French and French-Canadians who traded with regional Native Americans. More permanent communities were not established until the late 19th century. Initial settlements developed from logging camps and the logging industry.\nIn 1871, the first sawmill began operations at Clam Lake. Originally called the Pioneer Mill, it was built by John R. Yale. That same year, George A. Mitchell, a prominent local banker and railroad entrepreneur, and Adam Gallinger, a local carpenter, formed the Clam Lake Canal Improvement and Construction Company. Two years later, the Clam Lake Canal was constructed between Big and Little Clam lakes, known as present-day Lakes Mitchell and Lake Cadillac. Sawmill owners used the canal to transport timber from Big Clam Lake to the mills and railroad sites on Little Clam Lake. The Grand Rapids and Indiana Railroad (G.R. &amp; I. Railroad) had reached the area in 1872.\nThe settlement of Clam Lake was incorporated as a village in 1874. George Mitchell was elected as the first mayor. The village was incorporated as a city in 1877 and renamed Cadillac, after Antoine Laumet de La Mothe, sieur de Cadillac, a French colonist who started the first permanent settlement at Detroit in 1701.\nBattle of Manton.\nThe Wexford County seat of government, originally located in Sherman, was moved to Manton in 1881, as the result of a compromise between the feuding residents of Cadillac and Sherman. Cadillac partisans, however, won the county seat by a county-wide vote in April 1882. The day following the election, a sheriff's posse left the city for Manton by special train to seize the county records. After they arrived and collected a portion of the materials, however, an angry crowd confronted the Cadillac men and drove them out of town.\nWhen the sheriff returned to Cadillac, he encountered a force consisting of several hundred armed men; this group reportedly included a brass band. The Sheriff's force, some of whom may have been intoxicated, traveled back to Manton to seize the remaining records. Although Manton residents confronted the Cadillac men and barricaded the courthouse, the posse successfully seized the documents. They returned to Cadillac in dubious glory.\nCity of Cadillac.\nIn 1878, Ephraim Shay perfected his Shay locomotive, which was particularly effective in its ability to climb steep grades, maneuver sharp turns, and accommodate imperfections in railroad tracks. Cadillac was home to the Michigan Iron Works Company, which manufactured the Shay locomotive for a short time in the early 1880s. The lumber industry continued to dominate the city, attracting a large immigrant labor force, most of whom were Swedish. (Later, Cadillac made sister city arrangements with M\u00f6lnlycke, Sweden, and Rovaniemi, Finland).\nIn 1899, the Cadillac Club formed, the forerunner of the Cadillac Area Chamber of Commerce.\nBy the early 20th century, with the lumber depleted, the timber industry was in decline. Today, manufacturers employ 30% of residents. Cadillac's range of industries includes the manufacture of pleasure boats, automotive parts, water-well components, vacuum cleaners, and rubber products.\nIn 1936, the U.S. Forest Service and the Civilian Conservation Corps developed the Caberfae Ski Area during the Great Depression as an investment in future economic development. This resulted in promotion of this area as a tourist center. Caberfae remains in operation today, as the oldest ski resort in the midwest. Tourism and outdoor recreation have since become an important sector of Cadillac's economy.\nIn the summer, tourists travel to the city and region for boating, fishing, hiking, mountain biking, and camping. During the fall, hunting and color tours are popular. The winter is possibly the busiest season; the area can be found packed with downhill skiers, cross-country skiers, ice-fishers, snow-shoers and\u2013most of all\u2013snowmobilers. The North American Snowmobile Festival (NASF) is held on frozen Lake Cadillac every winter.\nThirsty's, a gas station on M-55 west of Cadillac, was the home of Samantha or \"Sam The Bear\" from the 1970s through the late 1990s, when Sam died of old age. Sam was the only brown bear in captivity in the US at the time to hibernate naturally. Sam lived in a large cage in front of the gas station and was fed ice cream cones by tourists every summer.\nIn October 1975 the rock group Kiss visited Cadillac and performed at the Cadillac High School gymnasium. They played the concert to honor the Cadillac High School football team. In previous years, the team had compiled a record of sixteen consecutive victories, but the 1974 squad opened the season with two losses. The assistant coach, Jim Neff, an English teacher and rock'n'roll fan, thought to inspire the team by playing Kiss music in the locker room. He also connected the team's game plan, K-I-S-S or \"Keep It Simple Stupid\", with the band. The team went on to win seven straight games and their conference co-championship. After learning of their association with the team's success, the band decided to visit the school and play for the homecoming game.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and is water.\nThe Lake Cadillac is entirely within the city limits. The larger, Lake Mitchell is nearby on the west side of the city, with of shoreline within the city's municipal boundary. The lakes were connected by a stream which was replaced in 1873 by the Clam Lake Canal. The canal was featured on Ripley's Believe It or Not in the 1970s due to the phenomenon that in winter the canal freezes before the lakes and then after the lakes freeze, the canal thaws and remains unfrozen for the rest of the winter.\nCadillac is located at the eastern edge of what is now managed as the Manistee National Forest. The surrounding area is heavily wooded, with mixed hardwood and conifer forests. Christmas tree farming has been important to the area agricultural industry. Cadillac was chosen in 1988 to donate the holiday tree installed at the lawn of the U.S. Capitol building in Washington, D.C.\nThe area surrounding Cadillac is primarily rural, and is considered to be part of Northern Michigan. Given the small size of nearby communities, the city is a major commercial and industrial hub of the region.\nCityscape.\nThe commercial center of the city is located on the eastern edge of Lake Cadillac. Most downtown buildings range from two to five stories in height. Many face Mitchell Street, the city's tree-lined main street and traditional corridor of travel through town. The downtown contains a movie theater, gift shops, restaurants, a bookstore, specialty food stores, jewelers, clothing retailers, and various other businesses.\nThe Courthouse Hill Historic District, recognized in April 2005, lies adjacent to the city's commercial center. The District contains a number of large Victorian-style residences built by the lumber barons and businessmen who helped develop the city in the 1870s. Population and building density is highest in this area.\nOn the western bank of Lake Cadillac, where M-55 intersects M-115, is what is locally referred to as Cadillac West. This is a small commercial district, bordering Mitchell State Park and the two lakes; it caters mostly to tourists. It contains a number of motels and restaurants.\nAlong the northern and southern stretches of the lake are the main residential areas of the city. They are generally of low to moderate density, characterized primarily by single-family structures.\nClimate.\nCadillac experiences a typical northern Michigan climate, undergoing temperate seasonal changes, influenced by the presence of Lake Michigan and the inevitable lake effect. Winters are generally cold with large amounts of snowfall. Summers are warm. The average high temperature in July is and the average low in January is . Summer temperatures can exceed , and winter temperatures can drop below . Average annual rainfall is , and average annual snowfall is . Snowfall typically occurs between the months of November and March. According to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, Cadillac has a humid continental climate, abbreviated \"Dfb\" on climate maps.\nSuperfund sites.\nCadillac has two superfund sites, according to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. One is located at 1100 Wright Street, the former site of Kysor Industrial Corp, which operations resulted in toxic wastes. The other is located at 1002 6th Street, the former site of Northernaire Plating. Its operations also produced hazardous wastes, which produced contamination.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 10,355 people, 4,280 households, and 2,625 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,927 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 95.6% White, 0.5% African American, 0.6% Native American, 1.0% Asian, 0.4% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.8% of the population.\nThere were 4,280 households, of which 32.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 39.2% were married couples living together, 16.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 5.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 38.7% were non-families. 32.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34 and the average family size was 2.90.\nThe median age in the city was 36.5 years. 24.7% of residents were under the age of 18; 10% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 24.4% were from 25 to 44; 23.8% were from 45 to 64; and 17.1% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 47.4% male and 52.6% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 10,000 people, 4,118 households, and 2,577 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,466 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 96.55% White, 0.21% Black or African American, 0.92% Native American, 0.63% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.28% from other races, and 1.38% from two or more races. 1.18% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 4,118 households, out of which 32.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.9% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.4% were non-families. 31.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.96.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 26.2% under the age of 18, 9.6% from 18 to 24, 27.9% from 25 to 44, 19.6% from 45 to 64, and 16.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.4 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $29,899, and the median income for a family was $36,825. Males had a median income of $29,773 versus $21,283 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,801. About 10.9% of families and 13.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.4% of those under age 18 and 13.3% of those age 65 or over.\nEconomy.\nManufacturing has been the greatest employer in Cadillac since the logging industry. More than 26% of the city's labor force is employed in manufacturing. Three industrial parks are located within the city limits, comprising 7% of the total land use in Cadillac. Their operations generate 47% of the city's tax base. Much of the city's economic performance is determined by the fortunes of local industry.\nThe center of the city is generally perceived to have a \"small-town-feel\". In the summer, the downtown fills with tourists, many from southern Michigan. The city center is one block from Lake Cadillac. For visitors by boat who dock at the public docks, it is nearly as accessible by boat as it is by car. The city's immediate proximity to two lakes, as well as Manistee National Forest, Pere Marquette State Forest, Mitchell State Park and a number of major highways, has established tourism as a significant sector of the local economy.\nDuring the winter months, Lake Cadillac and Lake Mitchell freeze over and the city becomes covered with snow. Cadillac is connected to a number of trail systems popular with winter recreation enthusiasts. The city integrates unusually well into the corridors of travel created by snowmobilers.\nCadillac is also known as Chestnut Town, USA. The local area has a relatively high number of American chestnut trees, planted by pioneers from New York and Pennsylvania who settled in western Michigan. A blight in the early 20th century killed nearly every American Chestnut tree, but those in western Michigan had developed a mysterious resistance and survived.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2019 \"Comprehensive Annual Financial Report\", the principal employers in the city were:\nArts and culture.\nSites in Cadillac with Michigan historical markers include: Cadillac Carnegie Library, Charles T. Mitchell House, Clam Lake Canal, Cobbs and Mitchell Building, Cobbs and Mitchell No. 1, and the Shay Locomotive.\nGovernment.\nCadillac was incorporated as a city in 1877. It is a home rule city with a Council-Manager form of government-one.\nCurrent council members are Antoinette Schippers (Mayor), Bryan Ellenbaas (Ward 1 councilmember), Scott Hopkins (Ward 2 Councilmember), Robert Engles (Ward 3 Councilmember), and Ruthann French (Ward 4 Councilmember). Antoinette Schippers has been serving as acting mayor since February 12, 2025, following Carla Filkins resignation. The present City Manager is Marcus Peccia.\nCadillac is located in Michigan's 2nd congressional district, represented by Republican John Moolenaar, and also Michigan\u2019s 36th senate district, represented by Michelle Hoitenga.\nEducation.\nCadillac's public education system has a total of 10 schools, with approximately 3,100 students and 166 teachers with a student:teacher ratio of 19.1:1. Cadillac has 4 private primary and secondary schools with approximately 394 students, 20 teachers and a student:teacher ratio of 20:1.\nCadillac Area Public Schools.\nPublic education is administered by Cadillac Area Public Schools. The city has two high schools: Cadillac High School and Innovation High School. The area also has a middle school, Mackinaw Trail Middle School (MTMS), covering grades 6, 7 and 8. There are three elementary schools, Forest View Elementary, Franklin Elementary, and Lincoln Elementary. There is one early childhood center, Viking Learning Center. Cadillac Area Public Schools is under the leadership of superintendent Jennifer Brown. Brown was also head of the recent bond that passed in 2017, where construction on all pre-k through 12th grade buildings was completed in 2024. Cadillac also has an alternative high school at the Innovation High School located across the street from the main high school campus and district administration.\nPrivate schools.\nCadillac Heritage Christian offers nondenominational Christian education from pre-K through 12th grade.\nNorthview Adventist School has 16 students in grades 1\u201310 as of 2020.\nSt. Ann School is a coed private Roman Catholic school with 236 students in grades pre-K through 7.\nTraining schools.\nNorthwoods Aviation, located at Wexford County Airport, offers training programs for piloting and servicing aircraft.\nThe Cadillac Institute of Cosmetology is a full service teaching salon in downtown Cadillac that offers training for general cosmetologists and specialized technicians to high school students through a partnership with Wexford-Missaukee Intermediate School District.\nColleges.\nThe Baker College-Cadillac campus occupies just outside the City of Cadillac. The school has an enrollment of more than 1,300 students and offers Associate's and bachelor's degrees, in addition to professional certifications.\nMedia.\nRadio.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelevision.\nAdditionally, Cadillac is served by Traverse City stations WPBN-TV (Channel 7, NBC) and WGTU (Channel 29, ABC).\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\nCadillac is situated as the confluence of three highways: US\u00a0131, M-55 and M-115. Prior to 2001, the northern end of the freeway portion of US\u00a0131 was located at the southern entrance to Cadillac. With the construction of a bypass, the US\u00a0131 freeway was extended around the east side of the city. The former route of the highway through downtown Cadillac was redesignated as BUS US\u00a0131. In the city, BUS US\u00a0131 is named Mitchell Street, after George Mitchell, but may be referred to as main street.\nRail.\nThe city is serviced by rail via the Great Lakes Central Railroad. This is primarily a freight line, although passenger service is expected in the future.\nNon-motorized transportation.\nThe White Pine Trail's northern terminus is in Cadillac. The trail, which stretches and originates from Comstock Park, follows an abandoned railroad bed into the center of the city. The trail is paved from the village of Leroy 16 miles north to Cadillac.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6589", "revid": "1093475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6589", "title": "COINTELPRO", "text": "Series of covert and illegal projects by the FBI\nCOINTELPRO (a syllabic abbreviation derived from Counter Intelligence Program) was a series of covert and illegal projects conducted between 1956 and 1971 by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) aimed at surveilling, infiltrating, discrediting, and disrupting American political parties and organizations that the FBI perceived as subversive.\nGroups and individuals targeted by the FBI included feminist organizations, the Communist Party USA, anti-Vietnam War organizers, activists in the civil rights and Black power movements (e.g., Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X, and the Black Panther Party), Student organizations such as Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) and Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), environmentalist and animal rights organizations, the American Indian Movement (AIM), Chicano and Mexican-American groups like the Brown Berets and the United Farm Workers, and independence movements (including Puerto Rican independence groups, such as the Young Lords and the Puerto Rican Socialist Party). Although the program primarily focused on organizations that were part of the broader New Left, they also targeted white supremacist groups, such as the Ku Klux Klan and the National States' Rights Party.\nThe FBI engaged in covert operations targeting domestic political groups from its earliest years. Covert operations under the official COINTELPRO label took place between 1956 and 1971. However, the official chronology of the program is the subject of debate. According to a senate investigation, \"If COINTELPRO had been a short-lived aberration, the thorny problems of motivation, techniques, and control presented might be safely relegated to history. However, COINTELPRO existed for years on an 'ad hoc basis before the formal programs were instituted, and more significantly, COINTELPRO-type activities may continue today under the rubric of 'investigation.\" Many of the tactics used in COINTELPRO are alleged to have seen continued use, including discrediting targets through psychological warfare; smearing individuals and groups using forged documents and by planting false reports in the media; harassment; wrongful imprisonment; illegal violence; and assassination. According to a Senate report, the FBI's motivation was \"protecting national security, preventing violence, and maintaining the existing social and political order\".\nBeginning in 1969, Black Panther party leaders were targeted by the COINTELPRO and \"neutralized\" through tactics including assassination, imprisonment, public humiliation, and false criminal charges. Some of the Black Panthers targeted include Fred Hampton, Mark Clark, Assata Shakur, Geronimo Pratt, Mumia Abu-Jamal, and Marshall Conway. Common tactics used by COINTELPRO were perjury, witness harassment, witness intimidation, and withholding of exculpatory evidence.\nFBI director J. Edgar Hoover issued directives governing COINTELPRO, ordering FBI agents to \"expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize\" the activities of these movements and especially their leaders. Under Hoover, the official in charge of COINTELPRO was assistant director William C. Sullivan. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy personally authorized some of the programs, giving written approval for limited wiretapping of Martin Luther King's phones \"on a trial basis, for a month or so\". Hoover extended the clearance so his men were \"unshackled\" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.\nHistory.\nThe FBI initiated COINTELPRO, an abbreviation for Counterintelligence Program, in 1956 with the aim of undermining the operations of the Communist Party of the United States. In the 1960s, the scope of the organization was broadened to encompass various additional domestic factions, including the Ku Klux Klan, the Socialist Workers Party, and the Black Panther Party. The cessation of all COINTELPRO operations occurred in 1971. Despite its relatively small scale (constituting approximately 0.2% of the FBI's overall workload during a 15-year timeframe), COINTELPRO was subsequently subject to criticism from both Congress and the American public for infringing upon first amendment rights and other grounds.\nTactics included anonymous phone calls, Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audits, and the creation of documents that would divide the American communist organization internally. An October 1956 memo from Hoover reclassified the FBI's ongoing surveillance of black leaders, including it within COINTELPRO, with the justification that the movement was infiltrated by communists. In 1956, Hoover sent an open letter denouncing Dr.\u00a0T.\u00a0R.\u00a0M. Howard, a civil rights leader, surgeon, and wealthy entrepreneur in Mississippi who had criticized FBI inaction in solving recent murders of George W. Lee, Emmett Till, and other African Americans in the South. When the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), an African-American civil rights organization, was founded in 1957, the FBI began to monitor and target the group almost immediately, focusing particularly on Bayard Rustin, Stanley Levison, and eventually Martin Luther King Jr.\nAfter the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, Hoover singled out King as a major target for COINTELPRO. Under pressure from Hoover to focus on King, Sullivan wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the light of King's powerful demagogic speech ... We must mark him now if we have not done so before, as the most dangerous Negro of the future in this nation from the standpoint of communism, the Negro, and national security.\nSoon after, the FBI was systematically bugging King's home and his hotel rooms, as they were now aware that King was growing in stature daily as the most prominent leader of the civil rights movement.\nIn the mid-1960s, King began to publicly criticize the Bureau for giving insufficient attention to the use of terrorism by white supremacists. Hoover responded by publicly calling King the most \"notorious liar\" in the United States. In his 1991 memoir, \"Washington Post\" journalist Carl Rowan asserted that the FBI had sent at least one anonymous letter to King encouraging him to commit suicide. Historian Taylor Branch documents an anonymous \"suicide package\" sent by the FBI on November 21, 1964, that contained audio recordings obtained through tapping King's phone and placing bugs throughout various hotel rooms over the previous two years, and that was created two days after the announcement of King's impending Nobel Peace Prize. The tape, which was prepared by FBI audio technician John Matter, documented a series of sexual indiscretions by King combined with a letter telling him: \"There is only one way out for you. You better take it before your filthy, abnormal, fraudulent self is bared to the nation\". King believed that he was subsequently informed that the audio would be released to the media if he did not acquiesce and commit suicide prior to accepting his Nobel Peace Prize. When King refused to satisfy their coercion tactics, FBI Associate Director, Cartha D. DeLoach, commenced a media campaign offering the surveillance transcript to various news organizations, including \"Newsweek\" and \"Newsday\". By 1969\u2014one year after King's assassination\u2014FBI efforts to \u201cexpose\u201d him continued unabated. According to Church Committee findings, the Bureau \u201cfurnished ammunition to opponents that enabled attacks on King's memory and ... tried to block efforts to honor the slain leader.\" However, more portions of the FBI letter to King were made public in 2014 which suggested that the FBI's intent was to push King out of leadership and have \"older leaders\" like Roy Wilkins lead the civil right movement. The claim that the FBI's intent was to remove King from SCLC leadership was also previously backed in 1976 by the findings of the Church Committee.\nDuring the same period the program also targeted Malcolm X. While an FBI spokesman has denied that the FBI was \"directly\" involved in Malcolm's murder in 1965, it is documented that the Bureau worked to \"widen the rift\" between Malcolm and Elijah Muhammad through infiltration and the \"sparking of acrimonious debates within the organization\", rumor-mongering, and other tactics designed to foster internal disputes, which ultimately led to Malcolm's assassination. The FBI heavily infiltrated Malcolm's Organization of Afro-American Unity in the final months of his life. 's Pulitzer Prize-winning asserts that most of the men who plotted Malcolm's assassination were never apprehended and that the full extent of the FBI's involvement in his death cannot be known.\nAmidst the urban unrest of July\u2013August 1967, the FBI began \"COINTELPRO\u2013BLACK HATE\", which focused on King and the SCLC, as well as the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM), the Deacons for Defense and Justice, Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), and the Nation of Islam. BLACK HATE established the Ghetto Informant Program and instructed 23 FBI offices to \"disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize the activities of black nationalist hate type organizations\".\nA March 1968 memo stated the program's goal was to \"prevent the coalition of militant black nationalist groups\"; to \"Prevent the RISE OF A 'MESSIAH' who could unify\u00a0... the militant black nationalist movement\"; \"to pinpoint potential troublemakers and neutralize them before they exercise their potential for violence [against authorities]\"; to \"Prevent militant black nationalist groups and leaders from gaining RESPECTABILITY, by discrediting them to\u00a0... both the responsible community and to liberals who have vestiges of sympathy\"; and to \"prevent the long-range GROWTH of militant black organizations, especially among youth\". Dr. King was said to have potential to be the \"messiah\" figure, should he abandon nonviolence and integrationism, and Stokely Carmichael was noted to have \"the necessary charisma to be a real threat in this way\" as he was portrayed as someone who espoused a much more militant vision of \"black power\". While the FBI was particularly concerned with leaders and organizers, they did not limit their scope of target to the heads of organizations. Individuals, e.g. writers, were also listed among the targets of operations.\nThis program coincided with a broader federal effort to prepare military responses for urban riots and began increased collaboration between the FBI, Central Intelligence Agency, National Security Agency, and the Department of Defense. The CIA launched its own domestic espionage project in 1967 called Operation CHAOS. A particular target was the Poor People's Campaign, a national effort organized by King and the SCLC to occupy Washington, DC. The FBI monitored and disrupted the campaign on a national level, while using targeted smear tactics locally to undermine support for the march. The Black Panther Party was another targeted organization, wherein the FBI collaborated to destroy the party from the inside out.\nOverall, COINTELPRO encompassed disruption and sabotage of the Socialist Workers Party (1961), the Ku Klux Klan (1964), the Nation of Islam, the Black Panther Party (1967), and the entire New Left social/political movement, which included antiwar, community, and religious groups (1968). A later investigation by the Senate's Church Committee (see below) stated that \"COINTELPRO began in 1956, in part because of frustration with Supreme Court rulings limiting the Government's power to proceed overtly against dissident groups.\" Official congressional committees and several court cases have concluded that COINTELPRO operations against communist and socialist groups exceeded statutory limits on FBI activity and violated constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and association.\nUncovering.\nThe program was secret until March 8, 1971, when the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI burgled an FBI field office in Media, Pennsylvania, took several dossiers, and exposed the program by passing this material to news agencies. The boxing match known as the Fight of the Century between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier in March 1971 provided cover for the activist group to successfully pull off the burglary. Muhammad Ali was a COINTELPRO target because he had joined the Nation of Islam and the anti-war movement.\nMany news organizations initially refused to immediately publish the information, with the notable exception of \"The Washington Post\". After affirming the reliability of the documents, it published them on the front page (in defiance of the Attorney General's request), prompting other organizations to follow suit. Within the year, Director J. Edgar Hoover declared that the centralized COINTELPRO was over, and that all future counterintelligence operations would be handled case by case.\nAdditional documents were revealed in the course of separate lawsuits filed against the FBI by NBC correspondent Carl Stern, the Socialist Workers Party, and a number of other groups. In 1976 the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities of the United States Senate, commonly referred to as the \"Church Committee\" after its chairman, Senator Frank Church (D-Idaho), launched a major investigation of the FBI and COINTELPRO. Many released documents have been partly or entirely redacted.\nThe Final Report of the Select Committee castigated the conduct of the intelligence community in its domestic operations (including COINTELPRO) in no uncertain terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Church Committee documented a history of the FBI (initially called BOI until 1936) exercising political repression as far back as World War I, and through the 1920s, when agents were charged with rounding up \"anarchists, communists, socialists, reformists and revolutionaries\" for deportation. From 1936 through 1976, the domestic operations were increased against political and anti-war groups.\nFBI claimed intent of COINTELPRO.\nThe FBI claimed that the purpose behind COINTELPRO was to \"expose, disrupt, misdirect, or otherwise neutralize\" groups that the FBI officials believed were \"subversive\" by instructing FBI field operatives to:\nRange of targets.\nAt its inception, the program's main target was the Communist Party.\nIn an interview with the BBC's Andrew Marr in February 1996, Noam Chomsky\u2014a political activist and MIT professor of linguistics\u2014spoke about the purpose and the targets of COINTELPRO, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;COINTELPRO was a program of subversion carried out not by a couple of petty crooks but by the national political police, the FBI, under four administrations\u00a0... by the time it got through, I won't run through the whole story, it was aimed at the entire new left, at the women's movement, at the whole black movement, it was extremely broad. Its actions went as far as political assassination.\nAccording to the Church Committee:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhile the declared purposes of these programs were to protect the \"national security\" or prevent violence, Bureau witnesses admit that many of the targets were nonviolent and most had no connections with a foreign power. Indeed, nonviolent organizations and individuals were targeted because the Bureau believed they represented a \"potential\" for violence\u2014and nonviolent citizens who were against the war in Vietnam were targeted because they gave \"aid and comfort\" to violent demonstrators by lending respectability to their cause.\nThe imprecision of the targeting is demonstrated by the inability of the Bureau to define the subjects of the programs. The Black Nationalist program, according to its supervisor, included \"a great number of organizations that you might not today characterize as black nationalist but which were in fact primarily black\". Thus, the nonviolent Southern Christian Leadership Conference was labeled as a Black Nationalist \"Hate Group\".\nFurthermore, the actual targets were chosen from a far broader group than the titles of the programs would imply. The CPUSA program targeted not only Communist Party members but also sponsors of the National Committee to Abolish the House Un-American Activities Committee and civil rights leaders allegedly under Communist influence or deemed to be not sufficiently \"anti-Communist\". The Socialist Workers Party program included non-SWP sponsors of anti-war demonstrations which were cosponsored by the SWP or the Young Socialist Alliance, its youth group. The Black Nationalist program targeted a range of organizations from the Panthers to SNCC to the peaceful Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and included every Black Student Union and many other black student groups. New Left targets ranged from the SDS to the InterUniversity Committee for Debate on Foreign Policy, from Antioch College (\"vanguard of the New Left\") to the New Mexico Free University and other \"alternate\" schools, and from underground newspapers to students' protesting university censorship of a student publication by carrying signs with four-letter words on them.\nExamples of surveillance, spanning all presidents from FDR to Nixon, both legal and illegal, contained in the Church Committee report:\nGroups that were known to be targets of COINTELPRO operations include:\nThe COINTELPRO operators targeted multiple groups at once and encouraged splintering of these groups from within. In letter-writing campaigns (wherein false letters were sent on behalf of members of parties), the FBI ensured that groups would not unite in their causes. For instance, they launched a campaign specifically to alienate the Black Panther Party from the Mau Maus, Young Lords, Young Patriots and SDS. These racially diverse groups had been building alliances, in part due to charismatic leaders, such as Fred Hampton and his attempts to create a \"Rainbow Coalition\". The FBI was concerned with ensuring that groups could not gain traction through unity, specifically across racial lines. One of the main ways of targeting these groups was to arouse suspicion between the different parties and causes. In this way the bureau took on a divide-and-conquer offensive.\nThe COINTELPRO documents show numerous cases of the FBI's intentions to prevent and disrupt protests against the Vietnam War. Many techniques were used to accomplish this task. \"These included promoting splits among antiwar forces, encouraging red-baiting of socialists, and pushing violent confrontations as an alternative to massive, peaceful demonstrations.\" One 1966 COINTELPRO operation tried to redirect the Socialist Workers Party from their pledge of support for the antiwar movement.\nThe FBI has said that it no longer undertakes COINTELPRO or COINTELPRO-like operations. However, critics have claimed that agency programs in the spirit of COINTELPRO targeted groups such as the Committee in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador, the American Indian Movement, Earth First!, and the anti-globalization movement.\nMethods.\nAccording to attorney Brian Glick in his book \"War at Home\", the FBI used five main methods during COINTELPRO:\nThe FBI specifically developed tactics intended to heighten tension and hostility between various factions in the black power movement, for example between the Black Panthers and the US Organization. For instance, the FBI sent a fake letter to the US Organization exposing a supposed Black Panther plot to murder the head of the US Organization, Ron Karenga. They then intensified this by spreading falsely attributed cartoons in the black communities pitting the Black Panther Party against the US Organization. This resulted in numerous deaths, among which were San Diego Black Panther Party members John Huggins, Bunchy Carter and Sylvester Bell. Another example of the FBI's anonymous letter writing campaign is how they turned the Blackstone Rangers head, Jeff Fort, against former ally Fred Hampton, by stating that Hampton had a hit on Fort. They also were instrumental in developing the rift between Black Panther Party leaders Eldridge Cleaver and Huey Newton, as executed through false letters inciting the two leaders of the Black Panther Party.\nDhoruba Bin Wahad, a former Black Panther, reflects on how these tactics made him feel, saying he had a combat mentality and felt like he was at war with the government. When asked about why he thinks the Black Panthers were targeted he said, \"In the United States, the equivalent of the military was the local police. During the early sixties, at the height of the civil rights movement, and the human rights movement, the police in the United States became increasingly militaristic. They began to train out of military bases in the United States. The Law Enforcement Assistance Act supplied local police with military technology, everything from assault rifles to army personnel carriers. In his opinion, the Counterintelligence Program went hand-in-hand with the militarization of the police in the Black community, with the militarization of police in America.\"\nThe FBI also conspired with the police departments of many U.S. cities (San Diego, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Oakland, Philadelphia, Chicago) to encourage repeated raids on Black Panther homes\u2014often with little or no evidence of violations of federal, state, or local laws\u2014which resulted in the police killing many members of the Black Panther Party, most notably Chicago Black Panther Party Chairman Fred Hampton on December 4, 1969. Whether or not the FBI sanctioned his killing remains unproven. Before the death of Hampton, long-term infiltrator, William O'Neal, shared floor plans of his apartment with the COINTELPRO team. He then gave Hampton a dose of secobarbital that rendered Hampton unconscious during the raid on his home.\nIn order to eliminate black militant leaders whom they considered dangerous, the FBI is believed to have worked with local police departments to target specific individuals, accuse them of crimes they did not commit, suppress exculpatory evidence and falsely incarcerate them. Elmer \"Geronimo\" Pratt, a Black Panther Party leader, was incarcerated for 27 years before a California Superior Court vacated his murder conviction, ultimately freeing him. Appearing before the court, an FBI agent testified that he believed Pratt had been framed, because both the FBI and the Los Angeles Police Department knew he had not been in the area at the time the murder occurred.\nSome sources claim that the FBI conducted more than 200 \"black bag jobs\", which were warrantless surreptitious entries, against the targeted groups and their members.\nIn 1969 the FBI special agent in San Francisco wrote Hoover that his investigation of the Black Panther Party had concluded that in his city, at least, the Panthers were primarily engaged in feeding breakfast to children. Hoover fired back a memo implying the agent's career goals would be directly affected by his supplying evidence to support Hoover's view that the Black Panther Party was \"a violence-prone organization seeking to overthrow the Government by revolutionary means\".\nHoover supported using false claims to attack his political enemies. In one memo he wrote: \"Purpose of counterintelligence action is to disrupt the Black Panther Party and it is immaterial whether facts exist to substantiate the charge.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nViola's family endured Hoover's claiming that cuts on her arm from the car's shattered window indicated \"recent drug use\" and that her proximity to Moton resembled \"a necking party,\" despite an autopsy revealing no traces of drugs in her system and indicating she hadn't had sex recently before her death.\n\u2014On the FBI's targeting of Viola Liuzzo\nIn one particularly controversial 1965 incident, white civil rights worker Viola Liuzzo was murdered by Ku Klux Klansmen, who gave chase and fired shots into her car after noticing that her passenger was a young black man; one of the Klansmen was Gary Thomas Rowe, an acknowledged FBI informant. The FBI spread rumors that Liuzzo was a member of the Communist Party and had abandoned her children to have sexual relationships with African Americans involved in the civil rights movement. FBI records show that J. Edgar Hoover personally communicated these insinuations to President Johnson. Despite this, three Klansmen would be convicted in a federal trial for Liuzzo's murder in December 1965.\nFBI informant Rowe has also been implicated in some of the most violent crimes of the 1960s civil rights era, including attacks on the Freedom Riders and the 1963 Birmingham, Alabama 16th Street Baptist Church bombing.\nThe ACLU has claimed the FBI supported an extreme right-wing group of former Minutemen, transforming it into a group called the Secret Army Organization that targeted groups, activists, and leaders involved in the Anti-War Movement, using both intimidation and violent acts.\nHoover ordered preemptive action \"to pinpoint potential troublemakers and neutralize them before they exercise their potential for violence.\"\nIllegal surveillance.\nThe final report of the Church Committee concluded:\nToo many people have been spied upon by too many Government agencies and too much information has been illegally collected. The Government has often undertaken the secret surveillance of citizens on the basis of their political beliefs, even when those beliefs posed no threat of violence or illegal acts on behalf of a hostile foreign power. The Government, operating primarily through secret and biased informants, but also using other intrusive techniques, such as wiretaps, microphone \"bugs\", surreptitious mail opening, and break-ins, has swept in vast amounts of information about the personal lives, views, and associations of American citizens. Investigations of groups deemed potentially dangerous\u2014and even of groups suspected of associating with potentially dangerous organizations\u2014have continued for decades, despite the fact that those groups did not engage in unlawful activity.\nGroups and individuals have been assaulted, repressed, harassed and disrupted because of their political views, social beliefs and their lifestyles. Investigations have been based upon vague standards whose breadth made excessive collection inevitable. Unsavory, harmful and vicious tactics have been employed\u2014including anonymous attempts to break up marriages, disrupt meetings, ostracize persons from their professions, and provoke target groups into rivalries that might result in deaths. Intelligence agencies have served the political and personal objectives of presidents and other high officials. While the agencies often committed excesses in response to pressure from high officials in the Executive branch and Congress, they also occasionally initiated improper activities and then concealed them from officials whom they had a duty to inform.\nGovernmental officials\u2014including those whose principal duty is to enforce the law\u2014have violated or ignored the law over long periods of time and have advocated and defended their right to break the law.\nThe Constitutional system of checks and balances has not adequately controlled intelligence activities. Until recently the Executive branch has neither delineated the scope of permissible activities nor established procedures for supervising intelligence agencies. Congress has failed to exercise sufficient oversight, seldom questioning the use to which its appropriations were being put. Most domestic intelligence issues have not reached the courts, and in those cases when they have reached the courts, the judiciary has been reluctant to grapple with them.\nLater similar operations.\nWhile COINTELPRO was officially terminated in April 1971, domestic espionage continued. Between 1972 and 1974, it is documented that the Bureau planted over 500 bugs without a warrant and opened over 2,000 pieces of personal mail. More recent targets of covert action include the American Indian Movement (AIM), Earth First!, and Committees in Solidarity with the People of El Salvador. Documents released under the FOIA show that the FBI tracked the late David Halberstam\u2014a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and author\u2014for more than two decades. \"Counterterrorism\" guidelines implemented during the Reagan administration have been described as allowing a return to COINTELPRO tactics. Some radical groups accuse factional opponents of being FBI informants or assume the FBI is infiltrating the movement. COINTELPRO survivor Filiberto Ojeda Rios was killed by the FBI's hostage rescue team in 2005, his death described by a United Nations special committee as an assassination.\nEnvironmentalist Eric McDavid, convicted on arson charges, was released after documents emerged demonstrating that the FBI informant in his Earth Liberation Front group provided crucial leadership, information, and material without which the crime could not have been committed, repeating the same pattern of behavior of COINTELPRO. It has been claimed these sorts of practices have become widespread in FBI \"counter-terrorism\" cases targeting Muslims in the 2009 Bronx terrorism plot and others.\nAuthors, such as Ward Churchill, Rex Weyler, and Peter Matthiessen allege that the federal government intended to acquire uranium deposits on the Lakota tribe's reservation land, and that this motivated a larger government conspiracy against AIM activists on the Pine Ridge reservation. Others believe COINTELPRO continues and similar actions are being taken against activist groups. Caroline Woidat says that, with respect to Native Americans, COINTELPRO should be understood within a historical context in which \"Native Americans have been viewed and have viewed the world themselves through the lens of conspiracy theory.\" Other authors argue that while some conspiracy theories related to COINTELPRO are unfounded, the issue of ongoing government surveillance and repression is real.\nFBI Agent Richard G. Held is known to have increased FBI support for the Guardians of the Oglala Nation (GOON) squads, who were a private paramilitary group established in 1972 by the elected tribal chairman, Dick Wilson, under authority of the Oglala Sioux. AIM accused GOONs of involvement in 300 assaults and 64 homicides of political opponents. Despite this, The Bureau rarely investigated them and instead used its resources overwhelmingly to prosecute AIM. In 2000, the FBI released a report regarding these alleged unsolved violent deaths on Pine Ridge reservation and accounted for most of the deaths and disputed the claims of unsolved murders. The report stated that only four deaths were unsolved and that some deaths were not murders.\nA lawsuit filed by Dhoruba bin-Wahad, a former member of the Black Panther Party, revealed the existence of multiple programs similar to COINTELPRO including \"Newkill\" (New York Police Killings), Chesrob (a program focused on Panther Assata Shakur), and PRISACTS (The Prison Activists Surveillance Program), a program that focused on \"neutralizing\" political activists who were already in prison, many of whom (like bin-Wahad) had been targeted by COINTELPRO.\nIn April 2018, the \"Atlanta Black Star\" characterized the FBI as still engaging in COINTELPRO behavior by surveilling the Black Lives Matter movement. Internal documents dated as late as 2017 showed that the FBI had surveilled the movement. In 2014, the FBI tracked a Black Lives Matter activist using surveillance tactics which \"The Intercept\" found \"reminiscent of a rich American history of targeting black Americans,\" including COINTELPRO. This practice, along with the imprisonment of black activists for their views, has been associated with the new FBI designation of \"Black Identity Extremists\".\nDefending Rights &amp; Dissent, a civil liberties group, cataloged known instances of First Amendment abuses and political surveillance by the FBI since 2010. The organization found that the FBI devoted disproportionate resources to spy on peaceful left-leaning civil society groups, including Occupy Wall Street, economic justice advocates, racial justice movements, environmentalists, Abolish ICE, and various anti-war movements.\nIn December 2012, the FBI released redacted documents in response to a Freedom of Information Act request from the Partnership for Civil Justice Fund (PCJF). Mara Verheyden-Hilliard, the executive director of PCJF, said the documents showed that FBI counterterrorism agents had monitored the Occupy movement from its inception in August 2011 and that the FBI acted improperly by collecting \"information on people's free-speech actions\" and entering it into \"unregulated databases, a vast storehouse of information widely disseminated to a range of law-enforcement and, apparently, private entities\" (see Domestic Security Alliance Council). The FBI also communicated with the New York Stock Exchange, banks, private businesses and state and local police forces about the movement. In 2014, the PCJF obtained an additional 4,000 pages of unclassified documents through a Freedom of Information Act request, showing \"details of the scrutiny of the Occupy protests in 2011 and 2012 by law enforcement officers, federal officials, security contractors and others.\"\nIn October 2020, Katie Reiter, chief of staff to Michigan state Senator Rosemary Bayer, had an FBI task force come to her house and aggressively question her about a draft bill she had recently discussed which would have limited the use of tear gas against protesters. Reiter had discussed the proposed ban on tear gas on a private 90-minute Zoom call with Bayer and a handful of other staffers. Reiter says the two officers refused to answer any questions about how they became aware of her private meeting. \"The Intercept\" reported about the incident: \"Reiter said that the FBI's visit left her confused and fearful. 'It has impacted my sleep, it has caused me quite a bit of anxiety,' she said. 'And it has certainly impacted how we talk. I try not to let it, I'll just be like, 'No, we're going to talk about this.' But it's in my mind all the time.'\" A spokesperson for the FBI declined to comment on the record, as did a spokesperson for Zoom.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nU.S. government reports.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "6590", "revid": "751903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6590", "title": "Cruise missile", "text": "Guided missile with precision targeting capabilities and multiple launch platforms\nA cruise missile is an unmanned self-propelled guided missile that sustains flight through aerodynamic lift for most of its flight path. Cruise missiles are designed to deliver a large payload over long distances with high precision. Modern cruise missiles are capable of traveling at high subsonic, supersonic, or hypersonic speeds, are self-navigating, and are able to fly on a non-ballistic, extremely low-altitude trajectory.\nHistory.\nThe idea of an \"aerial torpedo\" was shown in the British 1909 film \"The Airship Destroyer\" in which flying torpedoes controlled wirelessly are used to bring down airships bombing London.\nIn 1916, the American aviator Lawrence Sperry built and patented an \"aerial torpedo\", the Hewitt-Sperry Automatic Airplane, a small biplane carrying a TNT charge, a Sperry autopilot and barometric altitude control. Inspired by the experiments, the United States Army developed a similar flying bomb called the Kettering Bug. Germany had also flown trials with remote-controlled aerial gliders \"(Torpedogleiter)\" built by Siemens-Schuckert beginning in 1916.\nIn the Interwar Period, Britain's Royal Aircraft Establishment developed the Larynx (Long Range Gun with Lynx Engine), which underwent a few flight tests in the 1920s.\nIn the Soviet Union, Sergei Korolev headed the GIRD-06 cruise missile project from 1932 to 1939, which used a rocket-powered boost-glide bomb design. The 06/III (RP-216) and 06/IV (RP-212) contained gyroscopic guidance systems. The vehicle was designed to boost to altitude and glide a distance of , but test flights in 1934 and 1936 only reached an altitude of .\nIn 1944, during World War II, Germany deployed the first operational cruise missiles. The V-1, often called a flying bomb, contained a gyroscope guidance system and was propelled by a simple pulsejet engine, the sound of which gave it the nickname of \"buzz bomb\" or \"doodlebug\". Accuracy was sufficient only for use against very large targets (the general area of a city), while the range of was significantly lower than that of a bomber carrying the same payload. The main advantages were speed (although not sufficient to outperform contemporary propeller-driven interceptors) and expendability. The production cost of a V-1 was only a small fraction of that of a V-2 supersonic ballistic missile with a similar-sized warhead. Unlike the V-2, the initial deployments of the V-1 required stationary launch ramps which were susceptible to bombardment. Nazi Germany, in 1943, also developed the Mistel composite aircraft program, which can be seen as a rudimentary air-launched cruise missile, where a piloted fighter-type aircraft was mounted atop an unpiloted bomber-sized aircraft that was packed with explosives to be released while approaching the target. Bomber-launched variants of the V-1 saw limited operational service near the end of the war, with the pioneering V-1's design reverse-engineered by the Americans as the Republic-Ford JB-2 cruise missile.\nImmediately after World War II, the United States Air Force had 21 different guided missile projects, including proposed cruise missiles. By 1948, all but four of these projects had been canceled: the Air Materiel Command Banshee, the SM-62 Snark, the SM-64 Navaho, and the MGM-1 Matador. The Banshee design was similar to Operation Aphrodite; like Aphrodite, it failed, and was canceled in April 1949. Concurrently, the US Navy's Operation Bumblebee, was conducted at Topsail Island, North Carolina, from c. 1 June 1946, to 28 July 1948. Bumblebee produced proof-of-concept technologies that influenced the US military's other missile projects.\nDuring the Cold War, both the United States and the Soviet Union experimented further with the concept, of deploying early cruise missiles from land, submarines, and aircraft. The main outcome of the United States Navy submarine missile project was the SSM-N-8 Regulus missile, based upon the V-1 but powered by an Allison J33 jet engine. The Regulus entered service but was phased out with the advent of submarine launched ballistic missiles that did not require the submarine to surface in order to launch the missile and guide it to its target.\nThe United States Air Force's first operational surface-to-surface missile was the winged, mobile, nuclear-capable MGM-1 Matador, also similar in concept to the V-1. Deployment overseas began in 1954, first to West Germany and later to the Republic of China and South Korea. On 7 November 1956, the U.S. Air Force deployed Matador units in West Germany, whose missiles were capable of striking targets in the Warsaw Pact, from their fixed day-to-day sites to unannounced dispersed launch locations. This alert was in response to the crisis posed by the Soviet attack on Hungary which suppressed the Hungarian Revolution of 1956.\nBetween 1957 and 1961 the United States followed an ambitious and well-funded program to develop a nuclear-powered cruise missile, Supersonic Low Altitude Missile (SLAM). It was designed to fly below the enemy's radar at speeds above Mach 3 and carry hydrogen bombs that it would drop along its path over enemy territory. Although the concept was proven sound and the engine finished a successful test run in 1961, no airworthy device was ever completed. The project was finally abandoned in favor of ICBM development.\nWhile ballistic missiles were the preferred weapons for land targets, heavy nuclear and conventional weapon tipped cruise missiles were seen by the USSR as a primary weapon to destroy United States naval carrier battle groups. Large submarines (for example, Echo and Oscar classes) were developed to carry these weapons and shadow United States battle groups at sea, and large bombers (for example, Backfire, Bear, and Blackjack models) were equipped with the weapons in their air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) configuration.\nCategories.\nCruise missiles can be categorized by payload/warhead size, speed, range, and launch platform. Often variants of the same missile are produced for different launch platforms (for instance, air- and submarine-launched versions).\nGuidance systems can vary across missiles. Some missiles can be fitted with any of a variety of navigation systems (Inertial navigation, TERCOM, or satellite navigation). Larger cruise missiles can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead, while smaller ones carry only conventional warheads.\nHypersonic.\nA hypersonic cruise missile travels at least five times the speed of sound (Mach 5).\nSupersonic.\nThese missiles travel faster than the speed of sound, usually using ramjet engines. The range is typically 100\u2013500\u00a0km, but can be greater. Guidance systems vary.\nExamples:\nLong-range subsonic.\nChina, France, India, Iran, Israel, Japan, North Korea, Russia, South Korea, Ukraine, and the United States have developed several long-range subsonic cruise missiles. These missiles have a range of over and fly at about . They typically have a launch weight of about and can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead. Earlier versions of these missiles used inertial navigation; later versions use much more accurate TERCOM and DSMAC systems. Most recent versions can use satellite navigation.\nExamples:\nMedium-range subsonic.\nThese subsonic missiles have ranges between 300\u00a0km and 1000\u00a0km.\nExamples:\nShort-range subsonic.\nThese are subsonic missiles that weigh around and have a range of up to .\nExamples:\nDeployment.\nThe most common mission for cruise missiles is to attack relatively high-value targets such as ships, command bunkers, bridges and dams. Modern guidance systems permit accurate attacks.\nAs of 2001[ [update]], the BGM-109 Tomahawk missile model has become a significant part of the United States naval arsenal. It gives ships and submarines a somewhat accurate, long-range, conventional land attack weapon. Each costs about US$1.99 million. Both the Tomahawk and the AGM-86 were used extensively during Operation Desert Storm. On 7 April 2017, during the Syrian Civil War, U.S. warships fired more than 50 cruise missiles into a Syrian airbase in retaliation for a Syrian chemical weapons attack against a rebel stronghold.\nThe United States Air Force (USAF) deploys an air-launched cruise missile, the AGM-86 ALCM. The Boeing B-52 Stratofortress is the exclusive delivery vehicle for the AGM-86 and AGM-129 ACM. Both missile types are configurable for either conventional or nuclear warheads.\nThe USAF adopted the AGM-86 for its bomber fleet while AGM-109 was adapted to launch from trucks and ships and adopted by the USAF and Navy. The truck-launched versions, and also the Pershing II and SS-20 Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, were later destroyed under the bilateral INF (Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces) treaty with the USSR.\nThe British Royal Navy (RN) also operates cruise missiles, specifically the U.S.-made Tomahawk, used by the RN's nuclear submarine fleet. UK conventional warhead versions were first fired in combat by the RN in 1999, during the Kosovo War (the United States fired cruise missiles in 1991). The Royal Air Force uses the Storm Shadow cruise missile on its Typhoon and previously its Tornado GR4 aircraft. It is also used by France, where it is known as SCALP EG, and carried by the Arm\u00e9e de l'Air's Mirage 2000 and Rafale aircraft.\nIndia and Russia have jointly developed the supersonic cruise missile BrahMos. There are three versions of the Brahmos: ship/land-launched, air-launched, and sub-launched. The ship/land-launched version was operational as of late 2007. The Brahmos have the capability to attack targets on land. Russia also continues to operate other cruise missiles: the SS-N-12 Sandbox, SS-N-19 Shipwreck, SS-N-22 Sunburn and SS-N-25 Switchblade. Germany and Spain operate the Taurus missile while Pakistan has made the Babur missile Both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) have designed several cruise missile variants, such as the well-known C-802, some of which are capable of carrying biological, chemical, nuclear, and conventional warheads.\nNuclear warhead versions.\nChina.\nChina has the CJ-10 land attack cruise missile which is capable of carrying a nuclear warhead. Additionally, China appears to have tested a hypersonic cruise missile in August 2021, a claim it denies.\nFrance.\nThe French nuclear forces include both land and sea-based bombers with (ASMP) high-speed medium-range nuclear cruise missiles. Two models are in use, ASMP and a newer ASMP-Amelior\u00e9 (ASMP-A), which was developed in 1999. An estimated 40 to 50 were produced.\nIndia.\nIndia in 2017 successfully flight-tested its indigenous Nirbhay ('Fearless') land-attack cruise missile, which can deliver nuclear warheads to a strike range of 1,000\u00a0km. Nirbhay had been flight-tested successfully.\nIsrael.\nThe Israel Defense Forces reportedly deploy the medium-range air-launched Popeye Turbo ALCM and the Popeye Turbo SLCM medium-long range cruise missile with nuclear warheads on Dolphin class submarines.\nPakistan.\nPakistan currently has four cruise missile systems: the air-launched Ra'ad-I and its enhanced version Ra'ad-II; the ground and submarine launched Babur; ship-launched Harbah missile and surface launched Zarb missile. Both, Ra'ad and Babur, can carry nuclear warheads between 10 and 25 kt, and deliver them to targets at a range of up to and respectively. Babur has been in service with the Pakistan Army since 2010, and Pakistan Navy since 2018.\nRussia.\nRussia has Kh-55SM cruise missiles, with a range similar to the United States' AGM-129 range of 3000\u00a0km, but are able to carry a more powerful warhead of 200\u00a0kt. They are equipped with a TERCOM system which allows them to cruise at an altitude lower than 110 meters at subsonic speeds while obtaining a CEP accuracy of 15 meters with an inertial navigation system. They are air-launched from either Tupolev Tu-95s, Tupolev Tu-22Ms, or Tupolev Tu-160s, each able to carry 16 for the Tu-95, 12 for the Tu-160, and 4 for the Tu-22M. A stealth version of the missile, the Kh-101 is in development. It has similar qualities as the Kh-55, except that its range has been extended to 5,000\u00a0km, is equipped with a 1,000\u00a0kg conventional warhead, and has stealth features which reduce its probability of intercept.\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet Union, the most recent cruise missile developed was the Kalibr missile which entered production in the early 1990s and was officially inducted into the Russian arsenal in 1994. However, it only saw its combat debut on 7 October 2015, in Syria as a part of the Russian military campaign in Syria. The missile has been used 14 more times in combat operations in Syria since its debut.\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s, the Soviet Union was attempting to develop cruise missiles. In this short time frame, the Soviet Union was working on nearly ten different types of cruise missiles. However, due to resources, most of the initial types of cruise missiles developed by the Soviet Union were Sea-Launched Cruise Missiles or Submarine-Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCMs). The SS-N-1 cruise missile was developed to have different configurations to be fired from a submarine or a ship. However, as time progressed, the Soviet Union began to work on air-launched cruise missiles as well (ALCM). These ACLM missiles were typically delivered via bombers designated as \"Blinders\" or \"Backfire\". The missiles in this configuration were called the AS-1, and AS-2 with eventual new variants with more development time. The main purpose of Soviet-based cruise missiles was to have defense and offensive mechanisms against enemy ships; in other words, most of the Soviet cruise missiles were anti-ship missiles. In the 1980s the Soviet Union had developed an arsenal of cruise missiles nearing 600 platforms which consisted of land, sea, and air delivery systems.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has deployed nine nuclear cruise missiles at one time or another.\nEfficiency in modern warfare.\nCurrently, cruise missiles are among the most expensive of single-use weapons, up to several million dollars apiece. One consequence of this is that its users face difficult choices in target allocation, to avoid expending the missiles on targets of low value. For instance, during the 2001 strikes on Afghanistan the United States attacked targets of very low monetary value with cruise missiles, which led many to question the efficiency of the weapon. However, proponents of the cruise missile counter that the weapon can not be blamed for poor target selection, and the same argument applies to other types of UAVs: they are cheaper than human pilots when total training and infrastructure costs are taken into account, not to mention the risk of loss of personnel. As demonstrated in Libya in 2011 and prior conflicts, cruise missiles are much more difficult to detect and intercept than other aerial assets (reduced radar cross-section, infrared and visual signature due to smaller size), suiting them to attacks against static air defense systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
