{"id": "4257", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4257", "title": "Burgundians", "text": "Roman-era Germanic peoples\nThe Burgundians ( or less commonly ) were a Germanic people of the Roman imperial era, who established the powerful Kingdom of the Burgundians within the Roman empire, in what is now western Switzerland and south-eastern France. This kingdom is the source of much later names related to the region of Burgundy, including medieval entities such as the Duchy of Burgundy.\nIn earlier periods, peoples with the same name were reported by Roman sources to have lived in different parts of what is now Germany and Poland, and there are believed to be connections between at least some of these groups. For one thing, the kingdom's core group were followers of the Gibichung dynasty, who had previously led them as in Roman territory on the Rhine border, probably near Worms in present day Germany. They left the Rhine after the Romans and their Hun allies killed many of the Burgundians along with their king Gundahar in 436, accusing them of rebellion. The death of Gundahar at the hands of the Huns became a central theme in medieval Germanic heroic legend, including the \"Nibelungenlied\" (where he is \u201cG\u00fcnther\u201d) and the \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\" (where he is \u201cGunnar\u201d). After the remnants resettled in Sapaudia near Lake Geneva in about 443, their territory expanded to include Lyon as a new capital. The entire kingdom was incorporated into the Frankish empire in 534.\nAlthough they used Germanic language and customs when they arrived in Sapaudia, the non-Roman people led by the last Gibichungs had diverse origins. There are indications in Greco-Roman accounts that their forerunners, the Rhine Burgundians, saw themselves as descendants of Roman soldiers who had once manned Roman border defences in what is now southern Germany, east of the Rhine. Older Roman sources described Burgundians living in that region from the third century, initially as invaders and raiders, living near the Main river. Both they and their neighbours the Alemanni were previously unattested in this region, much of which had been under Roman control. Archaeological evidence suggests that both these peoples included newcomers from the east, and once they arrived they ruled over populations which were partly Romanised, and partly made up of Germanic tribes who had lived in the same area previously. It was in the fourth century that the Burgundians became allies of the Romans in their conflicts against the Alemanni. In about 406, during a period of wider crisis, when large numbers of armed Alans and Vandals moved into the area from Pannonia, the Gibichung-led Burgundians crossed the Rhine and settled within the empire.\nGreco-Roman writers also reported that there were still earlier Burgundians, who lived between the first and third century far to the east of the Main, near the Vistula river in present day Poland. The Romans reported that in the early third century these Burgundians suffered devastating defeats against the eastern European Gepids and Goths, and scholars today believe this may have induced some of them to move west in this period, closer to the empire. Some of these Burgundians may have migrated to the Main in the third century, and helped found the Burgundians of that region in the third century. \nThere are also indications that the early medieval inhabitants of the Baltic Sea island of Bornholm were also called \"Burgundi\", although there is no indication that they were ever called \"Burgundiones\". In the past, some historians have proposed a connection between these islanders and the continental \"Burgundi\" known to the Romans, although the shared name could also have a more topological explanation. A more speculative theory traces the origins of the \"Burgundi\" to what is now Norway, where similar placenames are relatively common. These origin stories are influenced not only by name similarities, but also by a tradition among medieval scholars, according to which many Germanic peoples originally migrated south from Scandinavia. All these placenames and ethnonyms appear to share a similar etymology, indicating that the places or peoples were high or elevated in some way.\nName.\nThe ethnonym \"Burgundians\" is commonly used in English to translate the Latin ethnonym , or less commonly , to refer to a people or peoples during the Roman era. In English the term \"Burgundians\" can also refer to inhabitants of various much later medieval or modern polities and regions called Burgundy, which derive their names from the Roman era kingdom. In modern times the only area still referred to as Burgundy () is in France, and it derives its name from the medieval Duchy of Burgundy and County of Burgundy, which are now both within the modern French region of Bourgogne-Franche-Comt\u00e9. This region is in the north of the old kingdom's territory at its largest extent, and does not correspond to the original core of the early medieval kingdom, near Lake Geneva. In the context of the Late Middle Ages the term \"Burgundian\" can also refer to the institutions and culture of the Burgundian Netherlands, especially in present-day Belgium, where the Valois Dukes of Burgundy often held court.\nBoth the main Latin forms of the names appeared throughout the Roman era, and are believed to have the same Germanic etymology, with the main stem \"*burgund-\" meaning \"high\", from earlier Proto-Indoeuropean \"*b\u02b0\u00e9r\u01f5\u02b0\" with the grammatical suffix \"*-onts\" making an adjective. It is probable that the Burgundians were named after a high place or area which was referred to with this name, although their name might have also been describing the Burgundians as high or elevated in some other sense. The long and short forms have different Germanic suffixes, \"-ja-\" or \"-jan-\", which are typically used to form nouns for types of people.\nSome scholars have argued that the less common short forms of the name are more associated with the small number of references to the \"eastern\" Burgundians near the Vistula, in the texts of Claudius Ptolemy, Jordanes, and Latin panegyric \"11\" of 291. Notably, the panegyric even uses the short forms when seeming to refer to eastern events, and the long form for western events. Scholars who have seen this as a sign that these are two distinct peoples have historically included Otto Maenchen-Helfen and Johann Kaspar Zeuss. However, major exceptions to the pattern include Ammianus Marcellinus, who always used the short form to refer to the Rhine Burgundians in the west (which he expressly describes as a name with a local origin). Furthermore, Pliny the Elder and Ptolemy both use the long form in eastern contexts.\nOrosius, a contemporary of the Burgundian move across the Rhine and their acceptance into the empire, also gave an etymology for the name. It is not accepted by modern scholars, but it gives an indication of beliefs at the time. He wrote: \"In earlier times, when the interior of Germany had been subjugated by Drusus and Tiberius, the adopted sons of Caesar, the Burgundians were stationed at different frontier posts. Later they united to form a great people. They took their name from their stations, for the dwelling places at frequent intervals along the frontier are commonly called \"burgi\".\"\nWhile this is etymologically incorrect, there may have still been Burgundians stationed in forts near the Rhine frontier in the lifetime of Orosius, and so this story probably projects that situation back in time to create a believable story, which appears to have been widely accepted, even among Burgundians. Already in about 369, when emperor Valentinian was first seeking their alliance against the Alemanni, Ammianus Marcellinus claimed the Burgundians \"know that they are descendants of the Romans from ancient times\". Although political convenience and Roman propaganda may have been playing a role, this seems to indicate that the Burgundians in any case had no clear alternative origin stories. The etymology given by Orosius was later taken up by Isidore of Seville and Fredegar.\nHistory.\nVistula Burgundians.\nBurgundians, or at least one or more peoples with the same name, were first described by early Roman writers as living in present-day Poland. In the 1st century AD, Pliny the Elder said there were five types of Germanic peoples () and the first of these he listed were the Vandili. This group included , and the . Pliny gives no exact location but the Gutones and Varini are known from other sources to have lived near the Baltic coast. The Gutones lived near the mouth of the Vistula and are believed to be important contributors to later Gothic culture in the Ukraine region. Modern scholars therefore typically see Pliny's as speakers of East Germanic languages similar to Gothic. Furthermore, because the 6th-century origin story of the Goths written by Jordanes claims that the Goths and Gepids moved from Scandinavia, which he saw as a womb or workshop of barbarian nations, this \"Vandili\"-category reported by Pliny is also sometimes seen as evidence that the Vistula Burgundians must also have Scandinavian origins.\nIn the 2nd century the geography of Claudius Ptolemy seems to list the Burgundians twice, in two neighbouring regions, with two different name variants. On the west side of the Vistula, in \"\"Germania\", he noted the (Ancient Greek, transcribable as \"Burgundi\") living between the \"Suevus\" (probably the Oder) and Vistula rivers. To their west lived the powerful Semnones. To their north the Aelvaeones (perhaps Helveconae) were between them and the coastal Rugiclei (perhaps Rugii). To their south the Lugians lived between them and the Western Carpathian mountains. Secondly, east of the Vistula in \"Sarmatia\"\", the Burgundians also seem to have been present as the \"Phrugundiones\". Based on this geographical description, scholars believe that the Vistula Burgundians were users of Przeworsk or \"cremation-pit\" material culture, which is identified by archaeologists in this region and period.\nWriting in the 6th century, Jordanes reported that in the 3rd century AD, during the reign of Ostrogotha, Burgundians living near the Vistula basin were almost annihilated () by Fastida, king of the Gepids. Jordanes believed the Gepids were living near the mouth of the Vistula prior to this, but seeking new lands to the south. (They would eventually settle in Dacia, which the Romans had abandoned.) The expansionism of Gepids and Goths in this period is a possible reason that archaeological evidence indicates that the Przeworsk culture shifted southwards starting in the second century. Within this archaeological complex, some scholars propose that while some Burgundians remained near the Vistula the main concentration of their settlements was shifting westwards over the Oder river, and that the Luboszyce culture is Burgundian. \nThe proposal that a Burgundian polity eventually formed with its centre between the Elbe and Oder is therefore based upon this archaeological evidence, and no classical sources including Jordanes report any specific Burgundian presence in this area. Possible support for a Burgundian presence in this region is sometimes seen as coming from the report in the \"Origo Gentis Langobardorum\", an account of Langobard origins, which says that the migrating Langobards stopped in a land called \"Vurgundaib\" \u2013 apparently a place named after the Burgundians, located somewhere on the Langobard trek from the Lower Elbe to the Middle Danube.\nLatin panegyric \"number 11\" (as it is known to modern scholarship), which was written in 291 AD, mentioned that during the reign of the emperor Maximian (reigned 286-305) the Burgundians were utterly destroyed by the Goths (, using the short form of the Burgundian ethnonym). The Goths were associated in this period with regions south and east of the Carpathians. Following on from this, the panegyric says that the Alemanni \"again arm themselves for/as losers\" (), implying that they fought in support of (or perhaps against) the Burgundians after this defeat. The Alamanni in this period were far to the west in what is now southern Germany, having taken control of the around 260. Because of the distance between the Goths and Alemanni historians have sometimes argued that the text must be an error, perhaps originally referring to the Alans. However, in a second passage soon afterwards, this panegyric mentions that in this period the Burgundians took farmland from the Alamanni (, using the longer \"-iones\" name), which the Alamanni were still trying to recover in 291. This panegyric therefore appears to associate the same Burgundians with both the eastern Goths, and the western Alamanni.\nNeighbours of the Alemanni.\nIn the late 3rd century AD, already before the panegyric of 291, there is a first report of Burgundians near the Rhine and Roman Gaul. Zosimus reported that the Burgundi and Vandals () were defeated by the emperor Probus in 278, near a river, during a campaign based upon the Rhine. Some scholars interpret the text to be specifying that this was the Lech river, which enters the Danube from the south in what is now Bavaria, but this reading is uncertain.\nIn his Latin panegyric \"10\" of 289, Claudius Mamertinus subsequently mentioned the as allies who attacked Gaul with a large force in 287 AD, and were defeated by Maximian, when the large size of their force led to famine among the invaders. The Alamanni at this time had recently taken control of the on the eastern side of the Rhine. This panegyric taken together with panegyric \"11\" of 291 may represent a series of conflicts in which violence in the east pushed the Burgundians and Vandals westwards, and involved them with the Alamanni and Romans. The two peoples clearly worked as allies one at least one occasion but came into conflict when the Burgundians started taking over Alemanni farmlands. It is possible that eastern Burgundians were also already beginning to settle permanently in the Main river area, already before the Gothic defeat. The lands they entered may have included territory that some Alemanni were no longer attending because of their own moves westward into the .\nThe Laterculus Veronensis, written in about 314, places the between the Alamanni and the Chatti, who were historically present north of the Main river, although this is one of the last mentions of them. This was a listing of barbarian peoples who had supposedly been under imperial control at some point. This adds to the impression that Burgundians had been living close to the Alemanni in the third century, and probably somewhere near the Main and its tributaries.\nIn 359 contemporary historian Ammianus Marcellinus reported that the future emperor Julian the Apostate began a campaign at Mainz, where the Main enters the Rhine, and travelled through Alemanni lands until they reached border stones marking the edge of Burgundian territory. There are two interpretations of the text, which says either that the boundary was between \"Alamanni and the Burgundians\" (), or between \"Romans and the Burgundians\" . According to the interpretation of Hans H. Anton the second version is correct, and the Alemanni were living within the , which had been Roman, and which still had a Roman population; the boundary between Burgundians and Alemanni was approximately where the old Romes border () had been. Ammianus says the place was called \"Capillacii or Palas\", and scholars have proposed that this may be near \u00d6hringen. More generally there is archaeological evidence in this period which links the population east of the old limes with burial customs and materials previously found in later phases of the Przeworsk culture.\nOrosius reported that the Burgundians, \"a new enemy with a new name, numbering, it is said, more than eighty thousand armed men\", settled on the banks of the Rhine (), during the reign of the Emperor Valentinian I, who reigned 364-375. He believed they were moving from old Roman frontier forts where their ancestors had been posted. In 369/370, Valentinian enlisted the aid of the Burgundians in his own war against the Alamanni, and their king Macrianus. In this context, Ammianus wrote an extended digression about the Burgundians, which gives insight into their language and customs: He explained that the emperor \"finally settled on the plan of stirring up the Burgundians against them \u2014 warlike and abounding in the strength of a vast youth population, and therefore feared by all their neighbours\".\n10 He wrote frequently to their kings through certain discreet and trustworthy messengers, asking that they, at an appointed time, should fall upon the Alamanni. He promised that he himself, after crossing the Rhine with Roman troops, would meet the frightened enemy \u2014 taken by surprise as they tried to avoid the weight of arms.\n11 The princes received the emperor\u2019s letters gladly, for two reasons: first, because the Burgundians knew that from ancient times they were descended from the Romans; second, because they had often quarrelled with the Alamanni over salt works and boundaries. So they sent out their choicest companies, which, before the Roman soldiers had assembled in one body, advanced as far as the banks of the Rhine. There, while the emperor was occupied with building defensive works, they became a source of great alarm to our troops.\n12 But after delaying for a short while \u2014 when neither did Valentinian, as he had promised, arrive on the appointed day, nor did they see any of the promises fulfilled \u2014 they sent envoys to the imperial court, requesting that assistance be given them for their return home, so that they would not be left to expose their unprotected backs to the enemy.\n13 When they realized, through evasions and delays, that this would be refused, they departed in sadness and indignation. When the kings learned of this, they raged as if they had been mocked, killed all their captives, and returned to their native lands.\n14 Among them, the general title for \u201cking\u201d is \"Hendinos\"; and according to ancient custom, he is removed from power if, under his rule, fortune wavers in war or the land refuses to produce abundant crops\u2014just as the Egyptians are accustomed to attribute such misfortunes to their rulers. The highest priest among the Burgundians is called \"Sinistus\"; his office is perpetual, and, unlike that of the kings, he is subject to no such dangers.\nThe mention of a disputed salt spring gives an opportunity for localisation. Anton argues that this must have been in the Kocher valley near Schw\u00e4bisch Hall, and that this must have been near the border between the Alemanni and Burgundians. Although the written record is very limited scholars such as Anton, envision the Burgundians gradually changing their position during this period - initially east of the Alamanni, but later gain accessing to the Rhine between present-day Wiesbaden and Mannheim, pushing the Alemanni south of the Neckar river.\nIn his summing up of the career of Valentinian Ammianus said that it would have been glorious if he had captured King Macrianus, but \"he learned with grief and sorrow that the king had escaped from the Burgundians\".\nPerhaps referring to the same events, Saint Jerome in his \"Chronicon\" says under the year 373 that almost 80,000 Burgundians came to the Rhine, which had never happened before. Writing a generation or two later Orosius took over this number of 80,000 Burgundians and he added that they already settled on the Rhine during the reign of Valentinian.\nKingdom west of the Rhine.\nIn 409, Saint Jerome first listed the Burgundians as one of the large number of barbarian peoples who, together with Pannonians from with the Roman empire itself, had recently entered Roman Gaul, west of the Rhine:\nCountless savage nations () have overrun the whole of Gaul. Everything between the Alps and the Pyrenees, bounded by the Ocean and the Rhine \u2014 the Quadi, Vandals, Sarmatians, Alans, Gepids, Heruli, Saxons, Burgundians, Alamanni, and \u2014 Alas for the commonwealth! \u2014 Pannonian enemies \u2014 have laid waste.\nWhile the entry of long-time neighbours into Gaul such as Saxons, Alamanni and Burgundians was not unprecedented \u2013 the Burgundians having lived in the region for more than a century now \u2013 the massive movement of peoples from the Pannonian and Middle Danube region was a shocking event, partly triggered by Stilicho's movement of Roman forces from northern Europe to help in conflicts against Goths in the south. The Vandals and Alans in particular made a largescale armed crossing of the Rhine on the last day of 406 and after plundering Gaul many of them crossed further into Hispania where they and a group of Suebi fought for a rebel Roman general Gerontius, and established their own kingdoms in what is now Spain. Orosius claimed that the Burgundians crossed the Rhine driven on by the movement of these Alans and Vandals. Having entered the empire, they stayed there. From this point on Roman writers refer mainly of the Burgundians on the west bank of the Rhine, in Gaul, where it is possible that the main part of their population now lived. Others continued to live east of the Rhine.\nSoon after, in 407, a rebel emperor Constantine III was proclaimed, and he set about establishing control in Gaul. After he died in 411, Olympiodorus of Thebes reported that the new Gallic usurper Jovinus was proclaimed emperor by an Alan leader Goar, and the \"tribal leader\" (phylarch) of the Burgundians named Gundahar. This happened at a place called in Lower Germany (Germania II), which is commonly believed to be Mainz, although that was normally written as and considered to be part of Upper Germany (Germania I).\nIn 413, after the death of Jovinus, Prosper of Aquitaine reported that the emperor in Rome, Honorius, now back in control of Gaul, gave the Burgundians a part of it near the Rhine. This may have represented his acceptance of an agreement the Burgundians already had with the usurper regime. The exact position of this Rhine kingdom is uncertain. However, it is this period of Burgundian history which is fictionalised in the \"Niebelungenlied\", which portrays king Gundahar ruling from Worms, south of Mainz, and so this is traditionally seen as the region where they settled. Modern historians interpret Prosper's remark to mean that the Burgundians were confirmed as Roman at this time.\nIn 430, Socrates of Constantinople, who was a contemporary, reported that a community of Burgundian artisans, who were living peacefully east of the Rhine, were being continually attacked by Huns under the leadership of king Uptar. After they converted to Roman Christianity, and Uptar died, 3000 of these Burgundians were able to kill 10,000 Huns. Scholars believe that King Uptar was the same as Octar, the uncle of Attila. At this time the Huns were allies of Flavius Aetius the Roman general.\nIn 435, Prosper reported that Aetius crushed Gundahar, \"king of the Burgundians dwelling within Gaul, and granted peace to him when he sued for it\". However, this \"did not hold for long, since the Huns wiped him out together with his people root and branch\u201d. The Gallic Chronicle of 452 and Hydatius report under 436 that it was Aetius himself who devastated the Burgundians and killed their king. He adds that the Burgundians had rebelled, and says that in 437, 20,000 Burgundians were slain. The trigger for this slaughter was apparently the Burgundian harassment of the province of Belgica, immediately to the west of Upper Germania, reported by Sidonius in his 7th poem in honour of the future emperor Avitus. According to Sidonius, the young Avitus showed his military prowess in this campaign, while fighting under A\u00ebtius, who had learned the \"Scythian\" ways of fighting with the Huns. In reality, there may have been a longer-run tensions between Burgundians and the Hunnic allies of Aetius, as reflected in reports of the conflict in 430.\nIn medieval legends such as the \"Nibelungenlied\", on which Wagner based his Ring Cycle King Gundahar becomes Old High German , and in the \"V\u00f6lsunga saga\" he is Old Norse . The king of the Huns who killed him in the story, Etzel or Atli, is based on Attila the Hun, but in the story G\u00fcnther travels to the kingdom of Attila who is his brother-in-law. In reality, Attila became a joint king of the Huns with his brother Bleda in 435, the same year that the Burgundian conflict with their ally Aetius appears to have begun. Although his uncle Octar apparently died during a campaign near Gaul against Burgundians in 430, it is not known if Attila was directly involved in the real campaign against Gundahar. In the legends, the father of Gundahar was named Gibeche or Gj\u00faki, and this may have been the real name of Gundahar's father, because the 6th-century \"Lex Burgundionum\" Gibica is the first name in a list of historical kings.\nBurgundian settlement near Lake Geneva.\nThe only source to date the Burgundian settlement near Lake Geneva is the unreliable Gallic Chronicle of 452, which records that in 443 \u201cSapaudia was given to the remainders of the Burgundians to be divided with the indigenous inhabitants.\u201d The exact boundaries of Sapaudia are uncertain, but it lay in the Roman province of Maxima Sequania, and the Burgundian territory included Geneva, and Neuch\u00e2tel.\nHistorian Ian N. Wood notes that this first settlement didn\u2019t draw much attention from contemporaries, and probably didn\u2019t involve a large migration of Burgundians. According to him the Burgundians settled in Sapaudia can be seen as a Roman military unit. These kings were in fact military officials of the Roman empire. Their non-Roman followers were not all Burgundian, and more non-Burgundians joined over time. In Wood\u2019s opinion, a true Burgundian \u201ckingdom\u201d which was not based upon a Roman military office, only emerged between 474 and 494. After the accession of his opponent Julius Nepos in 474 King Gundobad could no longer claim to represent the western imperial court.\nThe \"Lex Burgundionum\" law code, issued under Gundobad, nonetheless invokes earlier kings back to Gundahar, and beyond. One clause confirms the freedom of persons proved to have been freeborn under earlier \u201cpredecessors of royal memory\u201d including not only his father and uncle (Gundioc and Chilperic) but also \u201cGibica, Gundomar, Gislahar, and Gundahar\u201d. Whether or not Gundioc was the son, or even descendant, of Gundahar, is not certain. Gregory of Tours reported that Gundioc (\"Gundevech\") was a descendant of the Tervingian Goth Athanaric.\nImperial politics.\nAnother clause in the Burgundian legal code voids all unresolved Burgundian legal cases before the \"Battle of the Mauriac Plains\" (also known as the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains) in 451. This battle was a decisive turning point for the Burgundians, as it was also for the Visigoths. During the battle, Burgundians and other barbarian kingdoms from Gaul fought for Rome under Aetius, and put Attila the Hun and his allies to flight. However, the Visigothic king Theodoric I was killed during the battle, and Thorismund his son followed the advice of Aetius not to pursue the Huns. Near contemporary Sidonius Apollinaris reported that other Burgundians also fought on the Hun side, and these may have been Burgundians living east of the Rhine outside Roman control.\nIn about 450, around the time of the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains, Gundioc strengthened ties with the future western power-broker Ricimer by marrying his sister, helping to explain later Burgundian\u2013imperial cooperation. At this time Ricimer would not have been a very important or powerful person. \nIn 454, the \"Continuatio Prosperi Havniensis\" surprisingly reports that Burgundians \"spread throughout Gaul\" () but were \u201cdriven back\u201d () by the Gepids. The Gepids were one of the most powerful peoples in Attila's alliance, and they had fought at the Catalaunian plains, but their home was far to the east in what is now Rumania, and in 454 they were fighting for their independence after the death of Attila in 453, playing an important role at the Battle of Nedao. Scholars suspect that this passage may be corrupted, and the context is now unclear. Some historians believe that the text originally said that the Burgundians repelled the Gepids. \nIn 455, after the emperor Petronius Maximus was killed after less than three months in power, and Rome was sacked by the Vandals, the Visigothic king Theodoric II acclaimed the Gallo-Roman noble Avitus as emperor. In 456 the Burgundian kings Gundioc and Chilperic joined Theoderic, king of the Visigoths, on a successful Roman-backed campaign against the Kingdom of the Suebi in Hispania. In October 456 Avitus was overthrown as emperor by Majorian and Ricimer, who became the new emperor and \"magister militum\". Soon after this in 456, Marius Aventicensis reported that the Burgundians \"occupied part of Gaul and divided the lands with the Gallic senators\". This may have been based on military agreements already made by Avitus, implied by the Burgundian participation in the Suebian campaign. It is also possible that the Gallo-Roman nobility (the senators) didn't accept the new regime in Rome, and wanted to take their defence into their own hands. In 457, when the Burgundian soldiers return from Hispania, and some may have now been garrisoned in Lyon, the \"Continuatio Prosperi Havniensis\" reported that after the death of the Suebian king in Spain, \"Gundioc, king of the Burgundians, with his people and all his forces, entered Gaul to settle\", with Gothic approval and friendship.\nMajorian asserted himself in Gaul in 458, occupying Lyon and apparently ejecting a Burgundian garrison. After Majorian's assassination in 461, Ricimer\u2019s dominance allowed Burgundian influence to grow again. Gundioc, his brother-in-law was recognised as \"magister militum\" for Gaul, and Burgundian territory expanded along the Rh\u00f4ne valley.\nIn 469, Sidonius reported that his own uncle and fellow Gallo-Roman noble named Arvandus, suggested dividing Gaul between the Goths and Burgundians. However, he was convicted for treason for his remarks.\nGundioc died in about 470, succeeded by his brother Chilperic I, who repelled a Visigothic advance in 471, and fought the Alemanni on their northern frontier. In 472, Ricimer and Gundioc's son Gundobad killed Emperor Anthemius; Ricimer\u2019s death shortly afterwards left Gundobad in control at Rome, where he installed Glycerius as emperor. Glycerius was deposed in 474, and after this major setback, Gundobad returned to Burgundy, dividing the kingdom with his brothers Godigisel, Chilperic II, and Gundomar I.\nIndependent kingdom.\nAfter the death of Chilperic I around 480, his nephew Gundobad became principal king, while sharing power in Burgundian fashion with his brothers Godegisel, Chilperic II, and Godomar I. \nCivil war broke out in 500 when Godegisel allied with his brother-in-law Clovis I of the Franks, leading to Gundobad\u2019s defeat at Dijon. With Visigothic support, Gundobad regained control in 501, killing Godegisel and the Frankish garrison in Vienne. \nGundobad restored ties with Clovis and joined the Frankish war against the Visigoths in 507, although they probably did not fight at the Battle of Vouill\u00e9 itself. The Burgundians gained temporary conquests in Provence and raided as far as Toulouse and Barcelona. Ostrogothic intervention from Italy soon pushed them back, and the Durance was fixed as their southern frontier. The Burgundians emerged almost empty-handed, while the Franks and Ostrogoths made substantial gains.\nGundobad died in 516, leaving the throne to his Catholic son Sigismund, whose reign was marked by close cooperation with Avitus of Vienne, and the foundation of Agaune abbey in 515.\nIn 523\u2013524, after Sigismund executed his son Sigeric, a grandson of Theoderic the Great, the Burgundians faced a two-front war against the Ostrogoths and the sons of Clovis. Sigismund was captured and killed, but his brother Godomar II rallied and defeated the Franks at the Battle of V\u00e9zeronce. A new alliance with the Ostrogoths could not however prevent a renewed Frankish assault in 532\u2013534, which ended Burgundian independence. Their kingdom was absorbed into the Frankish realms, though a Burgundian identity survived under Merovingian rule.\nBurgundaefarones.\nIn the Merovingian period, the Franks ruled a large empire that contained many of the original post-Roman kingdoms including that of the Burgundians. Surviving written sources from this era mention people within the Frankish empire who were of Burgundian descent. A handful of people were described belonging to the , and on some of these occasions this seems to have significance. A special term was used mainly by Fredegar to refer to the leading men of Burgundy, although normally without any clear ethnic significance. In the hagiography of Saint Sigismund (\"Passio Sigismundi\") this same term is given as the original name of the Burgundians who one manned the Roman front line forts in southern Germany.\nBornholm as \"Burgund island\".\nEarly medieval writers reported that the now Danish island of Bornholm in the Baltic sea was called \"Burgund land\" or \"Burgund island\" \u2013 \"holm\" being a word for an island. In a 9th century description of Europe attached to his translation of Orosius, Alfred the Great called it \"Burgenda land\" in Old English. He was quoting Wulfstan of Hedeby, who reported that this was an island with its own king. He also quoted Ohthere of H\u00e5logaland who mentioned (plural), south of the Swedes (\"Sweon\"), and east of the \"Ostse\u00e6\" \u2013 the \"Ostse\u00e6\" being described as the \"arm\" of sea running north of the Danes, and south of the Swedes. Much later, Saxo Grammaticus called Bornholm in Latin ( also meaning island). Icelandic sources from the 13th century onward refer to the island as , where is a plural implying the existence of a people with this name.\nAlthough it appears there was a medieval people living on Bornholm with a name effectively the same as shorter Latin form sometimes used to refer to the Burgundians, this name probably related to the island's name which meant \"high island\", referring to the geography of the island itself. Whether or not there is a connection to the continental known to Rome is unknown. Scholars believe that a name coincidence is likely, because the shorter \"\"-version of the name is based upon a descriptive placename which can be found in many places in Europe. A parallel Celtic tribal name is for example also known, the Brigantes in the highlands of northern England. On the other hand, it has been argued that this geographical placename is especially common in Scandinavia. In Norway, for example, there are small villages named Borgund such as Borgund in L\u00e6rdal Municipality, Borgund in Stad Municipality, and Borgund Church in \u00c5lesund Municipality. An old proposal, now doubted by modern historians, is that the continental Burgundians known to the Romans must have migrated from Bornholm. A related proposal associated with older historiography is that these Burgundi of Bornholm had themselves migrated from Norway.\nMedieval Scandinavian origins myth.\nThe medieval hagiography of Sigismund of Burgundy (died 524), which was probably written in the 8th century, claimed that the Burgundians of southern France originated, before they lived in southern Germany, on the northern island called \"Scanadavia\" (sic). According to this account, the emperor Tiberius, who reigned 14-37 AD, settled them in Germany. This passage was also copied into the second hagiography of the Burgundian Saint Gangulphus. The involvement of Tiberius in their settlement was originally mentioned by the 5th century writer Orosius, but Orosius did not mention Scandinavia. Both sources also share the idea that these ancestors of the Burgundians once guarded the Roman frontier forts (\"burgi\") in Southern Germany, which they were supposedly named after. Before coming to the forts, they were therefore not called Burgundians. The idea that the Burgundians descended from people stationed in Roman frontier forts in southern Germany was in turn older, and already mentioned by Ammianus in the 4th century, but he did not make any claims about when they were settled, or about how the Burgundians got their name. For him this story was politically important, connected to the idea that the Burgundians should ally with the Romans against their neighbours the Alemanni. In his time the Burgundians literally lived in the area of the old Roman frontier in southern Germany, which was a border the Romans were still very conscious of and aimed to reclaim, although the Alemanni stood in the way. Orosius, in turn, knew and mentioned that this region of \"Germania\" where the Burgundians had lived had originally been subjugated by Rome long before, in the time of Tiberius.\nThe mention of Scandinavia as a place where the border guards originated did not however appear in Orosius, or 7th-century writers such as Fredegar or Isidore, who also copied Orosius, but were earlier than the Sigismund hagiography. This part followed the example of a sixth century origin story of the Goths, contained within the 6th-century \"Getica\" by Jordanes, which was also imitated in the \"Origo Gentis Langobardorum\", a similar medieval origin story of the Lombards. Although Fredegar, who apparently had connections to Burgundy, gave no origins account for the Burgundians, he did mention the story of Lombard origins in what he called \"Scathanavia\".\nFor his description of the island of \"Scandza\" (as he called it) Jordanes in turn cited the classical writer Ptolemy. But he notably added the idea that it was a \"womb\" or \"workshop\" where many barbarian nations originated (). Jordanes, who was writing specifically about the Goths, who attacked on horseback, was influenced in this by Saint Ambrose, who claimed that \"Gog\" the ruler of \"Magog\" mentioned in the \"Book of Ezekiel\" represented \"the Goths\", and that the Bible predicted an invader from the north, who would come on horseback as a mighty army, and be defeated. Gog and Magog were also associated with islands because God would \"send fire on Magog, and among them that dwell carelessly in the isles\".\nPhysical appearance.\nIn a letter to a friend who was a senator, the 5th century Gallo-Roman noble, poet and landowner Sidonius Apollinaris, wrote a description of Burgundians who he was staying with. He emphasized, and perhaps exaggerated, the cultural differences between them and himself.\nLanguage.\nLittle is known of the language or languages of the Burgundians before they integrated into the Romanised populations they lived with, but it is known that the language of the Kingdom based near the Rhone was a Germanic language. Some proper names of Burgundians are recorded, and a small number of words, for example in legal texts. It is however difficult to use these words to distinguish what type of Germanic they spoke. It is also highly probable that Burgundian vocabulary and naming was influenced by their neighbours, such as the Alemanni and the Visigoths, particularly when it comes to personal names.\nThe fifth century poet Sidonius Apollinaris referred in a letter to the language of the Burgundian kingdom and its laws, as \"Germanic language\" (). According to Wolfram, no one in this period would have applied the term \"Germanic\" to anything to do with the Gothic peoples. In fact, during this period, the term \"Germani\" was normally \"either limited to Franks and Alamanni or used for peoples of a distant past\". Herwig Wolfram has therefore argued that the Burgundians were probably called \"Germani\" by Sidonius because of their recent history in \"Germania\".\nEarlier Burgundians in present day Poland probably also spoke some type of Germanic language. Pliny the Elder categorized the earliest Burgundians together with the Gutones and Vandals in the first century AD. For this reason, scholars once assumed that Burgundians were speakers of an East Germanic language, like that later used by Wulfila to create the Gothic Bible. However, this is now considered uncertain, and Herwig Wolfram has written that for \"a long time linguists considered the Burgundians to be an East Germanic people, but today they are no longer so sure\".\nChristianity.\nOrosius, probably writing about 416/417, wrote that \"through the providence of God\" the Burgundians in Gaul \"all recently become Christians, embracing the Catholic faith and acknowledging obedience to our clergy, so that they live mild, gentle, and harmless lives, regarding the Gauls not as their subjects but in truth as their Christian brethren\". Socrates of Constantinople reported that a population of Burgundians living east of the Rhine, and mainly living as artisans, converted to Catholic Christianity in 430, under the guidance of a bishop based in nearby Roman Gaul.\nNevertheless, the Burgundian court in Geneva and Lyon had an Arian faction, which held sway over some of the kings including Gundobad. On the other hand, unlike the Gothic and Vandal kingdoms, and perhaps more like the Frankish court before the baptism of Clovis, the Burgundian court also had Catholics, including several of the female members of the family. Clovis himself was said to have been converted by his Burgundian wife. A notable exception to the pattern was King Sigismund, who converted to Catholicism, and was known for his dedication to it.\nLaw.\nThe Burgundians left several legal codes, which give the \"fullest evidence for the context and process of legislation in the earliest years of the successor states\" which came into existence at the end of the Western Empire.\nAlready in the time of Gundioc the letters of Sidonius make it clear that Syagrius, a friend and fellow Gallo-Roman noble, was working with the Burgundian court to write legal codes. There are also indications that Gundobad published edicts concerning the Burgundian population, and their interaction with the Gallo-Roman population, and also Roman law, the \"Lex Romana Burgundionum\" which is also called the \"Forma et Expositio Legum\".\nGregory of Tours, said that Gundioc's son Gundobad published new edicts after the civil war against his brother in 500. These were intended to help the Roman citizens, and stop them being treated badly by the Burgundians.\nIn the Carolingian era Saint Agobard, who was a bishop at Lyon, wrote a diatribe against the continuing existence of the distinct legal code for Burgundians, which he called the \"Lex Gundobada\", or Gundobad's law, which is taken by some to imply that Gundobad produced the main laws of the Burgundian code. He argued that everyone should live under one Frankish legal code. According to Ian Wood: \"For Agobard those subject to this law were a particularly quarrelsome group, who would not solve legal disputes through discussion or the testimony of true men, but instead resorted to the use of arms, thus ensuring the dominance of the strongest\". From this and other examples it is known that there was still a Burgundian people (), who were known to sometimes claim their legal right to trial by combat.\nOther evidence indicates that main Burgundian law code, the \"Liber Constitutionum\" or Book of Constitutions, or at least a predecessor of it, was issued in 517, in the second year of the reign of Sigismund, the son of Gundobad. However, some of the edicts were clearly made before his reign, in the time of Gundobad, and the exact contents of the laws published in 517 are now uncertain. After 517 the laws were expanded. In its name and style the law is made in the Roman imperial tradition. When the constitutions were made the Burgundian rulers were Roman officials, and did not see themselves as ruling an independent state. The laws are also not only addressed to the non-Roman population, although some parts refer to non-Romans using terms such as (our people), or (the barbarians, the non- Romans). These were not only Burgundians, but also other non Romans such as Alans or Goths. \nThe \"prima constitutio\", the first of the constitutions, is an introductory section which is signed by 31 \"comites\" or officers of the kingdom, all of who have Germanic names.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4260", "revid": "1317727325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4260", "title": "Dots and boxes", "text": "2 player paper and pencil game\nDots and boxes is a pencil-and-paper game for two players (sometimes more). It was first published in the 19th century by French mathematician \u00c9douard Lucas, who called it . It has gone by many other names, including dots and dashes, game of dots, dot to dot grid, boxes, and pigs in a pen.\nThe game starts with an empty grid of dots. Usually two players take turns adding a single horizontal or vertical line between two unjoined adjacent dots. A player who completes the fourth side of a 1\u00d71 box earns one point and takes another turn. A point is typically recorded by placing a mark that identifies the player in the box, such as an initial. The game ends when no more lines can be placed. The winner is the player with the most points. The board may be of any size grid. When short on time, or to learn the game, a 2\u00d72 board (3\u00d73 dots) is suitable. A 5\u00d75 board, on the other hand, is good for experts.\nStrategy.\nFor most novice players, the game begins with a phase of more-or-less randomly connecting dots, where the only strategy is to avoid adding the third side to any box. This continues until all the remaining (potential) boxes are joined into \"chains\" \u2013 groups of one or more adjacent boxes in which any move gives all the boxes in the chain to the opponent. At this point, players typically take all available boxes, then \"open\" the smallest available chain to their opponent. For example, a novice player faced with a situation like position 1 in the second diagram on the right, in which some boxes can be captured, may take all the boxes in the chain, resulting in position 2. But with their last move, they have to open the next, larger chain, and the novice loses the game.\nA more experienced player faced with position 1 will instead play the \"double-cross strategy\", taking all but 2 of the boxes in the chain and leaving position 3. The opponent will take these two boxes and then be forced to open the next chain. By achieving position 3, player A wins. The same double-cross strategy applies no matter how many long chains there are: a player using this strategy will take all but two boxes in each chain and take all the boxes in the last chain. If the chains are long enough, then this player will win.\nThe next level of strategic complexity, between experts who would both use the double-cross strategy (if they were allowed to), is a battle for control: an expert player tries to force their opponent to open the first long chain, because the player who first opens a long chain usually loses. Against a player who does not understand the concept of a sacrifice, the expert simply has to make the correct number of sacrifices to encourage the opponent to hand them the first chain long enough to ensure a win. If the other player also sacrifices, the expert has to additionally manipulate the number of available sacrifices through earlier play.\nIn combinatorial game theory, Dots and Boxes is an impartial game and many positions can be analyzed using Sprague\u2013Grundy theory. However, Dots and Boxes lacks the normal play convention of most impartial games (where the last player to move wins), which complicates the analysis considerably.\nUnusual grids and variants.\nDots and Boxes need not be played on a rectangular grid\u00a0\u2013 it can be played on a triangular grid or a hexagonal grid.\nDots and boxes has a dual graph form called \"Strings-and-Coins\". This game is played on a network of coins (vertices) joined by strings (edges). Players take turns cutting a string. When a cut leaves a coin with no strings, the player \"pockets\" the coin and takes another turn. The winner is the player who pockets the most coins. Strings-and-Coins can be played on an arbitrary graph.\nIn analyses of Dots and Boxes, a game that starts with outer lines already drawn is called a \"Swedish board\" while the standard version that starts fully blank is called an \"American board\". An intermediate version with only the left and bottom sides starting with drawn lines is called an \"Icelandic board\".\nA related game is Dots, played by adding coloured dots to a blank grid, and joining them with straight or diagonal line in an attempt to surround an opponent's dots.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4261", "revid": "40234806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4261", "title": "Big Brother (Nineteen Eighty-Four)", "text": "Literary character and symbol\nBig Brother is a character and symbol in George Orwell's dystopian 1949 novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". He is ostensibly the leader of Oceania, a totalitarian state wherein the ruling party, Ingsoc, wields total power for its own sake over the inhabitants. His image appears everywhere on posters within Oceanian society as a metaphor for the Party's complete control of the population. Orwell was deeply concerned with the rise of totalitarianism in the 1930s and 1940s, particularly in Stalinist Russia and Nazi Germany and wrote his novel as a warning about the potential of a totalitarian leader destroying objective truth. \nThe ubiquitous slogan \"Big Brother is watching you\" serves as a constant reminder that Party members in Oceania are not entitled to privacy. They are subject to constant surveillance to ensure their ideological purity. This is primarily through omnipresent telescreens, two-way video devices used for broadcasting propaganda and for spying on individuals by the Thought Police. As the figurehead of the Party, Big Brother is omnipotent and the subject of a cult of personality, illustrated in the daily, ritualistic Two Minutes Hate, a mass demonstration of adoration for the leader. \n\"Big Brother\" has become a synecdoche for abuse of government power and mass surveillance, particularly with respect to civil liberties and loss of privacy. The character has been influential on popular music, including songs by Stevie Wonder and David Bowie. As a metaphor for surveillance, Big Brother also inspired the worldwide reality television show, \"Big Brother\". He was described as one of the ten greatest villains in literature by Stephen King.\nBackground.\nThe concepts of Big Brother and the totalitarian regime of Oceania in George Orwell's dystopian novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" lie in his experiences in the Spanish Civil War. Orwell had volunteered to fight for the POUM and spent months on the Aragon front. In Barcelona he personally witnessed an atmosphere of terror when, in May 1937, the communists revolted against their allies resulting in five days of violence. Orwell and his wife, Eileen Blair, were forced to flee Spain. Orwell had been motivated to go to Spain by his concerns about fascism, but he discovered an atmosphere of paranoia, persecution and lies. The communists claimed that they had uncovered a network of traitors that had been working with the fascists to assassinate Republicans. This dishonesty shocked Orwell, but when he returned to England to publish what he had witnessed, he was told by friends that the truth could help to serve General Franco and fascism. The impact of his experiences was later expressed in his 1946 essay \"Why I Write\", in which he declared, \"Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism\".\nOrwell became preoccupied with totalitarianism in the 1930s and gained knowledge of the rising political tyranny in Soviet Russia from leaked accounts that he read by disillusioned communists such as Boris Souvarine and Andr\u00e9 Gide. He based many elements of Oceania's totalitarian state on Russia under the leadership of Joseph Stalin and Germany under Adolf Hitler, including a cult of personality, historical revisionism, repression of free speech and the atmosphere of paranoia and fear. Orwell wrote \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" as a satire and a fictional account of recent history. In his creation of Big Brother, he was inspired by the mystical nature of Stalin, as described in a passage by Gide: \"His portrait is seen everywhere, his name is on everyone's lips, and praise of him occurs in every public speech. Is all this the result of worship, love or fear? Who can say?\". Orwell combined multiple accounts, including \"Assignment in Utopia\" (1937) by Eugene Lyons, \"The Woman Who Could Not Die\" (1938) by Iulia de Beausobre, who wrote of her two years in a Soviet prison, and \"Darkness at Noon\" (1940), Arthur Koestler's novel about the Great Purge, and synthesised this knowledge to create the fictional dictatorship of Oceania under Big Brother. He outlined some of the main ideas for the novel in his notebook from 1937 onwards under the working title \"The Last Man in Europe\". Orwell was concerned that objective truth was fading from the world and wrote his novel as the ultimate conclusion of totalitarian destruction of truth. In his 1942 essay \"Looking Back on the Spanish War\" Orwell wrote about the potential of \"a nightmare world in which the Leader, or some ruling clique, controls not only the future but the past. If the Leader says of such and such an event, 'It never happened'\u2013 well, it never happened. If he says that two and two are five \u2013 well, two and two are five.\"\nOrwell finished writing his novel on the island of Jura, whilst ill with tuberculosis and it was published in 1949. \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" was written as a warning. Orwell explained to his publisher Fredric Warburg in June 1949, \"the moral to be drawn from this dangerous nightmare situation is a simple one. Don\u2019t let it happen. It depends on you\".\nConception.\nThe idea for Big Brother could be borrowed from the 1937 H. G. Wells novel \"Star Begotten\", in which \"Big Brother\" is referenced as a fictitious example of \"mystical personifications\" able to easily manipulate the common man, as well as the Soviet Union, where there was an ideology of \"brotherly nations\" or \"brotherly countries\". The Soviet Union presented itself as a big brother who watches over its younger brothers (other nations). The ideological word 'big brother' or 'older brother' was very well known and used in the Soviet Republics before and after the Second World War. In the \"Circe\" episode of James Joyce's \"Ulysses\" (1922) the prophet Elijah addresses God as \"Big Brother up there, Mr President\".\nIn the essay section of his novel \"1985\", Anthony Burgess states that Orwell got the idea for the name of Big Brother from advertising billboards for educational correspondence courses from Bennett College during World War II. The original posters showed J. M. Bennett with the phrase \"Let me be your father.\" After Bennett's death, his son took over the company and the posters were replaced with the text \"Let me be your big brother\".\nA theory made by Mr. W.J. West, a London book collector, who found radio transcripts and over 250 letters written by Orwell during his years at the BBC, that the inspiration for Big Brother was Brendan Bracken, the Minister of Information, based on Orwell's use of the initials B.B. was discredited as speculation by Gordon B. Beadle. David M. Lubin postulated that Big Brother's visage was based on Herbert Kitchener, whom Orwell admired as a child. Kitchener's face appeared on Alfred Leete's 1914 British military recruitment poster Lord Kitchener Wants You.\nRole in \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\".\nBig Brother is the leader of a totalitarian superstate named Oceania, a hierarchical society consisting of the Inner Party, the Outer Party and the \"proles\". The novel is set in London within the region of Airstrip One. He is described through the viewpoint of the novel's protagonist, Winston Smith, who experiences a midlife crisis when he begins to question the political ruling party of Oceania named Ingsoc. Winston is employed at the Ministry of Truth, where he rectifies inconvenient historical fact in accordance with the ever changing party line. He begins to rebel against the Party and develops a hatred for its leader Big Brother.\nBig Brother is described in the novel as \"a man of about forty-five, with a heavy black moustache and ruggedly handsome features\" and later as \"black-haired, black-moustachioed, full of power and mysterious calm\". His image appears everywhere on posters in public places:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On each landing, opposite the lift-shaft, the poster with the enormous face gazed from the wall. It was one of those pictures which are so contrived that the eyes follow you about when you move. BIG BROTHER IS WATCHING YOU, the caption beneath it ran.\u2014\u200a\nThrough Winston's personal rebellion, Orwell describes the full extent of the Party's power. Ingsoc employs the brutal methods of totalitarian control, through purges of dissidents, mass surveillance through a two-way device called a telescreen, propaganda events and psychological manipulation. Although rules of social behaviour are not written, members of the Outer Party, of which Winston is a member, are expected to conform completely. When Winston engages in an illicit affair with Julia, a forbidden act, he is unaware that they are monitored by the Thought Police and mistakenly believes that the Party can never control his inner mind. Upon their arrest, he is tortured in Room 101 and converted to a mindless, obedient citizen of Oceania who loves Big Brother.\nThe Party's eye.\nBig Brother's omnipresent gaze found on coins, stamps and posters in Oceania is a visual metaphor of the Party's mass surveillance of the population and its social control. Like the telescreen, Big Brother's face appears everywhere in society. In Oceania, it is impossible for the individual to see reality unless it is through the eyes of the Party. The telescreen is used both for broadcasting propaganda to the masses, but also to spy on individuals, as an extension of the Thought Police, which makes it an essential aspect of the Party's totalitarian control. Erika Gottleib writes that Orwell employs the mystical symbol of the all-seeing eye, which represents man being in the presence of God. Winston is horrified by the pervasive all-seeing eye and attempts to hide from its gaze until he is consumed by it and his individuality is broken in Room 101 where he finds a union with the Godhead. The Party uses Big Brother's eye not only to outwardly enforce obedience, but to penetrate the mind, so that the authority of the Party is internalised by the individual as an ultimate control of the self.\nCult of personality.\nBig Brother is the subject of a cult of personality. Winston witnesses this in the daily ritual called the Two Minutes Hate. It is broadcast from a large telescreen and its purpose is to create an emotional reaction in the audience. The event begins with a terrible screeching sound, followed by the face of Emmanuel Goldstein displayed on the screen, which generates hissing from the audience. The frenzy of hate reaches a climax and is then replaced with ecstasy, as the face of Big Brother appears.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At this moment the entire group of people broke into a deep, slow, rhythmic chant of 'B-B! ... B-B! ... B-B!'\u2014over and over again, very slowly, with a long pause between the first 'B' and the second\u2014a heavy murmurous sound, somehow curiously savage, in the background of which one seemed to hear the stamps of naked feet and the throbbing of tom-toms. For perhaps as much as thirty seconds they kept it up. It was a refrain that was often heard in moments of overwhelming emotion. Partly it was a sort of hymn to the wisdom and majesty of Big Brother, but still more it was an act of self-hypnosis, a deliberate drowning of consciousness by means of rhythmic noise.The emotional response of the audience towards Big Brother is intensified by the limited access to food and comforts available within Oceania's totalitarian society. Additionally, the Party limits all pleasure, ensuring that only the love for Big Brother exists. Such demonstrations of devotion distract the population from enduring the discomfort and restrictions of daily life.\nOmnipotent figurehead.\nThrough the continual revision of historical fact, the Party ensures that it is infallible and that Big Brother is omnipotent. The primary slogan of the Party is \"who controls the past controls the future, who controls the present controls the past\". Winston has only vague memories, such as the moment he first heard of Big Brother, and is denied any possibility of corroborating his memories. The Party ensures that history is continually revised to maintain the myth of its perfection. It is unclear if Big Brother is or had been a real person, or is a fictional personification of the Party. In the fictional book \"The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism\", read by Winston and purportedly written by the enemy of the state Emmanuel Goldstein, Big Brother is referred to as infallible and all-powerful. No one has ever seen him and there is a reasonable certainty that he will never die. He is simply \"the guise in which the Party chooses to exhibit itself to the world\" since the emotions of love, fear and reverence are more easily focused on an individual than an organisation. When Winston is later arrested, O'Brien states that Big Brother will never die. When Smith asks if Big Brother exists, O'Brien describes him as \"the embodiment of the Party\". O'Brien also explains the reason for Big Brother's existence: \"The object of persecution is persecution. The object of torture is torture. The object of power is power.\"\nCritical response.\nThe magazine \"Book\" ranked Big Brother no. 59 on its \"100 best characters in fiction since 1900\" list. \"Wizard\" magazine rated him the 75th-greatest villain of all time. Sally Watson-Jones writing in \"The Guardian\" described him as a \"terrifying villain\" due to his omnipotence as a god-like character made by the Inner Party. She commented that his existence is unimportant as his power comes from his superiority: \"He is never wrong, has no idiosyncrasies that can be exploited, no personality that can be manipulated, no desire that can be leveraged against him.\" American author Stephen King ranked Big Brother as one of the ten greatest fictional villains in books for \"Entertainment Weekly\" due to him \"watching you from every telescreen in George Orwell\u2019s more-relevant-than-ever novel of a nightmare dictatorship\".\nAdaptations.\nThe character, represented solely by a single still photograph, was played in the 1954 BBC television adaptation by production designer Roy Oxley. In the 1956 film adaptation, Big Brother was represented by an illustration of a stern-looking disembodied head. In the 1984 film adaptation starring John Hurt, the Big Brother still image was of actor Bob Flag.\nCultural influence.\nImpact on language.\n\"The Wall Street Journal\" said that of all the concepts and phrases from \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" that have been adopted in common language, \"Big Brother\" is the most pervasive. Ben Zimmer wrote that its current use has subverted its earlier meaning of an older brother, protector or carer. In the early 1900s, the phrase was commonly associated with charities, such as the Big Brothers movement, which in 1904 facilitated youth mentoring in New York City, later expanding to Big Brothers Big Sisters of America.\nUse as metaphor.\nSince the publication of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", the phrase \"Big Brother\" has been commonly used as a metaphor and synecdoche to describe any overly-controlling authority figure, increased government surveillance and loss of privacy. Immediately after the novel's publication \"Life\" magazine, in its 4 July 1949 issue, warned that the United States could fall under the influence of a Big Brother figure.\nIain Moncreiffe and Don Pottinger jokingly mentioned in their 1956 book \"Blood Royal\" the sentence: \"Without Little Father need for Big Brother\", referring to the Russian Revolution and the Soviet Union.\nIn 2007, concerns about the rise of surveillance cameras in the UK led to the Commons home affairs select committee launching an inquiry. A report published by the Royal Academy of Engineering recommended the use of \"community webcams\", which it said would \"prevent a Big Brother state\". Big Brother Watch, a British civil liberties campaign group founded in 2009, is named after Orwell's character with the aim of campaigning against state surveillance. Big Brother was again referenced in relation to concerns about state surveillance in the UK in 2019, when the government's surveillance camera commissioner warned that the country was moving towards a surveillance society through the use of technology, such as CCTV in public places and facial recognition cameras. In May 2025, \"El Pais\" reported on the large network of video surveillance and facial recognition cameras used in S\u00e3o Paulo named Smart Sampa, describing it as \"'Big Brother' is watching with 25,000 cameras\".\n\"The Times\" described the cancellation of the 1984 film adaptation of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" in Thailand in 2014 as a ban by \"Thailand's Big Brother\". When the film was due to be screened by the Punya Movie Club in Chiang Mai, the art gallery booked for the screening was warned by police for the film's political content. The novel was viewed symbolically as a protest against General Prayut Chan-ocha, who had seized power in a 2014 political coup and had been depicted in posters as Big Brother. China's Social Credit System has been described as akin to \"Big Brother\" by detractors, where citizens and businesses are given or deducted good behavior points depending on their choices. In September 2025, \"The Independant\" reported that the proposed introduction of digital identity cards in the UK raised fears of a \"Big Brother state\" and a \"dystopian nightmare\" based on concerns about privacy and civil liberties.\nBig Brother has been used in reference to concerns about online privacy issues, including the gathering of personal data by tech companies. The rise of artificial intelligence also raised concerns about the use of personal data, with the phrase \"Big Brother\" being incorporated into media headlines. Shoshana Zuboff wrote in \"Time\" about the rise of surveillance capitalism, comparing Big Brother to a \"Big Other\" in which human experience data on the Internet is captured and computed to predict behaviour: \"impersonal systems trained to monitor and shape our actions remotely, unimpeded by law\". Tim Harford in a BBC article warned about \"'Big Brother' technology\", comparing the telescreen used to monitor the population by Big Brother in the novel to devices like voice-activated smart speakers produced by large corporations. The growth of worker surveillance technology, including turnstyle data and monitoring software of mobile and home-based workers was described as \"your Big Brother boss\" by Charles Arthur in \"The Independent\".\nMaria Bustillos wrote in \"The New Yorker\" about the emergence of \"Little Brother\", the use of technology by citizens to record public events and observe those in authority, which was described as \"inverse panopticon 'sousveillance'\". In 2010, Walter Kirn commented in \"The New York Times\" that \"Little Brother\" intrusion of personal space through webcams and viral videos had replaced Big Brother surveillance as the prevalent challenge in everyday life. \"The New York Times\" said that Big Brother was the most ubiquitous metaphor for mass surveillance, but postulated that surveillance technology has become too sophisticated for the phrase to accurately capture the extent of the threat.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the decades following the publication of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", many musicians have been inspired by its concepts. American musician Stevie Wonder included the track \"Big Brother\" on his studio album \"Talking Book\" (1972), comprising lyrics focusing on America's treatment of minorities. The English musician David Bowie gained an appreciation of the novel from an early age. He had wanted to create a theatre adaptation but could not get the rights. His studio album \"Diamond Dogs\" (1974) incorporates themes from the novel in the tracks \"Big Brother\" and \"1984\". The British punk band Subhumans also wrote a song named \"Big Brother\", using the theme of mass surveillance as a commentary on mainstream media.\nThe image of Big Brother played a key role in Apple's \"1984\" television commercial introducing the Macintosh, which aired at Super Bowl XVIII on 22 January 1984. The Orwell Estate viewed the Apple commercial as a copyright infringement and sent a cease-and-desist letter to Apple and its advertising agency. The commercial was never televised again. Subsequent ads featuring Steve Jobs mimicked the format and appearance of the original ad campaign.\nThe worldwide reality television show \"Big Brother\" is based on the novel's concept of people being under constant surveillance. In 2000, after the United States version of the CBS program \"Big Brother\" premiered, the Orwell Estate sued CBS and its production company Orwell Productions, Inc. in federal court in Chicago for copyright and trademark infringement. The case was settled but the amount that CBS paid to the Orwell Estate was not disclosed.\nDue to Orwell's work entering the public domain in 2021 in the UK and 2040 in the US, the literary agency AM Heath had the phrase \"Big Brother is watching you\" trademarked to ensure that the Orwell Estate maintains control of merchandise.\nThe phrase \"Big Brother is watching you\" features in the design of a commemorative \u00a32 coin produced by the Royal Mint in 2025 to mark 75 years since Orwell's death.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4265", "revid": "5787719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4265", "title": "Bodes law", "text": ""}
{"id": "4266", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4266", "title": "Binary search", "text": "Search algorithm finding the position of a target value within a sorted array\nIn computer science, binary search, also known as half-interval search, logarithmic search, or binary chop, is a search algorithm that finds the position of a target value within a sorted array. Binary search compares the target value to the middle element of the array. If they are not equal, the half in which the target cannot lie is eliminated and the search continues on the remaining half, again taking the middle element to compare to the target value, and repeating this until the target value is found. If the search ends with the remaining half being empty, the target is not in the array.\nBinary search runs in logarithmic time in the worst case, making formula_1 comparisons, where formula_2 is the number of elements in the array. Binary search is faster than linear search except for small arrays. However, the array must be sorted first to be able to apply binary search. There are specialized data structures designed for fast searching, such as hash tables, that can be searched more efficiently than binary search. However, binary search can be used to solve a wider range of problems, such as finding the next-smallest or next-largest element in the array relative to the target even if it is absent from the array.\nThere are numerous variations of binary search. In particular, fractional cascading speeds up binary searches for the same value in multiple arrays. Fractional cascading efficiently solves a number of search problems in computational geometry and in numerous other fields. Exponential search extends binary search to unbounded lists. The binary search tree and B-tree data structures are based on binary search.\nAlgorithm.\nBinary search works on sorted arrays. Binary search begins by comparing an element in the middle of the array with the target value. If the target value matches the element, its position in the array is returned. If the target value is less than the element, the search continues in the lower half of the array. If the target value is greater than the element, the search continues in the upper half of the array. By doing this, the algorithm eliminates the half in which the target value cannot lie in each iteration.\nProcedure.\nGiven an array formula_3 of formula_2 elements with values or records formula_5sorted such that formula_6, and target value formula_7, the following subroutine uses binary search to find the index of formula_7 in formula_3.\nThis iterative procedure keeps track of the search boundaries with the two variables formula_10 and formula_12. The procedure may be expressed in pseudocode as follows, where the variable names and types remain the same as above, codice_1 is the floor function, and codice_2 refers to a specific value that conveys the failure of the search.\n function binary_search(A, n, T) is\n L := 0\n R := n \u2212 1\n while L \u2264 R do\n m := L + floor((R - L) / 2)\n if A[m] &lt; T then\n L := m + 1\n else if A[m] &gt; T then\n R := m \u2212 1\n else:\n return m\n return unsuccessful\nAlternatively, the algorithm may take the ceiling of formula_17. This may change the result if the target value appears more than once in the array.\nAlternative procedure.\nIn the above procedure, the algorithm checks whether the middle element (formula_15) is equal to the target (formula_7) in every iteration. Some implementations leave out this check during each iteration. The algorithm would perform this check only when one element is left (when formula_32). This results in a faster comparison loop, as one comparison is eliminated per iteration, while it requires only one more iteration on average.\nHermann Bottenbruch published the first implementation to leave out this check in 1962.\nWhere codice_3 is the ceiling function, the pseudocode for this version is:\n function binary_search_alternative(A, n, T) is\n L := 0\n R := n \u2212 1\n while L != R do\n m := L + ceil((R - L) / 2)\n if A[m] &gt; T then\n R := m \u2212 1\n else:\n L := m\n if A[L] = T then\n return L\n return unsuccessful\nDuplicate elements.\nThe procedure may return any index whose element is equal to the target value, even if there are duplicate elements in the array. For example, if the array to be searched was formula_51 and the target was formula_52, then it would be correct for the algorithm to either return the 4th (index 3) or 5th (index 4) element. The regular procedure would return the 4th element (index 3) in this case. It does not always return the first duplicate (consider formula_53 which still returns the 4th element). However, it is sometimes necessary to find the leftmost element or the rightmost element for a target value that is duplicated in the array. In the above example, the 4th element is the leftmost element of the value 4, while the 5th element is the rightmost element of the value 4. The alternative procedure above will always return the index of the rightmost element if such an element exists.\nProcedure for finding the leftmost element.\nTo find the leftmost element, the following procedure can be used:\nIf formula_70 and formula_71, then formula_72 is the leftmost element that equals formula_7. Even if formula_7 is not in the array, formula_10 is the rank of formula_7 in the array, or the number of elements in the array that are less than formula_7.\nWhere codice_1 is the floor function, the pseudocode for this version is:\n function binary_search_leftmost(A, n, T):\n L := 0\n R := n\n while L &lt; R:\n m := L + floor((R - L) / 2)\n if A[m] &lt; T:\n L := m + 1\n else:\n R := m\n return L\nProcedure for finding the rightmost element.\nTo find the rightmost element, the following procedure can be used:\nIf formula_94 and formula_95, then formula_96 is the rightmost element that equals formula_7. Even if \"formula_7\" is not in the array, formula_99 is the number of elements in the array that are greater than \"formula_7\".\nWhere codice_1 is the floor function, the pseudocode for this version is:\n function binary_search_rightmost(A, n, T):\n L := 0\n R := n\n while L &lt; R:\n m := L + floor((R - L) / 2)\n if A[m] &gt; T:\n R := m\n else:\n L := m + 1\n return R - 1\nApproximate matches.\nThe above procedure only performs \"exact\" matches, finding the position of a target value. However, it is trivial to extend binary search to perform approximate matches because binary search operates on sorted arrays. For example, binary search can be used to compute, for a given value, its rank (the number of smaller elements), predecessor (next-smallest element), successor (next-largest element), and nearest neighbor. Range queries seeking the number of elements between two values can be performed with two rank queries.\nPerformance.\nIn terms of the number of comparisons, the performance of binary search can be analyzed by viewing the run of the procedure on a binary tree. The root node of the tree is the middle element of the array. The middle element of the lower half is the left child node of the root, and the middle element of the upper half is the right child node of the root. The rest of the tree is built in a similar fashion. Starting from the root node, the left or right subtrees are traversed depending on whether the target value is less or more than the node under consideration.\nIn the worst case, binary search makes formula_105 iterations of the comparison loop, where the formula_106 notation denotes the floor function that yields the greatest integer less than or equal to the argument, and formula_107 is the binary logarithm. This is because the worst case is reached when the search reaches the deepest level of the tree, and there are always formula_105 levels in the tree for any binary search.\nThe worst case may also be reached when the target element is not in the array. If formula_109 is one less than a power of two, then this is always the case. Otherwise, the search may perform formula_105iterations if the search reaches the deepest level of the tree. However, it may make formula_111 iterations, which is one less than the worst case, if the search ends at the second-deepest level of the tree.\nOn average, assuming that each element is equally likely to be searched, binary search makes formula_112 iterations when the target element is in the array. This is approximately equal to formula_113 iterations. When the target element is not in the array, binary search makes formula_114 iterations on average, assuming that the range between and outside elements is equally likely to be searched.\nIn the best case, where the target value is the middle element of the array, its position is returned after one iteration.\nIn terms of iterations, no search algorithm that works only by comparing elements can exhibit better average and worst-case performance than binary search. The comparison tree representing binary search has the fewest levels possible as every level above the lowest level of the tree is filled completely. Otherwise, the search algorithm can eliminate few elements in an iteration, increasing the number of iterations required in the average and worst case. This is the case for other search algorithms based on comparisons, as while they may work faster on some target values, the average performance over \"all\" elements is worse than binary search. By dividing the array in half, binary search ensures that the size of both subarrays are as similar as possible.\nSpace complexity.\nBinary search requires three pointers to elements, which may be array indices or pointers to memory locations, regardless of the size of the array. Therefore, the space complexity of binary search is formula_115 in the word RAM model of computation.\nDerivation of average case.\nThe average number of iterations performed by binary search depends on the probability of each element being searched. The average case is different for successful searches and unsuccessful searches. It will be assumed that each element is equally likely to be searched for successful searches. For unsuccessful searches, it will be assumed that the intervals between and outside elements are equally likely to be searched. The average case for successful searches is the number of iterations required to search every element exactly once, divided by formula_2, the number of elements. The average case for unsuccessful searches is the number of iterations required to search an element within every interval exactly once, divided by the formula_117 intervals.\nSuccessful searches.\nIn the binary tree representation, a successful search can be represented by a path from the root to the target node, called an \"internal path\". The length of a path is the number of edges (connections between nodes) that the path passes through. The number of iterations performed by a search, given that the corresponding path has length l, is formula_118 counting the initial iteration. The \"internal path length\" is the sum of the lengths of all unique internal paths. Since there is only one path from the root to any single node, each internal path represents a search for a specific element. If there are n elements, which is a positive integer, and the internal path length is formula_119, then the average number of iterations for a successful search formula_120, with the one iteration added to count the initial iteration.\nSince binary search is the optimal algorithm for searching with comparisons, this problem is reduced to calculating the minimum internal path length of all binary trees with n nodes, which is equal to:\nformula_121\nFor example, in a 7-element array, the root requires one iteration, the two elements below the root require two iterations, and the four elements below require three iterations. In this case, the internal path length is:\nformula_122\nThe average number of iterations would be formula_123 based on the equation for the average case. The sum for formula_119 can be simplified to:\nformula_125\nSubstituting the equation for formula_119 into the equation for formula_127:\nformula_128\nFor integer n, this is equivalent to the equation for the average case on a successful search specified above.\nUnsuccessful searches.\nUnsuccessful searches can be represented by augmenting the tree with \"external nodes\", which forms an \"extended binary tree\". If an internal node, or a node present in the tree, has fewer than two child nodes, then additional child nodes, called external nodes, are added so that each internal node has two children. By doing so, an unsuccessful search can be represented as a path to an external node, whose parent is the single element that remains during the last iteration. An \"external path\" is a path from the root to an external node. The \"external path length\" is the sum of the lengths of all unique external paths. If there are formula_2 elements, which is a positive integer, and the external path length is formula_130, then the average number of iterations for an unsuccessful search formula_131, with the one iteration added to count the initial iteration. The external path length is divided by formula_132 instead of formula_2 because there are formula_132 external paths, representing the intervals between and outside the elements of the array.\nThis problem can similarly be reduced to determining the minimum external path length of all binary trees with formula_2 nodes. For all binary trees, the external path length is equal to the internal path length plus formula_136. Substituting the equation for formula_119:\nformula_138\nSubstituting the equation for formula_130 into the equation for formula_140, the average case for unsuccessful searches can be determined:\nformula_141\nPerformance of alternative procedure.\nEach iteration of the binary search procedure defined above makes one or two comparisons, checking if the middle element is equal to the target in each iteration. Assuming that each element is equally likely to be searched, each iteration makes 1.5 comparisons on average. A variation of the algorithm checks whether the middle element is equal to the target at the end of the search. On average, this eliminates half a comparison from each iteration. This slightly cuts the time taken per iteration on most computers. However, it guarantees that the search takes the maximum number of iterations, on average adding one iteration to the search. Because the comparison loop is performed only formula_105 times in the worst case, the slight increase in efficiency per iteration does not compensate for the extra iteration for all but very large formula_109.\nAdditional considerations.\nCost of comparison.\nIn analyzing the performance of binary search, another consideration is the time required to compare two elements. For integers and strings, the time required increases linearly as the encoding length (usually the number of bits) of the elements increase. For example, comparing a pair of 64-bit unsigned integers would require comparing up to double the bits as comparing a pair of 32-bit unsigned integers. The worst case is achieved when the integers are equal. This can be significant when the encoding lengths of the elements are large, such as with large integer types or long strings, which makes comparing elements expensive. Furthermore, comparing floating-point values (the most common digital representation of real numbers) is often more expensive than comparing integers or short strings.\nFast floating point comparison is possible via comparing as an integer. However, this kind of comparison forms a total order, which makes \"every\" floating-point value compare differently from each other and the same as itself. This is different from the typical comparison where -0.0 should be the same as 0.0 and NaN should not compare the same as any other value including itself.\nBranch prediction.\nAccording to Steel Bank Common Lisp contributor Paul Khuong, binary search leads to very few branch mispredictions despite its data-dependent nature. This is in part because most of it can be expressed as conditional moves instead of branches. The same applies to most logarithmic divide-and-conquer search algorithms.\nCache usage.\nOn most computer architectures, the processor has a hardware cache separate from RAM. Since they are located within the processor itself, caches are much faster to access but usually store much less data than RAM. Therefore, most processors store memory locations that have been accessed recently, along with memory locations close to it. For example, when an array element is accessed, the element itself may be stored along with the elements that are stored close to it in RAM, making it faster to sequentially access array elements that are close in index to each other (locality of reference). On a sorted array, binary search can jump to distant memory locations if the array is large, unlike algorithms (such as linear search and linear probing in hash tables) which access elements in sequence. This adds slightly to the running time of binary search for large arrays on most systems.\nPaul Khuong has noted that binary search on large (\u2265\u00a0512\u00a0KiB) arrays of exactly a power-of-two size tends to cause an additional problem with how CPU caches are implemented. Specifically, the translation lookaside buffer (TLB) is often implemented as a content-addressable memory (CAM), with the \"key\" usually being the lower bits of a requested address. When searching on an array of exactly a power-of-two size, memory address with the same lower bits tend to be accessed, causing collisions (\"aliasing\") with the \"key\" used to fetch the CAM. The typical TLB is 4-way associative, meaning it can handle at most four addresses hitting the same \"key\", after which TLB thrashing happens. (Although the other levels of CPU caches also use a similar setup, they manage smaller areas with a higher way count, usually 8 or 16, so they are less affected.) This can be prevented by offsetting the split point of the binary search so it divides at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;31\u204464 instead of exactly the middle.\nBinary search versus other schemes.\nSorted arrays with binary search are a very inefficient solution when insertion and deletion operations are interleaved with retrieval, taking formula_144 time for each such operation. In addition, sorted arrays can complicate memory use especially when elements are often inserted into the array. There are other data structures that support much more efficient insertion and deletion. Binary search can be used to perform exact matching and set membership (determining whether a target value is in a collection of values). There are data structures that support faster exact matching and set membership. However, unlike many other searching schemes, binary search can be used for efficient approximate matching, usually performing such matches in formula_145 time regardless of the type or structure of the values themselves. In addition, there are some operations, like finding the smallest and largest element, that can be performed efficiently on a sorted array.\nLinear search.\nLinear search is a simple search algorithm that checks every record until it finds the target value. Linear search can be done on a linked list, which allows for faster insertion and deletion than an array. Binary search is faster than linear search for sorted arrays except if the array is short, although the array needs to be sorted beforehand. All sorting algorithms based on comparing elements, such as quicksort and merge sort, require at least formula_146 comparisons in the worst case. Unlike linear search, binary search can be used for efficient approximate matching. There are operations such as finding the smallest and largest element that can be done efficiently on a sorted array but not on an unsorted array.\nTrees.\nA binary search tree is a binary tree data structure that works based on the principle of binary search. The records of the tree are arranged in sorted order, and each record in the tree can be searched using an algorithm similar to binary search, taking on average logarithmic time. Insertion and deletion also require on average logarithmic time in binary search trees. This can be faster than the linear time insertion and deletion of sorted arrays, and binary trees retain the ability to perform all the operations possible on a sorted array, including range and approximate queries.\nHowever, binary search is usually more efficient for searching as binary search trees will most likely be imperfectly balanced, resulting in slightly worse performance than binary search. This even applies to balanced binary search trees, binary search trees that balance their own nodes, because they rarely produce the tree with the fewest possible levels. Except for balanced binary search trees, the tree may be severely imbalanced with few internal nodes with two children, resulting in the average and worst-case search time approaching formula_109 comparisons. Binary search trees take more space than sorted arrays.\nBinary search trees lend themselves to fast searching in external memory stored in hard disks, as binary search trees can be efficiently structured in filesystems. The B-tree generalizes this method of tree organization. B-trees are frequently used to organize long-term storage such as databases and filesystems.\nHashing.\nFor implementing associative arrays, hash tables, a data structure that maps keys to records using a hash function, are generally faster than binary search on a sorted array of records. Most hash table implementations require only amortized constant time on average. However, hashing is not useful for approximate matches, such as computing the next-smallest, next-largest, and nearest key, as the only information given on a failed search is that the target is not present in any record. Binary search is ideal for such matches, performing them in logarithmic time. Binary search also supports approximate matches. Some operations, like finding the smallest and largest element, can be done efficiently on sorted arrays but not on hash tables.\nSet membership algorithms.\nA related problem to search is set membership. Any algorithm that does lookup, like binary search, can also be used for set membership. There are other algorithms that are more specifically suited for set membership. A bit array is the simplest, useful when the range of keys is limited. It compactly stores a collection of bits, with each bit representing a single key within the range of keys. Bit arrays are very fast, requiring only formula_148 time. The Judy1 type of Judy array handles 64-bit keys efficiently.\nFor approximate results, Bloom filters, another probabilistic data structure based on hashing, store a set of keys by encoding the keys using a bit array and multiple hash functions. Bloom filters are much more space-efficient than bit arrays in most cases and not much slower: with formula_149 hash functions, membership queries require only formula_150 time. However, Bloom filters suffer from false positives.\nOther data structures.\nThere exist data structures that may improve on binary search in some cases for both searching and other operations available for sorted arrays. For example, searches, approximate matches, and the operations available to sorted arrays can be performed more efficiently than binary search on specialized data structures such as van Emde Boas trees, fusion trees, tries, and bit arrays. These specialized data structures are usually only faster because they take advantage of the properties of keys with a certain attribute (usually keys that are small integers), and thus will be time or space consuming for keys that lack that attribute. As long as the keys can be ordered, these operations can always be done at least efficiently on a sorted array regardless of the keys. Some structures, such as Judy arrays, use a combination of approaches to mitigate this while retaining efficiency and the ability to perform approximate matching.\nVariations.\nUniform binary search.\nUniform binary search stores, instead of the lower and upper bounds, the difference in the index of the middle element from the current iteration to the next iteration. A lookup table containing the differences is computed beforehand. For example, if the array to be searched is [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11], the middle element (formula_15) would be 6. In this case, the middle element of the left subarray ([1, 2, 3, 4, 5]) is 3 and the middle element of the right subarray ([7, 8, 9, 10, 11]) is 9. Uniform binary search would store the value of 3 as both indices differ from 6 by this same amount. To reduce the search space, the algorithm either adds or subtracts this change from the index of the middle element. Uniform binary search may be faster on systems where it is inefficient to calculate the midpoint, such as on decimal computers.\nExponential search.\nExponential search extends binary search to unbounded lists. It starts by finding the first element with an index that is both a power of two and greater than the target value. Afterwards, it sets that index as the upper bound, and switches to binary search. A search takes formula_152 iterations before binary search is started and at most formula_153 iterations of the binary search, where formula_154 is the position of the target value. Exponential search works on bounded lists, but becomes an improvement over binary search only if the target value lies near the beginning of the array.\nInterpolation search.\nInstead of calculating the midpoint, interpolation search estimates the position of the target value, taking into account the lowest and highest elements in the array as well as length of the array. It works on the basis that the midpoint is not the best guess in many cases. For example, if the target value is close to the highest element in the array, it is likely to be located near the end of the array.\nA common interpolation function is linear interpolation. If formula_3 is the array, formula_156 are the lower and upper bounds respectively, and formula_7 is the target, then the target is estimated to be about formula_158 of the way between formula_10 and formula_12. When linear interpolation is used, and the distribution of the array elements is uniform or near uniform, interpolation search makes formula_161 comparisons.\nIn practice, interpolation search is slower than binary search for small arrays, as interpolation search requires extra computation. Its time complexity grows more slowly than binary search, but this only compensates for the extra computation for large arrays.\nFractional cascading.\nFractional cascading is a technique that speeds up binary searches for the same element in multiple sorted arrays. Searching each array separately requires formula_162 time, where formula_149 is the number of arrays. Fractional cascading reduces this to formula_164 by storing specific information in each array about each element and its position in the other arrays.\nFractional cascading was originally developed to efficiently solve various computational geometry problems. Fractional cascading has been applied elsewhere, such as in data mining and Internet Protocol routing.\nGeneralization to graphs.\nBinary search has been generalized to work on certain types of graphs, where the target value is stored in a vertex instead of an array element. Binary search trees are one such generalization\u2014when a vertex (node) in the tree is queried, the algorithm either learns that the vertex is the target, or otherwise which subtree the target would be located in. However, this can be further generalized as follows: given an undirected, positively weighted graph and a target vertex, the algorithm learns upon querying a vertex that it is equal to the target, or it is given an incident edge that is on the shortest path from the queried vertex to the target. The standard binary search algorithm is simply the case where the graph is a path. Similarly, binary search trees are the case where the edges to the left or right subtrees are given when the queried vertex is unequal to the target. For all undirected, positively weighted graphs, there is an algorithm that finds the target vertex in formula_1 queries in the worst case.\nNoisy binary search.\nNoisy binary search algorithms solve the case where the algorithm cannot reliably compare elements of the array. For each pair of elements, there is a certain probability that the algorithm makes the wrong comparison. Noisy binary search can find the correct position of the target with a given probability that controls the reliability of the yielded position. Every noisy binary search procedure must make at least formula_166 comparisons on average, where formula_167 is the binary entropy function and formula_168 is the probability that the procedure yields the wrong position. The noisy binary search problem can be considered as a case of the R\u00e9nyi-Ulam game, a variant of Twenty Questions where the answers may be wrong.\nQuantum binary search.\nClassical computers are bounded to the worst case of exactly formula_169 iterations when performing binary search. Quantum algorithms for binary search are still bounded to a proportion of formula_170 queries (representing iterations of the classical procedure), but the constant factor is less than one, providing for a lower time complexity on quantum computers. Any \"exact\" quantum binary search procedure\u2014that is, a procedure that always yields the correct result\u2014requires at least formula_171 queries in the worst case, where formula_172 is the natural logarithm. There is an exact quantum binary search procedure that runs in formula_173 queries in the worst case. In comparison, Grover's algorithm is the optimal quantum algorithm for searching an unordered list of elements, and it requires formula_174 queries.\nHistory.\nThe idea of sorting a list of items to allow for faster searching dates back to antiquity. The earliest known example was the Inakibit-Anu tablet from Babylon dating back to c.\u2009200 BCE. The tablet contained about 500 sexagesimal numbers and their reciprocals sorted in lexicographical order, which made searching for a specific entry easier. In addition, several lists of names that were sorted by their first letter were discovered on the Aegean Islands. \"Catholicon\", a Latin dictionary finished in 1286 CE, was the first work to describe rules for sorting words into alphabetical order, as opposed to just the first few letters.\nIn 1946, John Mauchly made the first mention of binary search as part of the Moore School Lectures, a seminal and foundational college course in computing. In 1957, William Wesley Peterson published the first method for interpolation search. Every published binary search algorithm worked only for arrays whose length is one less than a power of two until 1960, when Derrick Henry Lehmer published a binary search algorithm that worked on all arrays. In 1962, Hermann Bottenbruch presented an ALGOL 60 implementation of binary search that placed the comparison for equality at the end, increasing the average number of iterations by one, but reducing to one the number of comparisons per iteration. The uniform binary search was developed by A. K. Chandra of Stanford University in 1971. In 1986, Bernard Chazelle and Leonidas J. Guibas introduced fractional cascading as a method to solve numerous search problems in computational geometry.\nImplementation issues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although the basic idea of binary search is comparatively straightforward, the details can be surprisingly tricky\u2014\u200a\nWhen Jon Bentley assigned binary search as a problem in a course for professional programmers, he found that ninety percent failed to provide a correct solution after several hours of working on it, mainly because the incorrect implementations failed to run or returned a wrong answer in rare edge cases. A study published in 1988 shows that accurate code for it is only found in five out of twenty textbooks. Furthermore, Bentley's own implementation of binary search, published in his 1986 book \"Programming Pearls\", contained an overflow error that remained undetected for over twenty years. The Java programming language library implementation of binary search had the same overflow bug for more than nine years.\nIn a practical implementation, the variables used to represent the indices will often be of fixed size (integers), and this can result in an arithmetic overflow for very large arrays. If the midpoint of the span is calculated as formula_175, then the value of formula_176 may exceed the range of integers of the data type used to store the midpoint, even if formula_10 and formula_12 are within the range. If \"formula_10\" and \"formula_12\" are nonnegative, this can be avoided by calculating the midpoint as formula_181.\nAn infinite loop may occur if the exit conditions for the loop are not defined correctly. Once \"formula_10\" exceeds \"formula_12\", the search has failed and must convey the failure of the search. In addition, the loop must be exited when the target element is found, or in the case of an implementation where this check is moved to the end, checks for whether the search was successful or failed at the end must be in place. Bentley found that most of the programmers who incorrectly implemented binary search made an error in defining the exit conditions.\nLibrary support.\nMany languages' standard libraries include binary search routines:\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4267", "revid": "51029335", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4267", "title": "Belle and Sebastian", "text": "Scottish indie pop band\nBelle and Sebastian is a Scottish indie pop band formed in Glasgow in 1994. Led by Stuart Murdoch, Belle and Sebastian has released twelve studio albums. The band is often compared with acts such as the Smiths and Nick Drake. Belle and Sebastian took its name from a short story Murdoch had written about a boy and girl, whose title was a play on the 1965 television series \"Belle and Sebastian\".\nHistory.\nFormation, early years and \"Tigermilk\" (1994\u20131996).\nIn 1994, Stuart Murdoch and Stuart David both enrolled at Stow College's Beatbox programme for unemployed musicians in Glasgow. Together, with music professor Alan Rankine (formerly of the Associates), they recorded some demos, which in 1996 were picked up by the college's Music Business course that produces and releases one single each year on the college's label, Electric Honey. As Murdoch had a number of songs already and the label was extremely impressed with the demos, he was granted permission to record a full-length album, which was recorded mostly live over three days, entitled \"Tigermilk\".\nMurdoch and David recruited local musicians Stevie Jackson (guitar and vocals), Isobel Campbell (cello/vocals), Chris Geddes (keys) and Richard Colburn (drums), the latter of whom shared a flat with David and was a student on the Music Business course, to perform on the album, with Murdoch describing the process as a \"product of botched capitalism\". The band chose the name Belle and Sebastian from a short story Murdoch had written inspired by the television series of the same name, about a six-year-old boy and his dog, named Belle, a Pyrenean Mountain Dog. In June 1996, Electric Honey pressed up one thousand copies of \"Tigermilk\" on vinyl.\n\"If You're Feeling Sinister\" and early EPs (1996\u20131998).\nThe warm response \"Tigermilk\" received led to the band being signed to Jeepster Records in August 1996, who released their second album \"If You're Feeling Sinister\" on 18 November. The album was named by \"Spin\" as one of the 100 greatest albums between 1985 and 2005, and it is widely considered the band's masterpiece. Just before the recording of \"Sinister\", Sarah Martin (violin/vocals) joined the band.\nFollowing this a series of EPs were released throughout 1997. The first of these was \"Dog on Wheels\", released in May and consisting of four demo tracks recorded prior to the real formation of the band. In fact, the only long-term band members to play on the songs were Murdoch, David, and Mick Cooke, who played trumpet on the EP but would not officially join the band until a few years later. It charted at No.\u00a059 in the UK singles chart. The \"Lazy Line Painter Jane\" EP followed in July. The track was recorded in the church where Murdoch lived and features vocals from Monica Queen. The EP narrowly missed out on the UK top 40, peaking at No.\u00a041. The last of the EPs was October's \"3.. 6.. 9 Seconds of Light\". The EP was made Single of the Week in both the \"NME\" and \"Melody Maker\" and reached No.\u00a032 in the charts, thus becoming the band's first top 40 single.\nDespite the band's growing popularity, during this period they kept a low profile at the insistence of Murdoch, who was still regaining his strength following years struggling with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). The band played gigs sporadically, rarely gave interviews, and refused to appear in publicity photographs, often getting friends and acquaintances to pose instead. The relative reclusiveness helped to create an aura of mystique around them.\n\"The Boy with the Arab Strap\", \"Fold Your Hands Child, You Walk Like a Peasant\" and Line-up Changes (1998\u20132003).\nThe band released their third LP, \"The Boy with the Arab Strap\" in 1998, and it reached No.\u00a012 in the UK charts. \"Arab Strap\" garnered an NPR interview and positive reviews from \"Rolling Stone\" and \"The Village Voice,\" and others; however, the album has its detractors, including \"Pitchfork\", who gave the album a particularly poor review, calling it a \"parody\" of their earlier work (Pitchfork has since removed the review from their website and re-reviewed the album positively in 2018). During the recording of the album, long-time studio trumpet-player Mick Cooke was asked to join the band as a full member. The \"This Is Just a Modern Rock Song\" EP followed later that year.\nIn 1999, the band was awarded with Best Newcomer (for their third album) at the BRIT Awards, upsetting better-known acts such as Steps and 5ive. That same year, the band hosted their own festival, the Bowlie Weekender. \"Tigermilk\" was also given a full release by Jeepster before the band started work on their next LP. The result was \"Fold Your Hands Child, You Walk Like a Peasant\", which became the band's first top 10 album in the UK, though critics felt that the band were starting to stagnate. A stand-alone single, \"Legal Man\", reached No.\u00a015 and gave them their first appearance on Top of the Pops.\nAs the band's popularity and recognition was growing worldwide, their music began appearing in films and on television. The 2000 film \"High Fidelity\" mentions the band (with Jack Black's character referring to them as \"old sad bastard music\" and disdaining their soft style) and features a clip from the song \"Seymour Stein\" from \"The Boy with the Arab Strap\". Two songs by the band (\"Expectations\" and \"Piazza, New York Catcher\") appeared on the soundtrack for the 2007 hit film \"Juno.\" Also, the title track from \"Arab Strap\" was played over the end credits of the UK television series \"Teachers,\" and the lyric \"Colour my life with the chaos of trouble\" from the song was quoted by one of the characters in the 2009 film \"(500) Days of Summer\".\nStuart David soon left the band to concentrate on his side project, Looper, and his book writing, which included his \"The Idle Thoughts of a Daydreamer\". He was replaced by Bobby Kildea of V-Twin. The \"Jonathan David\" single, sung by Stevie Jackson, was released in June 2001 and was followed by \"I'm Waking Up to Us\" in November, which saw the band use an outside producer (Mike Hurst) for the first time. Most of 2002 was spent touring and recording a soundtrack album, \"Storytelling\" (for \"Storytelling\" by Todd Solondz). Campbell left the band in the spring of 2002, in the middle of the band's North American tour to pursue a solo career, first as The Gentle Waves, and later under her own name. She later collaborated with singer Mark Lanegan on three albums.\n\"Dear Catastrophe Waitress\", \"The Life Pursuit\" and hiatus (2003\u20132010).\nThe band left Jeepster in 2002, signing a four-album deal with Rough Trade Records. Their first album for Rough Trade, \"Dear Catastrophe Waitress\", was released in 2003 and was produced by Trevor Horn. The album showed a markedly more \"produced\" sound compared to their first four LPs, as the band was making a concerted effort to produce more \"radio-friendly\" music. At this point, the band began to engage more with the press and started appearing in publicity shots. The album was warmly received and is credited with restoring the band's \"indie cred\". The album also marked the return of Murdoch as the group's primary songwriter, following the poorly received \"Fold Your Hands Child, You Walk Like a Peasant\" and \"Storytelling\", both of which were more collaborative than the band's early work. A documentary DVD, \"Fans Only\", was released by Jeepster in October 2003, featuring promotional videos, live clips and unreleased footage. A single from the album, \"Step into My Office, Baby\" followed in November 2003; it would be their first single to be taken from an album, and included a track recorded with Divine Comedy producer Darren Allison entitled \"Love on the March\".\nThe Thin Lizzy-inspired \"I'm a Cuckoo\" was the second single from the album. It achieved their highest chart position yet, reaching No.\u00a014 in the UK. The \"Books\" EP followed, a double A-side single led by \"Wrapped Up in Books\" from \"Dear Catastrophe Waitress\" and the new \"Your Cover's Blown\". This EP became the band's third top 20 UK release, and the band was nominated for both the Mercury Music Prize and an Ivor Novello Award. In January 2005, B&amp;S was voted Scotland's greatest band in a poll by \"The List\", beating Simple Minds, Idlewild, Travis, Franz Ferdinand, and the Proclaimers, among others.\nIn April 2005, members of the band visited Israel and the Palestinian territories with the UK charity War on Want; the group subsequently recorded a song inspired by the trip titled \"The Eighth Station of the Cross Kebab House\", which would first appear on the digital-download version of the charity album \"\" and would later have a physical release as a B-side on 2006's \"Funny Little Frog\" single. \"Push Barman to Open Old Wounds\", a compilation of the Jeepster singles and EPs, was released in May 2005 while the band were recording their seventh album in California. The result of the sessions was \"The Life Pursuit\", produced by Tony Hoffer. The album, originally intended to be a double album, became the band's highest-charting album upon its release in February 2006, peaking at No.\u00a08 in the UK and No.\u00a065 on the US \"Billboard\" 200. \"Funny Little Frog\", which preceded it, also proved to be their highest-charting single, debuting at No.\u00a013.\nOn 6 July 2006, the band played a historic show with the Los Angeles Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl. The opening act at the 18,000 seat sell-out concert was the Shins. The members of the band see this as a landmark event, with Stevie Jackson saying, \"This is the biggest thrill of my entire life\". In October 2006, members of the band helped put together a CD collection of new songs for children titled \"Colours Are Brighter\", with the involvement of major bands such as Franz Ferdinand and the Flaming Lips.\nOn 18 November 2008 the band released \"The BBC Sessions\", which features songs from the period of 1996\u20132001 (including the last recordings featuring Isobel Campbell before she left the band), along with a second disc featuring a recording of a live performance in Belfast from Christmas 2001.\n\"Write About Love\" and \"Girls In Peacetime Want to Dance\" (2010\u20132016).\nOn 17 July 2010, the band performed their first UK gig in almost four years to a crowd of around 30,000 at Latitude Festival in Henham Park, Southwold. They performed two new songs, \"I Didn't See It Coming\" and \"I'm Not Living in the Real World\".\nTheir eighth studio album, released in the UK and internationally on 25 September 2010, was titled \"Write about Love\". The first single from the album, as well as the record's title track \"Write about Love\", was released in the US on 7 September 2010. \"Write about Love\" entered the UK albums chart in its first week of release, peaking at No.\u00a08 as of 19 October 2010. Norah Jones is featured on the track \"Little Lou, Ugly Jack, Prophet John\", and Carey Mulligan sings on the title track.\nIn December 2010 Belle and Sebastian curated the sequel to the \"Bowlie Weekender\" in the form of \"Bowlie 2\" presented by All Tomorrow's Parties.\nIn 2013, Pitchfork TV released an hour-long documentary in February, directed by RJ Bentler which focused on the band's 1996 album \"If You're Feeling Sinister\", as well as the formation and early releases of the band. The documentary featured interviews with every member that was present on the album, as well as several archival photos and videos from the band's early days. The band compiled a second compilation album \"The Third Eye Centre\" which included the B-sides and rarities released after \"Push Barman to Open Old Wounds\", from the albums \"Dear Catastrophe Waitress\", \"The Life Pursuit\", and \"Write about Love\". In an interview at the end of 2013, Mick Cooke confirmed he had left the band on good terms.\nThe band received an 'Outstanding Contribution to Music Award' at the NME Awards 2014.\nIn 2014, the band returned to the studio, recording in Atlanta, Georgia for their ninth studio album, along with announcing tour dates for various festivals and concerts across the world during 2014. Their ninth album \"Girls in Peacetime Want to Dance\" was released on 19 January 2015. It was their first album with Dave McGowan, who had been their touring bassist since 2011.\nThe Belle and Sebastian song \"There's Too Much Love\" forms much of the soundtrack for the Brazilian film \"The Way He Looks\", about a blind, gay teenage boy and his friends, released in 2014.\nBelle and Sebastian performed at the Glastonbury Festival on 28 June 2015, on 'The Other Stage' and at O2 Academy, Glasgow in March 2017 which was televised in the UK as part of the 'BBC 6 MUSIC Presents Festival'.\n\"How to Solve Our Human Problems\", \"A Bit of Previous\" and \"Late Developers\" (2017\u2013present).\nIn mid-2017, the band put out a new single, \"We Were Beautiful\". During the same year, the band appeared in the news for a comical story that occurred during their US tour, in which they accidentally forgot Colburn in a North Dakota Walmart. In December 2017 and January and February 2018, the band released a trio of EPs under the name \"How to Solve Our Human Problems\".\nOn 3 November 2018, the band announced that Dave McGowan had become a member.\nIn August 2019, to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the first Bowlie Weekender festival, Belle &amp; Sebastian held a third festival, dubbed the \"Boaty Weekender\". Unlike the previous two festivals, the Boaty Weekender was held on a cruise ship in the Mediterranean Sea instead of UK holiday parks.\nThe band's eleventh studio album, \"A Bit of Previous\", was released in May 2022.\nIn January 2023, the band announced the surprise release of their twelfth studio album, \"Late Developers\". Lead single \"I Don't Know What You See in Me\" was released on 9 January 2023 with the album released on 13 January 2023.\nBand members.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nTimeline\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4268", "revid": "48281269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4268", "title": "Boston Globe", "text": ""}
{"id": "4272", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4272", "title": "Baltic Sea/Elblag", "text": ""}
{"id": "4273", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4273", "title": "Baltic Sea/Truso", "text": ""}
{"id": "4275", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4275", "title": "Baltic Sea/Gdanzk", "text": ""}
{"id": "4276", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4276", "title": "Baltic Sea/Odra", "text": ""}
{"id": "4279", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4279", "title": "Broadcast domain", "text": "Section of a computer network in which all nodes can broadcast to each other\nA broadcast domain is a logical division of a computer network, in which all nodes can reach each other by broadcast at the data link layer. A broadcast domain can be within the same LAN segment or it can be bridged to other LAN segments.\nIn terms of current popular technologies, any computer connected to the same Ethernet repeater or switch is a member of the same broadcast domain. Further, any computer connected to the same set of interconnected switches or repeaters is a member of the same broadcast domain. Routers and other network-layer devices form boundaries between broadcast domains.\nThe notion of a broadcast domain can be compared with a collision domain, which would be all nodes on the same set of inter-connected repeaters and divided by switches and network bridges. Collision domains are generally smaller than and contained within broadcast domains. While some data-link-layer devices are able to divide the collision domains, broadcast domains are only divided by network-layer devices such as routers or layer-3 switches. Separating VLANs divides broadcast domains as well.\nFurther explanation.\nThe distinction between broadcast and collision domains comes about because simple Ethernet and similar systems use a shared medium for communication. In simple Ethernet (without switches or bridges), data frames are transmitted to all other nodes on a network. Each receiving node checks the destination address of each frame and simply ignores any frame not addressed to its own MAC address or the broadcast address.\nSwitches act as buffers, receiving and analyzing the frames from each connected network segment. Frames destined for nodes connected to the originating segment are not forwarded by the switch. Frames destined for a specific node on a different segment are sent only to that segment. Only broadcast frames are forwarded to all other segments. This reduces unnecessary traffic and collisions.\nIn such a switched network, transmitted frames may not be received by all other reachable nodes. Nominally, only broadcast frames will be received by all other nodes. Collisions are localized to the physical-layer network segment they occur on. Thus, the broadcast domain is the entire inter-connected layer-2 network, and the segments connected to each switch or bridge port are each a collision domain. To clarify; repeaters do not divide collision domains but switches do. This means that since switches have become commonplace, collision domains are isolated to the specific segment between the switch port and the connected node. Full-duplex segments, or links, don't form a collision domain as there is a dedicated channel between each transmitter and receiver, eliminating the possibility of collisions.\nBroadcast domain control.\nWith a sufficiently sophisticated switch, it is possible to create a network in which a broadcast domain is strictly controlled. One implementation of this concept is a private VLAN. Another implementation is possible with Linux and iptables. One analogy is that by creating multiple VLANs, the number of broadcast domains increases, but the size of each broadcast domain decreases. This is because a VLAN defines a broadcast domain.\nThis is achieved by designating one or more \"provider\" nodes, either by MAC address or switch port. Broadcast frames are allowed to originate from these sources and are sent to all other nodes. Broadcast frames from all other sources are directed only to the provider nodes. Traffic from other sources not destined to the provider nodes (peer-to-peer traffic) is blocked.\nThe result is a network based on a nominally shared transmission system; like Ethernet, but in which client nodes cannot communicate with each other, only with the provider. Allowing direct data link layer communication between client nodes exposes the network to various security attacks, such as ARP spoofing."}
{"id": "4282", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4282", "title": "Beechcraft", "text": "Aircraft manufacturing subsidiary of Textron\nBeechcraft is an American brand of civil aviation and military aircraft owned by Textron Aviation since 2014, headquartered in Wichita, Kansas. Originally, it was a brand of Beech Aircraft Corporation, an American manufacturer of general aviation, commercial, and military aircraft, ranging from light single-engined aircraft to twin-engined turboprop transports, business jets, and military trainers. Beech later became a division of Raytheon and then Hawker Beechcraft before a bankruptcy sale turned its assets over to Textron (parent company of Beech's historical cross-town Wichita rival, Cessna Aircraft Company). It remains a brand of Textron Aviation.\nHistory.\nBeech Aircraft Company was founded in Wichita, Kansas, in 1932 by Walter Beech as president, his wife Olive Ann Beech as secretary, Ted A. Wells as vice president of engineering, K. K. Shaul as treasurer, and investor C. G. Yankey as vice president. The company began operations in an idle Cessna factory. With designer Ted Wells, they developed the first aircraft under the Beechcraft name, the Beechcraft Model 17 Staggerwing, which flew in November 1932. Over 750 Staggerwings were built, including 352 for the United States Army Air Forces and 67 for the United States Navy during World War II.\nBeechcraft was not Beech's first company, as he had previously helped form Travel Air in 1924 and the design sequence used at Beechcraft followed Travel Air's, which were continued at Curtiss-Wright, after Travel Air had been absorbed in 1929. Beech had become president of Curtiss-Wright's airplane division and VP of sales, but was dissatisfied with being distanced from aircraft production. He quit to form Beechcraft, using the original Travel Air facilities and employing many of the same people. Model numbers prior to 11/11000 were built under the \"Travel Air\" name, while Curtiss-Wright built the CW-12, 14, 15, and 16 as well as previous successful Travel Air models (mostly the model 4000/4).\nIn 1942 Beech won its first Army-Navy \"E\" Award production award and was among the five percent of war contracting firms to win five straight awards for production efficiency, mostly for the twin-engine Model 18 Expeditor transport which remains in widespread use worldwide.\nAfter the war, the Staggerwing was replaced by the single-engined Bonanza monoplane, which featured a distinctive V-tail which was later dispensed with. It has remained in production since 1947, and has had the longest production run of any airplane. Other important Beech aircraft are the King Air and Super King Air line of twin-engined turboprops, in production since 1964, the Baron, a twin-engined variant of the Bonanza, and the Model 18 Expeditor.\nIn 1950, Olive Ann Beech took over as president and CEO, after her husband's death from a heart attack on November 29 of that year and continued as CEO until Beech was sold to Raytheon Company on February 8, 1980. Ted Wells was replaced as chief engineer by Herbert Rawdon, who remained until his retirement in the early 1960s.\nIn 1973, Beechcraft found Beechcraft Heritage Museum to host its historical aircraft.\nIn 1994, Raytheon merged Beechcraft with the Hawker product line it had acquired in 1993 from British Aerospace, forming Raytheon Aircraft Company. In 2002, the Beechcraft brand was revived to again designate the Wichita-produced aircraft. In 2006, Raytheon sold Raytheon Aircraft to Goldman Sachs creating Hawker Beechcraft. Since its inception Beechcraft has resided in Wichita, Kansas, also the home of chief competitors Cessna, Stearman and Learjet. Throughout much of the mid-to-late 20th century, Beechcraft was one of the \"Big Three\" in the field of general aviation manufacturing, along with Cessna and Piper.\nThe bankruptcy of Hawker Beechcraft on May 3, 2012, ended with its emergence on February 16, 2013, as a new entity, Beechcraft Corporation, with the Hawker Beechcraft name being retired. The new and much smaller company produces the King Air line of aircraft, the T-6/AT-6 military trainer/attack aircraft, as well as the single-engined Bonanza and twin-engined Baron. The jet line was discontinued, but the new company continues to support the aircraft already produced.\nBy October 2013, the company, now financially sound, was up for sale.\nOn December 26, 2013, Textron purchased Beechcraft, including the discontinued Hawker jet line, for $1.4 billion. The sale was concluded in the first half of 2014, with government approval. Textron said that Beechcraft and Cessna would be combined to form a new light aircraft manufacturing concern, Textron Aviation, that would result in US$65M\u2013$85M in annual savings over keeping the companies separate. Textron has however kept both the Beechcraft and Cessna names as separate brands.\nProducts.\nAs of July 2019, Textron Aviation was producing the following models under the Beechcraft brand name:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4283", "revid": "933305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4283", "title": "Battle of Peleliu", "text": "World War II battle in the Pacific theater\nThe Battle of Peleliu, codenamed Operation Stalemate II by the US military, was fought between the United States and Japan during the Mariana and Palau Islands campaign of World War II, from 15 September to 27 November 1944, on the island of Peleliu.\nUS Marines of the 1st Marine Division and then soldiers of the US Army's 81st Infantry Division fought to capture an airfield on the small coral island of Peleliu. The battle was part of a larger offensive campaign known as Operation Forager, which ran from June to November 1944 in the Pacific War.\nMajor General William Rupertus, the commander of the 1st Marine Division, predicted that the island would be secured within four days. However, after repeated Imperial Japanese Army defeats in previous island campaigns, Japan had developed new island-defense tactics and well-crafted fortifications, which allowed them to offer stiff resistance and extended the battle to more than two months. The heavily outnumbered Japanese defenders put up such staunch resistance, often fighting to the death in the name of the Japanese Emperor, that the island became known in Japanese as the \"Emperor's Island.\"\nIn the US, the battle was controversial because of the island's negligible strategic value and the high casualty rate incurred by American troops during the fighting, which exceeded that of all other amphibious operations during the Pacific War. The National Museum of the Marine Corps called it \"the bitterest battle of the war for the Marines\".\nBackground.\nBy 1944, American victories in the Southwest and Central Pacific had brought the war closer to Japan, with American bombers able to strike at the Japanese main islands from air bases secured during the Mariana Islands campaign (June\u2013August 1944). There was disagreement among the U.S. Joint Chiefs over two proposed strategies to defeat the Japanese Empire. The strategy proposed by General Douglas MacArthur called for the recapture of the Philippines, followed by the capture of Okinawa, then an attack on the Japanese home islands. Admiral Chester W. Nimitz favored a more direct strategy of bypassing the Philippines but seizing Okinawa and Taiwan as staging areas to an attack on the Japanese mainland, followed by the future invasion of Japan's southernmost islands.\nThe 1st Marine Division had already been chosen to make the assault. U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt traveled to Pearl Harbor to personally meet both MacArthur and Nimitz and hear their arguments. In the end, MacArthur's strategy was chosen. However, before MacArthur could retake the Philippines, the Palau Islands, specifically Peleliu and Angaur, were to be neutralized and an airfield built to protect the southern flank of MacArthur's planned landings on the Philippines.\nPreparations.\nJapanese.\nBy 1944, Peleliu was occupied by about 5,500 Japanese troops of the 14th Infantry Division. Considered a crack unit, the division had been detached from the Kwantung Army in Manchuria to garrison Peleliu after the fall of the Marshall Islands earlier in 1944, and had arrived on the island in May. Colonel Kunio Nakagawa, commander of the division's 2nd Regiment, led the preparations for the island's defense. In addition to these, there were about 4,000 naval troops, of whom about 1,500 of the 45th Base Guard Force were trained in the infantry role, the remainder were maintenance staff, air crews and other miscellaneous support troops. In addition to this, there was a large contingent of Korean and Japanese construction personnel.\nAfter their losses in the Solomons, Gilberts, Marshalls and Marianas, the Imperial Japanese Army assembled a research team to develop new island-defense tactics. Previously, Japanese island garrisons had heavily contested enemy landings on the beach itself, rendering them vulnerable to naval bombardment. The Japanese formulated new tactics that envisioned only a token defense of the landing beaches, instead protracting the conflict by holding defensible terrain in the island interior. Peleliu's steep, twisting coral ridges were ideal for such a defense in depth. Colonel Nakagawa used this rough terrain to his advantage by ordering the construction of heavily fortified bunkers, caves, and other subterranean positions, all interlocked in a \"honeycomb\" system. Traditional \"banzai charge\" attacks were to be discontinued, as they wasted manpower and were ineffective. These changes in tactics were designed to force the Americans into a war of attrition, compelling them to spend more troops, materiel and time to secure Japanese island garrisons.\nNakagawa's defenses were centered on Peleliu's highest point. Located at the center of Peleliu, the hills and steep ridges of Umurbrogol Mountain overlooked much of the island, including its crucial airfield. The Umurbrogol contained some 500 limestone caves, connected via tunnel by Japanese engineers. Many of these caves were former mine shafts developed by Nanyo Kohatsu Kaisha (South Seas Development Company), a Japanese firm established in 1921 primarily to develop the sugar industry in Saipan, where its headquarters were located. However, the company also owned and worked the phosphate deposits on Peleliu. The phosphate material was mined with native labor and transported via narrow gauge railcars operated by manpower to a phosphate refinery located at the wharf on Peleliu.\nThe mines and caves were turned into defensive positions. Engineers added sliding armored steel doors with multiple openings to many cave entrances, providing extra protection and concealment for artillery and machine guns. Cave entrances were opened or altered to be slanted as a defense against grenade and flamethrower attacks. The caves and bunkers were connected to a vast tunnel and trench system throughout central Peleliu, which allowed the Japanese to evacuate or reoccupy positions as needed, and to take advantage of shrinking interior lines.\nThe Japanese garrison was well armed with and mortars and anti-aircraft cannons, backed by a light tank unit and an anti-aircraft detachment. The Japanese also used the beach terrain to their advantage. The northern end of the landing beaches faced a coral promontory that overlooked the beaches from a small peninsula, a spot later known to the Marines who assaulted it simply as \"The Point\". Holes were blasted into The Point to accommodate a gun and six 20\u00a0mm cannons. The positions were then sealed shut, leaving only a thin slit to fire on the beaches. The Japanese constructed similar positions along the stretch of landing beaches on the western shore of Peleliu.\nThe beaches were also filled with thousands of obstacles for the landing craft, principally mines and a large number of heavy artillery shells buried with the fuses exposed, designed to explode when they were run over. Nakagawa placed a battalion along the beach to defend against the landing, but this unit was meant to merely delay the inevitable American advance inland. Neither Nakagawa nor his superior officers expected the garrison to survive if Peleliu was attacked, and Japanese military planners made no contingencies to evacuate any survivors.\nAmerican.\nUnlike the Japanese, who drastically altered their tactics for the upcoming battle, the American invasion plan was unchanged from that of previous amphibious landings, even after suffering 3,000 casualties and enduring two months of delaying tactics while overcoming entrenched Japanese defenders at the Battle of Biak. On Peleliu, American planners chose to land on the southwest beaches because of their proximity to the airfield on south Peleliu. The 1st Marine Regiment, commanded by Colonel Lewis B. \"Chesty\" Puller, was to land on the northern end of the beaches. The 5th Marine Regiment, under Colonel Harold Harris, would land in the center, and the 7th Marine Regiment, under Colonel Herman Hanneken, would land at the southern end.\nThe division's artillery regiment, the 11th Marines under Colonel William Harrison, would land after the infantry regiments. The plan was for the 1st and 7th Marines to push inland, guarding the 5th Marines' flanks and allowing them to capture the airfield located directly to the center of the landing beaches. The 5th Marines were to push across to the eastern shore, cutting the island in half. The 1st Marines would push north into the Umurbrogol, while the 7th Marines would clear the southern end of the island. Only one battalion was held in reserve, with the U.S. Army's 81st Infantry Division available for support from Angaur, just south of Peleliu.\nOn 4 September the Marines shipped off from their station on Pavuvu, north of Guadalcanal, a trip across the Pacific. A Navy Underwater Demolition Team cleared the beaches of some obstacles as warships began their pre-invasion bombardment of Peleliu on 12 September.\nThe battleships , , , and , heavy cruisers , , and , and light cruisers , and , led by the command ship , subjected the island to a massive three-day bombardment, pausing only to permit air strikes from the three aircraft carriers, five light aircraft carriers, and eleven escort carriers that sailed with the attack force. A total of 519 rounds of shells, 1,845 rounds of shells and 1,793 bombs pounded Peleliu during this period.\nThe Americans believed the bombardment to be successful, as Rear Admiral Jesse Oldendorf claimed that the Navy had run out of targets. In reality, most Japanese soldiers survived; even the battalion left to defend the beaches was virtually unscathed. During the initial American assault, the island's defenders exercised unusual firing discipline to avoid giving away their positions. However, the bombardment destroyed Japan's aircraft on the island and the buildings surrounding the airfield. The Japanese remained in their fortified positions, waiting to attack the American landing troops.\nOpposing forces.\nAmerican order of battle.\nUnited States Pacific Fleet\nAdmiral Chester W. Nimitz\nUS Third Fleet\nAdmiral William F. Halsey Jr.\nJoint Expeditionary Force (Task Force 31)\nVice Admiral Theodore S. Wilkinson\nExpeditionary Troops (Task Force 36)\nIII Amphibious Corps\nMajor General Julian C. Smith, USMC\nWestern Landing Force (TG 36.1)\nMajor General Roy S. Geiger, USMC\n1st Marine Division\nBeach assignments\nJapanese order of battle.\nPalau District Group\nLieutenant General Sadae Inoue (HQ on Koror Island)\nVice Admiral Yoshioka Ito\nMaj. Gen. Kenjiro Murai\n14th Division (Lt. Gen. Sadae)\nPeleliu Sector Unit (Lt. Col. Kunio Nakagawa)\nBattle.\nLanding.\nUS Marines began landing on Peleliu at 08:32 on 15 September. The 1st Marines landed to the north on White Beach 1 and 2, while the 5th and 7th Marines landed to the center and south on Orange Beach 1, 2, and 3. As the additional landing craft approached the beaches, the Marines on shore were caught in a crossfire when the Japanese opened the steel doors guarding their positions and began firing artillery. The positions on the coral promontories guarding each flank fired on the Marines with 47\u00a0mm guns and 20\u00a0mm cannons. By 09:30 the Japanese had destroyed 60 LVTs and DUKWs.\nThe 1st Marines were quickly bogged down by heavy fire from the high coral ridge on their left flank, \"The Point\". Puller's LVT was hit by a dud high-velocity artillery round, and his communications section was destroyed on its way to the beach by a hit from a 47\u00a0mm round. The 7th Marines faced a cluttered Orange Beach 3, with natural and man-made obstacles forcing the LVTs to bunch together and approach in column. The 1st Marines suffered very heavy casualties on White Beach 1, and its line was opened at multiple points, and faced potential annihilation in the face of a counterattack, but a counterattack had never materialized on the beach as the Japanese had employed new tactics in which they drew the Marines inland, while the beach forces engaged in a delaying action. Commanding 3/7, Major Hunter Hurst recalled, \u201cThe enemy was groggy, disorganized and devoid of communications, although bitterly defending every step of the way. At no time did we feel him capable of organizing a successful counterattack\".\nAfter securing the beachhead, the Marines advanced abreast, but progress was very slow contrasting with the envisioned 3-day timetable due to heavy resistance. Losses on White Beach 1 were particularly severe. A tank crewman recalled \"When the tide went out that night, you could have walked 300 yards across the beach on the bodies of dead Marines\". Many Japanese troops on the beachhead retreated northwards at this stage towards the ridges on the center of the island, while other stragglers and isolated pockets of Japanese continued to fight behind the Marine lines.\nJapanese counterattack.\nThe 5th Marines made the most progress on the first day, aided by cover provided by coconut groves. As they approached the airfield they were met with Nakagawa's first counterattack, comprising between 11 and 17 light tanks. The Japanese troops advanced across the airfield and attempted to push the Marines back. The light tanks raced across the landing strip, firing their guns at the Marines, with Japanese infantry mounted on some of them. The counterattack was met with tank fire, heavy machine guns and air attack and was swiftly defeated, though some of the tanks reached the Marine lines. In a mistake oft-repeated by the Japanese, the counter-attack had been made inland after the allies had landed most of their heavy equipment and tanks. After the first counterattack was beaten, the Japanese made several smaller counterattacks over the course of the next few hours, supported with two tanks each.\nAt the end of the first day, the Americans held their stretch of landing beaches but little else. Their biggest push in the south moved inland, but the 1st Marines to the north made very little progress in the face of extremely heavy Japanese resistance. The Marines had suffered 200 dead and 900 wounded on the first day. Rupertus, still unaware of his enemy's change of tactics, believed the Japanese defenses would quickly crumble since their perimeter had been broken.\nAs night settled, with the Marines capturing little more than a beachhead. Japanese troops, some wearing helmets of dead American Marines, began infiltrating the Marine lines and engaging in close-quarters combat with the Marines, with three infiltrators penetrating as far as Smith's command post in the rear of the Marine lines.\nAirfield/South Peleliu.\nOn 16 September the 5th Marines moved to capture the airfield and push toward Peleliu's eastern shore. The entire regiment crossed the airfield simultaneously, enduring heavy artillery fire from the highlands to the north, and suffered heavy casualties in the process. After capturing the airfield, they rapidly advanced to the eastern end of Peleliu. The Japanese 2nd Battalion, 15th Infantry was isolated on the southern tip of the island, and it fell to the 7th Marines to destroy this pocket.\nThis area was hotly contested by the Japanese, who still occupied numerous pillboxes. Heat indices were around , and the Marines suffered high casualties from heat exhaustion. Further complicating the situation, the Marines' drinking water was distributed in empty oil drums, contaminating it with oil residue. Regardless, by 23 September the 5th and 7th Marines had accomplished their objectives, holding the airfield and the southern portion of the island, although the airfield remained under threat of sustained Japanese fire from the heights of Umurbrogol Mountain until the end of the battle.\nAmerican forces began using the airfield on 17 September. Stinson OY-1 Sentinels from VMO-3 began aerial spotting missions for Marine artillery and naval gunfire support. On 26 September Marine F4U Corsairs from VMF-114 landed on the airstrip. The Corsairs began dive-bombing missions across Peleliu, firing rockets into open cave entrances in support of infantry attacks, and dropping napalm. This was only the second time that napalm had been used in the Pacific theater, and it proved effective at burning away vegetation hiding spider holes, usually killing their occupants. The time from takeoff to the target area for the Corsairs operating from Peleliu Airfield was very short, sometimes only 10 to 15 seconds. Most pilots did not bother to raise their landing gear, leaving them down during the strike. After a strike was completed, the Corsair simply turned back into the landing pattern again.\nThe Point.\n\"The Point\" at the end of the northern landing beaches continued to cause heavy Marine casualties from the enfilading fire of Japanese heavy machine guns and anti-tank artillery across the landing beaches. Puller ordered Captain George P. Hunt, commander of K Company, 3rd Battalion, 1st Marines, to capture the position. Hunt's company approached \"The Point\" short on supplies, having lost most of its machine guns while approaching the beaches. Hunt's second platoon was pinned down for nearly a day in an anti-tank trench between fortifications. The rest of his company was threatened when the Japanese cut a hole in their line, surrounding his unit and leaving his right flank cut off.\nA rifle platoon then began knocking out the Japanese gun positions one by one. Using smoke grenades for concealment, the platoon swept through each hole, destroying the positions via a combination of rifle grenades and close-quarters combat. After knocking out six machine gun positions, the Marines faced a cave housing the 47\u00a0mm gun. A lieutenant blinded the gun crew with a smoke grenade, allowing Corporal Henry W. Hahn to launch a grenade through the cave's aperture. The grenade detonated the 47\u00a0mm's shells, forcing the Japanese defenders out with their bodies alight and their ammunition belts exploding around their waists. A Marine fire team was positioned on the flank of the cave, where the emerging occupants were gunned down.\nK Company had captured \"The Point\", but Nakagawa again counterattacked. Over the next 30 hours the Japanese counterattacked four times against a single company, critically low on supplies, out of water and virtually surrounded. The Marines had to resort to hand-to-hand combat to fend off the Japanese attackers. By the time reinforcements arrived, the company had successfully repulsed all the Japanese attacks, but had been reduced to 18 men, suffering 157 casualties during the battle for The Point. Hunt and Hahn were both awarded the Navy Cross for their actions.\nNgesebus Island.\nThe 5th Marines\u2014after securing the airfield\u2014were sent to capture Ngesebus Island, just north of Peleliu. Ngesebus was occupied by multiple Japanese artillery positions and was the site of an airfield still under construction. The tiny island was connected to Peleliu by a narrow causeway, but 5th Marines commander Harris opted instead to make a shore-to-shore amphibious landing, predicting the causeway to be an obvious target for the island's defenders.\nHarris coordinated a pre-landing bombardment of the island on 28 September, carried out by Army guns, naval guns, howitzers from the 11th Marines, strafing runs from VMF-114's Corsairs and fire from the approaching LVTs. Unlike the Navy's bombardment of Peleliu, Harris' assault on Ngesebus successfully killed most of the Japanese defenders. The Marines still faced opposition in the ridges and caves, but the island fell quickly, with relatively light casualties for the 5th Marines. They had suffered 15 killed and 33 wounded and inflicted 470 casualties on the Japanese.\nBloody Nose Ridge.\nAfter capturing \"The Point\", the 1st Marines moved north into the Umurbrogol pocket, nicknamed \"Bloody Nose Ridge\" by the Marines. Puller led his men in numerous assaults, but each incurred severe casualties from Japanese fire. The 1st Marines' movement was constrained by the narrow paths between the ridges, with each ridge fortification able to support the others with direct and indirect fires.\nThe Marines took increasingly heavy casualties as they slowly advanced through the ridges. The Japanese again showed unusual fire discipline, striking only when they could inflict maximum casualties. As casualties mounted, Japanese snipers began to take aim at stretcher bearers, knowing that if stretcher bearers were injured or killed, more would have to return to replace them, providing more targets. In small groups, Japanese soldiers also frequently attempted to infiltrate the American lines at night. The Marines built two-man fighting holes, so one Marine could sleep while the other kept watch for infiltrators.\nA particularly intense engagement occurred on Bloody Nose Ridge, when the 1st Battalion, 1st Marines\u2014under the command of Major Raymond Davis\u2014attacked Hill 100. Over six days of fighting, the battalion suffered 71% casualties. Captain Everett P. Pope and his company penetrated deep into the ridges, leading his remaining 90 men to seize what he thought was Hill 100. It took a day's fighting to reach what he thought was the crest of the hill, which was in fact another ridge occupied by more Japanese defenders. \nTrapped at the base of the ridge, Pope set up a small defensive perimeter, which was attacked relentlessly by the Japanese throughout the night. The Marines ran out of ammunition and had to fight the attackers with knives and fists, even resorting to throwing coral rock and empty ammunition boxes at the Japanese. Pope and his men managed to hold out until dawn, which brought on more deadly fire. When they evacuated the position, only nine men remained. Pope later received the Medal of Honor for the action.\nThe Japanese inflicted 70% casualties on Puller's 1st Marines, or 1,749 men. After six days of fighting in the ridges of the Umurbrogol, Geiger sent elements of the U.S. Army's 81st Infantry Division to Peleliu to relieve the regiment. The 321st Regiment Combat Team landed on the western beaches of Peleliu\u2014at the northern end of Umurbrogol mountain\u2014on 23 September. The warren of ridges still occupied by Japanese troops became colloquially known as \"the Pocket\" by American forces on Peleliu. The 321st and the 7th Marines had fully encircled this \"Pocket\" by 24 September, D+9.\nBy 15 October the 7th Marines had suffered 46% casualties, and Geiger relieved them with the 5th Marines. Col. Harris adopted siege tactics, using bulldozers and flamethrower tanks to methodically destroy Japanese positions, and pushed into the ridges from the north. On 30 October the 81st Infantry Division took over command of Peleliu. It would take another six weeks, using the same tactics as the Marines, to finally reduce \"The Pocket\".\nAfter emerging victorious in the Battle of Angaur, the 81st Infantry Division was ordered to assist the 1st Marine Division in their efforts to seize Peleliu. The 81st Infantry Division eventually relieved the 1st Marine Division, and assumed command of combat operations on Peleliu. The 81st Infantry Division remained engaged on the island until the end of organized Japanese resistance on 18 January 1945.\nOn 24 November Nakagawa sent his final message to his superiors; \"Our sword is broken and we have run out of spears\", and that he had split his remaining 56 men into 17 groups and ordered them to \"attack the enemy everywhere\". He then burnt his regimental colors and, along with Major General Murai, performed ritual suicide. He was posthumously promoted to lieutenant general for his concerted defensive campaign on Peleliu. On 27 November the island was declared secure, ending the 73-day-long battle.\nA Japanese lieutenant with twenty-six 2nd Infantry soldiers and eight 45th Guard Force sailors held out in the caves on Peleliu until 22 April 1947, only surrendering after a former Japanese admiral convinced them the war was over.\nAftermath.\nThe reduction of the Japanese positions in \"The Pocket\" around Umurbrogol mountain has been called the most difficult fight that the U.S. military encountered during the entire war. The 1st Marine Division was severely mauled, and remained out of action until the invasion of Okinawa on 1 April 1945. In total, the 1st Marine Division suffered over 6,500 casualties during a month of combat on Peleliu, over one third of the entire division. The 81st Infantry Division also suffered heavy losses, incurring 3,300 casualties during its tenure on the island.\nPostwar statisticians calculated that it took U.S. forces over 1,500 rounds of ammunition to kill each individual Japanese defender, and that the Americans expended 13.32 million rounds of .30-calibre, 1.52 million rounds of .45-calibre, 693,657 rounds of .50-calibre bullets, 118,262 hand grenades, and 150,000 mortar rounds over the course of the battle.\nThe battle was controversial in the United States. Many felt that too many American lives had been lost for an island that had little strategic value. The Japanese defenders lacked the means to interfere with potential US operations in the Philippines and the airfield captured on Peleliu did not play a key role in any subsequent operations. Instead, Ulithi Atoll in the Caroline Islands was used as a staging base for the invasion of Okinawa. The casualty rate exceeded all other amphibious operations during the Pacific War.\nIn addition, few news reports were published about the battle because Rupertus's prediction of a \"three days\" victory motivated only six war reporters to report from shore. The battle was also overshadowed by MacArthur's return to the Philippines and the Allies' push towards Germany in Europe.\nThe battles for Angaur and Peleliu offered the Americans a preview of future Japanese island defense, but American planners made few adjustments to their tactics before the battles of Iwo Jima and Okinawa. Naval bombardment prior to amphibious assault at Iwo Jima was only slightly more effective than at Peleliu, but at Okinawa the preliminary shelling was greatly improved. Frogmen performing underwater demolition at Iwo Jima confused the enemy by sweeping both coasts, but later alerted Japanese defenders to the exact assault beaches at Okinawa. American ground forces at Peleliu gained experience in assaulting heavily fortified positions, which they would encounter again on Iwo Jima and Okinawa.\nAt the recommendation of Admiral William Halsey Jr., the planned occupation of Yap Island in the Caroline Islands was canceled. Halsey actually recommended that the landings on Peleliu and Angaur be canceled, too, and their Marines and soldiers be sent to Leyte Island instead, but this plan was overruled by Nimitz.\nIn his book \"With the Old Breed\", Eugene Sledge describes his experiences in the Battle for Peleliu. One of the final scenes in \"Parer's War\", a 2014 Australian television film, shows the Battle of Peleliu recorded by Damien Parer with his camera at the time of his death.\nIndividual honors.\nJapan.\nPosthumous promotions.\nFor heroism:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4284", "revid": "50921071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4284", "title": "Battle of Stalingrad", "text": "1942\u20131943; major battle of World War II\nThe Battle of Stalingrad (17 July 1942\u00a0\u2013 2 February 1943) was a major battle on the Eastern Front of World War II, beginning when Nazi Germany and its Axis allies attacked and became locked in a protracted struggle with the Soviet Union for control over the Soviet city of Stalingrad (now known as Volgograd) in southern Russia. The battle was characterized by fierce close-quarters combat and direct assaults on civilians in aerial raids; the battle epitomized urban warfare, and it was the single largest and costliest urban battle in military history. It was the bloodiest and fiercest battle of the entirety of World War II\u2014and arguably in all of human history\u2014as both sides suffered tremendous casualties amidst ferocious fighting in and around the city. The battle is commonly regarded as the turning point in the European theatre of World War II, as Germany's was forced to withdraw a considerable amount of military forces from other regions to replace losses on the Eastern Front. By the time the hostilities ended, the German 6th Army and 4th Panzer Army had been destroyed and Army Group B was routed. The Soviets' victory at Stalingrad shifted the Eastern Front's balance of power in their favour, while also boosting the morale of the Red Army.\nBoth sides placed great strategic importance on Stalingrad, for it was one of the largest industrial centres of the Soviet Union and an important transport hub on the Volga River: controlling Stalingrad meant gaining access to the oil fields of the Caucasus and having supreme authority over the Volga River. The city also held significant symbolic importance because it bore the name of Joseph Stalin, the leader of the Soviet Union. As the conflict progressed, Germany's fuel supplies dwindled and thus drove it to focus on moving deeper into Soviet territory and taking the country's oil fields at any cost. The German military first clashed with the Red Army's Stalingrad Front on the distant approaches to Stalingrad on 17 July. On 23 August, the 6th Army and elements of the 4th Panzer Army launched their offensive with support from intensive bombing raids by the \"Luftwaffe\", which reduced much of the city to rubble. The battle soon degenerated into house-to-house fighting, which escalated drastically as both sides continued pouring reinforcements into the city. By mid-November, the Germans, at great cost, had pushed the Soviet defenders back into narrow zones along the Volga's west bank. However, winter set in and conditions became particularly brutal, with temperatures often dropping tens of degrees below freezing. In addition to fierce urban combat, brutal trench warfare was prevalent at Stalingrad.\nOn 19 November, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus, a two-pronged attack targeting the Romanian armies protecting the 6th Army's flanks. The Axis flanks were overrun and the 6th Army was encircled. Adolf Hitler was determined to hold the city for Germany at all costs and forbade the 6th Army to try a breakout; instead, attempts were made to supply it by air and to break the encirclement from the outside. Though the Soviets were successful in preventing the Germans from making enough airdrops to the trapped Axis armies at Stalingrad, heavy fighting continued for another two months. On 2 February 1943, the 6th Army, having exhausted its ammunition and food, finally capitulated after several months of battle, making it the first of Hitler's field armies to have surrendered.\nIn modern Russia, the legacy of the Red Army's victory at Stalingrad is commemorated among the Days of Military Honour. It is also well known in many other countries that belonged to the Allied powers, and has thus become ingrained in popular culture. Likewise, in a number of the post-Soviet states, the Battle of Stalingrad is recognized as an important aspect of what is known as the Great Patriotic War.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nBy the spring of 1942, despite the failure of Operation Barbarossa to defeat the Soviet Union in a single campaign, the Wehrmacht had captured vast territories, including Ukraine, Belarus, and the Baltic republics. On the Western Front, Germany held much of Europe, the U-boat offensive was curbing American support, and in North Africa, Erwin Rommel had just captured Tobruk. In the east, the Germans had stabilized a front running from Leningrad to Rostov, with several minor salients. Hitler remained confident of breaking the Red Army, despite heavy losses west of Moscow in the winter of 1941\u201342, because large parts of Army Group Centre had been rested and re-equipped. Hitler decided that the 1942 summer campaign would target the southern Soviet Union. The initial objectives around Stalingrad were to destroy the city's industrial capacity and block the Volga River traffic, crucial for connecting the Caucasus and Caspian Sea to central Russia. The capture of Stalingrad would also disrupt Lend-Lease supplies via the Persian Corridor.\nOn 23 July 1942, Hitler expanded the campaign's objectives to include occupying Stalingrad, a city with immense propaganda value, as it bore the name of the Soviet leader. Hitler ordered the annihilation of Stalingrad's population, declaring that after its capture, all male citizens would be killed and women and children deported due to their \"thoroughly communistic\" nature. The city's fall was intended to secure the northern and western flanks of the German advance on Baku to capture its petroleum resources. This expansion of objectives stemmed from German overconfidence and an underestimation of Soviet reserves.\nMeanwhile, Stalin, convinced that the main German attack would target Moscow, prioritized defending the Soviet capital. As the Soviet winter counteroffensive of 1941\u20131942 culminated in March, the Soviet high command began planning for the summer campaign. Although Stalin desired a general offensive, he was dissuaded by Chief of the General Staff Boris Shaposhnikov, Deputy Chief of the General Staff Aleksandr Vasilevsky, and Western Main Direction commander Georgy Zhukov. Ultimately, Stalin instructed that the summer campaign be based on \"active strategic defence,\" while also ordering local offensives across the Eastern Front. Southwestern Main Direction commander Semyon Timoshenko proposed an attack from the Izyum salient south of Kharkov to encircle and destroy the German 6th Army. Despite opposition from Shaposhnikov and Vasilevsky, Stalin approved the plan.\nAfter delays in troop movements and logistical challenges, the Kharkov operation began on 12 May. The Soviets achieved initial success, prompting 6th Army commander Friedrich Paulus to request reinforcements. However, a German counterattack on 13 May halted the Soviet advance. On 17 May, Ewald von Kleist's forces launched Operation Fridericus I, encircling and destroying much of the Soviet forces in the ensuing Second Battle of Kharkov. The defeat at Kharkov left the Soviets vulnerable to the German summer offensive. Despite the setback, Stalin continued to prioritize defending Moscow, allocating only limited reinforcements to the Southwestern Front.\nThe commitment of panzer divisions needed for Case Blue to the Second Battle of Kharkov further delayed the offensive's start. On 1 June, Hitler modified the summer plans, delaying Case Blue to 20 June after preliminary operations in Ukraine.\nPrelude.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If I do not get the oil of Maykop and Grozny then I must finish [\"liquidieren\"; \"kill off\", \"liquidate\"] this war.\u2014\u200a\nArmy Group South was selected for a sprint forward through the southern Russian steppes into the Caucasus to capture the vital Soviet oil fields there. The planned summer offensive, code-named \"Fall Blau\" (Case Blue), was to include the German 6th, 17th, 4th Panzer and 1st Panzer Armies.\nHitler intervened, however, ordering the Army Group to split in two. Army Group South (A), under the command of Wilhelm List, was to continue advancing south towards the Caucasus as planned with the 17th Army and First Panzer Army. Army Group South (B), including Paulus's 6th Army and Hermann Hoth's 4th Panzer Army, was to move east towards the Volga and Stalingrad. Army Group B was commanded by General Maximilian von Weichs.\nThe start of \"Case Blue\" had been planned for late May 1942. However, a number of German and Romanian units that were to take part in \"Blau\" were besieging Sevastopol on the Crimean Peninsula. Delays in ending the siege pushed back the start date for \"Blau\" several times, and the city did not fall until early July.\nOperation Fridericus I by the Germans against the \"Izyum bulge\", pinched off the Soviet salient in the Second Battle of Kharkov, and resulted in the envelopment of a large Soviet force between 17 May and 29 May. Similarly, Operation Wilhelm attacked Voltshansk on 13 June, and Operation Fridericus attacked Kupiansk on 22 June.\n\"Blau\" finally opened as Army Group South began its attack into southern Russia on 28 June 1942. The German offensive achieved rapid success, as Soviet forces offered little resistance in the vast empty steppes and started streaming eastward. Several attempts to re-establish a defensive line failed when German units outflanked them. Two major pockets were formed and destroyed: the first, northeast of Kharkov, on 2 July, and a second, around Millerovo, Rostov Oblast, a week later. Meanwhile, the Hungarian 2nd Army and the German 4th Panzer Army had launched an assault on Voronezh, capturing the city on 5 July.\nThe initial advance of the 6th Army was so successful that Hitler intervened and ordered the 4th Panzer Army to join Army Group South (A) to the south. A massive road block resulted when the 4th Panzer and the 1st Panzer choked the roads, stopping both in their tracks while they cleared the mess of thousands of vehicles. The traffic jam is thought to have delayed the advance by at least one week. With the advance now slowed, Hitler changed his mind and reassigned the 4th Panzer Army back to the attack on Stalingrad.\nBy the end of July, Soviet forces were pushed back across the Don River. At this point, the Don and Volga Rivers are only apart, and the Germans left their main supply depots west of the Don. The Germans began using the armies of their Italian, Hungarian and Romanian allies to guard their left (northern) flank. Italian actions were also mentioned in official German communiques. Italian forces were generally held in little regard by the Germans, and were accused of low morale: in reality, the Italian divisions fought comparatively well, with the 3rd Infantry Division \"Ravenna\" and 5th Infantry Division \"Cosseria\" showing spirit, according to a German liaison officer. Italian forces were forced to retreat only after a massive armoured attack in which German reinforcements failed to arrive in time.\nTo the south, Army Group A was pushing far into the Caucasus, but the advance slowed as supply lines grew overextended. The two German army groups were too far apart to support one another.\nAfter German intentions became clear in July, Stalin appointed General Andrey Yeryomenko commander of the Southeastern Front on 1 August 1942. Yeryomenko and Commissar Nikita Khrushchev were tasked with planning the defence of Stalingrad. Beyond the Volga River on the eastern boundary of Stalingrad, additional Soviet units were formed into the 62nd Army under Lieutenant General Vasiliy Chuikov on 11 September 1942. Tasked with holding the city at all costs, Chuikov proclaimed, \"We will defend the city or die in the attempt.\" The battle earned him one of his two Hero of the Soviet Union awards.\nOrders of battle.\nRed Army.\nDuring the defence of Stalingrad, the Red Army deployed five armies in and around the city (28th, 51st, 57th, 62nd and 64th Armies); and an additional nine armies in the encirclement counteroffensive (24th, 65th, 66th Armies and 16th Air Army from the north as part of the Don Front offensive, and 1st Guards Army, 5th Tank, 21st Army, 2nd Air Army and 17th Air Army from the south as part of the Southwestern Front).\nAttack on Stalingrad.\nInitial attack.\nGerman forces first clashed with the Stalingrad Front on 17 July on the distant approaches to Stalingrad, in the bend of the Don. A significant clash in the early stages of the battle was fought at Kalach, in which the Germans \"had had to pay a high cost in men and materiel\u00a0... left on the Kalatch [sic] battlefield were numerous burnt-out or shot-up German tanks\". Military historian David Glantz indicated that four hard-fought battles \u2013 collectively known as the Kotluban Operations \u2013 north of Stalingrad, where the Soviets made their greatest stand, decided Germany's fate before the Nazis ever set foot in the city itself, and were a turning point in the war. Beginning in late August and lasting into October, the Soviets committed between two and four armies in hastily coordinated and poorly controlled attacks against the Germans' northern flank. The actions resulted in over 200,000 Soviet Army casualties but did slow the German assault.\nThe Germans formed bridgeheads across the Don on 20 August, with the 295th and 76th Infantry Divisions enabling the XIVth Panzer Corps \"to thrust to the Volga north of Stalingrad.\" The German 6th Army was only a few dozen kilometres from Stalingrad. The 4th Panzer Army, ordered south on 13 July to block the Soviet retreat with the 17th Army and the 1st Panzer Army, had turned northwards alone to help take the city from the south. 17th Army and 1st Panzer Army were transferred to the new Army Group A and continued towards the Caucasus. On 19 August, German forces were in position to launch an attack on the city.\nOn 23 August, the 6th Army reached the outskirts of Stalingrad in pursuit of the 62nd and 64th Armies, which had fallen back into the city. Kleist said after the war:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The capture of Stalingrad was subsidiary to the main aim. It was only of importance as a convenient place, in the bottleneck between Don and the Volga, where we could block an attack on our flank by Russian forces coming from the east. At the start, Stalingrad was no more than a name on the map to us.\nThe Soviets had enough warning of the German advance to ship grain, cattle, and railway cars across the Volga out of harm's way. This \"harvest victory\" left the city short of food even before the German attack began. Before the \"Heer\" reached the city itself, the \"Luftwaffe\" had cut off shipping on the Volga. In the days between 25 and 31 July, 32 Soviet ships were sunk, with another nine crippled.\n\"Generaloberst\" Wolfram von Richthofen's \"Luftflotte 4\" dropped some 1,000 tons of bombs on 23 August, with the aerial attack on Stalingrad being the most single intense aerial bombardment at that point on the Eastern Front, and the heaviest bombing raid that had ever taken place on the Eastern Front. At least 90% of the city's housing stock was obliterated as a result. The Stalingrad Tractor Factory continued to turn out T-34 tanks up until German troops burst into the plant. The 369th (Croatian) Reinforced Infantry Regiment was the only non-German unit selected by the \"Wehrmacht\" to enter Stalingrad city during assault operations, with it fighting as part of the 100th J\u00e4ger Division.\nGeorgy Zhukov, who was deputy commander-in-chief and commander of Stalingrad's defence during the battle, noted the importance of the battle, stating that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was clear to me that the battle for Stalingrad was of the greatest military and political significance. If Stalingrad fell, the enemy command would be able to cut off the south of the country from the centre. We could lose the Volga\u00a0\u2013 the important water artery, along which a large amount of goods flowed from the Caucasus.Stalin rushed all available troops to the east bank of the Volga, some from as far away as Siberia. Regular river ferries were quickly destroyed by the Luftwaffe, which then targeted troop barges being towed slowly across by tugs. It has been said that Stalin prevented civilians from leaving the city in the belief that their presence would encourage greater resistance from the city's defenders. Civilians, including women and children, were put to work building trenchworks and protective fortifications. Casualties due to the air raid on 23 August and beyond are debated, as between 23 and 26 August, Soviet reports indicate 955 people were killed and another 1,181 wounded as a result of the bombing. However, death toll of civilians due to the bombing has been estimated to have been 40,000, or as many as 70,000, though these estimates may be exaggerated. Also estimated are 150,000 wounded.\nThe Soviet Air Force, the \"Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily\" (VVS), was swept aside by the Luftwaffe. The VVS bases in the immediate area lost 201 aircraft between 23 and 31 August, and despite meagre reinforcements of some 100 aircraft in August, it was left with just 192 serviceable aircraft, 57 of which were fighters.\nEarly on 23 August, the German 16th Panzer and 3rd Motorized Divisions attacked out of the Vertyachy bridgehead with a force 120 tanks and over 200 armoured personnel carriers strong. The German attack broke through the 1382nd Rifle Regiment of the 87th Rifle Division and the 137th Tank Brigade, which were forced to retreat towards Dmitryevka. The 16th Panzer Division drove east towards the Volga, supported by the strikes of Henschel Hs 129 ground attack aircraft. Crossing the railway line to Stalingrad at 564\u00a0km Station around midday, both divisions continued their rush towards the river. Around 15:00, Hyacinth Graf Strachwitz's Panzer Detachment and the \"kampfgruppe\" of the 2nd Battalion, 64th Panzer Grenadier Regiment from the 16th Panzer reached the area of Latashanka, Rynok, and Spartanovka, northern suburbs of Stalingrad, and the Stalingrad Tractor Factory.\nA Soviet female soldier stated about the battle that:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had been imagining what war was like\u00a0\u2013 everything on fire, children crying, cats running about, and when we got to Stalingrad it turned out to be really like that, only more terrible.One of the first units to offer resistance in this area was the 1077th Anti-Aircraft Regiment, covering the Stalingrad Tractor Factory and the Volga ferry near Latashanka. The majority of the regiment was composed of men, but its directing and rangefinding crews and unit headquarters were made up of women. Several women also crewed anti-aircraft guns. The 1077th was notified of the German tanks' approach at 14:30 and its 6th Battery, dominating the Sukhaya Mechatka ravine, claimed the destruction of 28 German tanks. Later that day, its 3rd Battery on the road between Yerzovka and Stalingrad, saw particularly intense fighting against the 16th Panzer, reportedly fighting \"shot for shot.\" Two women were decorated for their actions that day, and the regiment's report praised the \"exceptional steadfastness and heroism\" of the women soldiers. The regiment lost 35 guns, eighteen killed, 46 wounded, and 74 missing on 23 and 24 August. The 16th Panzer Division's history mentioned its encounter with the regiment, claiming the destruction of 37 guns, and the unit's surprise that its opponents had in part included women.\nIn the early stages of the battle, the NKVD organised poorly armed \"Workers' militias\" similar to those that had defended the city twenty-four years earlier, composed of civilians not directly involved in war production for immediate use in the battle. The civilians were often sent into battle without rifles. Staff and students from the local technical university formed a \"tank destroyer\" unit. They assembled tanks from leftover parts at the tractor factory. These tanks, unpainted and lacking gun-sights, were driven directly from the factory floor to the front line. They could only be aimed at point-blank range through the bore of their gun barrels. Chuikov later remarked that soldiers approaching the battle would say \"We are entering hell\", but after one or two days, they said \"No, this isn't hell, this is ten times worse than hell\".\nBy the end of August, Army Group South (B) had finally reached the Volga, north of Stalingrad. Another advance to the river south of the city followed, while the Soviets abandoned their Rossoshka position for the inner defensive ring west of Stalingrad. The wings of the 6th Army and the 4th Panzer Army met near Jablotchni along the Zaritza on 2 September.\nSeptember city battles.\nA letter found on the body of a German officer described the insanity of the battle and brutal nature of the urban combat:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We must reach the Volga. We can see it\u00a0\u2013 less than a kilometre away. We have the constant support of our aircraft and artillery. We are fighting like madmen but cannot reach the river. The whole war for France was shorter than the fight for one Volga factory. We must be up against suicide squads. They have simply decided to fight to the last soldier. And how many soldiers are left over there? When will this hell come to an end? Historian David Glantz stated that the grinding and brutal battle resembled \"the fighting on the Somme and at Verdun in 1916 more than it did the familiar blitzkrieg war of the previous three summers\".\nOn 5 September, the Soviet 24th and 66th Armies organized a massive attack against XIV Panzer Corps. The \"Luftwaffe\" helped repel the offensive by heavily attacking Soviet artillery positions and defensive lines. The Soviets were forced to withdraw at midday after only a few hours. Of the 120 tanks the Soviets had committed, 30 were lost to air attack.\nOn 13 September, the battle for the city itself began. With German forces launching an attack which overran the small hill where the 62nd Soviet Army headquarters was established, in addition, the railway station was captured, and German forces advanced far enough to threaten the Volga landing stage.\nSoviet operations were constantly hampered by the \"Luftwaffe\". On 18 September, the Soviet 1st Guards and 24th Army launched an offensive against VIII Army Corps at Kotluban. \"VIII. Fliegerkorps\" dispatched multiple waves of Stuka dive-bombers to prevent a breakthrough. The offensive was repelled. The Stukas claimed 41 of the 106 Soviet tanks knocked out that morning, while escorting Bf 109s destroyed 77 Soviet aircraft.\nStalin's Order No. 227 of 27 July 1942 decreed that all commanders who ordered unauthorised retreats would be subject to a military tribunal. Blocking detachments composed of NKVD or regular troops were positioned behind Red Army units to prevent desertion and straggling, sometimes executing deserters and perceived malingerers. During the battle, the 62nd Army had the most arrests and executions: 203 in all, of which 49 were executed, while 139 were sent to penal companies and battalions. Blocking detachments of the Stalingrad and Don Fronts detained 51,758 men from the beginning of the battle to 15 October, with the majority returned to their units. Of those detained, the vast majority of which were from the Don Front, 980 were executed and 1,349 sent to penal companies. In the two-day period between 13 and 15 September, the 62nd Army blocking detachment detained 1,218 men, returning most to their units while shooting 21 men and arresting ten. Beevor claims that 13,500 Soviet soldiers were executed by Soviet authorities during the battle, however, this claim has been disputed.\nBy 12 September, at the time of their retreat into the city, the Soviet 62nd Army had been reduced to 90 tanks, 700 mortars and just 20,000 personnel. The remaining tanks were used as immobile strong-points within the city. The initial German attack on 14 September attempted to take the city in a rush. The 51st Army Corps' 295th Infantry Division went after the Mamayev Kurgan hill, the 71st attacked the central rail station and toward the central landing stage on the Volga, while 48th Panzer Corps attacked south of the Tsaritsa River. Though initially successful, the German attacks stalled in the face of Soviet reinforcements brought in from across the Volga. Lieutenant General Alexander Rodimtsev's 13th Guards Rifle Division had been hurried up to cross the river and join the defenders inside the city. Assigned to counterattack at the Mamayev Kurgan and at Railway Station No. 1, it suffered particularly heavy losses. Despite their losses, Rodimtsev's troops were able to inflict similar damage on their opponents. By 26 September, the opposing 71st Infantry Division had half of its battalions considered exhausted, reduced from all of them being considered average in combat capability when the attack began twelve days earlier. Rodimtsev received one of two Hero of the Soviet Union awards issued during the battle for his actions. \nThe brutality of the battle was noted in a journal found on German lieutenant Weiner of the 24th Panzer Division:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The street is no longer measured by meters but by corpses... Stalingrad is no longer a town. By day it is an enormous cloud of burning, blinding smoke; it is a vast furnace lit by the reflection of the flames. And when night arrives, one of those scorching howling bleeding nights, the dogs plunge into the Volga and swim desperately to gain the other bank. The nights of Stalingrad are a terror for them. Animals flee this hell; the hardest stones cannot bear it for long; only men endure.\nA ferocious battle raged for several days at the giant grain elevator in the south of the city. About fifty Red Army defenders, cut off from resupply, held the position for five days and fought off ten different assaults before running out of ammunition and water. Only forty dead Soviet fighters were found, though the Germans had thought there were many more due to the intensity of resistance. The Soviets burned large amounts of grain during their retreat in order to deny the enemy food. The grain elevator and silos were decided upon by Paulus to be the symbol of Stalingrad for a patch he was having designed to commemorate the battle after victory.\nMamayev Kurgan changed hands multiple times over the course of days, with fighting over the hill, rail station and Red Square being so intense that it was difficult to determine who was attacking and who was defending.\nIn another part of the city, a Soviet platoon under the command of Sergeant Yakov Pavlov fortified a four-story building that oversaw a square 300 metres from the river bank, which was later called \"Pavlov's House\". The soldiers surrounded it with minefields, set up machine-gun positions at the windows and breached the walls in the basement for better communications. The soldiers found about ten Soviet civilians hiding in the basement. They were not relieved, nor significantly reinforced, for the length of the two month siege. The building was labelled \"Festung\" (\"Fortress\") on German maps. Pavlov was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union title for his actions. General Chuikov took note of the brutal efficiency of the defence of \"Pavlov's House\", stating that \"Pavlov's small group of men, defending one house, killed more enemy soldiers than the Germans lost in taking Paris\".\n\"Generalmajor\" Hans Doerr stated about the conditions of the battle that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A bitter battle for every house, workshop, water tower, railway embankment, wall, cellar and every pile of rubble was waged, without equal even in the First World War... The distance between the enemy's arms and ours was as small as could possibly be. Despite the concentrated air and artillery power, it was impossible to break out of the area of close fighting. The Russians surpassed the Germans in their use of the terrain and in camouflage, and were more experienced in barricade warfare for individual buildings.Stubborn defences of semi-fortified buildings in the centre of the city cost the Germans countless soldiers. A violent battle occurred for the Univermag department store on Red Square, which served as the headquarters of the 1st Battalion of the 13th Guards Rifle Division's 42nd Guards Rifle Regiment. Another battle occurred for a nearby warehouse dubbed the \"nail factory\". In a three-story building close by, guardsmen fought on for five days, their noses and throats filled with brick dust from pulverized walls, with only six out of close to half a battalion escaping alive.\nThe Germans made slow but steady progress through the city. Positions were taken individually, but the Germans were never able to capture the key crossing points along the river bank. By 27 September, the Germans occupied the southern portion of the city, but the Soviets held the centre and northern part. Most importantly, the Soviets controlled the ferries to their supplies on the east bank of the Volga.\nFighting in the industrial district.\nAfter 27 September, much of the fighting in the city shifted north to the industrial district. Having slowly advanced over 10 days against strong Soviet resistance, the 51st Army Corps was finally in front of the three giant factories of Stalingrad: the Red October Steel Factory, the Barrikady Arms Factory and Stalingrad Tractor Factory. It took a few more days for them to prepare for the most savage offensive of all, which was unleashed on 14 October, which Chuikov considered to be the worst day of the battle. Exceptionally intense shelling and bombing paved the way for the first German assault groups. The main attack (led by the 14th Panzer and 305th Infantry Divisions) attacked towards the tractor factory, while another assault led by the 24th Panzer Division hit to the south of the giant plant.\nWerth points out the difficulties the Siberian Division faced, as throughout the course of an entire month, German forces launched 117 assaults at the division's regiments, and on one day they launched 23 attacks. Every trench, pillbox, rifle-pit and ruin in the area was turned into a strongpoint with its own direction and system of communications.\nAccording to Beevor, \"The Red October complex and Barrikady gun factory had been turned into fortresses as lethal as those of Verdun. If anything, they were more dangerous because the Soviet regiments were so well hidden.\" The danger of the Barrikady Arms Factory was made apparent firsthand by German sergeant Ernst Wohlfahrt, who witnessed 18 German pioneers get killed by a Russian booby trap. The fighting for the Barrikady has been described as some of the most brutal and ferocious fighting ever, with it being stated that the \"battlefield east of the Barrikady blazed with the most violent and profligate clash the world would ever see\" and that in regard to hand-to-hand fighting, \"nowhere was it more brutal, more savage, more relentless, than in the Barrikady\".\nThe German onslaught crushed the 37th Guards Rifle Division of Major General Viktor Zholudev and in the afternoon the forward assault group reached the tractor factory before arriving at the Volga River, splitting the 62nd Army into two. In response to the German breakthrough to the Volga, the front headquarters committed three battalions from the 300th Rifle Division and the 45th Rifle Division of Colonel Vasily Sokolov, a substantial force of over 2,000 men, to the fighting at the Red October Factory.\nAccording to Werth:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Here, in and around the main building of the October Plant, the fighting had gone on for weeks. It had been a hell of shell-fire and mortarfire, and tank and air attacks, and hand-to-hand fighting; they had fought for a workshop or half a workshop, or for the end of a drainpipe.Fighting raged inside the Barrikady Factory until the end of October. The Soviet-controlled area shrank down to a few strips of land along the western bank of the Volga, and in November the fighting concentrated around what Soviet newspapers referred to as \"Lyudnikov's Island\", a small patch of ground behind the Barrikady Factory where the remnants of Colonel Ivan Lyudnikov's 138th Rifle Division resisted all ferocious assaults thrown by the Germans and became a symbol of the stout Soviet defence of Stalingrad.\nIn the north of Stalingrad, by early November, the 16th Panzer Division referred to the Rynok-Spartanovka region as \"little Verdun\" because \"there was hardly a square meter that had not been churned up by bombs and shells.\"\nAir attacks.\nFrom 5 to 12 September, \"Luftflotte 4\" conducted 7,507 sorties (938 per day). From 16 to 25 September, it carried out 9,746 missions (975 per day). Determined to crush Soviet resistance, \"Luftflotte\" 4's \"Stukawaffe\" flew 900 individual sorties against Soviet positions at the Stalingrad Tractor Factory on 5 October. Several Soviet regiments were wiped out; the entire staff of the Soviet 339th Infantry Regiment was killed the following morning during an air raid.\nThe \"Luftwaffe\" retained air superiority into November, and Soviet daytime aerial resistance was nonexistent. However, the combination of constant air support operations on the German side and the Soviet surrender of the daytime skies began to affect the strategic balance in the air. From 28 June to 20 September, \"Luftflotte\" 4's original strength of 1,600 aircraft, of which 1,155 were operational, fell to 950, of which only 550 were operational. The fleet's total strength decreased by 40 percent. Daily sorties decreased from 1,343 per day to 975 per day. Soviet offensives in the central and northern portions of the Eastern Front tied down \"Luftwaffe\" reserves and newly built aircraft, reducing \"Luftflotte\" 4's percentage of Eastern Front aircraft from 60 percent on 28 June to 38 percent by 20 September. The \"Kampfwaffe\" (bomber force) was the hardest hit, having only 232 out of an original force of 480 left.\nIn mid-October, after receiving reinforcements from the Caucasus theatre, the \"Luftwaffe\" intensified its efforts against the remaining Red Army positions holding the west bank. \"Luftflotte\" 4 flew 1,250 sorties on 14 October and its Stukas dropped 550 tonnes of bombs, while German infantry surrounded the three factories. \"Stukageschwader\" 1, 2, and 77 had largely silenced Soviet artillery on the eastern bank of the Volga before turning their attention to the shipping that was once again trying to reinforce the narrowing Soviet pockets of resistance. The 62nd Army had been cut in two and, due to intensive air attack on its supply ferries, was receiving much less material support. With the Soviets forced into a strip of land on the western bank of the Volga, over 1,208 \"Stuka\" missions were flown in an effort to eliminate them.\nThe Soviet bomber force, the \"Aviatsiya Dal'nego Deystviya\" (Long Range Aviation; ADD), having taken crippling losses over the past 18 months, was restricted to flying at night. The Soviets flew 11,317 night sorties over Stalingrad and the Don-bend sector between 17 July and 19 November. These raids caused little damage and were of nuisance value only.\nAs historian Chris Bellamy notes, the Germans paid a high strategic price for the aircraft sent into Stalingrad: the \"Luftwaffe\" was forced to divert much of its air strength away from the oil-rich Caucasus, which had been Hitler's original grand-strategic objective.\nThe Royal Romanian Air Force was also involved in the Axis air operations at Stalingrad. Starting 23 October 1942, Romanian pilots flew a total of 4,000 sorties, during which they destroyed 61 Soviet aircraft. The Romanian Air Force lost 79 aircraft, most of them captured on the ground along with their airfields.\nGermans reach the Volga.\nIn August 1942 after three months of slow advance, the Germans finally reached the river banks, capturing 90% of the ruined city and splitting the remaining Soviet forces into two narrow pockets. Ice floes on the Volga now prevented boats and tugs from supplying the Soviet defenders. Nevertheless, the fighting continued, especially on the slopes of Mamayev Kurgan and inside the factory area in the northern part of the city. From 21 August to 20 November, the German 6th Army lost 60,548 men, including 12,782 killed, 45,545 wounded and 2,221 missing. Fighting for the Volga banks has been noted as the \"most concentrated and ferocious fighting in perhaps the whole war\".\nSoviet counter-offensives.\nRecognising that German troops were ill-prepared for offensive operations during the winter of 1942 and that most of them were deployed elsewhere on the southern sector of the Eastern Front, the Stavka decided to conduct a number of offensive operations between 19 November 1942 and 2 February 1943. These operations opened the Winter Campaign of 1942\u20131943 (19 November 1942 \u2013 3 March 1943), which involved some fifteen Armies operating on several fronts. As per Zhukov, \"German operational blunders were aggravated by poor intelligence: they failed to spot preparations for the major counter-offensive near Stalingrad where there were 10 field, 1 tank and 4 air armies.\"\nWeakness on the Axis flanks.\nDuring the siege, the German and allied Italian, Hungarian, and Romanian armies protecting Army Group B's north and south flanks had pressed their headquarters for support. The Hungarian 2nd Army was given the task of defending a section of the front north of Stalingrad between the Italian Army and Voronezh. This resulted in a very thin line, with some sectors where stretches were being defended by a single platoon (platoons typically have around 20 to 50 men). These forces were also lacking in effective anti-tank weapons. Zhukov states, \"Compared with the Germans, the troops of the satellites were not so well armed, less experienced and less efficient, even in defence.\"\nBecause of the total focus on the city, the Axis forces had neglected for months to consolidate their positions along the natural defensive line of the Don River. The Soviet forces were allowed to retain bridgeheads on the right bank from which offensive operations could be quickly launched. These bridgeheads in retrospect presented a serious threat to Army Group B.\nSimilarly, on the southern flank of the Stalingrad sector, the front southwest of Kotelnikovo was held only by the Romanian 4th Army. Beyond that army, a single German division, the 16th Motorised Infantry, covered 400\u00a0km. Paulus had requested permission on 10 November to \"withdraw the 6th Army behind the Don,\" but was rejected. According to Paulus's comments to his adjutant Wilhelm Adam, \"There is still the order whereby no commander of an army group or an army has the right to relinquish a village, even a trench, without Hitler's consent.\"\nOperation Uranus.\nIn autumn, Zhukov and Vasilevsky, responsible for strategic planning in the Stalingrad area, concentrated forces in the steppes to the north and south of the city. The northern flank was defended by Romanian units, often in open positions on the steppes. The natural line of defence, the Don River, had never been properly established by the German side. The armies in the area were also poorly equipped in terms of anti-tank weapons. The plan was to punch through the overstretched and weakly defended flanks and surround the German forces in the Stalingrad region.\nDuring the preparations for the attack, Marshal Zhukov personally visited the front and noticing the poor organisation, insisted on a one-week delay in the start date of the planned attack. The operation was code-named \"Uranus\" and launched in conjunction with Operation Mars, which was directed at Army Group Centre about to the northwest. The plan was similar to that used by Zhukov to achieve victory at Khalkhin Gol in 1939, where he had sprung a double envelopment and destroyed the 23rd Division of the Japanese army.\nOn 19 November 1942, Operation Uranus was launched. The attacking Soviet units under the command of Gen. Nikolay Vatutin consisted of three complete armies, the 1st Guards Army, 5th Tank Army and 21st Army, including a total of 18 infantry divisions, eight tank brigades, two motorised brigades, six cavalry divisions and one anti-tank brigade. The preparations for the attack were heard by the Romanians, who pushed for reinforcements, only to be refused. Romania's 3rd Army, which protected the northern flank of the German 6th Army, was overrun, due to thin lines, and being outnumbered and poorly equipped.\nOn 20 November, a second Soviet offensive (two armies) was launched to the south of Stalingrad against points held by the Romanian 4th Army Corps. The Romanian forces, made up primarily of infantry, were overrun by large numbers of tanks. The Soviet forces raced west and met on 23 November at the town of Kalach, sealing the ring around Stalingrad.\nSixth Army surrounded.\nBy the time of the encirclement, approximately 330,000 Axis personnel, including Germans, Romanians, Italians, and Croatians, were trapped. Among them were between 40,000 and 65,000 \"Hilfswillige\" (\"Hiwi\"), or \"volunteer auxiliaries,\" recruited from Soviet POWs and civilians. These \"Hiwi\" often served in supporting roles but were also deployed in frontline units due to their growing numbers.\nThe conditions within the German 6th Army deteriorated to those reminiscent of World War I trench warfare. Troops were forced to take up positions in the open steppe, lacking basic sanitation, which led to rapid spread of infections and dysentery, further debilitating the soldiers. By 19 November 1942, the German forces in the pocket numbered about 210,000, with 50,000 soldiers outside the encirclement. Of those trapped, 10,000 continued to fight, 105,000 eventually surrendered, 35,000 were evacuated by air, and 60,000 died.\nDespite the 6th Army's dire situation, no reinforcements were pulled from Army Group A in the Caucasus to aid in the relief of Stalingrad. It was only after Soviet forces broke through in Operation Little Saturn, threatening to encircle Army Group A, that a withdrawal was ordered on December 31 to avoid complete entrapment.\nArmy Group Don was established under Field Marshal von Manstein, tasked with leading the 20 German and two Romanian divisions encircled at Stalingrad. Despite Manstein's recommendation for a breakout, Hitler insisted on holding the city, relying on an ill-fated airlift to supply the 6th Army, which failed to deliver the necessary supplies. The airlift fell drastically short, delivering only 105 tons per day, far below the required 750 tons. The situation worsened after the Soviets captured Tatsinskaya Airfield on 24 December, forcing the Germans to relocate their air operations to more distant and less effective bases. As supplies dwindled, starvation and disease ravaged the 6th Army. By the time the airlift was terminated, the \"Luftwaffe\" had lost nearly 500 aircraft, including 266 Ju 52s, and failed to maintain adequate supply levels. Ultimately, the failure to relieve Stalingrad sealed the fate of the 6th Army, leading to one of the most catastrophic defeats in military history.\nEnd of the battle.\nOperation Winter Storm.\nManstein's plan to rescue the Sixth Army \u2013 Operation Winter Storm \u2013 was developed in full consultation with F\u00fchrer headquarters. It aimed to break through to the Sixth Army and establish a corridor to keep it supplied and reinforced, so that, according to Hitler's order, it could maintain its \"cornerstone\" position on the Volga, \"with regard to operations in 1943\". Manstein, however, who knew that Sixth Army could not survive the winter there, instructed his headquarters to draw up a further plan in the event of Hitler's seeing sense.\nThis would include the subsequent breakout of Sixth Army, in the event of a successful first phase, and its physical reincorporation in Army Group Don. This second plan was given the name Operation Thunderclap. Winter Storm, as Zhukov had predicted, was originally planned as a two-pronged attack. One thrust would come from the area of Kotelnikovo, well to the south, and around from the Sixth Army. The other would start from the Chir front west of the Don, which was little more than from the edge of the Kessel, but the continuing attacks of Romanenko's 5th Tank Army against the German detachments along the river Chir ruled out that start-line.\nThis left only the LVII Panzer Corps around Kotelnikovo, supported by the rest of Hoth's very mixed Fourth Panzer Army, to relieve Paulus's trapped divisions. The LVII Panzer Corps, commanded by General Friedrich Kirchner, had been weak at first. It consisted of two Romanian cavalry divisions and the 23rd Panzer Division, which mustered no more than thirty serviceable tanks. The 6th Panzer Division, arriving from France, was a vastly more powerful formation, but its members hardly received an encouraging impression. The Austrian divisional commander, General Erhard Raus, was summoned to Manstein's royal carriage in Kharkov station on 24 November, where the field marshal briefed him. \"He described the situation in very sombre terms\", recorded Raus.\nThree days later, when the first trainload of Raus's division steamed into Kotelnikovo station to unload, his troops were greeted by \"a hail of shells\" from Soviet batteries. \"As quick as lightning, the Panzergrenadiers jumped from their wagons. But already the enemy was attacking the station with their battle-cries of 'Urrah!'\"\nBy 18 December, the German Army had pushed to within 48\u00a0km (30\u00a0mi) of Sixth Army's positions. However, the predictable nature of the relief operation brought significant risk for all German forces in the area. The starving encircled forces at Stalingrad made no attempt to break out or link up with Manstein's advance. Some German officers requested that Paulus defy Hitler's orders to stand fast and instead attempt to break out of the Stalingrad pocket. Paulus refused, concerned about the Red Army attacks on the flank of Army Group Don and Army Group B in their advance on Rostov-on-Don, \"an early abandonment\" of Stalingrad \"would result in the destruction of Army Group A in the Caucasus\", and the fact that his 6th Army tanks only had fuel for a 30\u00a0km advance towards Hoth's spearhead, a futile effort if they did not receive assurance of resupply by air. Of his questions to Army Group Don, Paulus was told, \"Wait, implement Operation 'Thunderclap' only on explicit orders!\" \u2013 Operation Thunderclap being the code word initiating the breakout.\nOperation Little Saturn.\nOn 16 December, the Soviets launched Operation Little Saturn, which attempted to punch through the Axis army (mainly Italians) on the Don. The Germans set up a \"mobile defence\" of small units that were to hold towns until supporting armour arrived. From the Soviet bridgehead at Mamon, 15 divisions \u2013 supported by at least 100 tanks \u2013 attacked the Italian Cosseria and Ravenna Divisions, and although outnumbered 9 to 1, the Italians initially fought well, with the Germans praising the quality of the Italian defenders, but on 19 December, with the Italian lines disintegrating, ARMIR headquarters ordered the battered divisions to withdraw to new lines.\nThe fighting forced a total revaluation of the German situation. Sensing that this was the last chance for a breakout, Manstein pleaded with Hitler on 18 December, but Hitler refused. Paulus himself also doubted the feasibility of such a breakout. The attempt to break through to Stalingrad was abandoned and Army Group A was ordered to pull back from the Caucasus. The 6th Army now was beyond all hope of German relief. While a motorised breakout might have been possible in the first few weeks, the 6th Army now had insufficient fuel and the German soldiers would have faced great difficulty breaking through the Soviet lines on foot in harsh winter conditions. But in its defensive position on the Volga, the 6th Army continued to tie down a significant number of Soviet Armies.\nOn 23 December, the attempt to relieve Stalingrad was abandoned and Manstein's forces switched over to the defensive to deal with new Soviet offensives. As Zhukov states, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The military and political leadership of Nazi Germany sought not to relieve them, but to get them to fight on for as long possible so as to tie up the Soviet forces. The aim was to win as much time as possible to withdraw forces from the Caucasus (Army Group A) and to rush troops from other Fronts to form a new front that would be able in some measure to check our counter-offensive.\nSoviet victory.\nThe Red Army High Command sent three envoys while, simultaneously, aircraft and loudspeakers announced the terms of capitulation on 7 January 1943. The letter was signed by Colonel-General of Artillery Voronov and the commander-in-chief of the Don Front, Lieutenant-General Rokossovsky. A low-level Soviet envoy party (comprising Major Aleksandr Smyslov, Captain Nikolay Dyatlenko and a trumpeter) carried generous surrender terms to Paulus: if he surrendered within 24 hours, he would receive a guarantee of safety for all prisoners, medical care for the sick and wounded, prisoners being allowed to keep their personal belongings, \"normal\" food rations, and repatriation to any country they wished after the war. Rokossovsky's letter also stressed that Paulus' men were in an untenable situation. Paulus requested permission to surrender, but Hitler rejected Paulus' request out of hand. Accordingly, Paulus did not respond. The German High Command informed Paulus, \"Every day that the army holds out longer helps the whole front and draws away the Russian divisions from it.\"\nThe operation launched on 10 January 1943 with what was the single largest bombardment of the war at that point, with nearly 7,000 field guns, launchers and mortars firing against German positions. The operation was likely the largest scale economy-of-force offensive conducted in military history. The Germans retreated from the suburbs of Stalingrad to the city. The loss of the two airfields, Pitomnik on 16 January 1943 and Gumrak on the night of 21/22 January, meant an end to air supplies and the evacuation of the wounded. The third and last serviceable runway was at the Stalingradskaya flight school, which had its last landings and takeoffs on 23 January. After 23 January, there were no more reported landings, just intermittent air drops of ammunition and food until the end.\nDespite the horrendous situation that German forces faced, both starving and running out of ammunition, they continued to resist, with transcripts showing that despite many German soldiers yelling \"Hitler kaput\" to avoid being shot while surrendering, the level of armed resistance remained extraordinarily high till the end of the battle. In particular, the so-called \"HiWis\", Soviet citizens fighting for the Germans, had no illusions about their fate if captured. Bloody urban warfare began again in Stalingrad, but this time it was the Germans who were pushed back to the banks of the Volga. The Germans adopted a simple defence of fixing wire nets over all windows to protect themselves from grenades. The Soviets responded by fixing fish hooks to the grenades so they stuck to the nets when thrown.\nOn 22 January, Rokossovsky once again offered Paulus a chance to surrender. Paulus requested that he be granted permission to accept the terms. He told Hitler that he was no longer able to command his men, who were without ammunition or food. Hitler rejected it on a point of honour. He telegraphed the 6th Army later that day, claiming that it had made a historic contribution to the greatest struggle in German history and that it should stand fast \"to the last soldier and the last bullet\". Hitler told Goebbels that the plight of the 6th Army was a \"heroic drama of German history\". On 24 January, in his radio report to Hitler, Paulus reported: \"18,000 wounded without the slightest aid of bandages and medicines.\"\nOn 26 January 1943, the German forces inside Stalingrad were split into two pockets north and south of Mamayev-Kurgan. The northern pocket consisting of the VIIIth Corps, under General Walter Heitz, and the XIth Corps, was now cut off from telephone communication with Paulus in the southern pocket. Now \"each part of the cauldron came personally under Hitler\". On 28 January, the cauldron was split into three parts. The northern cauldron consisted of the XIth Corps, the central with the VIIIth and LIst Corps, and the southern with the XIVth Panzer Corps and IVth Corps \"without units\". The sick and wounded reached 40,000 to 50,000.\nOn 30 January 1943, the 10th anniversary of Hitler's coming to power, Goebbels read out a proclamation that included the sentence: \"The heroic struggle of our soldiers on the Volga should be a warning for everybody to do the utmost for the struggle for Germany's freedom and the future of our people, and thus in a wider sense for the maintenance of our entire continent.\" The same day, Hermann G\u00f6ring broadcast from the air ministry, comparing the situation of the surrounded German 6th Army to that of the Spartans at the Battle of Thermopylae, the speech was not well received by soldiers however. Paulus notified Hitler that his men would likely collapse before the day was out. In response, Hitler then issued a tranche of field promotions to the Sixth Army's officers, with Paulus made a \"Generalfeldmarschall\". In deciding to promote Paulus, Hitler noted that there was no record of a German or Prussian field marshal having ever surrendered. The implication was clear: if Paulus surrendered, he would shame himself and would become the highest-ranking German officer ever to be captured. As a result, Hitler believed that Paulus would either fight to the last man or commit suicide.\nOn the next day, the southern pocket in Stalingrad collapsed. Soviet forces reached the entrance to the German headquarters in the ruined GUM department store. Major Anatoly Soldatov described the conditions of the department store basement as such, \"it was unbelievably filthy, you couldn't get through the front or back doors, the filth came up to your chest, along with human waste and who knows what else. The stench was unbelievable.\" When interrogated by the Soviets, Paulus claimed that he had not surrendered. He said that he had been taken by surprise. He denied that he was the commander of the remaining northern pocket in Stalingrad and refused to issue an order in his name for them to surrender.\nThe central pocket, under the command of Heitz, surrendered the same day, while the northern pocket, under the command of General Karl Strecker, held out for two more days. Four Soviet armies were deployed against the northern pocket. At four in the morning on 2 February, Strecker was informed that one of his own officers had gone to the Soviets to negotiate surrender terms. Seeing no point in continuing, he sent a radio message saying that his command had done its duty and fought to the last man. When Strecker finally surrendered, he and his chief of staff, Helmuth Groscurth, drafted the final signal sent from Stalingrad, purposely omitting the customary exclamation to Hitler, replacing it with \"Long live Germany!\"\nAround 91,000 exhausted, ill, wounded, and starving prisoners were taken. The prisoners included 22 generals. Hitler was furious and confided that Paulus \"could have freed himself from all sorrow and ascended into eternity and national immortality, but he prefers to go to Moscow\".\nTactics and battle conditions.\nGerman military doctrine was based on the principle of combined-arms teams and close cooperation between tanks, infantry, engineers, artillery and ground-attack aircraft. To negate the German usage of tanks and artillery in the ruins of the city, Soviet commander Chuikov introduced a tactic he described as \"hugging\" the enemy: keeping Soviet front-line positions as close as possible to those of the Germans, so German artillery and aircraft could not attack without risking friendly fire. After mid-September, to reduce casualties, he ceased launching organized daylight counterattacks, instead emphasizing small unit tactics in which infantry moved through the city's sewers to strike into the rear of attacking German units. The Soviets preferred night attacks, which disrupted German morale by depriving them of sleep. Soviet reconnaissance patrols were used to find German positions and take prisoners for interrogation, enabling them to anticipate attacks. When Soviet troops detected a coming attack, they launched their own counterattacks at dawn before German air support could arrive. Soviet troops blunted the German attacks themselves through ambushes that separated tanks from their supporting infantry, as well as the employment of booby traps and mines. These tactical innovations became widespread.\nThe Soviets used the great amount of destruction to their advantage, by adding man-made defences such as barbed wire, minefields, trenches, and bunkers to the rubble, while large factories even housed tanks and large-calibre guns within. \"Red Army soldiers enjoyed inventing gadgets to kill Germans. New booby traps were dreamed up, each seemingly more ingenious and unpredictable in its results than the last.\" The battle saw all types of \"MOUT\" combat techniques at the time.\nThe forces involved in the battle were composed of well-trained, and in some cases, very-experienced troops, with the German 6th Army highly regarded, as it is noted that \"Stalingrad was fought and lost by the finest collection of divisions in an army that had not known strategic defeat for a quarter of a century\" in reference to German forces.\nStalingrad was the supreme example of \"total war\", described as \"approaching Clausewitz's theoretical description of absolute war\". The Soviets persisted against German forces by using all available means, with the commitment being reflected in their planning, orders and actions. Stalin's commitment to Stalingrad became total, using every available resource to hold it, and ordering the city be held at all costs. Evidence of commitment was the vast casualties the Soviets were willing to sustain. Collateral damage was not a major concern, the first priority was victory and all weapons would be used to that end with little regard for collateral damage. This is also reflected by a common saying among the Soviet defenders, who often exclaimed that \"for us, there is no land beyond the Volga\". Total war was reflected by Axis forces, as they attacked without concern and committed to a bombing campaign which utterly destroyed the city and killed thousands of civilians, and Hitler would not allow for German forces to retreat, even with the threat of encirclement. On 14 October, Hitler suspended all operations along the entire Eastern Front except for Stalingrad, and continued pushing even harder for Army Group B to capture the city, showing his willingness to capture it at any cost.\nAn important weapon was the flamethrower, which was \"effectively terrifying\" in its use of clearing sewer tunnels, cellars, and inaccessible hiding places. Operators were immediately targeted as soon as they were spotted. The Katyusha rocket launcher, known to the Germans as \"Stalin's organ\", was used with devastating effect. In hand-to-hand fighting, spades were used as axes. Equipment used during the battle represented a full spectrum of World War II equipment, encompassing manufactured and field-improvised systems, as both sides fielded and used their complete arsenals.\nThe battle consumed a tremendous amount of ammunition and resources, in September fighting alone, the 6th Army expended 25 million rounds of small arms, 500,000 anti-tank rounds, 752,000 artillery shells and 178,000 hand grenades, with German forces expending 300 to 500 tons of artillery ammunition each day. The Red Army fired more ammunition in this battle than any other operation of the war.\nThe Soviet urban warfare tactics relied on 20-to-50-man-assault groups, armed with machine guns, grenades and satchel charges, with buildings fortified as strongpoints with clear fields of fire. Strongpoints were defended by guns or tanks on the ground floor, while machine gunners and artillery observers operated from the upper floors. Assault groups used sewers or broke through walls into adjoining buildings, to maintain concealment while moving into the rear of German attacks. Soviet tactical innovations were a \"combination of intelligence, discipline, and determination\" enabling the Soviet defenders to keep fighting when the Germans had achieved victory by \"all conventional measures.\"\nThe battle was notable for hand-to-hand combat, the \"most savage hand-to-hand battle in human memory\". Ferocious fighting raged for ruins, streets, factories, houses, basements, and staircases. Blocks and buildings would change hands numerous times through intense hand-to-hand fighting. Combat was so close at times that soldiers preferred using melee weapons, such as knives, and grenades being tossed at such short distances they could be thrown back before they exploded. \"Every building had to be fought for; single buildings and single blocks became major military objectives. Often both German and Russian troops occupied parts of the same building.\" Even the sewers saw firefights. The Germans called this unseen urban warfare \"Rattenkrieg\", or \"Rat War\". Buildings had to be cleared room by room through the bombed-out debris of residential areas, office blocks, basements and apartment high-rises. Antony Beevor describes how this process was particularly brutal, \"In its way, the fighting in Stalingrad was even more terrifying than the impersonal slaughter at Verdun...It possessed a savage intimacy which appalled their generals, who felt that they were rapidly losing control over events.\" According to Peter Calvocoressi and Guy Wint, \"The closest and bloodiest battle of the war was fought among the stumps of buildings burnt or burning\". Buildings saw floor-by-floor, close combat, with the Germans and Soviets on alternate levels, firing at each other through holes in the floors. Fighting on and around Mamayev Kurgan, a prominent hill above the city, was particularly merciless; indeed, the position changed hands many times. A notable building brutally fought for was Gerhardt's Mill, still kept as a memorial. It was eventually cleared by the 39th Guards Regiment in close-quarters combat. Another example was on 14 September, the main railway station changed hands five times, and over the course of the next three days, another thirteen times. \nThe brutality was shown by the military casualties taken by units. The 13th Guards Rifle Division suffered 30% casualties in the first twenty-four hours, with only 320 men out of 10,000 remaining at the battle's conclusion. With buildings and floors changing hands dozens of times and taking up days to win, platoons and companies took up to 90% and even 100% casualties to win a building or floor within it. Chuikov estimated that about three thousand Germans had been killed during the fighting for the tractor factory on 14 October alone.\nThe Germans used aircraft, tanks and heavy artillery to clear the city with varying success. Towards the end of August, the gigantic railroad gun nicknamed \"Dora\" was brought in, being withdrawn soon after due to Soviet threats to the gun. Germans would shell Soviet reinforcements coming across the Volga without pause, with the Soviets firing back. Despite the notion of the vulnerability of tanks in urban settings, tank warfare was important, and the basis of every Soviet position was anti-tank warfare, with significant efforts made to resist German tank assaults. The \"Luftwaffe\" conducted 100,000 sorties and dropped 100,000 tons of bombs on the city and river crossings.\nThe battle epitomized the use of snipers in urban warfare. Snipers on both sides used the ruins to inflict casualties, with Soviet command heavily emphasizing sniper tactics to wear down the Germans. The most famous Soviet sniper was Vasily Zaytsev, who became a propaganda hero, credited with 225 kills. Targets were often soldiers bringing up food or water to forward positions. Artillery spotters were an especially prized target for snipers.\nThe ferocious and intense fighting was not only within the city itself. Most brutal fighting that consumed both forces occurred outside and west of the city, in the snow-covered steppes. The battle turned from the mobile warfare during the German push towards the city into positional warfare, with trench warfare becoming common inside and outside the city, as both sides entrenched themselves and built up positions, with trenches being turned into strongpoints and brutally fought for.\nA historical debate concerns the degree of terror in the Red Army. Beevor noted the \"sinister\" message from the Stalingrad Front's Political Department on 8 October 1942 that: \"The defeatist mood is almost eliminated and the number of treasonous incidents is getting lower\" as an example of the coercion Red Army soldiers experienced under the Special Detachments (renamed SMERSH). On the other hand, Beevor noted the often extraordinary bravery of the Soviet soldiers, and argued terror alone cannot explain such self-sacrifice. A Soviet officer interviewed, explained the feeling, \"There was this sense that every soldier and officer in Stalingrad was itching to kill as many Germans as possible. In Stalingrad people felt a particularly intense hatred for the Germans.\" German observers were perplexed by the relentlessness of the Soviets, with a 29 October 1942 article in the SS newspaper, \"Das Schwarze Korps\", stating \"The Bolshevists attack until total exhaustion, and defend themselves until the physical extermination of the last man and weapon . . . Sometimes the individual will fight beyond the point considered humanly possible\". One example of the heroism seen in Soviet troops was Soviet marine Mikhail Panikakha, who was covered in flames after his Molotov cocktail was shot while attempting to throw it, however he continued with another Molotov and destroyed a tank.\nRichard Overy addresses the question of how important the Red Army's coercive methods were to the war effort compared with other factors such as hatred for the enemy, stating that while it is \"easy to argue that from the summer of 1942 the Soviet army fought because it was forced to fight,\" to concentrate solely on coercion is nonetheless to \"distort our view of the Soviet war effort.\" After conducting interviews with Soviet veterans on the terror on the Eastern Front \u2013 and specifically Order No. 227 (\"Not a step back!\") \u2013 Catherine Merridale notes, seemingly paradoxically, \"their response was frequently relief.\" Infantryman Lev Lvovich's explanation is typical, \"[i]t was a necessary and important step. We all knew where we stood after we had heard it. And we all \u2013 it's true \u2013 felt better. Yes, we felt better.\"\nJoe Castillo argues that while the Wehrmacht inflicted the immediate killing, Stalin's leadership and the \"victory at any cost\", A doctrine crystallized in Order No. 227, turned Stalingrad into a deliberate bloodbath by banning retreat, deploying barrier troops, and creating penal battalions. He traces how the pre-war purge of the Red Army's officer corps, the devastation of August 1942, and on-the-ground testimonies (e.g., Vasily Grossman) show soldiers fighting from a mix of coercion, patriotism, and propaganda fuelled by the cult of Stalin. The paper concludes that Soviet ideology and Stalin's directives bear substantial responsibility for the battle's catastrophic Soviet losses, even amid ultimate victory.\nMany women fought on the Soviet side or were under fire. As General Chuikov acknowledged, \"Remembering the defence of Stalingrad, I can't overlook the very important question\u00a0\u2026 about the role of women in war, in the rear, but also at the front. Equally with men they bore all the burdens of combat life and together with us men, they went all the way to Berlin.\" At the beginning of the battle there were 75,000 women and girls from the Stalingrad area who had finished military or medical training, and they were to serve in the battle. Women staffed many anti-aircraft batteries that fought the \"Luftwaffe\" and German tanks. Soviet nurses not only treated wounded personnel under fire but were involved in the dangerous work of bringing wounded soldiers back to hospitals under fire. Many Soviet wireless and telephone operators were women who often suffered heavy casualties when their command posts came under fire. Though women were not usually trained as infantry, many Soviet women fought as machine gunners, mortar operators, scouts, and as snipers. Three air regiments at Stalingrad were entirely female. At least three women won the Hero of the Soviet Union while driving tanks.\nFor Stalin and Hitler, Stalingrad became a matter of prestige beyond its strategic significance. A book analyzing urban warfare remarked that \"Among the cases collected here, the most extreme example of politics and sentiment investing a city with importance is that of Stalingrad\". Another paper notes \"the battle between German and Soviet forces at Stalingrad was representative of the battle of wills between Hitler and Stalin\". The strain on military commanders was immense: Paulus developed an uncontrollable tic in his eye, which eventually affected the left side of his face, while Chuikov experienced an outbreak of eczema that required him to have his hands completely bandaged. Troops on both sides faced the constant strain of close-range combat.\nThe Soviets used psychological warfare tactics to intimidate and demoralize. On loudspeakers throughout the ruined city, it was continuously announced that \"Every seven seconds a German soldier dies in Russia. Stalingrad. . .mass grave\". The sound was interspersed with the monotonous sound of a ticking clock, and an orchestral melody dubbed the \"Tango of Death\".\nMedical and food conditions.\nThe conditions of both armies were atrocious. Disease ran rampant, with many deaths due to dysentery, typhus, diphtheria, tuberculosis and jaundice, causing medical staff to fear a possible epidemic. Rats and mice were plentiful, serving as one reason Germans could not counterattack in time, due to mice having chewed their tank wiring. Lice were heavily prevalent, and plagues of flies would gather around kitchens, adding to the possibility of wound infections. Brutal winter conditions affected soldiers tremendously, with temperatures at times reaching as low as \u221240\u00a0\u00b0C in the second half of November, and \u221230\u00a0\u00b0C in late January. The weather conditions were considered to be extreme and the worst possible. The weather conditions caused rapid frostbite, with many cases of gangrene and amputation. The conditions saw soldiers dying en masse due to frostbite and hypothermia. Both armies suffered food shortages, with mass starvation on both sides. Stress, tiredness and the cold upset the metabolism of soldiers, receiving a reduced amount of calories from food. German forces eventually ran out of medical supplies such as ether, antiseptics and bandages. Surgery had to be done without anaesthesia.\nBiologist Kenneth Alibek suggested the Red Army used tularemia as a biological weapon during the battle, though this is thought to have resulted from natural causes.\nCasualties.\nThe Axis suffered 800,000\u20131,500,000 casualties (killed, wounded or captured) among all branches of the German armed forces and their allies:\n235,000 German and allied troops in total, from all units, including Manstein's ill-fated relief force, were captured during the battle.\nIt is estimated that over one million soldiers and civilians combined were killed during the battle. Historian William Craig, while researching for his , stressed the incredible death toll of the battle, stating that \"Most appalling was the growing realization, formed by statistics I uncovered, that the battle was the greatest military bloodbath in recorded history. Well over a million men and women died because of Stalingrad, a number far surpassing the previous records of dead at the first battle of the Somme and Verdun in 1916.\" Historian Edwin P. Hoyt states that \"In less than seven months the Stalingrad dead numbered over three million\". Historian Jochen Hellbeck described the lethality of the battle as such, \"The battle of Stalingrad\u2014the most ferocious and lethal battle in human history\u2014ended on February 2. With an estimated death toll in an excess of a million, the bloodletting at Stalingrad far exceeded that of Verdun, one of the costliest battles of World War I.\" According to military historian Louis A. DiMarco, \"In terms of raw casualty numbers, the battle for Stalingrad was the single most brutal battle in history.\" Military historian Victor Davis Hanson affirmed that \"The costliest land battle in history took place at Stalingrad\" and that the \"fighting inside a besieged Stalingrad proved to be the most costly single battle of World War II. At least 1.5 million Russians and Germans died over the months of contesting the city's rubble, comparably only to the World War I German attack on the fortress complex at Verdun.\" British historian Andrew Roberts stated that \"Superlatives are unavoidable when describing the battle of Stalingrad; it was the struggle of Gog and Magog, the merciless clash where the rules of war were discarded . . . Around 1.1 million died in the battle on both sides\".\nThe Germans lost 900 aircraft (including 274 transports and 165 bombers used as transports), 500 tanks and 6,000 artillery pieces. A recent Soviet report states that 5,762 guns, 1,312 mortars, 12,701 heavy machine guns, 156,987 rifles, 80,438 sub-machine guns, 10,722 trucks, 744 aircraft; 1,666 tanks, 261 other armoured vehicles, 571 half-tracks and 10,679 motorcycles were captured by the Soviets.\nThe USSR, according to archival figures, suffered 1,129,619 total casualties; 478,741 personnel killed or missing, termed to be \"irrevocable\", and 650,878 wounded or sick. The USSR lost 4,341 tanks destroyed or damaged, 15,728 artillery pieces and 2,769 combat aircraft. Though the losses given by Soviet officials have been met with criticism, for accuracy of Soviet losses and underreporting. Recent clarifications of data and estimates of losses state that the USSR suffered 1,347,214 total casualties, with 674,990 irrevocable losses, and 672,224 being wounded or sick, with an extension of this data to include NKVD troops and volunteer formations, the total casualties could extend to 1.36 to 1.37 million. However, the data is still questioned as being underestimated. The British historian Laurence Rees gives a figure of one million Soviet soldiers dead on the Stalingrad front.\nRussian historian Boris Vadimovich Sokolov cites the memoirs of a former director of the Tsaritsyn-Stalingrad Defence Museum, who noted that over two million Soviets dead were counted before being ordered to stop, with \"still many months of work left\". Sokolov states it as being closer to the true death toll than official statistics due to severe underreporting. However, many of Russian historians, sociologists and publicists consider the data on the losses of the Red Army during the Great Patriotic War, given in the publications of Sokolov, to be unreliable. In 2016, he was expelled from the Free Historical Society for \"\u201cinappropriate handling of historical sources and incorrect quoting of other people's works.\u201d\"\nAccording to incomplete data from the Volgograd party archive, 42,754 people died during the course of the battle. However, research by Russian historian Tatyana Pavlova calculated there to be 710,000 inhabitants in the city on 23 August, and of that amount, 185,232 people had died by the battle's conclusion, and including about 50,000 in the rural areas of Stalingrad, for a total of 235,232 civilians dead. Also from her research, Pavlova states that \"The losses of the civilian population of Stalingrad are 32.3% higher than the losses of the population of Hiroshima from the atomic bombing\" and that \"In Stalingrad, an absolute world record was set for the mass destruction of the civilian population during World War II.\" A 2018 study concluded that the demographic losses due to the battle ranged from 2.5 to 3 million, thereby describing it as a \"real demographic catastrophe\".\nLuftwaffe losses.\nThe losses of transport planes were especially serious, as they destroyed the capacity for supply of the trapped 6th Army. The destruction of 72 aircraft when the airfield at Tatsinskaya Airfield was overrun meant the loss of about 10 percent of the Luftwaffe transport fleet.\nAftermath.\nThe German public was not officially told of the impending disaster until the end of January 1943, though positive media reports had stopped in the weeks before the announcement. Stalingrad marked the first time that the Nazi government publicly acknowledged a failure in its war effort. On 31 January, regular programmes on German state radio were replaced by a broadcast of the sombre Adagio movement from Anton Bruckner's Seventh Symphony, followed by the announcement of the defeat at Stalingrad. On 18 February, Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels gave the famous \"Sportpalast\" speech in Berlin, encouraging the Germans to accept a total war that would claim all resources and efforts from the entire population.\nBased on Soviet records, over 11,000 German soldiers continued to resist in isolated groups within the city for the next month. Some have presumed that they were motivated by a belief that fighting on was better than a slow death in Soviet captivity. Historian Omer Bartov claims they were motivated by belief in Hitler and National Socialism. He studied 11,237 letters sent by soldiers inside of Stalingrad between 20 December 1942 and 16 January 1943 to their families in Germany. Generally, the letters expressed belief in Germany's ultimate victory and the soldiers' willingness to fight and die at Stalingrad to achieve that victory. Bartov reported that a great many of the soldiers were well aware that they would not be able to escape from Stalingrad, but in their letters to their families stated that they were proud to \"sacrifice themselves for the F\u00fchrer\".\nA Soviet officer interviewed months after the battle, Nikolai Nikitich Aksyonov, described the scale of devastation and conflict at Stalingrad, stating that \"As a historian, I tried to draw comparisons to battles I know from history: Borodino, Verdun during the Imperialist War, but none of that was right because the scale of conflict in Stalingrad makes it hard to compare it to anything. It seemed as if Stalingrad was breathing fire for days on end.\" Some German soldiers expressed in their letters that they were trapped in a \"second Verdun\", while Soviet defenders described the battle as their \"Red Verdun\", in which they would refuse to surrender to the enemy. German captain Wilhelm Hosenfeld wrote in early October 1942 that, \"The fight for Stalingrad now surpasses all our previous struggles\u2014it has rightly been compared to Verdun. We must hope that the outcome is different. For I believe that the city holds a similar power for the Bolsheviks as Verdun did for the French in the First World War. It has become a symbol. This is a decisive moment. The French would say; Whoever holds Verdun will win the war.' The F\u00fchrer has spoken in similar fashion of Stalingrad\u2014and the city still has not fallen to us.\" In October 1942, a Soviet war correspondent remarked that \"A city of peace has become a city of war. The laws of warfare have placed it on the front line, at the epicenter of a battle that will shape the outcome of the entire war. After sixty days of fighting the Germans now know what this means. 'Verdun!' they scoff. 'This is no Verdun. This is something new in the history of warfare. This is Stalingrad.\" The world press commonly referred to it as the \"Verdun on the Volga\" during the battle.\nThe American Historian David M. Glantz stated that Stalingrad was \"the most brutal clash of arms in the most terrible of twentieth-century wars\". The French historian Fran\u00e7ois Kersaudy stated that \"Stalingrad was unique in the Second World War, in terms of duration, the number of soldiers killed, the relentlessness, the significance\" and that \"It was terrifying on both sides. They both had to carry on fighting until the very end. The people present there would have preferred hell itself\". British Historian Andrew Roberts stated that \"The battle of Stalingrad is deservedly considered to be the most desperate in human history. The German Sixth Army was sucked into a house-by-house, street-by-street, factory-by-factory struggle often even more attritional than the trench warfare of the Great War.\"\nThe battle is not only infamous for being a military bloodbath, but also for its disregard for civilians by both sides. When German forces reached the hospital for mentally handicapped children in the city, they promptly shot all the ten to fourteen year old patients. Soviet sniper Vasily Zaytsev took note of atrocities that took place during the battle, stating that, \"another time you see young girls, children hanging from trees in the park. . .It has tremendous impact.\" A Soviet sergeant in the 389th Infantry Division noted that Russian women coming out of houses during the fighting for the Barrikady workers' settlement to take shelter from German firing, ended up being killed by Russian machine-gun fire. \nThe bombing campaign and over five months of ferocious fighting had utterly destroyed 99% of the city, with the city being nothing more than a heap of rubble. Of the population of well over half a million before the battle, a quick census revealed only 1,515 people remained following the battle's conclusion. However, Beevor notes that a census revealed that 9,796 civilians were in the city at the battle's conclusion, including 994 children. \nThe remaining forces continued to resist, hiding in cellars and sewers, but by early March 1943 the last small and isolated pockets of resistance had surrendered. According to Soviet intelligence documents shown in the documentary, a remarkable NKVD report from March 1943 is available showing the tenacity of some of these German groups:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The mopping-up of counter-revolutionary elements in the city of Stalingrad proceeded. The German soldiers\u00a0\u2013 who had hidden themselves in huts and trenches\u00a0\u2013 offered armed resistance after combat actions had already ended. This armed resistance continued until 15 February and in a few areas until 20 February. Most of the armed groups were liquidated by March\u00a0... During this period of armed conflict with the Germans, the brigade's units killed 2,418 soldiers and officers and captured 8,646 soldiers and officers, escorting them to POW camps and handing them over.\nThe operative report of the Don Front's staff issued on 5 February 1943, 22:00 said,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The 64th Army was putting itself in order, being in previously occupied regions. Location of army's units is as it was previously. In the region of location of the 38th Motorised Rifle Brigade in a basement eighteen armed SS-men [\"sic\"] were found, who refused to surrender, the Germans found were destroyed.\nThe condition of the troops that surrendered was pitiful. British war correspondent Alexander Werth described the following scene in his \"Russia at War\" book, based on a first-hand account of his visit to Stalingrad on 3\u20135 February 1943,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We\u00a0[...] went into the yard of the large burnt out building of the Red Army House; and here one realised particularly clearly what the last days of Stalingrad had been to so many of the Germans. In the porch lay the skeleton of a horse, with only a few scraps of meat still clinging to its ribs. Then we came into the yard. Here lay more more [\"sic?\"] horses' skeletons, and to the right, there was an enormous horrible cesspool\u00a0\u2013 fortunately, frozen solid. And then, suddenly, at the far end of the yard I caught sight of a human figure. He had been crouching over another cesspool, and now, noticing us, he was hastily pulling up his pants, and then he slunk away into the door of the basement. But as he passed, I caught a glimpse of the wretch's face\u00a0\u2013 with its mixture of suffering and idiot-like incomprehension. For a moment, I wished that the whole of Germany were there to see it. The man was probably already dying. In that basement\u00a0[...] there were still two hundred Germans\u2014dying of hunger and frostbite. \"We haven't had time to deal with them yet,\" one of the Russians said. \"They'll be taken away tomorrow, I suppose.\" And, at the far end of the yard, besides the other cesspool, behind a low stone wall, the yellow corpses of skinny Germans were piled up\u00a0\u2013 men who had died in that basement\u2014about a dozen wax-like dummies. We did not go into the basement itself\u00a0\u2013 what was the use? There was nothing we could do for them. \nMost of the nearly 91,000 German prisoners captured in Stalingrad perished. Weakened by disease, starvation and lack of medical care during the encirclement, they were sent on forced marches to prisoner camps and later to labour camps all over the Soviet Union. Some 35,000 were eventually sent on transports, of which 17,000 did not survive. Most died of wounds, disease (particularly typhus), cold, overwork, mistreatment and malnutrition. Some were kept in the city to help rebuild it.\nA handful of senior officers were taken to Moscow and used for propaganda purposes, and some of them joined the National Committee for a Free Germany. Some, including Paulus, signed anti-Hitler statements that were broadcast to German troops. Paulus testified for the prosecution during the Nuremberg Trials and assured families in Germany that those soldiers taken prisoner at Stalingrad were safe. He remained in the Soviet Union until 1952, then moved to Dresden in East Germany, where he spent the remainder of his days defending his actions at Stalingrad and was quoted as saying that Communism was the best hope for postwar Europe. General Walther von Seydlitz-Kurzbach offered to raise an anti-Hitler army from the Stalingrad survivors, but the Soviets did not accept the offer. It was not until 1955 that the last of the 5,000\u20136,000 survivors were repatriated (to West Germany) after a plea to the Politburo by Konrad Adenauer.\nSignificance.\nStalingrad has been described as the greatest single defeat in the history of the German Army. Historian Geoffrey Roberts described it as \"the biggest and most traumatic defeat in German military history\" and that \"the myth of the invincible \"Wehrmacht\" was gone forever\". The German military historian Walter G\u00f6rlitz stated that \"It was a second Jena, and was certainly the greatest defeat in history that a German Army had ever undergone\". The battle is commonly identified as the turning point on the Eastern Front, in the war against Germany overall, and in the entire Second World War. The battle is analyzed as being a \"point of no return\" on the Eastern Front and as the \"final military consequence\" of Germany's decreasing chances to win the war against the Soviet Union. The Soviet general Viktor Matsulenko deemed the battle to be \"the beginning of a basic turning point not just in the course of the Great Patriotic War, but for the entire World War II\" and that the battle was \"the most important military-political event of World War II\". The battle is also seen as the turning point in the air war, as German forces lost countless aircraft and experienced crewmen. Stalingrad gave the people of the Soviet Union hope, with military historian David M. Glantz asserting that \"Russians, as well as many of the former Soviet Union's other ethnic minorities, saw the Red Army's victory at Stalingrad as a catharsis which saved Stalin's city and salvaged a nation's shattered pride\". In 1989, a comprehensive quantitative analysis concluded that Stalingrad was the military turning point of the war, the turning point for the Soviet leadership, as Stalin recognized the practicality of using his experienced commanders and gave his generals more freedom in fighting the war, and that the Soviet Union had indeed seized the initiative as a result of the battle, based on some of the critical factors examined in the study. An analysis in 2004 also concluded that the epic battle sealed the fate of the Germans in the East, a blow in which they would never recover from, and as a result the strategic initiative shifted to the Soviet side, therefore establishing the Battle of Stalingrad as the fundamental turning point in the war on the Eastern Front. A year of Axis gains from Case Blue had been wiped out. The Sixth Army of Germany had ceased to exist, and the forces of Germany's European allies, except Finland, had been shattered. In a speech on 9 November 1944, Hitler himself blamed Stalingrad for Germany's impending doom. Furthermore, according to some historians, such as Mikhail Myagkov, a Russian historian, the battle ended up completely dissuading Turkey and Japan from declaring war on the Soviet Union. The battle also stifled plans for future joint strategy in the Indian Ocean area between the Japanese and the Germans once their forces met up, and made certain that the German ambitions to use Soviet resources to fight against the Western Allies were no longer feasible. Its importance was further noted by historian John Erickson, who stated that \"If the battle of Poltava in 1709 turned Russia into a European power, then Stalingrad set the Soviet Union on the road to being a world power\".\nAccording to Roberts, \"Battles do change the course of history. They determine the outcome of wars, the shape and character of victory and the peace that follows. They also change how the history of a war is viewed. In both these respects no battle changed history more than Stalingrad\", and that \"The coming of the nuclear era meant that there would never be another battle like Stalingrad. The greatest battle of the last great war of the pre-atomic age was an epic struggle that will never be surpassed.\" Historian J. Bradford Delong expressed that the Battle of Stalingrad, \"of any battle in human history, has made the greatest positive difference for humanity\".\nThe destruction of multiple armies and the halting of Germany's advance made the battle a watershed moment. Germany had lost its best army, as the Sixth Army was regarded as \"the finest and most triumphant infantry in the world at that time\" and was deemed to have been the \"invincible, unstoppable spearhead of the Third Reich's arms\". At the time, the global significance of the battle was not in doubt. A Dresden newspaper wrote in early August that the battle would become the \"most fateful battle of the war\", and an article from the British \"Daily Telegraph\" in September shared similar views. Joseph Goebbels also shared similar sentiment, declaring that the battle was a \"question of life or death, and all of our prestige, just as that of the Soviet Union, will depend on how it will end\". The Reich Ministry of Propaganda declared it to be \"the greatest battle of attrition the world has ever seen\". On 2 February 1943, American journalist Barnet Nover wrote in the \"Washington Post\" that \"Stalingrad's role in this war was that of the Battles of the Marne, Verdun and the Second Marne of the last war rolled into one\". While on 3 February 1943, the \"New York Times\" heralded the destruction of \"the flower of Adolf Hitler's army\". The next day, on 4 February, French newspaper, \"La Semaine\", headlined it as \"the greatest battle of all time\". Writing in his diary on 1 January 1943, British General Alan Brooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, reflected on the change in the position from a year before:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I felt Russia could never hold, Caucasus was bound to be penetrated, and Abadan (our Achilles heel) would be captured with the consequent collapse of Middle East, India, etc. After Russia's defeat how were we to handle the German land and air forces liberated? England would be again bombarded, threat of invasion revived... And now! We start 1943 under conditions I would never have dared to hope. Russia has held, Egypt for the present is safe. There is a hope of clearing North Africa of Germans in the near future... Russia is scoring wonderful successes in Southern Russia. \nAt this point, the British had won the Battle of El Alamein in November 1942. However, there were only about 50,000 German soldiers at El Alamein in Egypt, while at Stalingrad, at least 200,000 Germans had been lost. Stalingrad is viewed as being more important than both El Alamein and Operation Torch.\nOn 30 January 1943, the tenth anniversary of his coming to power, Hitler chose not to speak. Joseph Goebbels read the text of his speech for him on the radio. The speech contained an oblique reference to the battle, which suggested that Germany was now in a defensive war. The public mood was sullen, depressed, fearful, and war-weary. \nThe reverse was the case on the Soviet side. There was an overwhelming surge in confidence and belief in victory. A common saying was: \"You cannot stop an army which has done Stalingrad.\" Stalin was feted as the hero of the hour and made a Marshal of the Soviet Union.\nThe news of the battle echoed round the world, with many people now believing that Hitler's defeat was inevitable. The Turkish Consul in Moscow predicted that \"the lands which the Germans have destined for their living space will become their dying space\". Britain's conservative \"The Daily Telegraph\" proclaimed that the victory had saved European civilisation. The country celebrated \"Red Army Day\" on 23 February 1943. A ceremonial Sword of Stalingrad was forged to the order of King George VI. After being put on public display in Britain, this was presented to Stalin by Winston Churchill at the Tehran Conference later in 1943. Soviet propaganda spared no effort and wasted no time in capitalising on the triumph, impressing a global audience. The prestige of Stalin, the Soviet Union, and the worldwide Communist movement was immense, and their political position greatly enhanced.\nCommemoration.\nIn recognition of the determination of its defenders, Stalingrad was awarded the title Hero City in 1945. A colossal monument called \"The Motherland Calls\" was erected in 1967 on Mamayev Kurgan, the hill overlooking the city where bones and rusty metal splinters can still be found. The statue forms part of a war memorial complex which includes the ruins of the Grain Silo and Pavlov's House. On 2 February 2013 Volgograd hosted a military parade and other events to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the final victory. Since then, military parades have always commemorated the victory in the city.\nEvery year still, hundreds of bodies of soldiers who died in the battle are recovered in the area around Stalingrad and reburied in the cemeteries at Mamayev Kurgan or Rossoshka.\nIn popular culture.\nThe events of the Battle for Stalingrad have been covered in numerous media works of British, American, German, and Russian origin, for its significance as a turning point in the Second World War and for the loss of life associated with the battle. Stalingrad has become synonymous with large-scale urban battles with immense casualties on both sides, and according to historian David Glantz, has become a \"metaphor for the ferocity of the Soviet-German conflict and, indeed, for the devastating nature of twentieth-century warfare as a whole\". Also, historian Geoffrey Roberts states that \"No battle of any war has had more written about it than Stalingrad\" and that \"No battle of the Second World War has captured the public imagination as much as the clash between Soviet Russia and Nazi Germany at Stalingrad in 1942... Stalingrad was an epic battle unmatched by any other in its dimensions, drama and decisiveness.\" In addition, besides the battle being recognized as the bloodiest and fiercest of the war, it is also considered to have been the closest of the war as well, as Geoffrey Roberts quotes the Duke of Wellington's remark about the Battle of Waterloo as a \"close-run thing\" to describe the Battle of Stalingrad, further adding to its popularity status and notoriety.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4285", "revid": "38706409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4285", "title": "Bodhidharma", "text": "Semi-legendary founder of Zen Buddhism\nBodhidharma was a semi-legendary Buddhist monk who lived during the 5th or 6th century CE. He is traditionally credited as the transmitter of Chan Buddhism to China, and is regarded as its first Chinese patriarch. He is also popularly regarded as the founder of Shaolin kung fu, an idea popularized in the 20th century, but based on the 17th century Yijin Jing and the Daoist association of \"daoyin\" gymnastics with Bodhidharma. \nLittle contemporary biographical information on Bodhidharma exists, and subsequent accounts are layered with legend and unreliable details. According to the principal Chinese sources, Bodhidharma came from the Western Regions, which typically refers to Central Asia but can also include the Indian subcontinent. He is described as either a \"Persian Central Asian\" or a \"South Indian [...] the third son of a great Indian king.\" Aside from the Chinese accounts, several popular traditions also exist regarding Bodhidharma's origins. Throughout Buddhist art, Bodhidharma is depicted as an ill-tempered, large-nosed, profusely bearded, wide-eyed non-Chinese person.\nThe accounts also differ on the date of his arrival. One early account claims that he arrived during the Liu Song dynasty (420\u2013479 CE). Later accounts date his arrival to the Liang dynasty (502\u2013557 CE). Bodhidharma was primarily active in the territory of the Northern Wei (386\u2013534 CE). Modern scholarship dates him to about the early 5th century CE.\nBodhidharma's teachings and practice center on meditation and the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\". The \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" (952) identifies Bodhidharma as the 28th Patriarch of Buddhism in an uninterrupted line that extends back to the Gautama Buddha himself.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNames.\nBodhidharma means 'dharma of awakening (bodhi)\" in Sanskrit and was often shortened to simply Dharma in Chinese. Daruma is the shortened form in Japanese and from where the name of daruma dolls derives, themselves modelled after the monk.\nBodhidharma is associated with several other names, and is also known by the name Bodhitara. Faure notes that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Bodhidharma's name appears sometimes truncated as Bodhi, or more often as Dharma (Ta-mo). In the first case, it may be confused with another of his rivals, Bodhiruci.\nBodhidharma is his dharma name. According to tradition, he was given this name by his teacher Prajnatara (or Praj\u00f1\u0101dhara and Panyatara). His name prior to monkhood is said to have been Jayavarman or Bodhidhana.\nTibetan sources give his name as \"Bodhidharmottara\" or \"Dharmottara\", that is, \"Highest teaching (dharma) of enlightenment\".\nHis traditional epithets in Chan texts include the \"founder\" () as the first teacher of Chan in China, \"golden rooster\" (), \"bearded man\" (), \"pierced-ear guest\" (, many Indian Buddhist monks wore earrings), \"wall-gazing Brahmin\" () on account of his nine year meditation at the Shaolin Monastery by gazing at a wall (zazen), and \"blue-eyed barbarian\" (, a general term non-Han people from the Western regions).\nBiography.\nPrincipal sources.\nThere are two known extant accounts written by contemporaries of Bodhidharma. According to these sources, Bodhidharma came from the Western Regions, and is described as either a \"Persian Central Asian\" or a \"South Indian [...] the third son of a great Indian king.\" Later materials draw on these two sources, adding additional details, including a change to being descended from a \"Brahmin\" king, which accords with the reign of the Pallavas, who \"claim[ed] to belong to a brahmin lineage.\"\nThe \"Western Regions\" was a historical name specified in the Chinese chronicles between the 3rd century BCE to the 8th century CE that referred to the regions west of Yumen Pass, most often Central Asia or sometimes, more specifically, the easternmost portion of it (e.g. Altishahr or the Tarim Basin in southern Xinjiang). Sometimes, it was used more generally to refer to other regions to the west of China as well, such as the Indian subcontinent (as in the novel \"Journey to the West\").\n\"The Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang\".\nThe earliest text mentioning Bodhidharma is \"The Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang\" ( \"Lu\u00f2y\u00e1ng Qi\u00e9l\u00e1nj\u00ec\") which was compiled in 547 by Yang Xuanzhi (), a writer and translator of Mahayana sutras into Chinese. Yang gave the following account:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At that time there was a monk of the Western Region named Bodhidharma, a Persian Central Asian. He traveled from the wild borderlands to China. Seeing the golden disks on the pole on top of Y\u01d2ngn\u00edng's stupa reflecting in the sun, the rays of light illuminating the surface of the clouds, the jewel-bells on the stupa blowing in the wind, the echoes reverberating beyond the heavens, he sang its praises. He exclaimed: \"Truly this is the work of spirits.\" He said: \"I am 150 years old, and I have passed through numerous countries. There is virtually no country I have not visited. Even the distant Buddha-realms lack this.\" He chanted homage and placed his palms together in salutation for days on end.\nThe account of Bodhidharma in the Luoyan Record does not particularly associate him with meditation, but rather depicts him as a thaumaturge capable of mystical feats. This may have played a role in his subsequent association with the martial arts and esoteric knowledge.\nTanlin \u2013 preface to the Two Entrances and Four Acts.\nThe second account was written by Tanlin (\u66c7\u6797; 506\u2013574). Tanlin's brief biography of the \"Dharma Master\" is found in his preface to the \"Long Scroll of the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices\", a text traditionally attributed to Bodhidharma and the first text to identify him as South Indian:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Dharma Master was a South Indian of the Western Region. He was the third son of a great Indian king. His ambition lay in the Mahayana path, and so he put aside his white layman's robe for the black robe of a monk [\u2026] Lamenting the decline of the true teaching in the outlands, he subsequently crossed distant mountains and seas, traveling about propagating the teaching in Han and Wei.\nTanlin's account was the first to mention that Bodhidharma attracted disciples, specifically mentioning Daoyu () and Dazu Huike (), the latter of whom would later figure very prominently in the Bodhidharma literature. Although Tanlin has traditionally been considered a disciple of Bodhidharma, it is more likely that he was a student of Huike.\n\"Record of the Masters and Students of the La\u1e45ka\".\nThe \"Record of the Masters and Students of the La\u1e45ka\" (L\u00e9ngqi\u00e9 Sh\u012bz\u012b J\u00ec \u695e\u4f3d\u5e2b\u8cc7\u8a18), which survives both in Chinese and in Tibetan translation (although the surviving Tibetan translation is apparently of older provenance than the surviving Chinese version), states that Bodhidharma is not the first ancestor of Zen, but instead the second. This text instead claims that Gu\u1e47abhadra, the translator of the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\", is the first ancestor in the lineage. It further states that Bodhidharma was his student. The Tibetan translation is estimated to have been made in the late eighth or early ninth century, indicating that the original Chinese text was written at some point before that.\nTanlin's preface has also been preserved in Jingjue's (683\u2013750) \"Lengjie Shizi ji\" \"Chronicle of the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra\" Masters\", which dates from 713 to 716./ca. 715 He writes, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The teacher of the Dharma, who came from South India in the Western Regions, the third son of a great Brahman king.\"\n\"Further Biographies of Eminent Monks\".\nIn the 7th-century historical work \"Further Biographies of Eminent Monks\" (\u7e8c\u9ad8\u50e7\u50b3 \"X\u00f9 g\u0101os\u0113ng zhu\u00e0n\"), Daoxuan () possibly drew on Tanlin's preface as a basic source, but made several significant additions:\nFirstly, Daoxuan adds more detail concerning Bodhidharma's origins, writing that he was of \"South Indian Brahman stock\" (\u5357\u5929\u7afa\u5a46\u7f85\u9580\u7a2e \"n\u00e1n ti\u0101nzh\u00fa p\u00f3lu\u00f3m\u00e9n zh\u014fng\").\nSecondly, more detail is provided concerning Bodhidharma's journeys. Tanlin's original is imprecise about Bodhidharma's travels, saying only that he \"crossed distant mountains and seas\" before arriving in Wei. Daoxuan's account, however, implies \"a specific itinerary\": \"He first arrived at Nan-y\u00fceh during the Sung period. From there, he turned north and came to the Kingdom of Wei\" This implies that Bodhidharma had travelled to China by sea and that he had crossed over the Yangtze.\nThirdly, Daoxuan suggests a date for Bodhidharma's arrival in China. He writes that Bodhidharma makes landfall in the time of the Song, thus making his arrival no later than the time of the Song's fall to the Southern Qi in 479.\nFinally, Daoxuan provides information concerning Bodhidharma's death. Bodhidharma, he writes, died at the banks of the Luo River, where he was interred by his disciple Dazu Huike, possibly in a cave. According to Daoxuan's chronology, Bodhidharma's death must have occurred prior to 534, the date of the Northern Wei's fall, because Dazu Huike subsequently leaves Luoyang for Ye. Furthermore, citing the shore of the Luo River as the place of death might possibly suggest that Bodhidharma died in the mass executions at Heyin () in 528. Supporting this possibility is a report in the Chinese Buddhist canon stating that a Buddhist monk was among the victims at H\u00e9y\u012bn.\nLater accounts.\n\"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\".\nIn the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" (\u7956\u5802\u96c6 \"Z\u01d4t\u00e1ngj\u00ed\") of 952, the elements of the traditional Bodhidharma story are in place. Bodhidharma is said to have been a disciple of Praj\u00f1\u0101t\u0101ra, thus establishing the latter as the 27th patriarch in India. After a three-year journey, Bodhidharma reached China in 527, during the Liang (as opposed to the Song in Daoxuan's text). The \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" includes Bodhidharma's encounter with Emperor Wu of Liang, which was first recorded around 758 in the appendix to a text by Shenhui (), a disciple of Huineng.\nFinally, as opposed to Daoxuan's figure of \"over 180 years,\" the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" states that Bodhidharma died at the age of 150. He was then buried on Mount Xiong'er (\u718a\u8033\u5c71), to the west of Luoyang. However, three years after the burial, in the Pamir Mountains, Song Yun ()\u2014an official of one of the later Wei kingdoms\u2014encountered Bodhidharma, who claimed to be returning to India and was carrying a single sandal. Bodhidharma predicted the death of Song Yun's ruler, a prediction which was borne out upon the latter's return. Bodhidharma's tomb was then opened, and only a single sandal was found inside.\nAccording to the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\", Bodhidharma left the Liang court in 527 and relocated to Mount Song near Luoyang and the Shaolin Monastery, where he \"faced a wall for nine years, not speaking for the entire time\", his date of death can have been no earlier than 536. Moreover, his encounter with the Wei official indicates a date of death no later than 554, three years before the fall of the Western Wei.\nDaoyuan \u2013 Transmission of the Lamp.\nSubsequent to the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\", the only dated addition to the biography of Bodhidharma is in the \"Jingde Records of the Transmission of the Lamp\" (\u666f\u5fb7\u50b3\u71c8\u9304 \"J\u012dngd\u00e9 chu\u00e1nd\u0113ng l\u00f9\", published 1004 CE), by Daoyuan (), in which it is stated that Bodhidharma's original name had been Bodhit\u0101ra but was changed by his master Praj\u00f1\u0101t\u0101ra. The same account is given by the Japanese master Keizan's 13th-century work of the same title.\nPopular traditions.\nSeveral contemporary popular traditions also exist regarding Bodhidharma's origins. An Indian tradition regards Bodhidharma to be the third son of a Pallava king from Kanchipuram. This is consistent with the Southeast Asian traditions which also describe Bodhidharma as a former South Indian Tamil prince who had awakened his kundalini and renounced royal life to become a monk. The Tibetan version similarly characterises him as a South Indian. Conversely, the Japanese tradition generally regards Bodhidharma as a red-haired Persian.\nPractice and teaching.\nTwo Entrances and Four Practices.\nBodhidharma is traditionally seen as introducing a Mahayana Buddhist practice of dhyana (meditation) in China. According to modern scholars, like the Japanese scholar of Chan Yanagida Seizan, generally hold that the \"Two Entrances and Four Practices\" \"https://\"https:// is the only extant work that can be attributed to Bodhidharma and as such, this is the main source for our knowledge of his teaching.\nAccording to this text, Bodhidharma taught two \"entrances\" to the Dharma. The first is a subitist teaching that directly apprehends the ultimate principle, that is, the true nature or buddha-nature. The second entrance deals with four practices: (1) accepting all our sufferings as the fruit of past karma, (2) accept our circumstances with equanimity, (3) to be without craving, and (4) to let go of wrong thoughts and practice the six perfections.\nAccording to Yanagida Seizan, the first \"entrance of principle\", was a subitist teaching which derives from the sudden enlightenment thought of Tao-sheng; while the four practices are a reworking of the \"four foundations of mindfulness\", which were popular in the late Six Dynasties period Buddhist meditation circles.\nWall-gazing.\nTanlin, in the preface to \"Two Entrances and Four Practices\", and Daoxuan, in the \"Further Biographies of Eminent Monks\", mentions a practice of Bodhidharma's termed \"wall-gazing\" (\u58c1\u89c0 \"b\u00ecgu\u0101n\"). Both Tanlin and Daoxuan associate this \"wall-gazing\" with \"quieting [the] mind\" ().\nIn the \"Two Entrances and Four Practices\", the term \"wall-gazing\" is given as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those who turn from delusion back to reality, who \"meditate on walls\", the absence of self and other, the oneness of mortal and sage, and who remain unmoved even by scriptures are in complete and unspoken agreement with reason.\nDaoxuan states, \"the merits of Mah\u0101y\u0101na wall-gazing are the highest\". These are the first mentions in the historical record of what may be a type of meditation being ascribed to Bodhidharma. Exactly what sort of practice Bodhidharma's \"wall-gazing\" was remains uncertain. Nearly all accounts have treated it either as an undefined variety of meditation, as Daoxuan and Dumoulin, or as a variety of seated meditation akin to the zazen () that later became a defining characteristic of Chan. The latter interpretation is particularly common among those working from a Chan standpoint.\nThere have also, however, been interpretations of \"wall-gazing\" as a non-meditative phenomenon. Jeffrey Broughton points out that where Bodhidharma's teachings appear in Tibetan translation among the Dunhuang manuscripts, the Chinese phrase \"in a coagulated state abides in wall-examining\" (ning chu pi-kuan) is replaced in Tibetan with \"rejects discrimination and \"abides in brightness\"\" (rtogs pa spangs te | lham mer gnas na). Broughton sees this as a curious divergence, as Tibetan translations of Chinese Chan texts are usually quite literal. He concludes that in early Tibet, \"wall examining\" did not refer to a literal practice of sitting cross-legged facing a wall.\nThe \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\".\nThere are early texts which explicitly associate Bodhidharma with the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\". Daoxuan, for example, in a late recension of his biography of Bodhidharma's successor Huike, has the s\u016btra as a basic and important element of the teachings passed down by Bodhidharma:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the beginning, Dhyana Master Bodhidharma took the four-roll \"La\u1e45k\u0101 S\u016btra\", handed it over to Huike, and said: \"When I examine the land of China, it is clear that there is only this sutra. If you rely on it to practice, you will be able to cross over the world.\"\nAnother early text, the \"Record of the Masters and Disciples of the La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\" () of Jingjue (\u6de8\u89ba; 683\u2013750), also mentions Bodhidharma in relation to this text. Jingjue's account also makes explicit mention of \"sitting meditation\" or zuochan/zazen:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For all those who sat in meditation, Master Bodhi[dharma] also offered expositions of the main portions of the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\", which are collected in a volume of twelve or thirteen pages [\u2026] bearing the title of \"Teaching of [Bodhi-]Dharma\".\nIn other early texts, the school that would later become known as Chan Buddhism is sometimes referred to as the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra school\" (\u695e\u4f3d\u5b97 \"L\u00e9ngqi\u00e9 z\u014dng\").\nThe \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\", one of the Mahayana sutras, is a highly \"difficult and obscure\" text whose basic thrust is to emphasize \"the inner enlightenment that does away with all duality and is raised above all distinctions\". It is among the first and most important texts for East Asian Yog\u0101c\u0101ra.\nAccording to Suzuki, one of the recurrent emphases in the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\" is a lack of reliance on words to effectively express reality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If, Mahamati, you say that because of the reality of words the objects are, this talk lacks in sense. Words are not known in all the Buddha-lands; words, Mahamati, are an artificial creation. In some Buddha-lands ideas are indicated by looking steadily, in others by gestures, in still others by a frown, by the movement of the eyes, by laughing, by yawning, or by the clearing of the throat, or by recollection, or by trembling.\nIn contrast to the ineffectiveness of words, the s\u016btra instead stresses the importance of the \"self-realization\" that is \"attained by noble wisdom\" and, according to Suzuki, occurs \"when one has an insight into reality as it is\": \"The truth is the state of self-realization and is beyond categories of discrimination\". According to Suzuki, reflecting his own emphasis on kensho, the s\u016btra goes on to outline the ultimate effects of an experience of self-realization:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[The bodhisattva] will become thoroughly conversant with the noble truth of self-realization, will become a perfect master of his own mind, will conduct himself without effort, will be like a gem reflecting a variety of colours, will be able to assume the body of transformation, will be able to enter into the subtle minds of all beings, and, because of his firm belief in the truth of Mind-only, will, by gradually ascending the stages, become established in Buddhahood.\nLegends about Bodhidharma.\nSeveral stories about Bodhidharma have become popular legends, which are still being used in the Chan, Seon, and Zen-tradition.\nEncounter with Emperor Wu of Liang.\nThe \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" says that in 527, Bodhidharma visited Emperor Wu of Liang, a fervent patron of Buddhism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nEmperor Wu: \"How much karmic merit have I earned for ordaining Buddhist monks, building monasteries, having sutras copied, and commissioning Buddha images?\"\nBodhidharma: \"None. Good deeds done with worldly intent bring good karma, but no merit.\"\nEmperor Wu: \"So what is the highest meaning of noble truth?\"\nBodhidharma: \"There is no noble truth, there is only emptiness.\"\nEmperor Wu: \"Then, who is standing before me?\"\nBodhidharma: \"I know not, Your Majesty.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nThis encounter was included as the first k\u014dan of the \"Blue Cliff Record\".\nNine years of wall-gazing.\nFailing to make a favorable impression in South China, Bodhidharma is said to have travelled to the Shaolin Monastery. After either being refused entry or being ejected after a short time, he lived in a nearby cave, where he \"faced a wall for nine years, not speaking for the entire time\".\nThe biographical tradition is littered with apocryphal tales about Bodhidharma's life and circumstances. In one version of the story, he is said to have fallen asleep seven years into his nine years of wall-gazing. Becoming angry with himself, he cut off his eyelids to prevent it from happening again. According to the legend, as his eyelids hit the floor the first tea plants sprang up, and thereafter, tea would provide a stimulant to help keep students of Chan awake during zuochan (zazen).\nThe most popular account relates that Bodhidharma was admitted into the Shaolin temple after nine years in the cave and taught there for some time. However, other versions report that he \"passed away, seated upright\"; or that he disappeared, leaving behind the \"Yijin Jing\"; or that his legs atrophied after nine years of sitting, which is why Daruma dolls have no legs.\nHuike cuts off his arm.\nIn one legend, Bodhidharma refused to resume teaching until his would-be student, Dazu Huike, who had kept vigil for weeks in the deep snow outside of the monastery, cut off his own left arm to demonstrate sincerity.\nTransmission.\nSkin, flesh, bone, marrow.\n\"Jingde Records of the Transmission of the Lamp\" (\u666f\u5fb7\u4f20\u706f\u5f55) of Daoyuan, presented to the emperor in 1004, records that Bodhidharma wished to return to India and called together his disciples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Bodhidharma asked, \"Can each of you say something to demonstrate your understanding?\"\nDao Fu stepped forward and said, \"It is not bound by words and phrases, nor is it separate from words and phrases. This is the function of the Tao.\"\nBodhidharma: \"You have attained my skin.\"\nThe nun Zong Chi stepped up and said, \"It is like a glorious glimpse of the realm of Akshobhya Buddha. Seen once, it need not be seen again.\"\nBodhidharma; \"You have attained my flesh.\"\nDao Yu said, \"The four elements are all empty. The five skandhas are without actual existence. Not a single dharma can be grasped.\"\nBodhidharma: \"You have attained my bones.\"\nFinally, Huike came forth, bowed deeply in silence and stood up straight.\nBodhidharma said, \"You have attained my marrow.\"&lt;/poem&gt;\nBodhidharma passed on the symbolic robe and bowl of dharma succession to Dazu Huike and, some texts claim, a copy of the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\". Bodhidharma then either returned to India or died.\nBodhidharma at Shaolin.\nSome Chinese myths and legends describe Bodhidharma as being disturbed by the poor physical shape of the Shaolin monks, after which, he instructed them in techniques to maintain their physical condition as well as teaching meditation. He is said to have taught a series of external exercises called the Eighteen Arhat Hands and an internal practice called the Sinew Metamorphosis Classic. In addition, after his departure from the temple, two manuscripts by Bodhidharma were said to have been discovered inside the temple: the \"Yijin Jing\" and the \"Xisui Jing\". Copies and translations of the \"Yijin Jing\" survive to the modern day. The \"Xisui Jing\" has been lost.\nTravels in Southeast Asia.\nAccording to Southeast Asian folklore, Bodhidharma travelled from Jambudvipa by sea to Palembang, Indonesia. Passing through Sumatra, Java, Bali, Malaysia, and Luzon Island, he eventually entered China through Nanyue. In his travels through the region, Bodhidharma is said to have transmitted his knowledge of the Mahayana doctrine and the martial arts. Malay legend holds that he introduced forms to silat. In Tagalog legend, Bodhidharma reached the island of Luzon in the Philippines passing through Palawan and he introduced Arnis to the locals.\nVajrayana tradition links Bodhidharma with the 11th-century south Indian monk Dampa Sangye who travelled extensively to Tibet and China spreading tantric teachings.\nAppearance after his death.\nThree years after Bodhidharma's death, Ambassador Song Yun of northern Wei is said to have seen him walking while holding a shoe at the Pamir Mountains. Song asked Bodhidharma where he was going, to which Bodhidharma replied, \"I am going home.\" When asked why he was holding his shoe, Bodhidharma answered, \"You will know when you reach Shaolin monastery. Don't mention that you saw me or you will meet with disaster.\" After arriving at the palace, Song told the emperor that he met Bodhidharma on the way. The emperor said Bodhidharma was already dead and buried and had Song arrested for lying. At Shaolin Monastery, the monks informed them that Bodhidharma was dead and had been buried in a hill behind the temple. The grave was exhumed and was found to contain a single shoe. The monks then said, \"Master has gone back home,\" and prostrated three times: \"For nine years, he had remained and nobody knew him; Carrying a shoe in hand he went home quietly, without ceremony.\"\nLineage.\nConstruction of lineages.\nThe idea of a patriarchal lineage in Chan dates back to the epitaph for Faru (), a disciple of the 5th patriarch Hongren (). In the \"Long Scroll of the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices\" and the \"Continued Biographies of Eminent Monks\", Daoyu and Dazu Huike are the only explicitly identified disciples of Bodhidharma. The epitaph gives a line of descent identifying Bodhidharma as the first patriarch.\nIn the 6th century, the biographies of famous monks were collected. From this genre, the typical Chan lineage was developed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These famous biographies were non-sectarian. The Ch'an biographical works, however, aimed to establish Ch'an as a legitimate school of Buddhism traceable to its Indian origins, and at the same time championed a particular form of Ch'an. Historical accuracy was of little concern to the compilers; old legends were repeated, new stories were invented and reiterated until they, too, became legends.\nAccording to McRae, it is not clear that the practitioners surrounding Bodhidharma and his disciple Huike considered themselves as belonging to a unified movement or group, such as a \"Chan school\", nor did they have any sense of sharing any continuity with the later tradition. He says even the name \"proto-Chan\" is not really reflective of their activities.\nD. T. Suzuki contends that the growth in Chan's popularity during the 7th and 8th centuries attracted criticism that it had \"no authorized records of its direct transmission from the founder of Buddhism\" and that Chan historians made Bodhidharma the 28th patriarch of Buddhism in response to such attacks.\nSix patriarchs.\nThe earliest lineages described the lineage from Bodhidharma into the 5th to 7th generation of patriarchs. Various records of different authors are known, which give a variation of transmission lines:\nContinuous lineage from Gautama Buddha.\nEventually, these descriptions of the lineage evolved into a continuous lineage from \u015a\u0101kyamuni Buddha to Bodhidharma. The idea of a line of descent from \u015a\u0101kyamuni Buddha is the basis for the distinctive lineage tradition of Chan Buddhism.\nAccording to the \"Song of Enlightenment\" (\u8b49\u9053\u6b4c \"Zh\u00e8ngd\u00e0o g\u0113\") by Yongjia Xuanjue, Bodhidharma was the 28th Patriarch of Chan, in a line of descent from Gautama Buddha via his disciple Mah\u0101k\u0101\u015byapa:\n&lt;poem&gt;Mahakashyapa was the first, leading the line of transmission;\nTwenty-eight Fathers followed him in the West;\nThe Lamp was then brought over the sea to this country;\nAnd Bodhidharma became the First Father here\nHis mantle, as we all know, passed over six Fathers,\nAnd by them many minds came to see the Light.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe \"Transmission of the Light\" gives 28 patriarchs in this transmission:\nModern scholarship.\nBodhidharma has been the subject of critical scientific research, which has shed new light on the traditional stories about Bodhidharma.\nBiography as a hagiographic process.\nAccording to John McRae, Bodhidharma has been the subject of a hagiographic process which served the needs of Chan Buddhism. According to him, it is not possible to write an accurate biography of Bodhidharma:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is ultimately impossible to reconstruct any original or accurate biography of the man whose life serves as the original trace of his hagiography \u2013 where \"trace\" is a term from Jacques Derrida meaning the beginningless beginning of a phenomenon, the imagined, but always intellectually unattainable, origin. Hence any such attempt by modern biographers to reconstruct a definitive account of Bodhidharma's life is both doomed to failure and potentially, no different in intent from the hagiographical efforts of premodern writers.\nMcRae's standpoint accords with Yanagida's standpoint: \"Yanagida ascribes great historical value to the witness of the disciple Tanlin, but at the same time, acknowledges the presence of 'many puzzles in the biography of Bodhidharma'\". Given the present state of the sources, he considers it impossible to compile a reliable account of Bodhidharma's life.\nSeveral scholars have suggested that the composed image of Bodhidharma depended on the combination of supposed historical information on various historical figures over several centuries. Bodhidharma as a historical person may even never have actually existed.\nOrigins and place of birth.\nDumoulin comments on the three principal sources. The Persian heritage is doubtful, according to Dumoulin: \"In the \"Description of the Lo-yang temple\", Bodhidharma is called a Persian. Given the ambiguity of geographical references in writings of this period, such a statement should not be taken too seriously.\" Dumoulin considers Tanlin's account of Bodhidharma being \"the third son of a great Brahman king\" to be a later addition, and finds the exact meaning of \"South Indian Brahman stock\" unclear: \"And when Daoxuan speaks of origins from South Indian Brahman stock, it is not clear whether he is referring to roots in nobility or to India in general as the land of the Brahmans.\"\nThese Chinese sources lend themselves to make inferences about Bodhidharma's origins. \"The third son of a Brahman king\" has been speculated to mean \"the third son of a Pallava king\". Based on a specific pronunciation of the Chinese characters \u9999\u81f3 as Kang-zhi, meaning \"fragrance extreme\", Tsutomu Kambe identifies \u9999\u81f3 to be Kanchipuram, an old capital town in the state Tamil Nadu, India. According to Tsutomu Kambe, \"Kanchi means 'a radiant jewel' or 'a luxury belt with jewels', and puram means a town or a state in the sense of earlier times. Thus, it is understood that the '\u9999\u81f3-Kingdom' corresponds to the old capital 'Kanchipuram'.\"\nAcharya Raghu, in his work 'Bodhidharma Retold', used a combination of multiple factors to identify Bodhidharma from the state of Andhra Pradesh in South India, specifically to the geography around Mt. Sailum or modern day Srisailam.\nThe Pakistani scholar Ahmad Hasan Dani speculated that according to popular accounts in Pakistan's northwest, Bodhidharma may be from the region around the Peshawar valley, or possibly around modern Afghanistan's eastern border with Pakistan.\nCaste.\nIn the context of the Indian caste system, the mention of \"Brahman king\" acquires a nuance. Broughton notes that \"king\" implies that Bodhidharma was of a caste of warriors and rulers. Brahman is, in western contexts, easily understood as Brahmana or Brahmin, which means \"priest\".\nAbode in China.\nBuswell dates Bodhidharma's abode in China approximately at the early 5th century. Broughton dates Bodhidharma's presence in Luoyang to between 516 and 526, when the temple referred to\u2014Yongning Temple (), was at the height of its glory. Starting in 526, Y\u01d2ngn\u00edngs\u00ec suffered damage from a series of events, ultimately leading to its destruction in 534.\nShaolin boxing.\nThe idea that Bodhidharma founded martial arts at the Shaolin Temple was spread in the 20th century. Martial arts historians have shown that this legend stems from a 17th-century qigong manual known as the \"Yijin Jing\" (\"Muscle Change Classic,\" \"Sinews Transformation's Classic\"). While the Shaolin-monks attributed the origins of their fighting-skills to Vajrapani, the daoist author of the \"Yijin Jing\" wrongly assumed that the monks attributed these skills to Bodhidharma, due to the daoist tradition of attributing \"daoyin\" gymnastics to Bodhidharma, and the influence of Buddhism on Daoist meditation techniques. The preface of this work says that Bodhidharma left behind the \"Yi Jin Jing\", and further states that the monks obtained the fighting skills which made them gain some fame from this manual.\nThe attribution of the \"Yijin Jing\" to Bodhidharma has been discredited early on, and is also rejected by historians like Tang Hao, Xu Zhen, and Matsuda Ryuchi. According to Lin Boyuan, \"This manuscript is full of errors, absurdities, and fantastic claims; it cannot be taken as a legitimate source.\"\nThe composition of the text itself has been dated to 1624, while the oldest available copy was published in 1827. In the 19th century, when the \"Yijin Jing\" became popular in military circles, and the Shaolin monks started to use it, the Shaolin martial tradition became gradually associated with Bodhidharma. The association of Bodhidharma with martial arts only became widespread as a result of the 1904\u20131907 serialization of the novel \"The Travels of Lao Ts'an\" in \"Illustrated Fiction Magazine\", which incorporated this newly developed attribution of Shaolin martial arts to Bodhidharma. According to Henning, the \"story is clearly a twentieth-century invention,\" which \"is confirmed by writings going back at least 250 years earlier, which mention both Bodhidharma and martial arts but make no connection between the two.\"\nCultural legacy.\nIn the Zen \"k\u014dan\" tradition, Bodhidharma is mentioned as a significant figure. In Dogen's 13th century \"k\u014dan\" collection, the \"Shinji Sh\u014db\u014dgenz\u014d\", Bodhidharma is mentioned in fourteen different \"k\u014dans\". In \"The Gateless Gate\" by Wumen Huikai:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"A monk asked Zhaozhou, \"What is the meaning of the ancestral teacher's (i.e., Bodhidharma's) coming from the west?\" Zhaozhou said, \"The cypress tree in front of the hall.\"\"\u2014\u200a\nIn a short addendum from 1245 CE, the text refers to a motto attributed to Bodhidharma: \"Bodhidharma coming from the west, unattached to any words, pointing directly to the mind of man, advocated seeing into one's nature and becoming Buddha.\" The legend of Dazu Huike and Bodhidharma is recounted in case no. 41 of \"The Gateless Gate\".\nBodhidharma's image became the inspiration for Japanese Daruma dolls, which originated in Meiwa-era Takasaki as good luck charms. A is held at the Shorinzan Daruma Temple in Takasaki every year, celebrating the city as the birthplace of the Daruma doll. Over 400,000 attendants come to purchase new dolls. The Japanese version of the children's game statues is named .\nA 1989 South Korean film, \"Why Has Bodhi-Dharma Left for the East?\", derives its title from a \"k\u014dan\" about Bodhidharma's legendary transmission of Chan Buddhism to China. The film screened at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival and was the first South Korean film to release theatrically in the United States. In 1994, the Hong Kong film \"Master of Zen\" (also known as \"Bodhidharma\") adapted the legends of Bodhidharma's life into a martial arts drama film, partly inspired by the master's association with Shaolin Kung Fu. The 2011 Indian Tamil science fiction martial arts film \"7 Aum Arivu\" features a descendant of Bodhidharma as a main character portrayed by Suriya, with its plot centering on the ancient monk's legendary skills and knowledge. The film faced criticism for its historical inaccuracies, particularly regarding Bodhidharma's age upon entering China. The controversy led to hunger strikes among Indian followers of Bodhidharma.\nAttributed works.\nModern scholars, such as the Japanese scholar of early Chan, Yanagida Seizan, agree that only one extant text can be attributed to Bodhidharma. This is the \"Two Entrances and Four Practices\" \"(\u4e8c\u5165\u56db\u884c\u8ad6),\" also known as \"Outline of Practice\" (\u4e8c\u7a2e\u5165 \"Er zhong ru)\", which is part of the larger \"Bodhidharma Anthology\" that also includes teachings from some of Bodhidharma's students, such as Huike and Dharma master Yuan.\nThere also exists a Dunhuang manuscript titled \"Treatise of Dhyana Master Bodhidharma\" (\"Tianzhu guo Putidamo chan shi lun\" \u5929\u7afa\u570b\u83e9\u63d0\u9054\u6469\u79aa\u5e2b\u8ad6). According to McRae, this text \"might be taken as a guide to the teachings of early Chan. The text is probably relatively early, although its putative date of compilation or transcription, 681, is not reliable. Unfortunately, its contents do not lend themselves to precise dating.\"\nLater attributions.\nThroughout the history of Chan, various other works became attributed to Bodhidharma and modern scholars have studied these as well, attempting to understand their provenance.\nCommonly attributed works include: \nPointing directly to one's mind.\nOne of the fundamental Ch\u00e1n texts attributed to Bodhidharma is a four-line stanza whose first two verses echo the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\"'s disdain for words and whose second two verses stress the importance of the insight into reality achieved through \"self-realization\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;A special transmission outside the scriptures\nNot founded upon words and letters;\nBy pointing directly to [one's] mind\nIt lets one see into [one's own true] nature and [thus] attain Buddhahood.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe stanza, in fact, is not Bodhidharma's, but rather dates to the year 1108.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrinted sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4286", "revid": "27147089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4286", "title": "Biconditional introduction", "text": "Inference in propositional logic\nIn propositional logic, biconditional introduction is a valid rule of inference. It allows for one to infer a biconditional from two conditional statements. The rule makes it possible to introduce a biconditional statement into a logical proof. If formula_1 is true, and if formula_2 is true, then one may infer that formula_3 is true. For example, from the statements \"if I'm breathing, then I'm alive\" and \"if I'm alive, then I'm breathing\", it can be inferred that \"I'm breathing if and only if I'm alive\". Biconditional introduction is the converse of biconditional elimination. The rule can be stated formally as:\nformula_4\nwhere the rule is that wherever instances of \"formula_1\" and \"formula_2\" appear on lines of a proof, \"formula_3\" can validly be placed on a subsequent line.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"biconditional introduction\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nformula_8\nwhere formula_9 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_3 is a syntactic consequence when formula_1 and formula_2 are both in a proof;\nor as the statement of a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nformula_13\nwhere formula_14, and formula_15 are propositions expressed in some formal system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4287", "revid": "39717737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4287", "title": "Biconditional elimination", "text": "Inference in propositional logic\nBiconditional elimination is the name of two valid rules of inference of propositional logic. It allows for one to infer a conditional from a biconditional. If formula_1 is true, then one may infer that formula_2 is true, and also that formula_3 is true. For example, if it's true that I'm breathing if and only if I'm alive, then it's true that if I'm breathing, I'm alive; likewise, it's true that if I'm alive, I'm breathing. The rules can be stated formally as:\nformula_4\nand\nformula_5\nwhere the rule is that wherever an instance of \"formula_1\" appears on a line of a proof, either \"formula_2\" or \"formula_3\" can be placed on a subsequent line.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"biconditional elimination\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nformula_9\nand\nformula_10\nwhere formula_11 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_2, in the first case, and formula_3 in the other are syntactic consequences of formula_1 in some logical system;\nor as the statement of a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nformula_15\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17, and formula_18 are propositions expressed in some formal system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4290", "revid": "1320344884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4290", "title": "Buddhist", "text": ""}
{"id": "4291", "revid": "51009147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4291", "title": "Buddhists", "text": "Adherents of Buddhism\nBuddhists () are people who adhere to Buddhism, a religious and philosophical tradition founded by Siddhartha Gautama (the Buddha) in the 5th\u20134th century BCE in India. Buddhist identity can be religious, cultural, or secular, encompassing monastic practitioners, lay followers, and individuals who adopt meditation and ethical practices without formal rituals.\nThe term originates from the Sanskrit word Bauddha (\u092c\u094c\u0926\u094d\u0927), meaning \"follower of the Buddha\", which itself is derived from Buddha (\u092c\u0941\u0926\u094d\u0927), meaning \"the Awakened One.\" In ancient India, followers of the Buddha identified themselves as Sakyans (Sakyabhiksu), derived from the name of the Buddha's clan, the Sakyas. The English term Buddhist emerged in the early 19th century, combining Buddha with the suffix \"-ist,\" denoting a follower or adherent. The first recorded use of Buddhist in English was in 1810. In descending order, the percentage of people who identify as Buddhists on each continental landmass stands at: the vast majority (about 98%) in Asia and the Pacific, around 1% in Europe, and less than 1% in Africa, Oceania, and the Americas collectively.\nAdditionally, in subdivided geographical regions, the figure stands at approximately 93% in East Asia, 67% in Southeast Asia, and 29% in South Asia. While there are several Buddhist schools and traditions, as well as non-denominational Buddhists, the two largest traditions are Therav\u0101da Buddhism (predominantly in Sri Lanka, Thailand, Myanmar, Cambodia, and Laos) and Mahayana Buddhism (predominantly in China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam).\nThere are about 320 million Buddhists, who comprise 4.1% of the global population. It is the only major religion to have declined massively in the last decade, particularly due to growing irreligion in East Asia. However, it has grown in influence in Western countries due to increasing interest in meditation and mindfulness practices. By sheer numbers, Thailand accounts for the largest portion of the global Buddhist population, followed by China and Myanmar. Outside of Buddhist-majority countries, significant populations are found in India and the United States.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Buddhist\" is derived from \"Buddha\", meaning \"the awakened one\", and was first used in English in the early 19th century to describe followers of the Buddha. In local contexts, early Indian practitioners were called \"Sramanas\" (ascetics) or \"Shramaneras\" (novice monks), emphasizing renunciation and ethical practice. With the spread of Buddhism across Asia, terms like \"Fo-zu\" (China), \"Bukky\u014dsha\" (Japan), and \"Chos-pa\" (Tibet) came into use, reflecting local languages and cultural adaptations.\nTerminology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMonks, even if bandits were to carve you up savagely into pieces with a two-handled saw, he among you who let his heart get angered even at that would not be [a Buddhist].\n Buddha\n , \"Kakac\u016bpama Sutta (MN 21)\"\nThe term \"Buddhist\" is used broadly to describe anyone who follows the teachings of the Buddha, regardless of specific school or region. While the umbrella term \"Buddhist\" is widely recognized in English language and other European languages, historical and regional variations exist. In early Indian texts, practitioners were often called \"Sramanas\", meaning ascetics, or \"Shramanas\" (novice monks), highlighting their focus on ethical conduct, meditation, and renunciation. \nWith the spread of Buddhism across Asia, different terms emerged to reflect local languages and traditions. In China, followers were known as \"Fo-zu\" (Buddha followers) or \"Fanfo\" (foreign Buddha). In Japan, they were called \"Bukky\u014dsha\" (practitioners of the Buddha's teachings). Tibetan and Himalayan communities use the term \"Chos-pa\" to denote those following the Dharma. \nAdditionally, within Buddhist schools, specific identifiers exist: Theravada Buddhists follow the P\u0101li Canon and Vinaya (monastic discipline) primarily in Southeast Asia; Mahayana Buddhists follow a diverse set of Mahayana sutras and emphasize the Bodhisattva path, particularly in East Asia; and Vajrayana Buddhists engage in esoteric practices and rituals found mainly in Tibet, Bhutan, and Mongolia. \nModern usage of the term \"Buddhist\" encompasses both traditional religious practitioners and secular individuals who adopt aspects of Buddhist philosophy, meditation, and ethical teachings without necessarily adhering to rituals or monastic life.\nHistory of Buddhist identity.\nBuddhist identity has evolved over more than two millennia, shaped by religious, cultural, and political contexts. In its earliest stages in India, followers were identified primarily as \"Sramanas\"\u2014ascetics committed to meditation, ethical living, and renunciation\u2014rather than as \"Buddhists.\" After the Buddha's death, Buddhist communities organized around viharas, and identity was often tied to adherence to the Vinaya (monastic code) and the P\u0101li Canon or Sanskrit scriptures. \nAs Buddhism spread beyond India along trade routes to Central Asia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia, regional and cultural adaptations influenced the formation of distinct Buddhist identities. In China, Buddhism integrated with Confucianism and Daoism, leading to the emergence of Mahayana traditions, while in Tibet, Vajrayana practices became central, creating a Tibetan Buddhist identity that combined religious, cultural, and political elements. In Southeast Asia, Theravada Buddhism became closely linked with national identity in countries such as Thailand, Myanmar, and Sri Lanka, where kings and governments historically patronized monasteries and promoted moral and social values. \nDuring colonial periods, European scholars and administrators began to categorize followers of Buddhism as \"Buddhists,\" standardizing the term in global discourse. This classification sometimes contrasted with local identities, which were often based on ethnicity, region, or monastic affiliation rather than the broad religious label. In the modern era, Buddhist identity can be religious, cultural, or even secular, encompassing traditional monastic practitioners, lay devotees, and individuals who adopt meditation and ethical practices without participating in formal rituals.\nOrigin.\nThe origins of Buddhists as a distinct community can be traced to the northeastern Indian subcontinent during the 6th to 4th centuries\u202fBCE, a period marked by social transformation, urbanisation, and philosophical inquiry. Early followers of the Buddha formed both monastic and lay communities, embracing his teachings on the Middle Way, Four Noble Truths, and Noble Eightfold Path. \nEarly Buddhists included members of the Shakya clan, merchants, peasants, and other ascetic seekers, who were drawn to the Buddha's teachings as an alternative to ritualistic and hierarchical Pali canon traditions. The monastic community, or Sangha, became central to Buddhist identity. Monks and nuns observed the Vinaya (monastic code) and acted as custodians of the teachings, while lay Buddhists supported the Sangha through donations and practiced ethical precepts and meditation. \nRoyal patronage, particularly by the Mauryan emperor Ashoka (c.\u202f268\u2013232\u202fBCE), facilitated the growth of Buddhists beyond India. Ashoka sponsored the construction of stupas, monasteries, and educational institutions, and dispatched missionaries to Sri\u202fLanka, Central Asia, and Southeast Asia. His edicts promoted non-violence (ahimsa), compassion, and religious tolerance, which helped solidify a communal Buddhist identity. \nAs Buddhism spread, distinct regional traditions and schools of thought developed, influencing the cultural and religious identity of Buddhists. Therav\u0101da Buddhism became established in Sri\u202fLanka and Southeast Asia, emphasizing P\u0101li Canon study and monastic discipline, while Mahayana Buddhism flourished in China, Korea, Japan, and Tibet, incorporating local practices, devotional rituals, and philosophical innovations. \nBuddhist identity has historically been expressed through ethical conduct, meditation, communal rituals, art, and architecture. Monasteries functioned as centers of learning, cultural preservation, and social welfare. Over time, Buddhist identity adapted to local cultures while retaining core teachings, allowing communities to survive periods of persecution, political change, and migration. \nBuddhists began to influence Western thought during the 19th and 20th centuries, particularly through the translation of Buddhist texts, scholarly study, and the interest of philosophers, psychologists, and writers. Western adherents often emphasize meditation, mindfulness, and ethical principles over ritual practice, reflecting a philosophical or secular approach to Buddhist identity. \nIn the 20th century, the establishment of Buddhist centers and monasteries in Europe and North America helped form new Buddhist communities. Figures such as Dalai Lama, Thich Nhat Hanh and Ch\u00f6gyam Trungpa contributed to the adaptation of Buddhist teachings in Western cultural contexts, emphasizing mindfulness, meditation, and socially engaged Buddhism. Western Buddhists often integrate Buddhist practices with psychology, health, and well-being initiatives, including Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) and related programs. This modern interpretation has led to a pluralistic and globalized Buddhist identity, combining traditional spiritual teachings with secular ethical and meditative practices.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2025, there are approximately 320 million Buddhist worldwide, representing about 4.1% of the global population. The majority of Buddhists reside in Asia, with significant populations in China, Thailand, Japan, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, and Vietnam. Thailand is home to the largest number of Buddhists, estimated at 67 million, including both practicing monks and lay followers who observe Buddhist customs and Buddhist rituals. \nSoutheast Asia has substantial Buddhist populations, with Thailand accounting for approximately 67 million, Myanmar 38 million, Sri Lanka 15 million, and Vietnam 14 million. East Asia also has significant Buddhist communities, including Japan with around 45 million followers and South Korea with about 11 million adherents. \nBuddhism is practiced by people of diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds. In South Asia, Buddhists are predominantly found among the Sinhalese in Sri Lanka, the Bamar in Myanmar, and various minority groups in India and Nepal. In East Asia and Southeast Asia, Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, Thai, and other ethnic groups maintain Buddhist traditions. Outside Asia, the global Buddhist population includes converts and practitioners in Europe, North America, Australia, and other regions, reflecting a growing secular or meditation-oriented form of Buddhist identity.\nCulture.\nBuddhist culture encompasses a wide range of practices, beliefs, artistic expressions, and social institutions that have developed over more than two millennia. Central to Buddhist culture are monastic communities, meditation practices, ethical conduct, and ritual observances. Monasteries serve as centers of learning, spiritual guidance, and community service, often playing an important role in Education, Healthcare, and social welfare in Buddhist-majority countries.\nBuddhist literature includes canonical texts such as the P\u0101li Canon, Mahayana sutras, and commentaries, which provide guidance on philosophy, ethics, meditation, and ritual. Local traditions have produced extensive literature in Sanskrit, Tibetan, Chinese, Japanese, and other languages. Meditation practices, including mindfulness (sati), concentration (samadhi), and Vipassana (insight), form an essential part of daily life for many Buddhists, whether monastic or lay, and have influenced global secular mindfulness movements.\nBuddhist culture also emphasizes Compassion, nonviolence, and ethical living, often reflected in social and charitable activities. In many countries, Buddhist organizations provide humanitarian aid, educational programs, and disaster relief, integrating spiritual teachings with practical service to society.\nBuddhist festivals.\nBuddhist festivals are spiritual and cultural celebrations that commemorate important events in the life of the Buddha, honor his teachings (Dharma), and strengthen the Buddhist community (Sangha). While the dates and customs vary among different traditions\u2014Therav\u0101da, Mah\u0101y\u0101na, and Vajray\u0101na\u2014all share a spirit of mindfulness, compassion, and gratitude. Most are observed according to the lunar calendar and combine religious devotion with social harmony and acts of generosity.\nPan-Buddhist.\nThe most widely observed Buddhist festival is Vesak (also known as Buddha Day or Buddha Purnima). It celebrates the birth, enlightenment, and passing into Nirvana of Siddhartha Gautama, the historical Buddha. Observed on the full moon of the month of Vaisakha (April\u2013May), Vesak is marked by visits to temples, offering flowers and lamps, chanting, meditation, and acts of compassion and generosity.\nTherav\u0101da.\nIn the Therav\u0101da tradition, several full-moon festivals commemorate major events in the Buddha's life and teachings, as well as milestones in the monastic year. Magha Puja (Sangha Day), held on the full moon of Magha (February\u2013March), commemorates the spontaneous gathering of 1,250 arahants to hear the Buddha's sermon on harmony and discipline. Devotees light candles, chant, and participate in meditation.\nAsalha Puja (Dhamma Day), observed on the full moon of Asalha (July), marks the Buddha's first sermon at Deer Park in Sarnath, known as the \u201cTurning of the Wheel of Dharma.\u201d It is a time for reflection on the Four Noble Truths and for making merit.\nVassa, or the Rains Retreat, is a three-month monastic retreat beginning in July, during which monks remain in monasteries for meditation and study. At the end of the retreat, on Pavarana Day, monks seek mutual forgiveness, and lay followers participate in the Kathina Ceremony, offering new robes and requisites to the Sangha.\nRegional Therav\u0101da observances include Poson Poya in Sri Lanka, marking the introduction of Buddhism to the island by Arahant Mahinda Thera, and the Thadingyut Festival of Lights in Myanmar, which celebrates the Buddha's descent from Tavatimsa Heaven.\nMah\u0101y\u0101na.\nMah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism celebrates a number of festivals that emphasize the Buddha's spiritual milestones and the practice of compassion for all beings. Bodhi Day, held on 8 December, commemorates the Buddha's enlightenment under the Bodhi Tree in Bodh Gaya. Devotees meditate, study sutras, and make offerings of tea, candles, and simple food.\nParinirvana Day (Nirvana Day), observed on 15 February, marks the Buddha's final passing into Nirvana. It is a time for meditation on impermanence and for reading the \"Mah\u0101parinirvana S\u016btra\". Ullambana, also known as Yulanpen in China and Obon in Japan, is held in July or August to honor ancestors and relieve the suffering of spirits. Inspired by the legend of Maudgalyayana saving his mother, people make offerings, light lanterns, and chant sutras.\nIn Japan, the Hana Matsuri or \u201cFlower Festival\u201d on 8 April celebrates the Buddha's birth, when images of the infant Buddha are bathed in sweet tea. In China, the Laba Festival, observed on the 8th day of the 12th lunar month (December\u2013January), commemorates the Buddha's enlightenment with the preparation of \"Laba porridge\" and temple offerings.\nVajray\u0101na.\nIn Vajray\u0101na, especially in Tibet and the Himalayan regions, festivals blend spiritual practice with rich cultural traditions. Losar, the Tibetan New Year celebrated in February\u2013March, marks a period of purification, renewal, and joy. Families clean their homes, perform rituals, and participate in community dances and celebrations.\nSaga Dawa Duchen, observed on the full moon of the fourth Tibetan month (May\u2013June), commemorates the Buddha's birth, enlightenment, and parinirvana. It is regarded as the holiest month in the Tibetan calendar, during which people undertake pilgrimages, recite mantras, and engage in acts of generosity. Ch\u00f6khor D\u00fcchen, celebrated on the fourth day of the sixth Tibetan month (July\u2013August), honors the \u201cTurning of the Wheel of Dharma,\u201d the Buddha's first teaching of the Four Noble Truths. Devotees engage in meditation, rituals, and Dharma recitations.\nPersecution.\nBuddhists have faced persecution at various points in history, often due to political, religious, or ethnic conflicts. In India, Buddhism declined after the 12th century, partly due to invasions by Muslim rulers and the destruction of monasteries and universities such as Nalanda and Vikramashila. In Tibet, the Chinese invasion of 1950 led to the suppression of religious institutions, imprisonment of monks, and destruction of monasteries, causing a large-scale diaspora of Tibetan Buddhists.\nDuring the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia (1975\u20131979), Buddhism was targeted as a symbol of the old society; monks were defrocked, temples destroyed, and religious practice banned, resulting in the deaths of thousands of monks.\nIn modern times, Buddhists in countries like Bangladesh, Pakistan, and parts of Central Asia face discrimination and threats as minority communities. Despite these challenges, Buddhist communities have often emphasized nonviolence, resilience, and dialogue, reflecting core teachings of Compassion and tolerance while seeking protection of religious freedom and cultural heritage."}
{"id": "4292", "revid": "40153758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4292", "title": "Base pair", "text": "Two nucleobases bound by hydrogen bonds\nA base pair (bp) is a fundamental unit of double-stranded nucleic acids consisting of two nucleobases bound to each other by hydrogen bonds. They form the building blocks of the DNA double helix and contribute to the folded structure of both DNA and RNA. Dictated by specific hydrogen bonding patterns, \"Watson\u2013Crick\" (or \"Watson\u2013Crick\u2013Franklin\") base pairs (guanine\u2013cytosine and adenine\u2013thymine/uracil) allow the DNA helix to maintain a regular helical structure that is subtly dependent on its nucleotide sequence. The complementary nature of this based-paired structure provides a redundant copy of the genetic information encoded within each strand of DNA. The regular structure and data redundancy provided by the DNA double helix make DNA well suited to the storage of genetic information, while base-pairing between DNA and incoming nucleotides provides the mechanism through which DNA polymerase replicates DNA and RNA polymerase transcribes DNA into RNA. Many DNA-binding proteins can recognize specific base-pairing patterns that identify particular regulatory regions of genes.\nIntramolecular base pairs can occur within single-stranded nucleic acids. This is particularly important in RNA molecules (e.g., transfer RNA), where Watson\u2013Crick base pairs (guanine\u2013cytosine and adenine-uracil) permit the formation of short double-stranded helices, and a wide variety of non\u2013Watson\u2013Crick interactions (e.g., G\u2013U or A\u2013A) allow RNAs to fold into a vast range of specific three-dimensional structures. In addition, base-pairing between transfer RNA (tRNA) and messenger RNA (mRNA) forms the basis for the molecular recognition events that result in the nucleotide sequence of mRNA becoming translated into the amino acid sequence of proteins via the genetic code.\nThe size of an individual gene or an organism's entire genome is often measured in base pairs because DNA is usually double-stranded. Hence, the number of total base pairs is equal to the number of nucleotides in one of the strands (with the exception of non-coding single-stranded regions of telomeres). The haploid human genome (23 chromosomes) is estimated to be about 3.2 billion base pairs long and to contain 20,000\u201325,000 distinct protein-coding genes. A kilobase (kb) is a unit of measurement in molecular biology equal to 1000 base pairs of DNA or RNA. The total number of DNA base pairs on Earth is estimated at 5.0\u00d71037 with a weight of 50 billion tonnes. In comparison, the total mass of the biosphere has been estimated to be as much as 4\u00a0TtC (trillion tons of carbon).\nNotation.\nThis article employs the \"\u2022\" character in describing any noncovalant interaction, which includes all types of base pairs, in line with IUPAC's 1970 recommendation.N3.4.2\nAccording to the IUPAC, \"-\" is not acceptable because it implies covalent linkage and neither are \":\" and \"/\" because they can be mistaken as ratios. Not using any symbol is also unacceptable because it can be confused with a (covalent) polymer sequence.N3.4.2\nIUPAC makes no specific recommendation for differentiating types of noncovalant bonds. When it is necessary to differentiate, this article uses \"*\" for the Hogsteen pair.\nHydrogen bonding and stability.\nTop, a G\u2022C base pair with three hydrogen bonds. Bottom, an A\u2022T base pair with two hydrogen bonds. Non-covalent hydrogen bonds between the bases are shown as dashed lines. The wiggly lines stand for the connection to the pentose sugar and point in the direction of the minor groove. \nHydrogen bonding is the chemical interaction that underlies the base-pairing rules described above. Appropriate geometrical correspondence of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors allows only the \"right\" pairs to form stably. DNA with high GC-content is more stable than DNA with low GC-content. Crucially, however, stacking interactions are primarily responsible for stabilising the double-helical structure; Watson-Crick base pairing's contribution to global structural stability is minimal, but its role in the specificity underlying complementarity is, by contrast, of maximal importance as this underlies the template-dependent processes of the central dogma (e.g. DNA replication).\nThe bigger nucleobases, adenine and guanine, are members of a class of double-ringed chemical structures called purines; the smaller nucleobases, cytosine and thymine (and uracil), are members of a class of single-ringed chemical structures called pyrimidines. Purines are complementary only with pyrimidines: pyrimidine\u2013pyrimidine pairings are energetically unfavorable because the molecules are too far apart for hydrogen bonding to be established; purine\u2013purine pairings are energetically unfavorable because the molecules are too close, leading to overlap repulsion. Purine\u2013pyrimidine base-pairing of AT or GC or UA (in RNA) results in proper duplex structure. The only other purine\u2013pyrimidine pairings would be AC and GT and UG (in RNA); these pairings are mismatches because the patterns of hydrogen donors and acceptors do not correspond. The GU pairing, with two hydrogen bonds, does occur fairly often in RNA (see wobble base pair).\nPaired DNA and RNA molecules are comparatively stable at room temperature, but the two nucleotide strands will separate above a melting point that is determined by the length of the molecules, the extent of mispairing (if any), and the GC content. Higher GC content results in higher melting temperatures; it is, therefore, unsurprising that the genomes of extremophile organisms such as \"Thermus thermophilus\" are particularly GC-rich. On the converse, regions of a genome that need to separate frequently \u2014 for example, the promoter regions for often-transcribed genes \u2014 are comparatively GC-poor (for example, see TATA box). GC content and melting temperature must also be taken into account when designing primers for PCR reactions.\nExamples.\nThe following DNA sequences illustrate pair double-stranded patterns. By convention, the top strand is written from the 5\u2032-end to the 3\u2032-end; thus, the bottom strand (complementary strand) is written 3\u2032 to 5\u2032.\n A base-paired DNA sequence:\n \n The corresponding RNA sequence, in which uracil is substituted for thymine in the RNA strand:\n \nNon-canonical base pairing.\nIn addition to the canonical Watson\u2013Crick pairing (A\u2022T/U G\u2022C), some conditions can also favour base-pairing with alternative base orientation, and number and geometry of hydrogen bonds. These pairings are accompanied by alterations to the local backbone shape.\nThe most common of these is the wobble base pairing that occurs between tRNAs and mRNAs at the third base position of many codons during transcription and during the charging of tRNAs by some tRNA synthetases. They have also been observed in the secondary structures of some RNA sequences.\nAdditionally, Hoogsteen base pairing (typically written as A*U/T and G*C) can happen when a different \"face\" of a purine base is used for pairing. This happens in some DNA sequences (e.g. CA and TA dinucleotides) in dynamic equilibrium with standard Watson\u2013Crick pairing. They have also been observed in some protein\u2013DNA complexes. There is also a kind of reverse Hoogsteen base pair in tRNA where both a purine and a pyrimidine uses a different \"face\".\nIn addition to these alternative base pairings, a wide range of base-base hydrogen bonding is observed in RNA secondary and tertiary structure. These bonds are often necessary for the precise, complex shape of an RNA, as well as its binding to interaction partners.\nBase pairs and mutation.\nMismatch repair.\nMismatched base pairs can be generated by errors of DNA replication and as intermediates during homologous recombination. The process of mismatch repair ordinarily must recognize and correctly repair a small number of base mispairs within a long sequence of normal DNA base pairs. To repair mismatches formed during DNA replication, several distinctive repair processes have evolved to distinguish between the template strand and the newly formed strand so that only the newly inserted incorrect nucleotide is removed (in order to avoid generating a mutation). The proteins employed in mismatch repair during DNA replication, and the clinical significance of defects in this process are described in the article DNA mismatch repair. The process of mispair correction during recombination is described in the article gene conversion.\nBase analogs and intercalators.\nChemical analogs of nucleotides can take the place of proper nucleotides and establish non-canonical base-pairing, leading to errors (mostly point mutations) in DNA replication and DNA transcription. This is due to their isosteric chemistry. One common mutagenic base analog is 5-bromouracil, which resembles thymine but can base-pair to guanine in its enol form.\nOther chemicals, known as DNA intercalators, fit into the gap between adjacent bases on a single strand and induce frameshift mutations by \"masquerading\" as a base, causing the DNA replication machinery to skip or insert additional nucleotides at the intercalated site. Most intercalators are large polyaromatic compounds and are known or suspected carcinogens. Examples include ethidium bromide and acridine.\nAs a unit of length.\nThe following abbreviations are commonly used to describe the length of a D/RNA molecule:\nFor single-stranded DNA/RNA, units of nucleotides are used\u2014abbreviated nt (or knt, Mnt, Gnt)\u2014as they are not paired.\nTo distinguish between units of computer storage and bases, kbp, Mbp, Gbp, etc. may be used for base pairs.\nThe centimorgan is also often used to imply distance along a chromosome, but the number of base pairs it corresponds to varies widely depending on the patterns of chromosomal crossover. In the human genome, the centimorgan is about 1 million base pairs.\nUnnatural base pair (UBP).\nAn unnatural base pair (UBP) is a designed subunit (or nucleobase) of DNA which is created in a laboratory and does not occur in nature. DNA sequences have been described which use newly created nucleobases to form a third base pair, in addition to the two base pairs found in nature, A\u2022T (adenine \u2013 thymine) and G\u2022C (guanine \u2013 cytosine). A few research groups have been searching for a third base pair for DNA, including teams led by Steven A. Benner, Philippe Marliere, Floyd E. Romesberg and Ichiro Hirao. Some new base pairs based on alternative hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions and metal coordination have been reported.\nIn 1989 Steven Benner (then working at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich) and his team led with modified forms of cytosine and guanine into DNA molecules \"in vitro\". The nucleotides, which encoded RNA and proteins, were successfully replicated \"in vitro\". Since then, Benner's team has been trying to engineer cells that can make foreign bases from scratch, obviating the need for a feedstock.\nIn 2002, Ichiro Hirao's group in Japan developed an unnatural base pair between 2-amino-8-(2-thienyl)purine (s) and pyridine-2-one (y) that functions in transcription and translation, for the site-specific incorporation of non-standard amino acids into proteins. In 2006, they created 7-(2-thienyl)imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (Ds) and pyrrole-2-carbaldehyde (Pa) as a third base pair for replication and transcription. Afterward, Ds and 4-[3-(6-aminohexanamido)-1-propynyl]-2-nitropyrrole (Px) was discovered as a high fidelity pair in PCR amplification. In 2013, they applied the Ds-Px pair to DNA aptamer generation by \"in vitro\" selection (SELEX) and demonstrated the genetic alphabet expansion significantly augment DNA aptamer affinities to target proteins.\nIn 2012, a group of American scientists led by Floyd Romesberg, a chemical biologist at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego, California, published that his team designed an unnatural base pair (UBP). The two new artificial nucleotides or \"Unnatural Base Pair\" (UBP) were named d5SICS and dNaM. More technically, these artificial nucleotides bearing hydrophobic nucleobases, feature two fused aromatic rings that form a (d5SICS\u2013dNaM) complex or base pair in DNA. His team designed a variety of \"in vitro\" or \"test tube\" templates containing the unnatural base pair and they confirmed that it was efficiently replicated with high fidelity in virtually all sequence contexts using the modern standard \"in vitro\" techniques, namely PCR amplification of DNA and PCR-based applications. Their results show that for PCR and PCR-based applications, the d5SICS\u2013dNaM unnatural base pair is functionally equivalent to a natural base pair, and when combined with the other two natural base pairs used by all organisms, A\u2013T and G\u2013C, they provide a fully functional and expanded six-letter \"genetic alphabet\".\nIn 2014 the same team from the Scripps Research Institute reported that they synthesized a stretch of circular DNA known as a plasmid containing natural T-A and C-G base pairs along with the best-performing UBP Romesberg's laboratory had designed and inserted it into cells of the common bacterium \"E. coli\" that successfully replicated the unnatural base pairs through multiple generations. The transfection did not hamper the growth of the \"E. coli\" cells and showed no sign of losing its unnatural base pairs to its natural DNA repair mechanisms. This is the first known example of a living organism passing along an expanded genetic code to subsequent generations. Romesberg said he and his colleagues created 300 variants to refine the design of nucleotides that would be stable enough and would be replicated as easily as the natural ones when the cells divide. This was in part achieved by the addition of a supportive algal gene that expresses a nucleotide triphosphate transporter which efficiently imports the triphosphates of both d5SICSTP and dNaMTP into \"E. coli\" bacteria. Then, the natural bacterial replication pathways use them to accurately replicate a plasmid containing d5SICS\u2013dNaM. Other researchers were surprised that the bacteria replicated these human-made DNA subunits.\nThe successful incorporation of a third base pair is a significant breakthrough toward the goal of greatly expanding the number of amino acids which can be encoded by DNA, from the existing 20 amino acids to a theoretically possible 172, thereby expanding the potential for living organisms to produce novel proteins. The artificial strings of DNA do not encode for anything yet, but scientists speculate they could be designed to manufacture new proteins which could have industrial or pharmaceutical uses. Experts said the synthetic DNA incorporating the unnatural base pair raises the possibility of life forms based on a different DNA code.\nData sources for base pair strengths.\nThe following sources have information on the free energy (thermodynamic measures of strength) of base pairs:\nHowever, simply knowing what the minimal-energy hydrogen-bonded state between two nucleobases is not enough. The stability of a nucleic acid molecule also comes from base stacking, the stengths of which can vary with modified bases with respect to the original version. The optimal hydrogen-bonded state for two bases can also turn out to require an unnatural amount of bending of the nucleic acid backbone. All of these contribute to the \"effective\" strength of a base pair in the context of nucleic acid secondary structure, which is why predicting such structures need \"nearest neighbor\" models that describe base pairs in terms of free energy (at 37\u00a0\u00b0C) and enthalpy (for rescaling to different temperatures) of:\nA list of \"nearest neighbor\" models can be found at .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4293", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4293", "title": "Baltimore Ravens", "text": "National Football League franchise in Baltimore, Maryland\nThe Baltimore Ravens are a professional American football team based in Baltimore. The Ravens compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) North division. The team plays its home games at M&amp;T Bank Stadium and is headquartered in Owings Mills, Maryland.\nThe Baltimore Ravens were established in 1996 after Art Modell, then owner of the Cleveland Browns, announced plans in 1995 to move the franchise from Cleveland to Baltimore. As part of a settlement between the league and the city of Cleveland, Modell was required to leave the Browns' history, team colors, and records in Cleveland for a replacement team and replacement personnel that would resume play in 1999. In return, he was allowed to take his own personnel and team to Baltimore, where such personnel would form an expansion team. Steve Bisciotti has been the Ravens' majority owner since 2004. In 2023, the franchise was valued at $4.63 billion, the world's 28th-most valuable sports franchise.\nAs of 2023, the Ravens had a regular season record of 268\u2013199\u20131 (), the highest winning percentage among active franchises, and the fourth-highest playoff winning percentage at 18\u201314 (). The team has qualified for the NFL playoffs 16 times since 2000 with two Super Bowl titles (XXXV and XLVII), two AFC Championship titles (2000 and 2012), five AFC Championship game appearances (2000, 2008, 2011, 2012, and 2023), and eight AFC North division titles (2003, 2006, 2011, 2012, 2018, 2019, 2023, and 2024). They and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers are the only teams undefeated in multiple Super Bowl appearances. The Ravens organization was led by general manager Ozzie Newsome from 1996 until he retired after the 2018 season; it has had three head coaches: Ted Marchibroda, Brian Billick, and since 2008, John Harbaugh. Starting with a record-breaking defensive performance in their 2000 season, the Ravens have established a reputation for strong defensive play. Former players such as middle linebacker Ray Lewis, safety Ed Reed, and offensive tackle Jonathan Ogden have been enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nHistory.\nTeam name.\nThe name \"Ravens\" was inspired by Edgar Allan Poe's poem \"The Raven\". Chosen in a fan contest that drew 33,288 voters, the allusion honors Poe who spent the early part of his career in Baltimore and is buried there. Other names polled included \"Marauders\", \"Americans\", and \"Bombers\", among others. As \"The Baltimore Sun\" reported at the time, fans also \"liked the tie-in with the other birds in town, the Orioles, and found it easy to visualize a tough, menacing black bird\". Edgar Allan Poe also had distant relatives who played football for the Princeton Tigers in the 1880s through the early 1900s. These brothers were famous players in the early days of American football.\nBefore the football team, there was the Baltimore Ravens wheelchair basketball team \u2014 the original Baltimore Ravens. In 1972, the Ravens wheelchair basketball team was founded by Ralph Smith, long-time resident of Baltimore, second Vice President of the National Wheelchair Basketball Association (NWBA) and Member of the NWBA Hall of Fame. The name \"Ravens\" was inspired by Bob Ardinger, a member of the Ravens wheelchair basketball team. In the 1990s, the naming rights were later sold to the football team when they came to the city and the wheelchair basketball team became known as the Maryland Ravens.\nBackground.\nAfter the Colts moved in 1984 to Indianapolis, several attempts were made to bring an NFL team back to Baltimore. In 1993, ahead of the 1995 league expansion, the city was considered a favorite, behind only St. Louis, to be granted one of two new franchises. League officials and team owners feared litigation due to conflicts between rival bidding groups if St. Louis was awarded a franchise. In October Charlotte, North Carolina was the first city chosen. Several weeks later, Baltimore's bid for a franchise\u2014dubbed the Baltimore Bombers, in honor of the locally produced Martin B-26 Marauder bomber\u2014had three ownership groups in place and a state financial package which included a proposed $200 million, rent free stadium and permission to charge up to $80 million in personal seat license fees. Baltimore, however, was unexpectedly passed over in favor of Jacksonville, Florida, despite Jacksonville's minor TV market status and that the city had withdrawn from contention in the summer, only to return with former Commissioner Paul Tagliabue's urging. Although league officials denied that any city had been favored, it was reported that Tagliabue and his longtime friend Washington Redskins owner Jack Kent Cooke had lobbied against Baltimore due to its proximity to Washington, DC, and that Tagliabue had used the initial committee voting system to prevent the entire league ownership from voting on Baltimore's bid. This led to public outrage and \"The Baltimore Sun\" describing Tagliabue as having an \"Anybody But Baltimore\" policy. Maryland governor William Donald Schaefer said afterward that Tagliabue had led him on, praising Baltimore and the proposed owners while working behind the scenes to oppose Baltimore's bid.\nBy May 1994, Baltimore Orioles owner Peter Angelos had gathered a new group of investors, including author Tom Clancy, to bid on teams whose owners had expressed interest in moving. Angelos found a potential partner in Georgia Frontiere, who was open to moving the Los Angeles Rams to Baltimore. Jack Kent Cooke opposed the move, intending to build the Redskins' new stadium in Laurel, Maryland, close enough to Baltimore to cool outside interest in bringing in a new franchise. This led to heated arguments between Cooke and Angelos, who accused Cooke of being a \"carpetbagger\". The league eventually persuaded Rams team president John Shaw to move to St. Louis instead, leading to a leaguewide rumor that Tagliabue was again steering interest away from Baltimore, a claim that Tagliabue denied. In response to anger in Baltimore, including Governor Schaefer's threat to announce over the loudspeakers Tagliabue's exact location in Camden Yards any time he attended a Baltimore Orioles game, Tagliabue said of Baltimore's financial package, \"Maybe [Baltimore] can open another museum with that money.\" After that, Angelos made an unsuccessful $200 million bid to bring the Tampa Bay Buccaneers to Baltimore.\nHaving failed to obtain a franchise via the expansion, the city, despite having \"misgivings\", turned to the possibility of obtaining the Cleveland Browns, whose owner Art Modell was financially struggling and at odds with the city of Cleveland over desired improvements to the team's stadium.\nReturn of American football in Baltimore.\nEnticed by Baltimore's available funds for a first-class stadium and a promised yearly operating subsidy of $25 million, Modell announced on November 6, 1995, his intention to move the team from Cleveland to Baltimore the following year. The resulting controversy ended when representatives of Cleveland and the NFL reached a settlement on February 8, 1996. Tagliabue promised the city of Cleveland that an NFL team would play in Cleveland, either through relocation or expansion, \"no later than 1999\". The agreement also stipulated that the Browns' name, colors, uniform design and franchise records would remain in Cleveland. The franchise history includes Browns club records and connections with Pro Football Hall of Fame players. Modell's Baltimore team, while retaining all current player contracts, would, for purposes of team history, appear as an expansion team, a new franchise. Not all players, staff or front office would make the move to Baltimore.\nAs the team prepared to open the 1996 season in Baltimore, Modell hired a new head coach: Ted Marchibroda, known for his work as head coach of the Baltimore Colts during the 1970s and the Indianapolis Colts during the early 1990s. Ozzie Newsome, the Browns' tight end for many seasons, joined Modell in Baltimore as director of football operations. He was later promoted to vice president/general manager.\nThe home stadium for the Ravens first two seasons was Baltimore's Memorial Stadium, previously home to the Baltimore Colts, the Baltimore Orioles, and the Canadian Football League's Baltimore Stallions.\nThe early years and Ted Marchibroda era (1996\u20131998).\nIn the 1996 NFL draft, the Ravens, with two picks in the first round, drafted offensive tackle Jonathan Ogden at No. 4 overall and linebacker Ray Lewis at No. 26 overall. Both Ogden and Lewis went on to play for the Ravens for their entire professional careers and were both inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nThe 1996 Ravens won their opening game against the Oakland Raiders, but finished the season 4\u201312 despite receiver Michael Jackson leading the league with 14 touchdown catches. The 1997 Ravens started 3\u20131. Peter Boulware, a rookie defender from Florida State, recorded 11.5 sacks and was named AFC Defensive Rookie of the Year. The team finished 6\u20139\u20131. On October 26, the team made its first trip to Landover, Maryland to play their new regional rivals, the Washington Redskins. The Ravens won the game 20\u201317. On December 14, 1997, the Ravens played the final professional sporting event at Baltimore's historic Memorial Stadium, winning 21\u201319 over the Tennessee Oilers.\nIn 1998, the Ravens moved to a brand-new stadium, next to Camden Yards: PSINet Stadium, named for after the now-defunct internet service provider which purchased the original naming rights. It is now known as M&amp;T Bank Stadium.\nQuarterback Vinny Testaverde left for the New York Jets before the season, and was replaced by former Indianapolis Colt Jim Harbaugh, and later Eric Zeier. Cornerback Rod Woodson joined the team after a successful stint with the Pittsburgh Steelers, and Priest Holmes started getting the first playing time of his career and ran for 1,000 yards. The Ravens finished 1998 with a 6\u201310 record. On November 29, the Colts played in Baltimore for the first time in 15 years. Amid a shower of boos for the Colts, the Ravens won 38\u201331.\nBrian Billick era (1999\u20132007).\nMarchibroda was fired after three consecutive losing seasons. Brian Billick took over as head coach in 1999. Billick had been offensive coordinator for the record-setting Minnesota Vikings the season before. Quarterback Tony Banks came to Baltimore from the St. Louis Rams and had the best season of his career with 17 touchdown passes and an 81.2 pass rating. He was joined by receiver Qadry Ismail, who posted a 1,000-yard season. The Ravens initially struggled with a record of 4\u20137 but managed to finish with an 8\u20138 record.\nDue to continual financial hardships for the organization, the NFL took an unusual move and directed Modell sell his franchise. On March 27, 2000, NFL owners approved the sale of 49% of the Ravens to Steve Bisciotti. In the deal, Bisciotti had an option to purchase the remaining 51% for $325 million in 2004 from Art Modell. On April 9, 2004, the NFL approved Steve Bisciotti's purchase of the majority stake in the club.\n2000: Super Bowl XXXV champions.\nBanks shared playing time in the 2000 regular season with Trent Dilfer. Both players put up decent numbers (and a 1,364-yard rushing season by rookie Jamal Lewis helped too) but the defense became the team's hallmark and bailed a struggling offense out in many instances through the season. Ray Lewis was named Defensive Player of the Year. Two of his defensive teammates, Sam Adams and Rod Woodson, made the Pro Bowl. Baltimore's season started strong with a 5\u20131 record. But the team struggled through midseason, at one point going five games without scoring an offensive touchdown. The team regrouped and won each of their last seven games, finishing 12\u20134 and making the playoffs for the first time.\nDuring the 2000 season, the Ravens' dominating defense broke a notable NFL record. They held opposing teams to 165 total points, surpassing the 1986 Chicago Bears mark of 187 points for a 16-game season, which at that time was the current NFL record. That record still stands, and the 2000 Ravens remain in the discussion as one of the greatest NFL defenses of all time, most notably alongside the 1985 Chicago Bears defense.\nSince the divisional rival Tennessee Titans had a record of 13\u20133, the Ravens had to play in the wild card round. They dominated the Denver Broncos 21\u20133 in their first game. In the divisional playoff, they went on the road to Tennessee. With the score tied 10\u201310 in the fourth quarter, an Al Del Greco field goal attempt was blocked and returned for a touchdown by Anthony Mitchell, and a Ray Lewis interception return for a score put the game squarely in Baltimore's favor. The 24\u201310 win put the Ravens in the AFC Championship against the Oakland Raiders. The game was rarely in doubt. Shannon Sharpe's 96-yard touchdown catch early in the second quarter followed by an injury to Raiders quarterback Rich Gannon were crucial as the Ravens won easily, 16\u20133.\nBaltimore then went to Tampa for Super Bowl XXXV against the New York Giants. The Ravens' defense carried them to a win. They recorded four sacks and forced five turnovers, one of which was a Kerry Collins interception returned for a touchdown by Duane Starks. The Giants' only score was a Ron Dixon kickoff return for a touchdown; however, the Ravens immediately countered with a touchdown return on the next kickoff by Jermaine Lewis. The Ravens became champions with a 34\u20137 win.\n2001\u20132007.\nIn 2001, the Ravens attempted to defend their title with Elvis Grbac as their new starting quarterback, but a season-ending injury to Jamal Lewis on the first day of training camp and poor offensive performances stymied the team. After a 3\u20133 start, the Ravens defeated the Minnesota Vikings in the final week to clinch a wild card berth at 10\u20136. In the first round the Ravens showed flashes of their previous year with a 20\u20133 win over the Miami Dolphins, in which the team forced three turnovers and outgained the Dolphins 347 yards to 151. In the divisional playoff the Ravens played the Pittsburgh Steelers. Three interceptions by Grbac ended the Ravens' season, as they lost 27\u201310.\nBaltimore ran into salary cap problems entering the 2002 season and was forced to part with a number of impactful players. In the NFL draft, the team selected Ed Reed with the 24th overall pick. Reed would go on to become one of the best safeties in NFL history, making nine Pro Bowls until leaving the Ravens for the Houston Texans in 2013. Despite low expectations, the Ravens stayed somewhat competitive in 2002 until a losing streak in December eliminated any chances of a postseason berth and a 7\u20139 finish.\nIn 2003, the Ravens drafted their new quarterback, Kyle Boller, but he was injured midway through the season and was replaced by Anthony Wright. Jamal Lewis ran for 2,066 yards (including a then-NFL record 295 yards in one game against the Cleveland Browns on September 14). With a 10\u20136 record, Baltimore won their first AFC North division title. Their first playoff game, at home against the Tennessee Titans, went back and forth, with the Ravens being held to only 54 yards total rushing. The Titans won 20\u201317 on a late field goal, and Baltimore's season ended early.\nRay Lewis was also named Defensive Player of the year for the second time in his career.\nIn April 2003, Art Modell sold 49% of the team to Steve Bisciotti, a local businessman who had made his fortune in the temporary staffing field. After the season, Art Modell sold his remaining 51% ownership to Bisciotti, ending over 40 years of tenure as an NFL franchise owner.\nThe Ravens did not make the playoffs in 2004 and finished the season with a record of 9\u20137 with Boller spending the season at QB. They did get good play from veteran corner Deion Sanders and third-year safety Ed Reed, who won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year award. They were also the only team to defeat the 15\u20131 Pittsburgh Steelers in the regular season.\nThe next off-season, the Ravens looked to augment their receiving corps (which was second-worst in the NFL in 2004) by signing Derrick Mason from the Titans and drafting Oklahoma wide receiver Mark Clayton in the first round of the 2005 NFL draft. However, the Ravens ended their season 6\u201310.\nThe 2006 Baltimore Ravens season began with the team trying to improve on their 6\u201310 record of 2005. The Ravens, for the first time in franchise history, started 4\u20130, under the leadership of former Titans quarterback Steve McNair.\nIn 2006, The Ravens lost two straight games midseason on offensive troubles, prompting coach Billick to drop their offensive coordinator Jim Fassel in their week seven bye. After the bye, and with Billick calling the offense, Baltimore would record a five-game win streak before losing to the Cincinnati Bengals in week 13. Still ranked second overall to first place San Diego Chargers, the Ravens continued on. They defeated the Kansas City Chiefs, and held the defending Super Bowl champion Pittsburgh Steelers to only one touchdown at Heinz Field, allowing the Ravens to clinch the AFC North.\nThe Ravens ended the regular season with a franchise-best 13\u20133 record. Baltimore had secured the AFC North title, the No. 2 AFC playoff seed, and clinched a 1st-round bye by season's end. The Ravens were slated to face the Indianapolis Colts in the second round of the playoffs, in the first meeting of the two teams in the playoffs. Many Baltimore and Indianapolis fans saw this historic meeting as a sort of \"Judgment Day\" with the new team of Baltimore facing the old team of Baltimore (the former Baltimore Colts having left Baltimore under questionable circumstances in 1984). Both Indianapolis and Baltimore were held to scoring only field goals as the two defenses slugged it out all over M&amp;T Bank Stadium. McNair threw two costly interceptions, including one at the 1-yard line. The eventual Super Bowl champion Colts won 15\u20136, ending Baltimore's season.\nThe Ravens hoped to improve upon their 13\u20133 record but injuries and poor play plagued the team. The Ravens finished the 2007 season in the AFC North cellar with a disappointing 5\u201311 record. A humiliating 22\u201316 overtime loss to the previously winless Miami Dolphins on December 16 ultimately led to Billick's dismissal after the end of the regular season. He was replaced by John Harbaugh, the special teams coach of the Philadelphia Eagles and the older brother of former Ravens quarterback Jim Harbaugh (1998).\nJohn Harbaugh/Joe Flacco era (2008\u20132018).\n2008: Arrival of Harbaugh and Flacco.\nWith rookies at head coach (John Harbaugh) and quarterback (Joe Flacco), the Ravens entered the 2008 campaign with much uncertainty. Baltimore smartly recovered in 2008, winning eleven games and achieving a wild card spot in the postseason. On the strength of four interceptions, one resulting in an Ed Reed touchdown, the Ravens began its postseason run by winning a rematch over Miami 27\u20139 at Dolphin Stadium on January 4, 2009, in a wild-card game. Six days later, they advanced to the AFC Championship Game by avenging a Week 5 loss to the Titans 13\u201310 at LP Field on a Matt Stover field goal with 53 seconds left in regulation time. The Ravens fell one victory short of Super Bowl XLIII by losing to the Steelers 23\u201314 at Heinz Field on January 18, 2009.\n2009\u20132011.\nIn 2009, the Ravens won their first three games, then lost the next three, including a close match in Minnesota. The rest of the season was an uneven string of wins and losses, which included a home victory over Pittsburgh in overtime followed by a Monday Night loss in Green Bay. That game was notable for the number of penalties committed, costing a total of 310 yards, and almost tying with the record set by Tampa Bay and Seattle in 1976. Afterwards, the Ravens easily crushed the Lions and Bears, giving up less than ten points in both games. The next match was against the Steelers, where Baltimore lost a close one before beating the Raiders to end the season. With a record of 9\u20137, the team finished second in the division and gained another wild card. Moving into the playoffs, they overwhelmed the Patriots 33\u201314; nevertheless they did not reach the AFC Championship because they were routed 20\u20133 by the Colts in the Divisional Round a week later.\nBaltimore managed to beat the Jets 10\u20139 on the 2010 opener, but then lost a poorly played game against Cincinnati the following week. The Ravens rebounded against the other two division teams, beating Cleveland 24\u201317 in Week 3 and then. The Ravens scored a fine win (31\u201317) at home against Denver in Week 5. The Ravens finished the season 12\u20134, second in the division due to a tiebreaker with Pittsburgh, and earning a wild card spot. Baltimore headed to Kansas City and defeated the Chiefs 30\u20137, but once again were knocked from the playoffs by Pittsburgh in a hard-fought game 31\u201324.\nThe Ravens hosted their arch-enemy in Week 1 of the 2011 season. On a hot, humid day in M&amp;T Bank Stadium, crowd noise and multiple Steelers mistakes allowed Baltimore to crush them with four touchdowns 35\u20137. The frustrated Pittsburgh players also committed several costly penalties. Thus, the Ravens had gained their first-ever victory over the Steelers with Ben Roethlisberger playing and avenged themselves of repeated regular and postseason losses in the series.\nBut in Week 2, the Ravens collapsed in Tennessee and lost 26\u201313. They rebounded by routing the Rams in Week 3 and then overpowering the Jets 34\u201317 in Week 4.\nWeek 5, the Ravens had a bye week, following a game against the Texans. But in Week 7, Baltimore had a stunning MNF upset loss in Jacksonville as they were held to one touchdown in a 12\u20137 loss. Their final scoring drive failed as Joe Flacco threw an interception in the closing seconds of the game.\nAfter beating the Cincinnati Bengals in Week 17 of the regular season, the Ravens advanced to the playoffs as the Number 2 seed in the AFC with a record of 12\u20134. They gained the distinction of AFC North Champions over Pittsburgh (12\u20134) due to a tie-breaker.\nRavens' Lee Evans was stripped of a 14-yard touchdown pass by the Patriots Sterling Moore with 22 seconds left and Ravens kicker Billy Cundiff pushed a 32-yard field goal attempt wide left on fourth down as the Patriots held on to beat the Ravens 23\u201320 during the AFC championship game and advance to Super Bowl XLVI.\n2012: Ray Lewis' final season and second Super Bowl victory.\nThe Ravens' attempt to convert Joe Flacco into a pocket passer remained a work in progress as the 2012 season began. Terrell Suggs suffered a tendon injury during an off-season basketball game and was unable to play for at least several weeks. In the opener on September 10, Baltimore routed Cincinnati 44\u201313. After this easy win, the team headed to Philadelphia, but lost 24\u201323.\nReturning home for a primetime rematch of the AFC Championship, another bizarre game ensued. New England picked apart the Baltimore defense (which was considerably weakened without Terrell Suggs and some other players lost over the offseason) for the first half. Trouble began early in the game when a streaker ran out onto the field and had to be tackled by security, and accelerated when, at 2:18 in the 4th quarter, the referees made a holding call on RG Marshal Yanda. Enraged fans repeatedly chanted an obscenity at this penalty. The Ravens finally drove downfield and on the last play of the game, Justin Tucker kicked a 27-yard field goal to win the game 31\u201330, capping off a second intense and controversially officiated game in a row for the Ravens.\nThe Ravens would win the AFC North with a 10\u20136 record, but finished 4th in the AFC playoff seeding, and thus had to play a wild card game. After defeating the Indianapolis Colts 24\u20139 at home (the final home game of Ray Lewis), the Ravens traveled to Denver to play against the top-seeded Broncos. In a very back-and-forth contest, the Ravens pulled out a 38\u201335 victory in two overtimes. They then won their 2nd AFC championship by coming back from a 13\u20137 halftime deficit to defeat the Patriots once again, 28\u201313.\nThe Ravens played the Super Bowl XLVII against the San Francisco 49ers. Baltimore built a 28\u20136 lead early in the third quarter before a partial power outage in the Superdome suspended play for 34 minutes (earning the game the added nickname of the Blackout Bowl). After play resumed, San Francisco scored 17 unanswered third-quarter points to cut the Ravens' lead, 28\u201323, and continued to chip away in the fourth quarter. With the Ravens leading late in the game, 34\u201329, the 49ers advanced to the Baltimore 7-yard line just before the two-minute warning but turned the ball over on downs. The Ravens then took an intentional safety in the waning moments of the game to preserve the victory. Baltimore quarterback Joe Flacco, who completed 22 of 33 passes for 287 yards and three touchdowns, was named Super Bowl MVP.\n2013\u20132018.\nComing off as the defending Super Bowl champions, this was the first year in franchise history for the team without Ray Lewis. The Ravens started out 3\u20132, and started the 2\u20130 Houston Texans 14-loss streak by shutting them 30\u20139 in Week 3. However, the Ravens lost their next 3 games, losing to the Green Bay Packers and Pittsburgh Steelers in last-minute field goals and were shut out in an attempt to tie the game against the Cleveland Browns 24\u201318.\nAfter winning and losing their next game, the Ravens came out 4\u20136, but managed winning their next four games in dominating the Jets 19\u20133, a Steelers win 22\u201320 during Thanksgiving, a booming ending in Baltimore against the Vikings 29\u201326, and an 18\u201316 win at Detroit, including Justin Tucker's 61 yarder to win the game. The Ravens were 8\u20136, with the 6th seed, but after losing their next two games, and the San Diego Chargers winning their next two to clinch the 6th seed, the Ravens finished 8\u20138 and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2007.\nOn January 27, 2014, the Ravens hired former Houston Texans head coach Gary Kubiak to be their new offensive coordinator after Jim Caldwell accepted the new available head coaching job with the Detroit Lions. On February 15, 2014, star running back Ray Rice and his fianc\u00e9e Janay Palmer were arrested and charged with assault after a physical altercation at Revel Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey. Celebrity news website TMZ posted a video of Rice dragging Palmer's body out of an elevator after apparently knocking her out. For the incident, Rice was initially suspended for the first two games of the 2014 NFL season on July 25, 2014, which led to widespread criticism of the NFL.\nIn Week 1, on September 7, the Baltimore Ravens lost to the Cincinnati Bengals, 23\u201316. The next day, on September 8, 2014, TMZ released additional footage from an elevator camera showing Rice punching Palmer. The Baltimore Ravens terminated Rice's contract as a result, and was later indefinitely suspended by the NFL, although a judge later vacated this indefinite suspension. In Week 12, the Ravens traveled down for an interconference battle with the New Orleans Saints, which the Ravens won. In Week 16, the Ravens traveled to Houston to take on the Texans. In one of Flacco's worst performances, the offense sputtered against the Houston defense and Flacco threw three interceptions, falling to the Texans 25\u201313. With their playoff chances and season hanging in the balance, the Ravens took on the Browns in Week 17 at home. After three quarters had gone by and down 10\u20133, Joe Flacco led the Ravens on a comeback scoring 17 unanswered points, winning 20\u201310. With the win, and the Kansas City Chiefs defeating the San Diego Chargers, the Ravens clinched their sixth playoff berth in seven seasons.\nIn the wild card round, the Ravens won 30\u201317 against their divisional rivals, the Pittsburgh Steelers, at Heinz Field. In the next game in the Divisional round, the Ravens faced the New England Patriots. Despite a strong offensive effort and having a 14-point lead twice in the game, the Ravens were defeated by the Patriots 35\u201331, ending their season.\nThe 2015 season marked 20 seasons of the franchise's existence competing in the NFL, which the franchise recognized with a special badge being worn on their uniforms during the 2015 NFL season. The Ravens lost key players such as Joe Flacco, Justin Forsett, Terrell Suggs, Steve Smith Sr., and Eugene Monroe to injuries. Injuries and their inability to win close games early in the season led to the first losing season in the Harbaugh-Flacco era with a 5\u201311 mark. The 2016 Ravens finished 8\u20138, but failed to qualify the playoffs for the second straight year. They were eliminated from playoff contention after their Week 16 loss to their division rivals, the Steelers. This was the first time the Ravens missed the playoffs in consecutive seasons since 2004\u20132005, as well as the first in the Harbaugh/Flacco era.\nDuring the 2017 season, the Ravens improved upon their 8\u20138 record from 2016 by one win, finishing the season 9\u20137 and missing the playoffs for the third year in a row. This marked the first time the Ravens failed to make the playoffs in three straight seasons since the team's first three years of existence (1996\u20131998). The Ravens suffered a loss at home to the Cincinnati Bengals in the final game of the season that prevented them from earning a playoff berth.\nLamar Jackson era (2018\u2013present).\nThe Ravens drafted quarterback Lamar Jackson with the 32nd pick in the 2018 draft. After the team started the season with a 4\u20135 record, Jackson took over as the starting QB in Week 11 when Joe Flacco was sidelined with a hip injury. The team won six of its next seven games, finishing the 2018 season with a 10\u20136 record and winning the AFC North, giving them their first playoff appearance since 2014 and their first division title since 2012. The Ravens lost to the Los Angeles Chargers in the Wild Card round with Jackson at quarterback, making him the youngest QB in NFL history to start a playoff game. At the conclusion of the season, Ozzie Newsome stepped down as the team's general manager. He was replaced by longtime assistant Eric DeCosta.\nOn March 13, 2019, the Ravens traded Joe Flacco to the Denver Broncos in exchange for a fourth round pick in the 2019 NFL draft. That season, Lamar Jackson led the Ravens to a franchise-best 14\u20132 record, including a 12-game winning streak to finish the regular season. On December 22, they clinched homefield advantage for the first time in franchise history following a win over the Cleveland Browns. On December 8, Jackson became only the second player in NFL history to rush for over 1,000 yards from the quarterback position. Four days later, Jackson broke Michael Vick's single season quarterback rushing record of 1,037 yards. Thirteen Ravens were selected to the 2019 Pro Bowl, matching the all-time NFL record.\nThe Ravens finished the 2019 regular season with 3,296 rushing yards, the most rushing yards by any team in NFL history during a season and they became the first team in NFL history to average at least 200 passing yards and 200 rushing yards per game in the same season.\nDespite earning the number one seed in the playoffs, the Ravens were eliminated by the 6th seed Tennessee Titans in the Divisional Round of the playoffs, 28\u201312. Lamar Jackson was unanimously voted AP NFL MVP, becoming only the second player in NFL history to do so, after Tom Brady in 2010.\nIn 2020, the Ravens went 6\u20135 in their first 11 games, but rebounded and finished the season 11\u20135, taking second place in the AFC North and earning a Wild Card playoff berth with the fifth seed. They also led the NFL in rushing yards for the second year in a row during the regular season, with 3,071 yards. In the Wild Card round, they defeated the fourth-seeded Tennessee Titans in Nashville, 20\u201313. In the Divisional Round, they fell to the second seed Buffalo Bills, 17\u20133.\nIn 2021, the Ravens claimed the record of consecutive preseason wins with 20, overtaking Vince Lombardi's Green Bay Packers record. In Week 3 of the 2021 season against the Detroit Lions, Justin Tucker put his name in the NFL record books by kicking the longest field goal in the history of the National Football League, 66 yards, which also was the field goal that won the game and 5 yards longer than his previous career long of 61 yards that was also kicked in Detroit. The following week, the Ravens tied the NFL record of consecutive 100 yard rushing games by a team with 43 in a win over the Denver Broncos, equaling the 1974 to '77 Pittsburgh Steelers record. The team reached an 8\u20133 record by Week 12, but ended the season on a six-game losing streak to finish 8\u20139, missing the playoffs and coming in last in the AFC North. Jackson sustained an ankle injury during the Week 14 loss to the Browns and did not appear in any subsequent games. In the 2022 season, the Ravens finished with a 10\u20137 record, which finished second in the AFC North. They lost in the Wild Card Round 24\u201317 to the Cincinnati Bengals.\nIn the 2023 season, the Ravens finished with a 13\u20134 record, which earned them the AFC North title and the #1 overall seed for the AFC playoffs. In the Divisional Round, they defeated the Houston Texans 34\u201310. In the AFC Championship, they lost to the Kansas City Chiefs 17\u201310.\nPrior to the start of the 2024 season, the Ravens acquired All-Pro running back Derrick Henry and by week 6 became the first NFL team to post six straight games with at least 150 yards and one touchdown through the air and one on the ground. In the 2024 season, the Ravens finished with a 12\u20135 record and won the AFC North title. The Ravens defeated the Steelers 28\u201314 in the Wild Card Round before falling to the Bills 27\u201325 in the Divisional Round.\nRivalries.\nDivisional.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nBy far the team's biggest rival is the Pittsburgh Steelers. Pittsburgh and Baltimore are separated by a less-than-5-hour drive along Interstate 70. Both teams are known for their hard-hitting physical style of play. They play twice a year in the AFC North, and have met five times in the playoffs. Pittsburgh leads the all-time series, 33\u201325, and holds a 3\u20132 advantage in the five matchups in the postseason. Games between these two teams usually come down to the wire as most within the last 5 years have come down to under 4 points.\nThe rivalry is considered one of the most significant and intense in the NFL today.\nCincinnati Bengals.\nThe Ravens' rivalry with the Cincinnati Bengals began when the original Browns franchise moved to Baltimore to become the Ravens. Since then, the rivalry heated up when longtime Ravens defensive coordinator Marvin Lewis was hired as the head coach of the Bengals. The Ravens lead the all-time series 32\u201327 as of the 2024 season. The Bengals won the only playoff meeting in the 2022 AFC Wild Card round.\nCleveland Browns.\nThe Browns\u2013Ravens rivalry in the AFC North began when the Cleveland Browns resumed operations in 1999, after suspending operations for three seasons after the original Browns moved to Baltimore and became the Ravens. The rivalry between the Browns and Ravens was more directed at former Browns owner Art Modell, who orchestrated the move, than the team itself, and has, by most Ravens fans, been simply considered a divisional game. The rivalry has been largely one-sided, as the Ravens hold a 37\u201315 series lead as of the end of the 2024 season. The two teams have not met in the playoffs.\nConference.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe Ravens first met the New England Patriots in 1996, but the rivalry truly started in 2007 when the Ravens suffered a bitter 27\u201324 loss in the Patriots' quest for perfection. The rivalry began to escalate in 2009 when the Patriots beat the Ravens 27\u201321 in a game that involved a confrontation between Patriots quarterback Tom Brady and Ravens linebacker Terrell Suggs. Both players would go on to take verbal shots at each other through the media after the game.\nAs of the 2023 season, the Patriots lead the overall series, 11\u20135. The two teams have split four postseason meetings, 2\u20132. The Ravens won the , 33\u201314, and the , 28\u201313. The Patriots won the 23\u201320 and the , 35\u201331.\nTennessee Titans.\nReemerging in the late 2010s, the rivalry between the Ravens and Tennessee Titans actually started in the early 2000s when both teams were in the AFC Central, with both teams having tough and bitter games. The Ravens gave the Titans their first ever loss at the new Adelphia Coliseum in the 2000 season and the Ravens eliminated Tennessee during the playoffs later on. Fans and analysts have noted an emerging rivalry between the Baltimore Ravens and the Tennessee Titans of the AFC South. While there is no known animosity between the cities of Baltimore and Nashville, games between their respective teams have become heated and included fiery verbal exchanges between coaches and players. In the five postseason matchups between the two teams, the road team has won every time to date. As of the 2023 season, the Ravens lead the all-time series 14\u201313.\nInstate.\nBeltway Bowl: Washington Commanders.\nThough the two teams only play each other every four years, the Ravens have a minor geographic rivalry with the Washington Commanders, whose stadium is about 40 miles away. The Commanders particularly had long blocked the return of an NFL team to Baltimore since the Colts franchise moved to Indianapolis in 1984. Former owner Jack Kent Cooke had been accused in multiple instances of orchestrating any means to prevent the city from receiving a new franchise until the Cleveland Browns moved to Baltimore in 1996, prompting Cooke to put the Redskins' then-new stadium in Landover, Maryland. The two teams play each other annually during the preseason. As of August 2024, the Ravens lead the series 4\u20133.\nLogo controversy.\nThe team's first helmet logo, used from 1996 through the 1999 Pro Bowl, featured raven wings outspread from a shield displaying a letter \"B\" framed by the word \"Ravens\" overhead and a cross bottony underneath. The US Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed a jury verdict that the logo infringed on a copyright retained by Frederick E. Bouchat, an amateur artist and security guard in Maryland, though he was not awarded a dollar amount for his claim.\nBouchat had submitted his design to the Maryland Stadium Authority by fax after learning that Baltimore was to acquire an NFL team. He was not credited for the design when the logo was announced. Bouchat sued the team, claiming to be the designer of the emblem; representatives of the team asserted that the image had been designed independently. The court ruled in favor of Bouchat, noting that team owner Modell had access to Bouchat's work. Bouchat's fax had gone to John Moag, the Maryland Stadium Authority chairman, whose office was located in the same building as Modell's. Bouchat ultimately was not awarded monetary compensation in the damages phase of the case.\n\"The Baltimore Sun\" ran a poll showing three designs for new helmet logos. Fans participating in the poll expressed a preference for a raven's head in profile over other designs. Art Modell announced that he would honor this preference but still wanted a letter \"B\" to appear somewhere in the design. The new Ravens logo, introduced in 1999, featured a raven's head in profile with the letter B superimposed. The secondary logo is a shield that honors Baltimore's history of heraldry. Alternating Calvert and Crossland emblems (seen also in the flag of Maryland and the flag of Baltimore) are interlocked with stylized letters \"B\" and \"R\".\nUniforms.\nThe design of the Ravens uniform has remained essentially unchanged since the team's inaugural season in 1996. Art Modell admitted to ESPN's Roy Firestone that the Ravens' colors, introduced in early 1996, were inspired by the Northwestern Wildcats 1995 dream season. Helmets are black with purple \"talon\" stripes rising from the facemask to the crown. Players normally wear purple jerseys at home and white jerseys on the road. In 1996 the team wore black pants with a single large white stripe for all games.\nIn 1997 the Ravens opted for a more classic NFL look with white pants sporting stripes in purple and black, along with the jerseys sporting a different font for the uniform numbers. The white pants were worn with both home and road jerseys. The road uniform (white pants with white jerseys) was worn by the Ravens in Super Bowl XXXV, at the end of the 2000 NFL season. This all-white combination was originally worn with black socks, but starting in 2021, the Ravens began wearing white hosiery with the all-white uniform.\nIn the 2002 season the Ravens began the practice of wearing white jerseys for the home opener that has a 1:00 kickoff. In recent seasons, the practice has come when the home game is played in week one. Since John Harbaugh became the head coach in 2008, the Ravens have also worn their white jerseys at home for preseason games.\nIn November 2004 the team introduced an alternate uniform design featuring black jerseys and solid black pants with black socks. The all-black uniform was first worn for a home game against the Cleveland Browns, entitled \"Pitch Black\" night, that resulted in a Ravens win. The uniform has since been worn for select prime time national game broadcasts and other games of significance.\nThe Ravens began wearing black pants again with the white jersey in 2008. On December 7, 2008, during a Sunday Night Football game against the Washington Redskins, the Ravens introduced a new combination of black jersey with white pants. It was believed to be due to the fact that John Harbaugh doesn't like the \"blackout\" look. However, on December 19, 2010, the Ravens wore their black jerseys and black pants in a 30\u201324 victory over the New Orleans Saints.\nSince 2010, the Ravens have worn their black jerseys at least twice each season. From 2011 to 2013 and again in 2015, they wore the all blacks once and the black on white once. In 2014 and 2016, they wore all black both times they wore alternate uniforms. In 2017, they wore all black twice and black on white once (although the league is supposed to limit teams to wearing alternate jerseys a maximum of two times a season).\nOn December 5, 2010, the Ravens reverted to the black pants with the purple jerseys versus the Pittsburgh Steelers during NBC's \"Sunday Night Football\" telecast. The Ravens lost to the Steelers 13\u201310. They wore the same look again for their game against the Cleveland Browns on December 24, 2011, and they won, 20\u201314. They wore this combination a third time against the Houston Texans on January 15, 2012, in the AFC Divisional playoff. They won 20\u201313. They would again wear this combination on January 6, 2013, during the AFC Wild Card playoff and what turned out to be Ray Lewis' final home game, where they defeated the Indianapolis Colts 24\u20139.\nFrom their inaugural season until 2006, the Ravens wore white cleats with their uniforms; they switched to black cleats in 2007. From the mid-2010s onward, the NFL relaxed its rules regarding primary cleat colors, and Ravens players began wearing customized cleats in either purple, black, gold or white.\nOn December 20, 2015, the team unexpectedly debuted gold pants for the first time, wearing them with their regular purple jerseys against the Kansas City Chiefs. Although gold is an official accent color of the Ravens, the pants got an overwhelmingly negative response on social media by both Ravens fans and fans of other NFL teams, with some comparisons being made to the rival Pittsburgh Steelers' pants, and mustard.\nDuring the 2015 season, the NFL announced a jersey promotion called Color Rush in which teams would wear uniforms typically of one color head-to-toe during select primetime games. The promotion was used three times that season; all the games that featured them were on Thursday Night and had both teams wear them in each. The following season, the league released uniforms for all 32 teams and announced they would be worn during all Thursday Night games that year, as well as on Christmas. The Ravens had one Thursday Night game in 2016; they wore their all-purple Color Rush uniforms and won 28\u20137 over the division rival Cleveland Browns. They had one other Thursday night game the following season, in which they again wore the jerseys and won 40\u20130 over the Miami Dolphins. In their Christmas 2016 game against the Steelers, the Ravens wore their regular all-white uniforms while their rivals wore their Color Rush uniforms. Starting in 2024, the Ravens would wear alternate purple helmets with the Color Rush uniform, featuring a new front-facing Ravens logo as the helmet decals. The full set was rebranded as the \"Purple Rising\" uniforms.\nOn September 13, 2018, the Ravens debuted a new combination in a road game against the Cincinnati Bengals, wearing white jerseys with purple pants. The purple pants are similar to the ones used for Color Rush except that it has side stripes of black and white; the Color Rush purple pants have gold and white stripes. Then on October 21 against the New Orleans Saints, the Ravens paired their new purple pants with their regular purple uniforms. Black socks were originally worn with this combination, but on January 2, 2022, the Ravens wore purple socks with the regular all-purple combination against the Los Angeles Rams, essentially replicating their Color Rush uniforms but with minimal gold elements.\nFor the regular season finale against the Browns on December 30, the Ravens wore their black uniforms with purple pants. The Ravens wore this combination again October 11, 2021, against the Indianapolis Colts on \"Monday Night Football\" in a 31\u201325 overtime win.\nMarching band.\nThe team marching band is called Baltimore's Marching Ravens. They began as the Colts' marching band and have operated continuously from September 7, 1947, to the present. They helped campaign for football to return to Baltimore after the Colts moved. Because they stayed in Baltimore after the Colts left, the band is nicknamed \"the band that would not die\" and were the subject of an episode of ESPN's \"30 for 30\". The Washington Commanders are the only other NFL team that currently has a marching band.\nPlayers of note.\nPro Football Hall of Fame.\nNote: The following lists inductees of the Hall of Fame who spent portions of their careers with the Ravens. Bold number indicates player inducted primarily for their contributions to the franchise. For other Hall of Famers, players whose numbers were retired, and players who played for the Baltimore Colts, see Indianapolis Colts. For Cleveland Browns players, including those in the Hall of Fame and those whose numbers were retired, see Cleveland Browns.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Ravens do not have officially retired numbers. However, the number 19 is not issued out of respect for Baltimore Colts quarterback Johnny Unitas, except for quarterback Scott Mitchell in his lone season in Baltimore in 1999 with Unitas' permission. In addition, numbers 75, 52, 20, 55, and 73 in honor of Jonathan Ogden, Ray Lewis, Ed Reed, Terrell Suggs, and Marshal Yanda respectively, have not been issued since those players' retirements from football.\nRing of Honor.\nThe Ravens have a \"Ring of Honor\" which is on permanent display encircling the field of M&amp;T Bank Stadium. The ring currently honors 20 members, including eight former members of the Baltimore Colts.\nKey/Legend\nFirst round draft picks.\nThe team's first draft was the 1996 NFL draft, where they selected UCLA offensive tackle Jonathan Ogden 4th overall and University of Miami linebacker Ray Lewis 24th overall. Both players won a Super Bowl with the team, earned numerous Pro Bowl and All-Pro selections, and are members of the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Along with their pick in the next year's draft, this was the highest first round draft pick that the Ravens have had. In 1996, 2000, 2003, 2018, 2021 and 2022, the Ravens had two first round draft picks. In 2004, 2010, and 2012, they had none. Two of their first round picks have made at least ten Pro Bowls.\nStatistics.\nOverall head-to-head record vs. NFL teams.\nBelow is table of the Baltimore Ravens head-to-head franchise record as of January 13, 2024.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "4294", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4294", "title": "British National Party", "text": "British fascist political party founded in 1982\nThe British National Party (BNP) is a far-right, fascist political party in the United Kingdom. It is headquartered in Wigton, Cumbria, and is led by Adam Walker. A minor party, it has no elected representatives at any level of UK government. The party was founded in 1982, and reached its greatest level of success in the 2000s, when it had over fifty seats in local government, one seat on the London Assembly, and two Members of the European Parliament. It has been largely inactive since 2019.\nTaking its name from that of a defunct 1960s far-right party, the BNP was created by John Tyndall and other former members of the fascist National Front (NF). During the 1980s and 1990s, the BNP placed little emphasis on contesting elections, in which it did poorly. Instead, it focused on street marches and rallies, creating the Combat 18 paramilitary\u2014its name a coded reference to Nazi German leader Adolf Hitler\u2014to protect its events from anti-fascist protesters. A growing 'moderniser' faction was frustrated by Tyndall's leadership, and ousted him in 1999. The new leader Nick Griffin sought to broaden the BNP's electoral base by presenting a more moderate image, targeting concerns about rising immigration rates, and emphasising localised community campaigns. This resulted in increased electoral growth throughout the 2000s, to the extent that it became the most electorally successful far-right party in British history. Concerns regarding financial mismanagement resulted in Griffin being removed as leader in 2014. By this point, the BNP's membership and vote share had declined dramatically, groups like Britain First and National Action had splintered off, and the English Defence League had supplanted it as the UK's foremost far-right group.\nIdeologically positioned on the extreme-right or far-right of British politics, the BNP has been characterised as fascist or neo-fascist by political scientists. Under Tyndall's leadership, it was more specifically regarded as neo-Nazi. The party is ethnic nationalist, and it once espoused the view that only white people should be citizens of the United Kingdom. It calls for an end to non-white migration into the UK. It called initially for the compulsory expulsion of non-whites but, since 1999, it has advocated voluntary removals with financial incentives. It promotes biological racism and the white genocide conspiracy theory, calling for global racial separatism and condemning interracial relationships. Under Tyndall, the BNP emphasised anti-semitism and Holocaust denial, promoting the conspiracy theory that Jews seek to dominate the world through both communism and international capitalism. Under Griffin, the party's focus switched from anti-semitism towards Islamophobia. It promotes economic protectionism, Euroscepticism, and a transformation away from liberal democracy, while its social policies oppose feminism, LGBT rights, and societal permissiveness.\nOperating around a highly centralised structure that gave its chair near total control, the BNP built links with far-right parties across Europe and created various sub-groups, including a record label and trade union. The BNP attracted most support from within White British working-class communities in northern and eastern England, particularly among middle-aged and elderly men. A poll in the 2000s suggested that most Britons favoured a ban on the party. It faced much opposition from anti-fascists, religious organisations, the mainstream media, and most politicians, and BNP members were banned from various professions.\nHistory.\nJohn Tyndall's leadership (1982\u20131999).\nThe British National Party (BNP) was founded by the extreme-right political activist John Tyndall. Tyndall had been involved in neo-Nazi groups since the late 1950s before leading the far-right National Front (NF) throughout most of the 1970s. Following an argument with senior party member Martin Webster, he resigned from the NF in 1980. In June 1980 Tyndall established a rival, the New National Front (NNF). At the recommendation of Ray Hill\u2014who was secretly an anti-fascist spy seeking to sow disharmony among Britain's far-right\u2014Tyndall decided to unite an array of extreme-right groups as a single party. To this end, Tyndall established a Committee for Nationalist Unity (CNU) in January 1982. In March 1982, the CNU held a conference at the Charing Cross Hotel in London, at which 50 far-right activists agreed to the formation of the BNP.\nThe BNP was formally launched on 7 April 1982 at a press conference in Victoria. Led by Tyndall, most of its early members came from the NNF, although others were defectors from the NF, British Movement, British Democratic Party, and Nationalist Party. Tyndall remarked that there was \"scarcely any difference [between the BNP and NF] in ideology or policy save in the minutest detail\", and most of the BNP's leading activists had formerly been senior NF figures. Under Tyndall's leadership the party was neo-Nazi in orientation and engaged in nostalgia for Nazi Germany. It adopted the NF's tactic of holding street marches and rallies, believing that these boosted morale and attracted new recruits. Their first march took place in London on St. George's Day 1982. These marches often involved clashes with anti-fascist protesters and resulted in multiple arrests, helping to cement the BNP's association with political violence and older fascist groups in the public eye. As a result, BNP organisers began to favour indoor rallies, although street marches continued to be held throughout the mid-to-late 1980s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThrough the streets now we are marching.Like an army as to war.For the cause of race and nation.With our banners to the fore.Into battle, into battle, into battle BNP!Into battle BNP!\n\u2014 BNP marching song, 1982\nIn its early years, the BNP's involvement in elections was \"irregular and intermittent\", and for its first two decades it faced consistent electoral failure. It suffered from low finances and few personnel, and its leadership was aware that its electoral viability was weakened by the anti-immigration rhetoric of Conservative Party Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. In the 1983 general election the BNP stood 54 candidates, although it only campaigned in five seats. Although it was able to air its first party political broadcast, it averaged a vote share of 0.06% in the seats it contested.\nAfter the Representation of the People Act 1985 raised the electoral deposit to \u00a3500, the BNP adopted a policy of \"very limited involvement\" in elections. It abstained in the 1987 general election, and stood only 13 candidates in the 1992 general election. In a 1993 local by-election the BNP gained one council seat\u2014won by Derek Beackon in the East London district of Millwall\u2014after a campaign that played to local whites who were angry at the perceived preferential treatment received by Bangladeshi migrants in social housing. Following an anti-BNP campaign launched by local religious groups and the Anti-Nazi League, it lost this seat during the 1994 local elections. In the 1997 general election, it contested 55 seats and gained an average 1.4% of the vote.\nIn the early 1990s, the paramilitary group Combat 18 (C18) was formed to protect BNP events from anti-fascists. In 1992, C18 carried out attacks on left-wing targets like an anarchist bookshop and the headquarters of the \"Morning Star\". Tyndall was angered by C18's growing influence on the BNP's street activities, and by August 1993, C18 activists were physically clashing with other BNP members. In December 1993, Tyndall issued a bulletin to BNP branches declaring C18 to be a proscribed organisation, furthermore suggesting that it may have been established by agents of the state to discredit the party. To counter the group's influence among militant British nationalists, he secured the American white nationalist militant William Pierce as a guest speaker at the BNP's annual rally in November 1995.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJohn Tyndall was both [the BNPs] greatest asset and its greatest drawback. His persistence, rock-like reliability and leadership had kept the movement going, but with almost imperceptible growth since its 1982 foundation.\n\u2014 Senior BNP member John Bean\nIn the early 1990s, a \"moderniser\" faction emerged within the party, favouring a more electorally palatable strategy and an emphasis on building grassroots support to win local elections. It was impressed by the electoral gains made by a number of extreme-right parties in continental Europe \u2014 such as J\u00f6rg Haider's Austrian Freedom Party and Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front \u2014 which had been achieved by both switching focus from biological racism to the perceived cultural incompatibility of different racial groups and by replacing anti-democratic platforms with populist ones. \nThe modernisers called for community campaigns among the white working-class populations of London's East End, and Northern England. While the modernisers gained some concessions from the party's hard-liners, Tyndall opposed many of their ideas and sought to stem their growing influence. In his view, \"we should not be looking for ways of applying ideological cosmetic surgery to ourselves in order to make our features more appealing to the public\".\nNick Griffin's leadership (1999\u20132014).\nAfter the BNP's poor performance at the 1997 general election, opposition to Tyndall's leadership grew. The modernisers called the party's first leadership election, and in October 1999 Tyndall was ousted when two-thirds of those voting backed Nick Griffin, who offered an improved administration, financial transparency, and greater support for local branches. Often characterised as a political chameleon, Griffin had once been considered a party hardliner before switching allegiance to the modernisers in the late 1990s. In his youth, he had been involved in the NF as well as Third Positionist groups like Political Soldier and the International Third Position. Criticising his predecessors for fuelling the image of the BNP as \"thugs, losers and troublemakers\", Griffin inaugurated a period of change in the party.\nInfluenced by Le Pen's National Front in France, Griffin sought to widen the BNP's appeal to individuals who were concerned about immigration but had not previously voted for the extreme-right. The BNP replaced Tyndall's policy of compulsory deportation of non-whites to a voluntary system whereby non-whites would be given financial incentives to emigrate. It downplayed biological racism and stressed the cultural incompatibility of different racial groups. This emphasis on culture allowed it to foreground Islamophobia; following the September 11 attacks in 2001, it launched a \"Campaign Against Islam\". It stressed the claim that the BNP was \"\"not\" a racist party\" but an \"organised response to anti-white racism\". At the same time Griffin sought to reassure the party's base that these reforms were based on pragmatism and not a change in principle.\nGriffin also sought to shed the BNP's image as a single-issue party, by embracing a diverse array of social and economic issues. Griffin renamed the party's monthly newspaper from \"British Nationalist\" to \"The Voice of Freedom\", and established a new journal, \"Identity\". The party developed community-based campaigns, through which it targeted local issues, particularly in those areas with large numbers of skilled white working-class people who were disaffected with the Labour Party government. For instance, in Burnley it campaigned for lower speed limits on housing estates and against the closure of a local swimming pool, while in South Birmingham it targeted pensioners' concerns about youth gangs. In 2006, the party urged its activists to carry out local activities like cleaning up children's play areas and removing graffiti while wearing high-vis jackets emblazoned with the party logo.\nGriffin believed that Peak Oil and a growth in Third World migrants arriving in Britain would result in a BNP government coming to power by 2040. \nThe close of the twentieth century produced more favourable conditions for the extreme-right in Britain as a result of increased public concerns about immigration and established Muslim communities coupled with growing dissatisfaction with the established mainstream parties. In turn, the BNP gained rapidly growing levels of support over the coming years. In July 2000, it came second in the council elections for the North End of the London Borough of Bexley, its best result since 1993. At the 2001 general election it gained 16% of the vote in one constituency and over 10% in two others. In the 2002 local elections the BNP gained four councillors, three of whom were in Burnley, where it had capitalised on white anger surrounding the disproportionately high levels of funding being directed to the Asian-dominated Daneshouse ward. This breakthrough generated public anxieties about the party, with a poll finding that six in ten supported a ban on it. In the 2003 local elections, the BNP gained 13 additional councillors, including seven more in Burnley; the party received over 100,000 votes in this election. Concerned that much of its potential vote was going to the UK Independence Party (UKIP), in 2003 the BNP offered UKIP an electoral pact but was rebuffed. Griffin then accused UKIP of being a Labour Party scheme to steal the BNP's votes. It invested much in the campaign for the 2004 European Parliament election, at which it received 800,000 votes but failed to secure a parliamentary seat. In the 2004 local elections, it secured four more seats, including three in Epping.\nFor the 2005 general election, the BNP expanded its number of candidates to 119 and targeted specific regions. Its average vote in the areas it contested rose to 4.3%. It gained significantly more support in three seats, achieving 10% in Burnley, 13% in Dewsbury, and 17% in Barking. In the 2006 local elections the party gained 220,000 votes, with 33 additional councillors, having averaged a vote share of 18% in the areas it contested. In Barking and Dagenham, it saw 12 of its 13 candidates elected to the council. At the 2008 London Assembly election, the BNP gained 130,000 votes, reaching the 5% mark and thus gaining an Assembly seat. At the 2009 European Parliament election, the party gained almost 1 million votes, with two of its candidates, Nick Griffin and Andrew Brons, being elected as Members of the European Parliament for North West England and Yorkshire and the Humber respectively. That election also saw extreme-right parties winning seats for various other EU member-states. This victory marked a major watershed for the party. Amid significant public controversy, Griffin was invited to appear on the BBC show \"Question Time\" in October 2009, the first time that the BNP had been invited to share a national television platform with mainstream panellists. Griffin's performance was however widely regarded as poor.\nDespite its success, there was dissent in the party. In 2007 a group of senior members known as the \"December rebels\" challenged Griffin, calling for internal party democracy and financial transparency, but were expelled. In 2008, a group of BNP activists in Bradford split to form the Democratic Nationalists. In November 2008, the BNP membership list was posted to WikiLeaks, after appearing briefly on a weblog. A year later, in October 2009, another list of BNP members was leaked.\nEddy Butler then led a challenge to Griffin's leadership, alleging financial corruption, but he had insufficient support. The rebels who supported him split into two groups: one section remained as the internal Reform Group, the other left the BNP to form the British Freedom Party.\nBy 2010, there was discontent among the party's grassroots, a result of the change to its white-only membership policy and rumours of financial corruption among its leadership. Some defected to the National Front or left to form parties like the Britannica Party. Anti-fascist groups like Hope not Hate had campaigned extensively in Barking to stop the area's locals voting for the BNP. At the 2010 general election, the BNP had hoped to make a breakthrough by gaining a seat in the House of Commons, although it failed to achieve this. It nevertheless gained the fifth largest national vote share, with 1.9% of the vote, representing the most successful electoral performance for an extreme-right party in UK history. In the 2010 local elections, it lost all of its councillors in Barking and Dagenham. Nationally, the party's number of councillors dropped from over fifty to 28. Griffin described the results as \"disastrous\".\nDecline (2014\u2013present).\nIn a 2011 leadership election, Griffin secured a narrow victory, beating Brons by nine votes of a total of 2,316 votes cast. In October 2012, Brons left the party, leaving Griffin as its sole MEP. In the 2012 local elections, the party lost all of its seats and saw its vote share fall dramatically; whereas it gained over 240,000 votes in 2008, this had fallen to under 26,000 by 2012. Commenting on the result, the political scientist Matthew Goodwin noted: \"Put simply, the BNP's electoral challenge is over.\" In the 2012 London mayoral election, the BNP candidate came seventh, with 1.3% of first-preference votes, its poorest showing in the London mayoral contest. The 2012 election results established that the BNP's steady growth had ended. In the 2013 local elections, the BNP fielded 99 candidates but failed to win any council seats, leaving it with only two.\nIn June 2013, Griffin visited Syria along with members of Hungarian far-right party Jobbik to meet with government officials, including the Speaker of the Syrian People's Assembly, Mohammad Jihad al-Laham, and the Prime Minister Wael Nader al-Halqi. Griffin claims he was influential in the speaker of Syria's Parliament writing an open letter to British MPs urging them to \"turn Great Britain from the warpath\" by not intervening in the Syrian conflict. Griffin lost his European Parliament seat in the May 2014 European election. The party blamed the UK Independence Party for its decline, accusing the latter of stealing BNP policies and slogans. In July 2014, Griffin resigned and was succeeded by Adam Walker as acting chairman. In October, Griffin was expelled from the party for \"trying to cause disunity [in the party] by deliberately fabricating a state of crisis\".\nIn January 2015, membership of the party numbered 500, down from 4,220 in December 2013. At the general election in 2015, the BNP fielded eight candidates, down from 338 in 2010. The party's vote share declined 99.7% from its 2010 result. In January 2016, the Electoral Commission de-registered the BNP for failing to pay its annual registration fee of \u00a325. At this time, it was estimated that BNP assets totalled less than \u00a350,000. According to the commission, \"BNP candidates cannot, at present, use the party's name, descriptions or emblems on the ballot paper at elections.\" A month later, the party was re-registered. There were ten BNP candidates at the general election in 2017. At the 2018 local elections, the party's last remaining councillor\u2014Brian Parker of Pendle\u2014decided not to stand for re-election, leaving the party without representation at any level of UK government. The BNP fielded only one candidate, David Furness, at the 2019 general election in Hornchurch and Upminster, where he came last.\nThe BNP has been essentially inactive since 2019, and has not put forward a single candidate in any elections since the 2021 local elections.\nIdeology.\nFar-right politics, fascism and neo-Nazism.\nMany academic historians and political scientists have described the BNP as a far-right party, or as an extreme-right party. As the political scientist Matthew Goodwin used it, the term referred to \"a particular form of political ideology that is defined by two anti-constitutional and anti-democratic elements: first, right-wing extremists are \"extremist\" because they reject or undermine the values, procedures and institutions of the democratic constitutional state; and second they are \"right-wing\" because they reject the principle of fundamental human equality\".\nVarious political scientists and historians have described the BNP as being fascist in ideology. Others have instead described it as neo-fascist, a term which the historian Nigel Copsey argued was more exact. Academic observers\u2014including the historians Copsey, Graham Macklin, and Roger Griffin, and the political theologian Andrew P. Davey\u2014have argued that Nick Griffin's reforms were little more than a cosmetic process to obfuscate the party's fascist roots. According to Copsey, under Griffin the BNP was \"fascism recalibrated\u2014a form of neo-fascism\u2014to suit contemporary sensibilities\". Macklin noted that despite Griffin's 'modernisation' project, the BNP retained its ideological continuity with earlier fascist groups and thus had not transformed itself into a genuinely \"post-fascist\" party. In this it was distinct from parties like the Italian National Alliance of Gianfranco Fini, which has been credited with successfully shedding its fascist past and becoming post-fascist.\nIn 1995, the anti-fascist activist Gerry Gable referred to the BNP as a \"Nazi organisation\", while the Anti-Nazi League published leaflets describing the BNP as the \"British Nazi Party\". Copsey suggested that while the BNP under Tyndall could be described as neo-Nazi, it was not \"crudely mimetic\" of the original German Nazism. Davey characterised the BNP as a \"populist ethno-nationalist\" party.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe [BNP's] smart modernized veneer\u00a0... is superficial; the core of the Party remains ideologically fascist, and this was nowhere more apparent than in the BNP manifesto for the 2010 General Election, which returned to a clutch of traditional fascist themes including the bond of blood, homeland, the decadence of contemporary culture, a nostalgia for folk traditions and heritage, and an emphasis on stricter discipline in education and society. During the election campaign anti-Semitism, racism and neo-Nazi sympathies were identified on candidates' social network sites.\n\u2014 Political theologian Andrew P. Davey, 2011\nIn his writings, Griffin acknowledged that much of his 'modernisation' was an attempt to hide the BNP's core ideology behind more electorally palatable policies. Like the National Front, the BNP's private discourse differed from its public one, with Griffin stating that \"Of course we must teach the truth to the hardcore\u00a0... [but] when it comes to influencing the public, forget about racial differences, genetics, Zionism, historical revisionism and so on\u00a0... we must at all times present them with an image of moderate reasonableness\". The BNP has eschewed the labels \"fascist\" and \"Nazi\", stating that it is neither. In its 1992 electoral manifesto, it said that \"Fascism was Italian. Nazism was German. We are British. We will do things our own way; we will not copy foreigners\". In 2009, Griffin said that the term \"fascism\" was simply \"a smear that comes from the far left\"; he added that the term should be reserved for groups that engaged in \"political violence\" and desired a state that \"should impose its will on people\", claiming that it was the anti-fascist group Unite Against Fascism\u2014and not the BNP\u2014who were the real fascists. More broadly, many on Britain's extreme right sought to avoid the term \"British fascism\" because of its electorally unpalatable connotations, utilising \"British nationalism\" in its place.\nAfter Griffin took control of the party, it made increasing use of nativist themes in order to emphasise its \"British\" credentials. In its published material, the party made appeals to the idea of Britain and Britishness in a manner not dissimilar to mainstream political parties. In this material it has also made prominent use of the Union flag and the colours red, white, and blue. Roger Griffin noted that the terms \"Britain\" and \"England\" appear \"confusingly interchangeable\" in BNP literature, while Copsey has pointed out that the BNP's form of British nationalism is \"Anglo-centric\". The party employed militaristic rhetoric under both Tyndall and Griffin's leadership; under the latter for example its published material spoke of a \"war without uniforms\" and a \"war for our survival as a people\". Tyndall described the BNP as a revolutionary party, calling it a \"guerrilla army operating in occupied territory\".\nEthnic nationalism and biological racism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe British National Party exists to secure a future for the indigenous peoples of these islands in the North Atlantic which have been our homeland for a millennia.\n\u2014 The BNP, 2005\nThe BNP adheres to biological racist ideas, displaying an obsession with the perceived differences of racial groups. Both Tyndall and Griffin believed that there was a biologically distinct white-skinned \"British race\" which was one branch of a wider Nordic race, a view akin to those of earlier fascists such as Hitler and Arnold Leese.\nThe BNP adheres to an ideology of ethnic nationalism. It promotes the idea that not all citizens of the United Kingdom belong to the British nation. Instead, it states that the nation only belongs to \"the English, Scots, Irish and Welsh along with the limited numbers of peoples of European descent, who have arrived centuries or decades ago and who have fully integrated into our society\". This is a group that Griffin referred to as the \"home people\" or \"the folk\". According to Tyndall, \"The BNP is a racial nationalist party which believes in Britain for the British, that is to say racial separatism.\" Richard Edmonds in 1993 told \"The Guardian\"'s Duncan Campbell that \"we [the BNP] are 100% racist\". The BNP does not regard UK citizens who are not ethnic white Europeans as \"British\", and party literature calls on supporters to avoid referring to such individuals as \"Black Britons\" or \"Asian Britons\", instead describing them as \"racial foreigners\".\nTyndall believed the white British and the broader Nordic race to be superior to other races; under his leadership, the BNP promoted pseudoscientific claims in support of white supremacy. Following Griffin's ascendency to power in the party, it officially repudiated racial supremacism and insisted that no racial group was superior or inferior to another. Instead it foregrounded an \"ethno-pluralist\" racial separatism, claiming that different racial groups had to be kept separate and distinct for their own preservation, maintaining that global ethno-cultural diversity was something to be protected. This switch in focus owed much to the discourse of the French movement which had emerged within France's extreme right during the 1960s. At the same time the BNP switched focus from openly promoting biological racism to stressing what it perceived as the cultural incompatibility of racial groups. It placed great focus on opposing what it referred to as \"multiculturalism\", characterising this as a form of \"cultural genocide\", and stating that it promoted the interests of non-whites at the expense of the white British population. However, internal documents produced and circulated under Griffin's leadership demonstrated that\u2014despite the shift in its public statements\u2014it remained privately committed to biological racist ideas.\nThe party emphasises what it sees as the need to protect the racial purity of the white British. It condemns miscegenation and \"race mixing\", stating that this is a threat to the British race. Tyndall said that he \"felt deeply sorry for the child of a mixed marriage\" but had \"no sympathy whatsoever for the parents\". Griffin similarly stated that mixed-race children were \"the most tragic victims of enforced multi-racism\", and that the party would not \"accept miscegenation as moral or normal\u00a0... we never will\". In its 1983 election manifesto, the BNP stated that \"family size is a private matter\" but still called for white Britons who are \"of intelligent, healthy and industrious stock\" to have large families and thus raise the white British birth rate. The encouragement of high birth rates among white British families continued under Griffin's leadership.\nUnder Tyndall's leadership, the BNP promoted eugenics, calling for the forced sterilisation of those with genetically transmittable disabilities. In party literature, it talked of improving the British 'racial stock' by removing \"inferior strains within the indigenous races of the British Isles\". Tyndall argued that medical professionals should be responsible for determining whom to sterilise, while a lowering of welfare benefits would discourage breeding among those he deemed to be genetic inferiors. In his magazine \"Spearhead\", Tyndall also stated that \"the gas chamber system\" should be used to eliminate \"sub-human elements\", \"perverts\", and \"asocials\" from British society.\nAnti-immigration and repatriation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nImmigration into Britain by non-Europeans\u00a0... should be terminated forthwith, and we should organise a massive programme of repatriation and resettlement overseas of those peoples of non-European origin already resident in this country.\n\u2014 The BNP's first policy on repatriation, 1982\nOpposition to immigration has been central to the BNP's political platform. It has engaged in xenophobic campaigns which emphasise the idea that immigrants and ethnic minorities are both different from, and a threat to, the white British and white Irish populations. In its campaign material it presented non-whites both as a source of crime in the UK, and as a socio-economic threat to the white British population by taking jobs, housing, and welfare away from them. It engaged in welfare chauvinism, calling for white Britons to be prioritised by the UK's welfare state. Party literature included such as claims as that the BNP was the only party which could \"do anything effective about the swamping of Britain by the Third World\" or \"lead the native peoples of Britain in our version of the New Crusade that must be organised if Europe is not to sink under the Islamic yoke\".\nMuch of its published material made claims about a forthcoming race war and promoted the conspiracy theory about white genocide. In a 2009 radio interview, Griffin referred to this as a \"bloodless genocide\". It presents the idea that white Britons are engaged in a battle against their own extinction as a racial group. It reiterated a sense of urgency about the situation, claiming that both high immigration rates and high birth rates among ethnic minorities were a threat to the white British. In 2010, it for instance was promoting the idea that at current levels, \"indigenous Britons\" would be a minority within the UK by 2060.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe immigrant communities in Britain are\u00a0... colonies filled with colonists. They are alien islands inside our towns and cities with their own laws and cultures. They will never integrate as they did not come here to integrate, but to re-create their own cultures in our country. The fact is that the only solution to Multi-Culturalism is not some asinine and bogus attempt to impose British cultural values on immigrants, but simply to commence repatriating them.\n\u2014 Lee Barnes, senior BNP leader, 2005\nThe BNP calls for the non-white population of Britain to either be reduced in size or removed from the country altogether. Under Tyndall's leadership, it promoted the compulsory removal of non-whites from the UK, stating that under a BNP government they would be \"repatriated\" to their countries of origin. In the early 1990s it produced stickers with the slogan \"Our Final Solution: Repatriation\". Tyndall understood this to be a two-stage process that would take ten to twenty years, with some non-whites initially leaving willingly and the others then being forcibly deported. During the 1990s, party modernisers suggested that the BNP move away from a policy of compulsory repatriation and toward a voluntary system, whereby non-white persons would be offered financial incentives to leave the UK. This idea, adopted from Powellism, was deemed more electorally palatable.\nWhen Griffin took control of the party, the policy of voluntary repatriation was officially adopted, with the party suggesting that this could be financed through the use of the UK's pre-existing foreign aid budget. It stated that any non-whites who refused to leave would be stripped of their British citizenship and categorised as \"permanent guests\", while continuing to be offered incentives to emigrate. Griffin's BNP also stressed its support for an immediate halt to non-white immigration into Britain and for the deportation of any migrants illegally in the country. Speaking on the BBC's \"Andrew Marr Show\" in 2009, Griffin declared that, unlike Tyndall, he \"does not want all-white UK\" because \"nobody out there wants it or would pay for it\".\nAnti-Semitism and Islamophobia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy experience as a campaigner against the multi-racial idea in Britain and in favour of our country's centuries-old tradition of racial homogeneity has brought home to me beyond any doubt the fact that Jews are to be found at the forefront of opposition to British racial self-preservation.\n\u2014 Tyndall's belief that a Jewish conspiracy was behind multiracial Britain\nUnder Tyndall's leadership, the BNP was openly anti-Semitic. From A. K. Chesterton, Tyndall had inherited a belief that there was a global conspiracy of Jews bent on world domination, viewing the \"Protocols of the Elders of Zion\", which is known to be a forgery, as genuine evidence for this. He believed that Jews were responsible for both communism and international finance capitalism and that they were responsible for undermining the British Empire and the British race. He believed that both democratic government and immigration into Europe were parts of the Jewish conspiracy to weaken other races. In an early edition of \"Spearhead\" published in the 1960s, Tyndall wrote that \"if Britain were to become Jew-clean she would have no nigger neighbours to worry about\u00a0... It is the Jews who are our misfortune: T-h-e J-e-w-s. Do you hear me? THE JEWS?\" Tyndall added Holocaust denial to the anti-Semitic beliefs inherited from Chesterton, believing that the Holocaust was a hoax created by the Jews to gain sympathy for themselves and thus aid their plot for world domination. Among those to endorse such anti-Semitic conspiracy theories was Griffin, who promoted them in his 1997 pamphlet, \"Who are the Mind Benders?\" Griffin also engaged in Holocaust denial, publishing articles promoting such ideas in \"The Rune\", a magazine produced by the Croydon BNP. In 1998, these articles resulted in Griffin being convicted of inciting racial hatred.\nWhen Griffin took power, he sought to banish overt anti-Semitic discourse from the party. He informed party members that \"we can get away with criticising Zionists, but any criticism of Jews is likely to be legal and political suicide\". In 2006, he complained that the \"obsession\" that many BNP members had with \"the Jews\" was \"insane and politically disastrous\". In 2004, the party selected a Jewish candidate, Pat Richardson, to stand for it during local council elections, something Tyndall lambasted as a \"gimmick\". References to Jews in BNP literature were often coded to hide the party's electorally unpalatable anti-Semitic ideas. For instance, the term \"Zionists\" was often used in party literature as a euphemism for \"Jews\". As noted by Macklin, Griffin still framed many of his arguments \"within the parameters of recognizably anti-Semitic discourse\". The BNP's literature is replete with references to a conspiratorial group who have sought to suppress nationalist sentiment among the British population, who have encouraged immigration and mixed-race relationships, and who are promoting the Islamification of the country. This group is likely a reference to the Jews, being an old fascist canard.\nSectors of the extreme-right were highly critical of Griffin's softening on the subject of the Jews, claiming that he had \"sold out\" to the 'Zionist Occupied Government'. In 2006, John Bean, editor of \"Identity\", included an article in which he reassured BNP members that the party had not \"sold out to the Jews\" or \"embraced Zionism\" but that it remained \"committed to fighting\u00a0... subversive Jews\". Under Griffin, the BNP's website linked to other web pages that explicitly portrayed immigration as part of a Jewish conspiracy, while it also sold books that promoted Holocaust denial. In 2004, secretly filmed footage was captured in which Griffin was seen claiming that \"the Jews simply bought the West, in terms of press and so on, for their own political ends\".\nCopsey noted that a \"culture of anti-Semitism\" still pervaded the BNP. In 2004, a London activist told reporters that \"most of us hate Jews\", while a Scottish BNP group was observed making Nazi salutes while shouting \"Auschwitz\". The party's Newcastle upon Tyne Central candidate compared the Auschwitz concentration camp to Disneyland, while their Luton North candidate stated her refusal to buy from \"the kikes that run Tesco\". In 2009, a BNP councillor from Stoke-on-Trent resigned from the party, complaining that it still contained Holocaust deniers and Nazi sympathisers.\nGriffin informed BNP members that rather than \"bang on\" about the Jews\u2014which would be deemed extremist and prove electorally unpopular\u2014their party should focus on criticising Islam, an issue that would be more resonant among the British public. After Griffin took over, the party increasingly embraced an Islamophobic stance, launching a \"Campaign Against Islam\" in September 2001. In \"Islam: A Threat to Us All\", a leaflet distributed to London households in 2007, the BNP claimed that it would stand up to both Islamic extremism and \"the threat that 'mainstream' Islam poses to our British culture\". In contrast to the mainstream British view that the actions of militant Islamists\u2014such as those who perpetrated the 7 July 2005 London bombings\u2014are not representative of mainstream Islam, the BNP insists that they are. In some of its literature it presents the view that every Muslim in Britain is a threat to the country. Griffin referred to Islam as an \"evil, wicked faith\", and elsewhere publicly described it as a \"cancer\" that needed to be removed from Europe through \"chemotherapy\".\nThe BNP has called for the prohibition of immigration from Muslim countries and for the banning of the burka, halal meat, and the building of new mosques in the UK. It also called for the immediate deportation of radical Islamist preachers from the country. In 2005, the party stated that its primary issue of concern was the \"growth of fundamentalist-militant Islam in the UK and its ever-increasing threat to Western civilization and our implicit values\". To broaden its anti-Islamic agenda, Griffin's BNP made overtures to the UK's Hindu, Sikh, and Jewish communities; Griffin's claim that Jews can make \"good allies\" in the fight against Islam caused controversy within the international far-right.\nGovernment.\nTyndall believed that liberal democracy was damaging to British society, stating that liberalism was a \"doctrine of decay and degeneration\". Under Tyndall, the party sought to dismantle the UK's liberal democratic system of parliamentary governance, although was vague about what it sought to replace this system with. In his 1988 work \"The Eleventh Hour\", Tyndall wrote of the need for \"an utter rejection of liberalism and a dedication to the resurgence of authority\". Tyndall's BNP perceived itself as a revolutionary force that would bring about a national rebirth in Britain, entailing a radical transformation of society. It proposed a state in which the Prime Minister would have full executive powers, and would be elected directly by the population for an indefinite period of time. This Prime Minister could be dismissed from office in a further election that could be called if Parliament produced a vote of no confidence in them. It stated that rather than having political parties, candidates standing for election to the parliament would be independent. During the period of Griffin's leadership, the party downplayed its anti-democratic themes and instead foregrounded populist ones. Its campaign material called for the devolution of greater powers to local communities, the reestablishment of county councils, and the introduction of citizens' initiative referendums based on those used in Switzerland.\nThe BNP has adopted a hard Eurosceptic platform from its foundation. Under Tyndall's leadership, the BNP had overt anti-Europeanist tendencies. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, he maintained the party's opposition to the European Economic Community. Antagonism toward what became the European Union was retained under Griffin's leadership, which called for the UK to leave the Union. One of Vote Leave's biggest donors during the Brexit referendum was former BNP member Gladys Bramall, and the party has claimed that its anti-Establishment rhetoric \"created the road\" to Britain's vote to leave the European Union.\nTyndall suggested replacing the EEC with a trading association among the \"White Commonwealth\", namely countries like Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. Tyndall held imperialist views and was sympathetic to the re-establishment of the British Empire through the recolonization of parts of Africa. However, officially the BNP had no plans to re-establish the British Empire or secure dominion over non-white nations. In the 2000s, it called for an immediate military withdrawal from both the Iraq War and the War in Afghanistan. During his appearance on \"Question Time\", regarding the Iraq War, Griffin described the war as \"illegal\", saying, \"We shouldn't have gone into Iraq, we must never go into Iran, we should leave them alone.\" It has advocated ending overseas aid to provide economic support within the UK and to finance the voluntary repatriation of legal immigrants.\nUnder Tyndall, the BNP rejected both Welsh nationalism and Scottish nationalism, stating that they were bogus because they caused division among the wider \"British race\". Tyndall also led the BNP in support of Ulster loyalism, for instance by holding public demonstrations against the Irish republican party Sinn F\u00e9in, and endorsing Ulster loyalist paramilitaries. Under Griffin, the BNP continued to support Northern Ireland's membership of the United Kingdom, calling for the crushing of the Irish Republican Army and the scrapping of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. Griffin later expressed the view that \"the only solution that could possibly be acceptable to loyalists and republicans alike\" would be the reintegration of the Irish Republic into the United Kingdom, which would be reorganised along federal lines. However, while retaining the party's commitment to Ulster loyalism, under Griffin the importance of the issue was downplayed, something that was criticised by Tyndall loyalists.\nEconomic policy.\nTyndall described his approach to the economy as \"National Economics\", expressing the view that \"politics must lead, and not be led by, economic forces\". His approach rejected economic liberalism because it did not serve \"the national interest\", although still saw advantages in a capitalist system, looking favourably on individual enterprise. He called on capitalist elements to be combined with socialist ones, with the government playing a role in planning the economy. He promoted the idea of the UK becoming an autarky which was economically self-sufficient, with domestic production protected from foreign competition. This attitude was heavily informed by the corporatist system that had been introduced in Benito Mussolini's Fascist Italy.\nA number of senior members, including Griffin and John Bean, had anti-capitalist leanings, having been influenced by Strasserism and National Bolshevism. Under Griffin's leadership, the BNP promoted economic protectionism and opposed globalisation. Its economic policies reflect a vague commitment to distributist economics, ethno-socialism, and national autarky. The BNP maintains a policy of protectionism and economic nationalism, although in comparison with other far-right nationalist parties, the BNP focuses less on corporatism. It has called for British ownership of its own industries and resources and the \"subordination of the power of the City to the power of the government\". It has promoted the regeneration of farming in the United Kingdom, with the object of achieving maximum self-sufficiency in food production. In 2002, the party criticised corporatism as a \"mixture of big capitalism and state control\", saying it favoured a \"distributionist tradition established by home-grown thinkers\" favouring small business. The BNP has also called for the renationalisation of the railways. The BNP, in its 2010 manifesto, called for Britain to emulate the \"tiger states\" of East Asia, such as South Korea and Singapore.\nWhen it comes to environmentalism, the BNP refers to itself as the \"real green party\", stating that the Green Party of England and Wales engages in \"watermelon\" politics by being green (environmentalist) on the outside but red (leftist) on the inside. Influenced by the Nouvelle Droite, it framed its arguments regarding environmentalism in an anti-immigration manner, talking about the need for 'sustainability'. It engages in climate change denial, with Griffin claiming that global warming is a hoax orchestrated by those trying to establish the New World Order.\nSocial issues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere is only one political party that Christians can support without betraying the Lord Jesus Christ. This Party is opposed to abortion and the teaching of homosexuality to children. This Party supports the institution of marriage and the traditional family\u00a0... This Party is opposed to political correctness and the creeping Islamification of Britain.\n\u2014 A 2010 BNP leaflet distributed to Christian leaders\nThe BNP is opposed to feminism and has pledged that\u2014if in government\u2014it would introduce financial incentives to encourage women to leave employment and become housewives. It would also seek to discourage children being born out of wedlock. It has stated that it would criminalise abortion, except in cases where the child has been conceived as a result of rape, the mother's life is threatened, or the child will be disabled. There are nevertheless circumstances where it has altered this anti-abortion stance; an article in \"British Nationalist\" stated that a white woman bearing the child of a black man should \"abort the pregnancy\u00a0... for the good of society\". More widely, the party censures inter-racial sex and accuses the British media of encouraging inter-racial relationships.\nUnder Tyndall, the BNP called for the re-criminalisation of homosexual activity. Following Griffin's takeover, it moderated its policy on homosexuality. However, it opposed the 2004 introduction of civil partnerships for same-sex couples. During his 2009 \"Question Time\" appearance, Griffin described the sight of two men kissing as \"for a lot of us (Christians)\u00a0... really creepy\". The party has also condemned the availability of pornography; its 1992 manifesto stated that the BNP would give the \"pedlars of this filth\u00a0... the criminal status that they deserve\". The BNP promoted the reintroduction of capital punishment, and the sterilisation of some criminals. It also called for the reintroduction of national service in the UK, adding that on completion of this service adults would be permitted to keep their standard issue assault rifle.\nAccording to the academic Steven Woodbridge, the BNP had a \"rather ambivalent attitude toward Christian belief and religious themes in general\" during most of its history, but under Griffin's modernisation the party increasingly utilised Christian terminology and themes in its discourse. Various members of the party presented themselves as \"true Christians\", and defenders of the faith, with key ideologues stating that the religion has been \"betrayed\" and \"sold out\" by mainstream clergy and the British establishment. British Christianity, the BNP said, was under threat from Islam, Marxism, multiculturalism, and \"political correctness\". On analysing the BNP's use of Christianity, Davey argued that the party's emphasis was not on Christian faith itself, but on the inheritance of European Christian culture.\nThe BNP long considered the mainstream media to be one of its major impediments to electoral success. Tyndall said that the media represents a \"state above the state\" which was committed to the \"left-liberal\" goals of internationalism, liberal democracy, and racial integration. The party has said that the mainstream media has given disproportionate coverage to the achievements of ethnic minority sportsmen and to the victims of anti-black racism while ignoring white victims of racial prejudice and the BNP's activities. Both Tyndall and Griffin have said that the mainstream media is controlled by Jews, who use it for their own devices; the latter promoted this idea in his \"Who are the Mind Benders?\" Griffin has described the BBC as \"a thoroughly unpleasant, ultra-leftist establishment\". The BNP has stated that if it took power, it would end \"the dictatorship of the media over free debate\". It said that it would introduce a law prohibiting the media from disseminating falsehoods about an individual or organisation for financial or political gain, and that it would ban the media from promoting racial integration.\nBNP policy pledges to protect freedom of speech, as part of which it would repeal all laws banning racial or religious hate speech. It would repeal the 1998 Human Rights Act and withdraw from the European Convention on Human Rights.\nVoter base.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe BNP does not have mass appeal, but the evidence\u00a0... suggests it is forging ties with 'angry white men': middle-aged and elderly working-class men who have low levels of education, are deeply pessimistic about their economic prospects and live in more deprived urban areas close to large Muslim communities. Foremost, these citizens are sending a message about their profound concern over issues they care deeply about, but which they feel are not being adequately addressed by the main parties.\n\u2014 Political scientist Matthew Goodwin, 2011\nGoodwin described the BNP's voters as being \"socially distinct and concerned about a specific set of issues\". Under Griffin's leadership, the party targeted areas with high proportions of skilled white working-class voters, particularly those who were disenchanted with the Labour government. It has attempted to appeal to disaffected Labour voters with slogans such as \"We are the Labour Party your Grandfather Voted For\". The BNP had little success in gaining support from women, the middle classes, and the more educated.\nGoodwin noted a \"strong male bias\" in the party's support base, with statistical polling revealing that between 2002 and 2006, seven out of ten BNP voters were male. That same research also indicated that BNP voters were disproportionately middle-aged and elderly, with three quarters being aged over 35, and only 11% aged between 18 and 24. This contrasted to the NF's support base during the 1970s, when 40% of its voters were aged between 18 and 24. Goodwin suggested two possibilities for the BNP's failure to appeal to younger voters: one was the 'life cycle effect', that older people have obtained more during their life and thus have more to lose, feeling both more threatened by change and more socially conservative in their views. The other explanation was the 'generational effect', with younger Britons who have grown up since the onset of mass immigration having had greater social exposure to ethnic minorities and thus being more tolerant toward them. Conversely, many older voters came of age during the 1970s, under the impact of the anti-immigrant rhetoric promoted by Powellism, Thatcherism, and the NF, and thus have less tolerant attitudes.\nMost BNP voters had no formal qualifications and the party's support was centred largely in areas with low educational attainment. According to the 2002\u20132006 data, two-thirds of BNP voters had either no formal qualifications or had left education after their O-levels/GCSEs. Only one in ten BNP voters possessed an A-level, and an even smaller percentage had a university degree. Most of the BNP's voting base were from the financially insecure lower classes. Research conducted from 2002 to 2006 indicated that seven out of ten BNP voters were either skilled or unskilled workers or unemployed. A 2009 poll found that six out of ten BNP voters fitted this profile. Goodwin suggested that it was the skilled working classes rather than their unskilled or unemployed neighbours who were the main support base behind the BNP, because they owned some assets and thus felt that they had more to lose as a result of the economic threat posed by immigrants and ethnic minorities.\nResearch indicated that BNP voters also held opinions that were distinct from the average British citizen. They were far more pessimistic about their economic prospects than average, with seven out of ten BNP voters expecting their economic prospects to decline in future, contrasted with four out of ten who held this view in the wider population. In the 2002\u20132006 period, 59% of BNP voters considered immigration to be the most important issue facing the UK, compared with only 16% of the wider population who agreed. By 2009, 87% of BNP voters identified immigration and asylum as the most important issue, to 49% of the wider population. BNP voters were also more likely to identify law and order, the EU, and Islamic extremism as the most important issues facing the UK than other voters, and less likely than average to rate the economy, NHS, pensions, and housing market as the most important.\nBNP voters were also more likely than average to believe both that white Britons face unfair discrimination, and that Muslims, non-whites, and homosexuals had unfair advantages in British society. 78% of BNP voters endorsed the belief that the Labour Party prioritised immigrants and ethnic minorities over white British people, to 44% of the wider population. When asked questions about immigration and Muslims, BNP voters were found to be far more hostile to them than the average Briton, and also more willing than average to support outright racially discriminatory policies toward them. Copsey believed that \"popular racism\"\u2014namely against asylum seekers and Muslims\u2014generated the BNP's \"largest reservoir of support\", and that in many Northern English towns the main factors behind BNP support were white resentment toward Asian communities, anger at Asian-on-white crime, and the perception that Asians received disproportionately high levels of public funding.\nResearch also indicated that BNP voters were more mistrustful of the establishment than average citizens. In 2002\u20132006, 92% of BNP voters described themselves as being dissatisfied with the government, to 62% of the wider population. Over 80% of BNP voters were found to distrust their local Member of Parliament, council officials, and civil servants, and were also more likely than average to think that politicians were personally corrupt. There was also a tendency for BNP voters to read tabloids like the \"Daily Mail\", \"Daily Express\", and \"The Sun\", all of which promote anti-immigration sentiment. Whether these voters gained such sentiment as a result of reading these tabloids or they read these tabloids because it endorsed their pre-existing views is unclear.\nThe early stronghold of the BNP was in London, where it established enclaves of support in the boroughs of Enfield, Hackney, Lewisham, Southwark, and Tower Hamlets, with smaller units in Bexley, Camden, Greenwich, Hillingdon, Lambeth and Redbridge. By the late 1990s, the party was increasingly retreating from its original East End heartland, finding that its electoral support had declined in the area. Griffin expressed the view that it was too dangerous for BNP activists to campaign in the East End, suggesting that they would be likely to be attacked by opponents. Instead, the party shifted its focus to parts of Outer London, in particular the boroughs of Barking, Bexley, Dagenham, Greenwich and Havering. After Griffin took power, the party focused on building support in the North of England, taking advantage of the anxieties generated by the ethnic riots that took place in Bradford, Oldham and Burnley in 2001. In the period between 2002 and 2006, over 40% of the BNP's voters were in Northern England.\nThe decline of the BNP as an electoral force around 2014 helped to open the way for the growth of another right-wing party, UKIP. In a study Goodwin produced with Robert Ford, the two political scientists noted that UKIP's support base mirrored the BNP's in that it had the same \"very clear social profile\": the \"old, male, working class, white and less educated\". One area where the two differed, they noted, was in the fact that BNP support had been highest among the middle-aged before tailing off among the over 55s, whereas UKIP retained strong support with those over 55. Ford and Goodwin suggested that this might be because more over 55s had \"direct or indirect experiences\" of the Second World War, in which Britain defeated the fascist powers, resulting in them being less inclined to support fascist parties than their younger counterparts. Despite these commonalities, UKIP proved far more successful at mobilising these social groups than did the BNP. This was likely in part because UKIP had a \"reputational shield\"; it emerged from within the Eurosceptic tradition of British politics rather than from the far-right and thus, while often ridiculed by the mainstream, was regarded as a legitimate democratic actor in a way that the BNP was not.\nOrganisation.\nStructure.\nOn its formation, the BNP avoided the National Front's committee-rule system of collective leadership in the hope of evading the infighting and factionalism that had damaged the NF. Instead it was founded around what it called the \"leadership principle\", with a central chairman having complete control over the party, which was then arranged in a highly hierarchical structure. The BNP lacked internal democracy, with the grassroots membership having almost no formal power, except for electing the party leader. On taking power, Griffin retained the leadership principle inherited from Tyndall. He nevertheless established an Advisory Council which would meet several times a year; the members were to be selected by Griffin himself and would serve as his advisors.\nThe party's branches and local groups were referred to as \"units\" within the party. These were designed to recruit followers, raise funds, and campaign during elections. Under Tyndall, the party operated with a skeleton organisation. It had no full-time staff and for most of the 1980s lacked a telephone number. Instead it relied on a handful of geographically scattered, unpaid regional organisers. Its early activists were recruited from within the extreme-right movement, and thus lacked the experience and skills in electoral campaigning. When Griffin took control, he introduced a variety of internal departments to help manage the party's activities: the administration and enquiries department, department for group development, legal affairs department, security department, and communications department. Griffin tried to build a more professional party machine by educating and training BNP members, providing them with incentives, establishing a steady income stream, and overcoming factionalism and dissent. He launched an \"annual college\" for activists in 2001 and formed an education and training department in 2007. In 2008 and 2010, he oversaw the establishment of \"summer schools\" for high-ranking officials. The party also began employing full-time members of staff, having three in 2001 and 13 in 2007.\nTo incentivise members to remain committed to the party, Griffin followed the example of the Swedish National Democrats by implementing a new \"voting membership\" scheme in 2007. This meant that those who had been BNP members for two years could become a \"voting member\", at which they would go on a year's probation. During this year they were required to attend educational and training seminars, to engage in a certain amount of activism and to donate a specified amount of money to the party. Once completed, they were allowed to vote on certain matters at general members' meetings and annual conferences, to participate in policy debates, and to be eligible for intermediate and senior positions. This policy ensured that those who reached the higher echelons of the BNP were fully trained in the party's ideology and electoral strategy.\nSub-groups and propaganda output.\nGriffin hoped to build a wider social movement around the BNP by establishing affiliated networks and organisations. In many cases, these were presented to the public in a way that concealed any direct connection to the BNP. Most of these affiliated groups were poorly funded and had few members. The party established its own record label, Great White Records, a radio station, and a trade union known as Solidarity \u2013 The Union for British Workers. It formed a group for young people known as the Young BNP, although in 2010 renamed this group as the BNP Crusaders, \"to pay homage to our ancestors from the Middle Ages who saved Christian Europe from the onslaught of Islam\". It established a Land and People group to recruit support in rural areas, a Family Circle to recruit women and families, and both a Veterans Group and an Association of British ex-Servicemen for former military servicemen. A group called Families Against Immigrant Racism was established to counter perceived racism against white Britons, while an Ethnic Liaison Committee was created to build links with anti-Muslim Hindu and Sikh groups active in Britain. Another group was the American Friends of the British National Party (AFBNP), set up by Mark Cotterill in 1999 to gain support from sympathisers in the United States. In 2001 it had 100 members, and by 2008 had 107.\nA group called Islands of the North Atlantic (IONA) was established to promote the BNP's view of British culture and identity. The British Students Association was founded to promote the party's views among university students in 2000.\nAlbion Life Insurance was set up in September 2006 as an insurance brokerage company established on behalf of the BNP to raise funds for its activities. The firm ceased to operate in November 2006. In 2006, the BNP launched the Christian Council of Britain (CCB), a group designed to rival the Muslim Council of Britain and oppose the growing \"Islamification\" of inner city areas. The CCB was established and run by BNP member Robert West, who claimed to have been ordained by the Apostolic Church, a claim that the church denies. West is a Calvinist and espouses a theology of nations which is influenced by Calvinist theologians like Abraham Kuyper, holding that God wishes every race and nation to remain separate until end time.\nGriffin's BNP also established an annual Red, White and Blue festival, which was based on the organised by France's National Front. The festival brought party activists together and aimed to promote a more family friendly image for the group, although it also provided a venue for white power skinhead bands like Stigger, Nemesis and Warlord. Around 1,000 BNP members attended the party's 2001 festival.\nUnder Griffin's leadership, the BNP zealously embraced the use of alternative media to promote itself in a way different from the negative portrayal that featured in the mainstream media. On its website\u2014which had been established in 1995\u2014it created an internet television channel, 'BNPtv'. It has created blogs that cover different themes without being explicitly political in order to promote the party's message. The BNP established an online marketing platform, Excalibur, through which to sell its merchandise. In 2003, the BNP said that it had the most viewed website of a political party in Britain, and by 2011 was claiming to have the most viewed such website in Europe. In September 2007, \"The Daily Telegraph\" newspaper reported that Hitwise, the online competitive intelligence service, said that the BNP website had more hits than any other website of a British political party.\nMembership.\nFor most of its history, the BNP had a whites-only membership policy. In 2009, the state's Equality and Human Rights Commission stated that this was a violation of the Race Relations Act 1976 and called on the party to amend its constitution accordingly. Responding to this, in early 2010 members voted to remove the racial restriction to membership, although it is unlikely that many non-whites joined. \nAt its creation, the BNP had approximately 1,200 members. By the 1983 general election, this had grown to approximately 2,500, although by 1987 had slumped to 1,000, with no significant further growth until the 21st century. After taking control Griffin began publishing the party's membership figures: 2,174 in 2001, 3,487 in 2002, 5,737 in 2003, and 7,916 in 2004. Membership dropped slightly to 6,281 in 2005, but had grown to 9,297 in 2007 and to 10,276 in spring 2010. In 2011, it was noted that this meant that the BNP had experienced the most rapid growth since 2001 of any minor party in the UK.\nA party membership list dating from late 2007 was leaked onto the internet by a disgruntled activist, containing the names and addresses of 12,000 members. This included names, addresses and other personal details. People on the list included prison officers (barred from BNP membership), teachers, soldiers, civil servants and members of the clergy. The leaked list indicated that membership was concentrated in particular areas, namely the East Midlands, Essex, and Pennine Lancashire, but with particular clusters in Charnwood, Pendle, and Amber Valley. Many of these areas had long been targeted by extreme-right campaigns, dating back to the NF activity of the 1970s, suggesting that such longstanding activism may have had an effect on levels of BNP membership. This information also revealed that membership was most likely in urban areas with low rates of educational attainment and large numbers of economically insecure people employed in manufacturing, with further correlations to nearby Muslim communities. Following an investigation by Welsh police and the Information Commissioner's Office, two people were arrested in December 2008 for breach of the Data Protection Act concerning the leak. Matthew Single was subsequently found guilty and fined \u00a3200 in September 2009. The 'low' fine was criticised as an \"absolute disgrace\" by a BNP spokesman and a detective sergeant involved said he was \"disappointed\" with the outcome, stating that people were fearful for their safety. More than 160 complaints were made nationally to police after attacks on BNP members and their property.\nThe leaked membership list showed that the party was 17.22% female. While women have occupied key positions within the BNP, men dominated at every level of the party. In 2009, over 80% of the party's Advisory Council was male and from 2002 to 2009, three-quarters of its councillors were male. The average percentage of female candidates presented at local elections in 2001 was 6%, although this had risen to 16% by 2010. Since 2006, the party had made a point of selecting female candidates, with Griffin stating that this was necessary to \"soften\" the party's image. Goodwin suggested that membership fell into three camps: the \"activist old guard\" who had previously been involved in the NF during the 1970s, the \"political wanderers\" who had defected from other parties to the BNP, and the \"new recruits\" who had joined post-2001 and who had little or no political interest or experience beforehand.\nHaving performed qualitative research among the BNP by interviewing various members, Goodwin noted that few of those he interviewed \"conformed to the popular stereotypes of them being irrational and uninformed crude racists\". He noted that most strongly identified with the working class and claimed to have either been former Labour voters or from a Labour-voting family. None of those interviewed claimed a family background in the ethnic nationalist movement. Instead, he noted that members said that they joined the party as a result of a \"profound sense of anxiety over immigration and rising ethno-cultural diversity\" in Britain, along with its concomitant impact on \"British culture and society\". He noted that among these members, the perceived cultural threat of immigrants and ethnic minorities was given greater prominence than the perceived economic threat that they posed to white Britons. He noted that in his interviews with them, members often framed Islam in particular as a threat to British values and society, expressing the fear that British Muslims wanted to Islamicise the country and eventually impose \"sharia\" on its population.\nFinances.\nIn contrast to the UK's mainstream parties, the BNP received few donations from businesses, wealthy donors, or trade unions. Instead it relied on finances produced by its membership. Under Tyndall, the party operated on a shoestring budget with a lack of transparency; in 1992 it collected \u00a35000 and in 1997 it collected \u00a310,000. It also tried raising money by selling extreme-right literature, and opened a bookshop in Welling in 1989, although this was closed in 1996 after being attacked by anti-fascists and proving too costly to run. In 1992, the party formed a dining club of its wealthier supporters, which was renamed the Trafalgar Club in 2000. By the 1997 general election, it admitted that its expenses had \"far out-stripped\" its income, and it was appealing for donations to pay off loans it had taken out.\nGriffin placed greater emphasis on fundraising; from 2001 through to 2008, the BNP's annual turnover increased almost fivefold. Membership subscriptions grew from \u00a335,000 to \u00a3166,000, while its donations raised from \u00a338,000 to \u00a3660,000. However, expenses also rose as the BNP spent more on its electoral campaigns, and the party reported a financial deficit in 2004 and again in 2005. Between 2007 and 2009, the BNP accumulated debts of \u00a3500,000.\nInternational affiliations.\nUnder Griffin, the BNP forged stronger links with various extreme-right parties elsewhere in Europe, among them France's National Front, Germany's National Democratic Party (NPD), Sweden's National Democrats, and Hungary's Jobbik. Griffin unsuccessfully urged the NPD to move away from neo-Nazism and embark on the same 'modernisation' project that he had taken the BNP. Jean-Marie Le Pen of the French Front National was the guest of honour at an \"Anglo-French Patriotic Dinner\" held by the BNP in April 2004.\nGriffin met leaders of the Hungarian far right party Jobbik to discuss co-operation between the two parties and spoke at a Jobbik party rally in August 2008. In April 2009, Simon Darby, deputy chairman of the BNP, was welcomed with fascist salutes by members of the Italian nationalist Forza Nuova during a trip to Milan. Darby stated that the BNP would look to form an alliance with France's Front National in the European Parliament. Following the election of two BNP MEPs in 2009, the following year saw the BNP join with other extreme-right parties to form the Alliance of European National Movements, with Griffin becoming its vice president. The party also had close links with the Historical Review Press, a publisher focused on promoting Holocaust denial.\nBritain's extreme-right has long faced internal and public divisions. Disgruntled BNP members left the party to found or join a wide range of rivals, among them the British Freedom Party, White Nationalist Party, Nationalist Alliance, Wolf's Hook White Brotherhood, British People's Party, England First Party, Britain First, Democratic Nationalists, and the New Nationalist Party. Various BNP members were involved in the nascent English Defence League (EDL)\u2014with EDL leader Tommy Robinson having been a former BNP activist\u2014although Griffin proscribed the organisation and condemned it as having been manipulated by \"Zionists\". The political scientist Chris Allen noted that the EDL shared much of the BNP's ideology, but that its \"strategies and actions\" were very different, with the EDL favouring street marches over electoral politics. By 2014, both the BNP and EDL were in decline, and Britain First\u2014founded by former BNP members James Dowson and Paul Golding\u2014had risen to prominence. It combined the electoral tactics of the BNP with the street marches of the EDL.\nThe Steadfast Trust was established as a charity in 2004 with the stated aims of reducing poverty among those of Anglo-Saxon descent and supporting English culture. It has many former and current BNP, NF and British Ku Klux Klan members. It was deregistered as a charity by the Charity Commission in February 2014. In 2014, after Nick Griffin lost the leadership of BNP, he set up British Voice, but before it was launched, he decided to set up a different group, British Unity.\nElectoral performance.\nThe BNP has contested seats in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Research from Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin shows that BNP support is concentrated among older and less educated working-class men living in the declining industrial towns of the North and Midlands regions, in contrast to previous significant far-right parties like the National Front, which drew support from a younger demographic.\nGeneral elections.\nThe BNP placed comparatively little emphasis on elections to the British House of Commons, aware that the first past the post voting system was a major obstacle.\nThe British National Party has contested general elections since 1983. It put forward no candidates for the 2024 general election.\nThe BNP in the 2001 general election saved five deposits (out of 33 contested seats) and secured its best general election result in Oldham West and Royton (which had recently been the scene of racially motivated rioting between white and Asian youths) where party leader Nick Griffin secured 16% of the vote.\nThe 2005 general election was considered a major breakthrough by the BNP, as it received 192,746 votes in the 119 constituencies it contested, took a 0.7% share of the overall vote and retained a deposit in 40 of the seats.\nThe BNP put forward candidates for 338 out of 650 seats for the 2010 general election gaining 563,743 votes (1.9%), finishing in fifth place and failing to win any seats. However, a record of 73 deposits were saved. Party chairman Griffin came third in the Barking constituency, behind Margaret Hodge of Labour and Simon Marcus of the Conservatives, who were first and second respectively. At 14.6%, this was the BNP's best result in any of the seats it contested that year.\nLocal elections.\nThe BNP's first electoral success came in 1993, when Derek Beackon was returned as a councillor in Millwall, London. He lost his seat in elections the following year. The next BNP success in local elections was not until the 2002 local elections, when three BNP candidates gained seats on the Burnley council. The BNP's first councillor for six years was John Haycock, elected as a parish councillor for Bromyard and Winslow in Herefordshire in 2000. Haycock failed to attend any council meetings for six months and was later disqualified from office.\nThe party had 55 councillors for a time in 2009. After the 2013 local county council elections, the BNP was left with a total of two borough councillors in England.\nAs of 2011, the BNP had yet to make \"a major breakthrough\" on local councils.\nThe BNP's councillors usually had \"an extremely limited impact on local politics\" because they were isolated as individuals or small groups on the council. Councillors from the main parties often disliked their BNP colleagues and deemed having to work alongside them as an affront to dignity and decency.\nQuestions were often raised as to whether BNP councillors could adequately represent the interests of all of their local constituents. On being elected, Beackon for instance stated that he refused to serve his Asian constituents in Millwall. There were also allegations made that BNP councillors had particularly low attendance at council meetings, although research indicated that this was not the case, with the BNP's attendance record being largely average.\nThere is evidence to suggest that racially and religiously motivated crime increased in those areas where BNP councillors had been elected. For instance, after the 1993 election of Beackon, there was a spike in racist attacks in the borough of Tower Hamlets. BNP members were directly responsible for some of this; the party's national organiser Richard Edmonds was sentenced to three months imprisonment for his part in an attack on a black man and his white girlfriend.\nRegional assemblies and parliaments.\nBNP lead candidate Richard Barnbrook won a seat in the London Assembly in May 2008, after the party gained 5.3% of the London-wide vote. However, in August 2010, he resigned the party whip and became an independent.\nIn the 2007 Welsh Assembly elections, the BNP fielded 20 candidates, four in each of the five regional lists, with Nick Griffin standing in the South Wales West region. It did not win any seats, but was the only minor party to have saved deposits in the electoral regions, one in the North Wales region and the other in the South Wales West region. In total the BNP polled 42,197 votes (4.3%).\nIn the 2011 Welsh Assembly elections, the BNP fielded 20 candidates, four in each of the five regional lists and for the first time 7 candidates were fielded in FPTP constituencies. On the regional lists, the BNP polled 22,610 votes (2.4%), down 1.9% from 2007. In 2 out of the 7 FPTP constituencies contested the BNP saved deposits: (Swansea East and Islwyn).\nIn the 2007 Scottish Parliament election, the party fielded 32 candidates, entitling it to public funding and an election broadcast, prompting criticism. The BNP received 24,616 votes (1.2%), no seats were won, nor were any deposits saved. In the 2011 Scottish Parliament election, the BNP fielded 32 candidates in the regional lists. 15,580 votes were polled (0.78%).\nThe BNP fielded 3 candidates for the first time in three constituencies each in the 2011 Northern Ireland Legislative Assembly elections (Belfast East, East Antrim and South Antrim). 1,252 votes were polled (0.2%), winning no seats for the party.\nEuropean Parliament.\nThe BNP has taken part in European Parliament elections since 1999, when it received 1.13% of the total vote (102,647 votes).\nIn the 2004 elections to the European Parliament, the BNP won 4.9% of the vote, making it the sixth biggest party overall, but did not win any seats.\nThe BNP won two seats in the European Parliament in the 2009 elections. Andrew Brons was elected in the Yorkshire and the Humber regional constituency with 9.8% of the vote. Party chairman Nick Griffin was elected in the North West region, with 8% of the vote. Nationally, the BNP received 6.26%.\nThe UK government announced in 2009 that the BNP's two MEPs would be denied some of the access and information afforded to other MEPs. The BNP would be subject to the \"same general principles governing official impartiality\" and they would receive \"standard written briefings as appropriate from time to time\", but diplomats would not be \"proactive\" in dealing with the BNP MEPs and that any requests for policy briefings from them would be treated differently and on a discretionary basis.\nThe BNP did not stand any candidates in the 2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom.\nPublic profile.\nAssociation with violence.\nThe leaders and senior officers of the BNP have criminal convictions for inciting racial hatred.\nJohn Hagan claims that the BNP has conducted right-wing extremist violence to gain \"institutionalized power\". A 1997 report by Human Rights Watch accused the party of recruiting from skinhead groups and promoting racist violence.\nIn the past, Nick Griffin has defended the threat of violence to further the party's aims. After the BNP won its first council seat in 1993, he wrote that the BNP should not be a \"postmodernist rightist party\" but \"a strong, disciplined organisation with the ability to back up its slogan 'Defend Rights for Whites' with well-directed boots and fists. When the crunch comes, power is the product of force and will, not of rational debate\". In 1997 he said: \"It is more important to control the streets of a city than its council chambers.\"\nA BBC \"Panorama\" programme reported on a number of BNP members who have had criminal convictions, some racially motivated. Some of the more notable convictions include:\nSome members of the BNP were radicalised during their involvement with the party and subsequently sought to carry out acts of violence and terrorism. Tony Lecomber was imprisoned for three years for possessing explosives, after a nail bomb exploded while he was transporting it to the offices of the Workers' Revolutionary Party in 1985. He was imprisoned for three years in 1991 whilst serving as the BNP's Director of Propaganda for assaulting a Jewish teacher. In 1999, the ex-BNP member David Copeland used nail bombs to target homosexuals and ethnic minorities in London. In 2005, the BNP's Burnley candidate Robert Cottage was convicted of stockpiling chemicals for use in what he believed was a coming civil war, while a Yorkshire BNP member, Terry Gavan, was convicted in 2010 for stockpiling firearms and nail bombs.\nReception.\nIn 2011, Goodwin described the BNP as being \"the most successful party in the history of the extreme right in Britain\". That same year, John E. Richardson noted that it had achieved \"a level of electoral success that is unparalleled in the history of British fascism\". The historian Alan Sykes stated that \"in electoral terms\", the BNP achieved \"more in the first three years of the twenty-first century\" than the British far right \"as a whole achieved in the previous seventy\". However, Copsey said that the party's belief that one day the conditions would be right for it to win a general election belonged to the \"Never-Never Land of British politics\". Copsey also said that the BNP's electoral successes had been modest in comparison to those achieved by extreme-right groups elsewhere in Western Europe such as France's National Front, Italy's National Alliance, and Belgium's Vlaams Blok.\nThe BNP's growth met a hostile reaction, and in 2011 the political scientists Copsey and Macklin described it as \"Britain's most disliked party\". It was widely reviled as racist and even following Griffin's \"modernisation\" project it was still heavily tainted by its associations with neo-Nazism. For many years it remained closely associated with the National Front in the British public imagination.\nThe BNP remained unable to gain a broad appeal or widespread credibility. In a 2004 poll, seven out of ten voters said that they would never consider voting for the BNP. A 2009 poll found that two-thirds would \"under no circumstances\" consider voting BNP, while only 4% of respondents would \"definitely consider\" voting for them.\nThe Conservative leader Michael Howard stated that the BNP were a \"stain\" on British democracy, adding that \"this is not a political movement, this is a bunch of thugs dressed up as a political party\". His successor David Cameron described it as a \"completely unacceptable\" organisation which \"thrives on hatred\". The Labour prime minister, Tony Blair, called it a \"nasty, extreme organisation\", while the Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg termed it a \"party of thugs and fascists\". In 2004, the General Synod of the Church of England declared that supporting the BNP was incompatible with Christianity, comparing it to \"spitting in the face of God\". Christian groups throughout Britain have maintained that the BNP's hostility toward cultural and ethnic diversity in the country was at odds with mainstream Christianity's emphasis on inclusiveness, tolerance, and interfaith dialogue. Winston Churchill's family has criticised the BNP's use of his image and quotations, labelling it \"offensive and disgusting\". The singer Vera Lynn condemned the party for selling a CD featuring her recordings on its website. In 2009, the Royal British Legion asked Griffin\u2014at first privately and then publicly\u2014to not wear their poppy symbol.\nThe British police, Fire Brigades Union, and Church of England, prohibited its members from joining the BNP. In 2002, Martin Narey, banned BNP membership among prison workers; he subsequently received death threats. In 2010, the Education Secretary Michael Gove announced bans allowing headteachers to ban their staff from being party members.\nIndividuals whose membership of the party was made public sometimes faced ostracism and the loss of their job: examples include a school headmaster who had to resign, a caretaker who was sacked after attending a BNP rally, and a police officer dismissed from his position. After BNP membership lists were leaked on the Internet, a number of police forces investigated officers whose names appeared on the lists.\nIn 2005, an invitation to Nick Griffin by the University of St Andrews Union Debating Society to participate in a debate on multiculturalism was withdrawn after protests. The BNP says that National Union of Journalists guidelines on reporting \"far right\" organisations forbid unionised journalists from reporting uncritically on the party. In April 2007, an election broadcast was cancelled by BBC Radio Wales whose lawyers believed that the broadcast was defamatory of the Chief Constable of North Wales Police, Richard Brunstrom. The BNP said that BBC editors were following an agenda.\nMainstream media and academia.\nAttitudes toward the BNP in both mainstream broadcast media and print journalism have been overwhelmingly negative, and no mainstream newspaper has endorsed the party. This hostile coverage has even been found in right-wing tabloids like the \"Daily Mail\", \"Daily Express\" and \"The Sun\" which otherwise share the BNP's hostile attitude toward issues like immigration. In 2003, the \"Daily Mail\" described the BNP as \"poisonous bigots\", while in 2004 \"The Sun\" printed the headline of \"BNP: Bloody Nasty People\". Senior BNP figures nevertheless believed that these tabloids' hostile coverage of immigration and Islam helped to legitimise and normalise the party and its views among much of the British public, a view echoed by some academic observers. When, in 2004, anti-racist activists picketed outside the \"Daily Mail\" office in central London to protest against its negative coverage of asylum seekers, BNP members organised a counter-picket at which they displayed the placard \"Vote BNP, Read the \"Daily Mail\"\".\nThe BNP initially faced a 'no platform for fascists' policy from the broadcast media, although this eroded as Griffin was invited on to a number of television programmes amid the party's growing electoral success. When the BBC invited him to appear on \"Question Time\" in 2009 it was criticised by several trade unions, sections of the media, and several Labour politicians, all of whom believed that the BNP should not be given a public platform. Anti-fascist protesters assembled outside of the television studio to protest Griffin's inclusion.\nThe first academic attention to be directed at the BNP appeared after it gained a councillor in the 1993 local elections. Nevertheless, throughout the 1990s it remained the subject of little academic research. Academic interest increased following its victories at local elections from 2002 onward. The first detailed monograph study to be devoted to the party was Nigel Copsey's \"Contemporary British Fascism\", first published in 2004. In September 2008, an academic symposium on the BNP was held at Teesside University.\nThe wider extreme-right and anti-fascists.\nOpposition to the BNP also came from the organised anti-fascist movement. By the mid-1990s, the BNP's attempts to stage public events in Scotland, the North West and the Midlands were largely thwarted by the militant disruption of the Anti-Fascist Action (AFA) group. The BNP's modernisation and move away from street demonstrations and toward electoral campaigning caused problems for the AFA, who proved unable to successfully change their tactics; on those occasions when AFA activists tried to forcibly disrupt BNP activities, they were prevented and arrested by riot police.\nMore liberal sections of the anti-fascist movement sought to counter the BNP through community-based initiatives. \"Searchlight\" encouraged trade unions to establish localised campaigns that would ensure that ethnic minority and other anti-BNP locals voted. It suggested that such campaigns should avoid associating with the mainstream parties from which BNP voters felt disenfranchised and that they should not be afraid of calling out Islamic fundamentalists and extremists active in the area. The Unite Against Fascism group also sought to maximise anti-BNP turnout at elections, calling on the electorate to vote for \"anyone but fascists\". Evidence suggests that such anti-fascist activities did little to erode the far-right vote; this was in part because anti-fascist groups had encouraged the stereotype that BNP candidates were violent skinheads, something which conflicted with the more normal, friendly image that BNP activists cultivated when canvassing.\nThe BNP often received a hostile response from other sections of the British extreme-right. Some extreme-right-wingers, such as the British Freedom Party, expressed frustration at the party's inability to moderate itself further on the issue of race, while those such as Colin Jordan and the NF accused the BNP\u2014particularly under Griffin's leadership\u2014of being too moderate. This latter view was articulated by an extreme-right groupuscule, the International Third Position, when it said that the BNP \"has been openly courting the Jewish vote and pumping out material which confirms what most us knew years ago: the BNP has become a multi-racist, Zionist, queer-tolerant anti-Muslim pressure group\".\nIn \"ASLEF v. United Kingdom\", the European Court of Human Rights overturned an employment appeal tribunal ruling that awarded BNP member and train driver Jay Lee damages for expulsion from a trade union. In Redfearn v United Kingdom, the court ruled that members of racist organisations could lawfully be dismissed on health and safety grounds if there was a danger of violence occurring in the workplace. In November 2012, the European Court of Human Rights made a majority ruling (4 to 3) that in Redfearn's case against the UK government, his rights under Article 11 (free association) had been infringed, but not those under Article 10 (free expression) or Article 14 (discrimination).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "4295", "revid": "367949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4295", "title": "Batavi (Germanic tribe)", "text": "Germanic tribe\nThe Batavians or were a Roman-era Germanic people that lived in Batavia in the eastern Rhine delta \u2014 an area that is now the Netherlands, but then lay upon the northernmost border of the Roman Empire in continental Europe. Their origins are uncertain, but they appear to have settled in Batavia around 50\u201315 BC, when a Rome-allied Chatti military elite joined a Celtic-influenced community that had already been living there long before the arrival of the Romans. Throughout the several centuries in which they appear in historical records the Batavians were continually associated with elite cavalry units in the Roman military, who were famous for their ability to cross rivers while armed and on horseback, without breaking line.\nBatavia was already referred to by the Roman leader Julius Caesar as the \"Island of the Batavi\" () in his account of his campaigns in Gaul in 58\u201352 BC \u2014 although he did not explain who the Batavi were. Tacitus, writing in about 100 AD, reported that they had a special old alliance () with the empire as major contributors to the Roman military, and they did not pay any other form of tribute or tax. Some modern scholars have suggested that this relationship was established by Caesar himself who had a Germanic cavalry unit which fought for him in Gaul, and then in his Roman civil war. According to these proposals, this force evolved into the later bodyguard of Caesar's imperial successors in the Julio-Claudian dynasty, who continued to recruit Batavians for this role. \nApart from the bodyguard, the Batavi in the first century AD provided 9 or 10 auxiliary cohorts which each included cavalry, all with their own Batavian command structures. Based upon estimates of the Batavian population at about 40,000 people, of whom 5000 or more were posted in the Roman military, historians believe the Batavi had a highly militarized society, even if they were able to recruit from neighbouring populations. While at least one cohort stayed close to home, eight played an important role in the Roman subjugation of Britain. In 69 AD, the \"Year of the Four Emperors\", Julius Civilis, a Batavi leader and Roman citizen, led the Batavian Revolt. This was one of several attempts by regional leaders to claim power during this period, and it involved not only the Batavi and their neighbours the Cananefates, but also allies from both inside and outside Roman Gaul. Vitellius, a Roman governor of their region, who was contending to become emperor was their main enemy at first, and was defeated. However, the Batavi were themselves eventually forced to come to an agreement with a new emperor, Vespasian. \nAfter this revolt, the Batavian forces were once again posted in Britain, but in the second century Batavian forces began to be assigned to the Danubian frontier. In the second and third centuries the \"Batavian\" military units recruited in the provinces where they were based, and gradually became less ethnically Batavian. Networks of military families, many now Roman citizens, continued to identify as Batavi into the second century, but often while living outside of their home region. Although their name survived in the names of Roman military units and the Roman military base at Passau (), the Batavians themselves disappeared from the historical record during the Crisis of the Third Century, when Rome lost control of Batavia to tribes from north of the Rhine. Their main Roman settlement at Nijmegen was abandoned by 250 AD. When the Romans recovered partial control of the region generations later, they moved large parts of the native population to other parts of the empire.\nName and language.\nThere is little evidence concerning the language of the Roman era Batavi, but a significant number of their personal names have Germanic etymologies, while a smaller number are Celtic. Scholars believe that although, like the Chatti, the Batavi had a Celtic-influenced background, \"at the very least\" they were \"early drawn into the process of Germanization\" which was happening near the Rhine.\nScholars have long reported that the regional name \"Batavia\" has a Germanic etymology, *\"bat\"-. The first part is reconstructed as the stem of a word * meaning \"beneficial\", which is reflected for example in modern English \"best\" or \"better\". The second reconstructed word could refer to floodplains, meadows, and islands, and derives ultimately from the Indo-European word for water. The name therefore means something like \"good island\". However, this traditional etymology is not universally accepted, and Norbert Wagner has argued that the name of the Batavi can be explained as Celtic. The first part of the name would come from a Latin-Gaulish \"battu(ere)\", which Wagner derives from the type of gladiator called an \"andabata\". Older scholarship proposed that \"bata\" came from Gaulish, meaning \"to strike\", or \"to beat\", and Wagner concludes that the meaning of the Batavi name is therefore \"fighters\". He argues based upon the second part of the name that it is probably older than the Germanisation of the lower Rhine, and fits within a regional cluster (Veluwe, Chamavi, Frisiavones).\nThere is therefore also some uncertainty about whether the ethnonym Batavi is derived from the geographical name Batavia. The standard Germanic etymology of their name would imply that an immigrating Germanic-speaking element of the Batavi must have first named the region, and then named themselves after the region. However, all of the early Roman mentions of Batavia call it simply the island of the Batavians. The Latin word \"Batavia\" is not found in Roman texts until centuries later, in the third century. Dio Cassius was the first to use the term, although in a Greek form, ( as a genitive singular). Notably, while writing about the period of Augustus, he claimed that the Batavi were named after their country. On the other hand he also referred to the \"Island of the Batavi\" in another passage, (). The Latin spelling \"Batavia\" started to appear in the late 3rd century and early 4th century \"Latin Panegyrics\", but only after the area had been devastated and the Batavians themselves had ceased to appear in records.\nThe island of the Batavi.\nThe Batavi are not mentioned directly by Julius Caesar in his commentary on his Gallic Wars, which lasted from 58 to 52 BC. However, he described the \"Island of the Batavi\" () as an island in the Rhine delta. He named the first large offshoot of the Rhine where the delta begins as the Waal (), and according to him the Waal then flowed into a different river, the Maas (, ), and together the Waal and Maas formed a boundary of this island. This point where the two rivers joined was no more than 80 Roman miles from the Ocean. For modern scholars there is some uncertainty about where the Waal joined the Maas, and during which periods this happened. Nico Roymans argues that they must have joined near Lith and Rossum, where the two rivers still come close to joining today. In favour of this proposal, present day Dordrecht, another possible location, is only 40km from the coast, which does not match the distance given by Caesar.\nCaesar noted that there were also many other large islands in the delta, many inhabited by barbarian nations (), some of whom were thought to live on fish and the eggs of birds. Apparently distinct from these he mentions that Menapii, a Gaulish tribe who he had fought as part of the alliance of the Belgae, were inhabiting both sides of the Rhine, somewhere near where it empties into the sea. He described the Menapii lands more generally as bordering upon the ocean, and containing areas with tidal islands, protected by forests and swamps. The Menapii were however forced back from the Rhine when the Germanic Tencteri and Usipetes attacked and used Menapian boats to cross the Rhine. The place near the sea where this Rhine crossing occurred is uncertain. Roymans, who believes eastern Batavia to have been inhabited at this time by Eburones, proposes that the Tencteri and Usipetes crossed only a branch of the Rhine, in the delta. According to this scenario they then wandered eastwards out of the islands, to the area between the Maas and the \"Rhine\", understood by Roymans to be its branch, the Waal. It was in this area that Caesar located and attacked them. He slaughtered many of the women, children and elderly at the place where this Rhine branch flowed into the Maas, forcing the survivors to the opposite side of the Rhine, where some found refuge with the Sugambri who lived east of the delta. Caesar also indicated that the lands of the Eburones, who he claimed to be defending from the Tencteri and Usipetes, also stretched to the delta. When Caesar later sought to annihilate them in 53-51 BC, many Eburones sought refuge in this region of tidal islands.\nIn the first century AD Tacitus and Pliny, like Caesar, continued to refer to the \"Island of the Batavi\", and not \"Batavia\". Pliny wrote about 23 AD, and described the as the most famous of the many Rhine delta islands, and he noted that the Batavi shared it with the Canninefates. On other delta islands he reported that there were Frisii, Chauci, Frisiavones, Sturii, and Marsaci. He placed the Menapii of his time south of the Scheldt, and the Eburones, crushed by Caesar, were no longer mentioned. Tacitus later agreed with Pliny that the Canninefates shared the same island with the Batavi. He also described them as being the same as the Batavi in origin, language, and valour, but smaller in numbers.\nTacitus, writing in about 100 AD, also uses the term . In his \"Annals\" he notes that it had many convenient landing places for building up a fleet, and that the island begins at the point where the Rhine first splits as it approaches the sea. He explained that the Rhine branch which splits off on the Gaulish side is called the Waal () by the inhabitants, and like Caesar he describes the Waal as merging into the Maas. The other primary branch of the Rhine \"retains its name and the force of its current on the side that flows past Germania\". In both his \"Germania\" and his \"Histories\" Tacitus notes that apart from the island surrounded by branches of the Rhine, the Batavi also occupied a smaller neighbouring region on the neighbouring \"Gaulish\" bank of the river. \nTacitus also mentioned the in his account of the Batavian Revolt in his \"Histories\", when he described how the revolt temporarily drove the Roman name out of the \"island of the Batavi\". In another passage he describes how the Batavians sailed a fleet into the mouth of the Meuse, which was like a sea, where it \"pours its waters together with the Rhine into the Ocean\". After a short naval engagement the Roman general Quintus Petillius Cerialis \"mercilessly ravaged the Island of the Batavi\", though he left the estates of his Batavian opponent Civilis intact. \"Meanwhile, however, the autumn was far advanced, and the river, swollen by the continual rains of the season, overflowed the island, marshy and low-lying as it is, till it resembled a lake. There were no ships, no provisions at hand, and the camp, which was situated on low ground, was in process of being carried away by the force of the stream.\"\nOrigins.\nWriting in about 100 AD Tacitus reported that the Batavi, who he described as the most valorous of all the peoples () on the Rhine, had originally been a part of the Chatti. According to Tacitus, domestic strife () forced the Batavi to move away from the other Chatti. He also emphasized that they had a privileged and old alliance () with Rome. It is however not clear exactly either when and how the Romans first came into contact with either the Batavi, or the Chatti, or when the Chatto-Batavian elite first settled in the Rhine delta. One early possibility is that it was Julius Caesar himself who settled the Batavi in the delta, although he never clearly mentioned either the Chatti nor the Batavi in his accounts of his conquest of the region in 58\u201352 BC. It has even been argued that the Chatto-Batavian settlement could have even happened before Caesar's arrival in the region. More generally, because Tacitus implies that they settled in the Rhine, with the understanding of the Romans, it is believed that they settled there some time between 55 BC in the time of Caesar's wars, and 12 BC. By 12 BC the Romans had established their own military settlement near present day Nijmegen in Batavian territory, which was used as a base by the Roman prince and general Drusus the Elder. Evidence suggests that the first Roman settlements at Nijmegen began between 19 and 17 BC, corresponding roughly with the second governorship of Gaul by Agrippa's, the son-in-law of Augustus, although the new Batavian elite may have settled in Batavia before the Romans established their own base in the region.\nAlthough Caesar did not report the location of the Chatti in his time many historians believe they lived in the same region where they would later live in the first century AD, approximately corresponding to the modern German state of Hesse. In support of this, there is evidence that the Batavi began producing a new coinage based off one earlier made earlier at the oppidum on the D\u00fcnsberg in Hesse, which subsequently became less active. On the basis of this coin evidence, Lanting and van der Plicht argue that the Batavian settlement must have happened about 40 BC, which would correspond to the first governorship of Agrippa in Gaul. On the other hand, Petrikovits argued that the Chatti must originally have lived closer to Batavia, and also been forced to move. He noted how Dio Cassius wrote that the Chatti, like the Batavi, were assigned land by the Romans. He also noted that in the Lower Rhine region not only the Batavi and Cananefates had a likely connection to the Chatti, but also the Chattuarii, who lived east of Batavia, and whose name means \"holders/inhabitants of Chatti-land\".\nIn his \"Germania\" Tacitus described the Batavian settlement in the Rhine delta as a place where the Batavi \"would become part of the Roman Empire\", and in his \"Histories\" he wrote that the land they seized was empty of inhabitants. However, this is contradicted by archaeological evidence, which shows continuous habitation of the eastern part of the delta from at least the third century BC onward. It is more likely that an elite group of these \"Chatto-Batavians\" moved to the delta and integrated themselves into a pre-existing population, bringing new traditions with them. Archaeologist Nico Roymans has argued that the pre-Roman people of Batavia were a major branch of the Eburones, who Caesar claimed to have destroyed.\nTacitus also emphasized the unusual nature of the Batavian agreements with Rome. \"Their honour still remains, and the mark of their ancient alliance: they are neither burdened with tribute, nor worn down by tax-collectors. Exempt from imposts and contributions, and set apart only for the purposes of war, they are, as it were, weapons and armour, reserved for battle.\" And in his \"Histories\" he noted that they were not \"worn down by obligations (a rare thing in alliance with stronger powers): they supplied only men and arms for the empire, long trained in German wars, and afterwards increased in renown by service in Britain, when cohorts were sent over there, which, by ancient custom, were commanded by the noblest of their countrymen. At home, too, there was a levy of cavalry, with a special skill in swimming: keeping hold of their arms and horses, they charged across the Rhine in unbroken squadrons.\"\nAlthough Caesar didn't mention the Batavi he indicated that he recruited a unit of about 400 \"Germani\" horsemen, who he kept close to himself during battle at Neung-sur-Beuvron against Vercingetorix in 52 BC, and then sent into the battle at a crucial moment. Historian Michael Speidel argued these Germanic troops were the same ones mentioned in accounts of the subsequent civil wars. They were used by him against Pompey's Roman forces in Spain and Alexandria, and on at least one occasion they were used to attack across a river. The poet Lucan explicitly said that Caesar had Batavi with him during the civil war, and this is probably correct. This Germanic force therefore probably established the tradition of the Julio-Claudian dynasty's personal Germanic bodyguard, which was sometimes called the , and was in later generations dominated by Batavi and Ubii.\nRevolt of the Batavi.\nAfter the Batavian participation in the subjugation of Britain, tensions rose between them and the empire, for reasons which are no longer clear. In 68 AD Gaius Julius Civilis, a leader of the Batavi, and a Roman citizen, was paraded in chains in Rome before Nero, accused of treason. His brother had already been executed. Nero was the last Julio-Claudian emperor Nero and was deposed soon after. The next emperor Galba, released him but also disbanded the Germanic bodyguard. \n69 AD was the \"Year of the Four Emperors\". Civilis was again arrested when he returned to Gaul, by the governor of Germania inferior, Vitellius. He was released when Vitellius began putting together forces to invade Italy, to install himself as emperor. At first used the eight cohorts of Batavians who had been stationed in Britain, but riots broke out and these forces were eventually sent home where they joined the rebellion.\nCivilis led the Batavi and their neighbours into the so-called Batavian revolt. He managed to capture Castra Vetera, the Romans' lost two legions, while two others (I Germanica and XVI Gallica) were controlled by the rebels. The rebellion became a real threat to the Empire when the conflict escalated to northern Gaul and Germania. \nThe Roman army retaliated and invaded the \"insula Batavorum\". A bridge was built over the river Nabalia, where the warring parties approached each other on both sides to negotiate peace. The narrative was told in great detail in Tacitus' History, book iv, although, unfortunately, the narrative breaks off abruptly at the climax. Following the uprising, Legio X \"Gemina\" was housed in a stone \"castra\" to keep an eye on the Batavians.\nAs Civilis claimed to be on the side of Vespasian, who eventually won, the conflict can at least partly be seen as a part of a greater Roman civil war.\nArchaeological evidence.\nThe inhabitants of Batavia both before and after Caesar show archaeological traits associated with the La T\u00e8ne culture, which is a culture traditionally associated with Celts. Relevant traits include major fortified settlements called oppida, the use of specific types of coins, and the emergence of collective sanctuaries in Empel, Kessel near modern Lith, and Elst, which continued to be used into imperial times. Glass bracelets associated with the La T\u00e8ne culture also remained very popular in eastern Batavia into the first century AD, under imperial rule.\nOn the other hand, pottery and house architecture evidence indicates \"a substantial, if not dominant, emergence of new forms, structures and techniques during the second half of the 1st century BC\", along with indications of continuity. There was an increased diversity, and hybridization of technologies, which were influenced by neighbouring regions to the west, on the coast, and east, in what is now northern Germany. This has been interpreted as evidence that not one but several groups immigrated, \"probably over a longer period of time, originating from different regions and arriving in a land where a (probably limited) residual population was still living\".\nCoin use also increased significantly in the Lower Rhine area already in the second half of the first century BC, in the period after Caesar's conquests there. This included the eastern delta region, while there appears to have initially been less coin use near the coast.\nRoman capital at Nijmegen.\nArchaeological evidence shows that a Roman military settlement was started in about 19 BC on the Hunnerberg, which is upon a ridge to the southeast of the city centre of Nijmegen. About 15000 troops are estimated to have been stationed there, and 42 hectares were used. More or less simultaneously a new Batavian settlement was built just to the west, closer to the river, and this is believed to be the place referred to as both the \"Oppida Batavorum\" or \"Batavodurum\", in a single passage of Tacitus.\nDuring the Clades Lolliana in 16 BC, when Sicambri, Tencteres and Usipetes from east of the Rhine suddenly attacked Roman forces, it is likely that the Oppida was abandoned, but with the strengthening of imperial focus upon the area the Oppida was renewed and a new Roman command post fort was built east of the existing fort on the Kops plateau. This appears to have been used sometimes as a base for the imperial princes who led the major offensives east of the Rhine during the Roman campaigns in Germania (12 BC \u2013 AD 16).\nAfter the victories of Romans and their establishment of frontier forts along the Rhine, the town developed in a way which show significant Roman influence. In around 40 AD, the fort on the Kops plateau became the home of an elite cavalry unit, probably the \"Ala Batavorum\".\nAfter the Batavian Revolt of 69-70, the settlements and forts changed significantly. The Oppida was burnt down deliberately by the Batavians, as reported by Tacitus, and after the revolt the focus of civilian buildings was to the west of this, in a lower lying Waterkwartier district near the river, while the original oppida in what is now the centre of Nijmegen was left undeveloped. It is in the west that a Roman city eventually formed, with the name of \"Ulpia Noviomagus\", from which the modern name of Nijmegen is derived. In the east, military settlements continued to exist for Roman and auxiliary troops, and a new fort was built at the Hunnerberg area. It was probably an official Roman municipality by 100 AD.\nUlpia Noviomagus and many other settlements in the region were abandoned around 280 AD. Diocletian who reasserted Roman authority, built a fort in the centre of the former settlement of Oppidum Batavorum.\nMilitary.\nThe first Batavian to be mentioned by name was Chariovalda who, along with other Batavian nobles, led a unit of Batavi who fought as Roman allies under the Roman prince and general Germanicus, against the Cherusci and their allies on the river Weser river in 16 AD. It is not clear when and how the Batavi were converted into regular Roman auxiliary cohorts.\nImperial bodyguard.\nOver a long period, the Batavian and Ubian soldiers traditionally made up a large part of the Roman Emperor's personal Germanic bodyguard, together with smaller numbers from other tribes in their region. \nThe Julio-Claudian dynasty from Augustus to Nero, had a Germanic bodyguard called the . Dio Cassius stated directly that the bodyguard of Augustus were Batavians, named after their island homeland and excellent horsemen. Suetonius also noted that the emperor Caligula was specifically advised to recruit Batavians to attend him. This unit was disbanded by Galba after Nero, the last emperor of this dynasty, died. Scholars such as Speidel and Roymans argue that this connection to the emperors probably started in the time of Caesar.\nBatavians were also recruited into the horse guards of later Emperors' horse guards, the \"Equites singulares Augusti\" beginning during the time of the Nerva-Antonine dynasty. This unit also came to be referred to as the Batavians. It is not clear when this unit was founded. Speidel suggests that it may have already been set-up by Domitian. More clearly, the evidence for the new horseguard is stronger from the time of Trajan, who was a governor based on the Rhine before becoming emperor.\nThe \"Ala I Batavorum\".\nAn elite cavalry unit (, literally \"wing\") of Batavi are known to have existed in Batavia itself. It is first mentioned by Tacitus in the context of the Batavian revolt, during which it rebelled against its commander Labeo, and switched to the side of Civilis. Either the same unit, or a new one with the same name, existed after the revolt, and in the second century it was transferred to Pannonia and Dacia on the Danube.\nWhile many scholars presume there was only one such unit, J.A. van Rossum believes there were two at the beginning of the Batavian revolt, seeing the unit described by Tacitus as being under Civilis as such a unit. Other scholars have seen the unit under Civilis in different ways, for example as one of the eight , or as an otherwise unattested ninth one, or even as a special unit made up of returned imperial bodyguards after the disbandment in Rome.\nAuxiliary \"equitatae\" Cohorts.\nApart from the imperial bodyguard, and the 1 or 2 Ala units kept close to home the Batavi in the first century AD provided 8 auxiliary cohorts which each included cavalry, all with their own Batavian command structures. While the \"Ala Batavorum\" unit appears to have stayed close to home in this period, the other eight were part-cavalry units , each with about 500 men, and are best known for their important role in the subjugation of Britain. In line with more general changes being made to cohort sizes, these eight were eventually transformed after the Batavian Revolt, giving four 1000-man (\"milliary\") cohorts, numbered I, II, III and IX. These 4 units were returned to serve in Britain during the late first and early second century.\nIn the second century many of the Batavian units were moved east, to areas near the Danube frontier. In about 130 AD, Cohort I was in Noricum, and Cohort II was in Dacia, and both were apparently in Pannonia in 98 AD. Cohort III was in Raetia in 107 and in Pannonia by 135, while Cohort IX was in Raetia by 116. The units were no longer being posted close to each other, and were no longer commanded or manned exclusively by Batavians. A single 500 man unit continued to serve in Britain until the 3rd or 4th century, and was already present there in 122 AD.\nNumerous altars and tombstones of the cohorts of Batavi, dating to the second century and third century, have been found along Hadrian's Wall, notably at Castlecary and Carrawburgh. As well as in Germany, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Romania and Austria.\nSwimming skills.\nThe Germanic soldiers of Caesar, who probably included Batavi, were used to make attacks at rivers. In the Battle of the Nile (47 BC), scattered groups of Caesar's Germanic cavalry forded the Nile.\nAbout 150 years later, Tacitus especially associated this skill with Batavian forces, and their fellow \"Germani\" who lived across the Rhine. He described how the Batavi had a home-based elite cavalry corps (), \"distinguished by a special zeal for swimming: holding on to their weapons and horses, they were able to force their way through the Rhine with their squadrons unbroken\". Already in 16 AD Tacitus mentions Batavi auxiliaries who travelled in the fleet of Germanicus from the Rhine delta to the mouth of the Ems, where \"the cavalry and the legions fearlessly crossed the first estuaries in which the tide had not yet risen. However, the rear of the auxiliaries, and the Batavi among the number, plunging recklessly into the water and displaying their skill in swimming, fell into disorder, and some were drowned.\" In a later part of this campaign a major battle was fought against the Cherusci of Arminius. Germanicus, confronted by the Cherusci and their allies on the opposite side of the Weser, decided to first send cavalry across before trying to ford with the main force across the river. While two high-ranking Romans Stertinius and Aemilius attacked at widely different points so as to distract the enemy, \"Chariovalda, the Batavian chief (), dashed to the charge where the stream is most rapid\". Chariovalda and many of the Batavian nobles fell after \"plunging into the thickest of the battle\".\nSeveral more historical examples of this skill are noted by scholars, and believed to have involved the Batavi, even when they were not named explicitly:\nThere is a \"famous\" inscription about one of the \"Batavi\" in the Roman army which is in the form of a poem, \"perhaps written by the emperor Hadrian himself\". It commemorates a soldier named Soranus, who in the summer of 118 swam in full army with his horse across the Danube, while Hadrian watched. Speidel proposed that this \"Batavian\" was probably not ethnically Batavian, but rather a member of the emperor's elite unit, the equites singulares Augusti, which was commonly referred to still as \"the Batavi\". As a skilled archer, Soranus is likely in this period and unit to have been recruited in Syria or Arabia. Dio Cassius described the role of Hadrian's elite \"Batavians\" as extremely important in the campaigns of this period in the early second century. According to him, barbarians were horrified to see how well prepared and trained the Romans were, which helped the Hadrian to keep the peace. \"So excellently, indeed, had his soldiery been trained that the cavalry of the Batavians, as they were called, swam the Danube with their arms. Seeing all this, the barbarians stood in terror of the Romans, and turning their attention to their own affairs, they employed Hadrian as an arbitrator of their differences.\"\n\"Batavian\" \"Auxilia Palatina\".\nNew \"Batavian\" units were created in the late third or early fourth century known as the \"Batavi seniores\", \"Batavi iuniores\", \"Equites Batavi seniores\" en \"Equites Batavi iuniores\". These are for example mentioned in the Notitia Dignitatum, which probably represents the situation around 400 AD.\nHowever, by this time the Batavi themselves are no longer mentioned in Roman sources as an ethnic group. Batavia was instead described as being dominated by Franks since the third century. The Romans in the late third century depopulated the area after it had been rebellious under the Franks. Apart from the heavy recruitment of population into the military there was also a largescale movement of population to help the economy in southern Gaul.\nFate of the Batavi.\nAfter the defeat of the revolt, the Batavi royal clan lost some of its authority and by about 100 AD, the Batavi state or was given status within the Roman administrative system.\nAlthough inscriptional evidence shows that many residents still identified primarily as Batavi, during the 2nd and early third centuries there is also a new tendency of residents who referred to themselves as people of the \"civitas\" capital at \"Noviomagus\", or \"Ulpia Noviomagus\", (modern Nijmegen). This may have been influenced not only by the decreased importance of the old royal family, but also by the increasing proportion of people there who now had Roman citizenship, or who descended from new settlers from other parts of the empire, such as veterans and traders.\nAfter the crisis of the third century and the subsequent revolt of the Menapian Carausius, the Romans lost control of the Rhine delta. Ulpia Noviomagus was abandoned by about 250 AD. The \"Panegyrici Latini\" report that the area was taken over by Franks and Frisians, including the Chamavi. When the Roman military reasserted itself under the new tetrarchy, it moved large numbers of people to other regions. The population and agricultural activity decreased dramatically, and the Romans had given it up as an area for normal taxation and governance. \nSome Frankish were allowed to remain in Batavia around 293-294 AD when it was reconquered by Constantius Chlorus. New units were created from the defeated Franks, known as the \"Batavi seniores\", \"Batavi iuniores\", \"Equites Batavi seniores\" en \"Equites Batavi iuniores\". New fortifications were built at Noviomagus around 300 AD, and the Roman military continued to use this and other delta forts until the second half of the 5th century.\nFranks were also later allowed to settle south of the Meuse in Texandria by emperor Constans in 342 AD, after fighting there in 341 AD. Julian the apostate also associated the usurper Magnentius, who had killed emperor Constans and ruled the region in 350-353 AD, with the Franks and Saxons of this region. By 358, after the Chamavi once again attempted to take control of the area, the Salians were accepted by the Romans as the local rulers of Batavia. \nJulian created new military units named after the Salians, Chamavii and other inhabitants of the delta. \nIn the Late Roman army there was still units called \"Batavi\". The name of the Bavarian town of Passau descends from the Roman \"Batavis\", which was named after such a unit, and was next to a much older settlement called \"Boiodurum\" (now Innstadt). (Passau's modern name shows the typical effects of the High German consonant shift of b to p and t to ss.) The \"Notitia Dignitatum\" mentions a tribune of the cohort of \"novae Batavorum, Batavis\", and this tribune was under the Dux of Raetia, while Boiodurum was under the Dux of Noricum and Pannonia. It also lists a tribune of the \"first Batavian cohort\" in Procolitia (modern Carrawburgh) on Hadrian's Wall in Britain.\nThe \"Notitia Dignitatum\" notes the existence of prefects for \"Batavian\" laeti populations in Gaul \u2014 barbarians who lived within the empire and provided troops. At Arras and Condren there were prefects for Batavi laeti, and in the area of Bayeux and Coutances in what is now Normandy () there was a prefect for Batavian and Suebian laeti.\nThe Batavian revival.\nIn the 16th-century emergence of a popular foundation story and origin myth for the Dutch people, the Batavians came to be regarded as their ancestors during their national struggle for independence during the Eighty Years' War. The mix of fancy and fact in the \"Cronyke van Hollandt, Zeelandt ende Vriesland\" (called the \"Divisiekroniek\") by the Augustinian friar and humanist Cornelius Gerardi Aurelius, first published in 1517, brought the spare remarks in Tacitus' newly rediscovered \"Germania\" to a popular public; it was being reprinted as late as 1802. Contemporary Dutch virtues of independence, fortitude and industry were fully recognizable among the Batavians in more scholarly history represented in Hugo Grotius' \"Liber de Antiquitate Republicae Batavicorum\" (1610). The origin was perpetuated by Romeyn de Hooghe's \"Spiegel van Staat der Vereenigden Nederlanden\" (\"Mirror of the State of the United Netherlands,\" 1706), which also ran to many editions, and it was revived in the atmosphere of Romantic nationalism in the late eighteenth-century reforms that saw a short-lived Batavian Republic and, in the colony of the Dutch East Indies, a capital that was named Batavia. Though since Indonesian independence the city is called Jakarta, its inhabitants up to the present still call themselves \"Betawi\" or \"Orang Betawi\", i.e. \"People of Batavia\" \u2013 a name ultimately derived from the ancient Batavians.\nHowever, a disadvantage of this historical nationalism soon became apparent. It suggested there were no strong external borders, while allowing for the fairly clear-cut internal borders that were emerging as the society polarized into three parts. After 1945, the tribal knowledge lost its grip on anthropology and mostly vanished. Modern variants of the Batavian founding myth are made more accurate by pointing out that the Batavians were one part of the ancestry of the Dutch people - together with the Frisians, Franks and Saxons \u2013 by tracing patterns of DNA. Echoes of this cultural continuity can still be found among various areas of Dutch modern culture, such as the very popular replica of the ship \"Batavia\" that can today be found in Lelystad.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4298", "revid": "1300609", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4298", "title": "Baptism", "text": "Christian rite of initiation into the Church\nBaptism (from ) is a Christian rite of initiation almost invariably with the use of water. It may be performed by sprinkling or pouring water on the head, or immersing in water (partially or completely), traditionally three times for each person of the Trinity. It is also called christening, although this is typically reserved for the baptism of infants. Baptism is regarded as a sacrament in most churches and an ordinance in others, with the synoptic gospels recounting that John the Baptist baptized Jesus.\nBaptism according to the Trinitarian formula, which is done in most mainstream Christian denominations, is seen as being a basis for Christian ecumenism, the concept of unity amongst Christians. In certain Christian denominations, such as the Catholic Churches, Eastern Orthodox Churches, Oriental Orthodox Churches, Assyrian Church of the East, and Lutheran Churches, baptism is the door to church membership, with candidates taking baptismal vows. It has also given its name to the Baptist churches and denominations.\nCertain schools of Christian thought (such as Catholic and Lutheran theology) regard baptism as necessary for salvation (though not without exception), but some writers, such as Huldrych Zwingli (1484\u20131531), have denied its necessity. Though water baptism is extremely common among Christian denominations, some, such as Quakers and The Salvation Army, do not practice water baptism at all. Among denominations that practice baptism, differences occur in the manner and mode of baptizing and in the understanding of the significance of the rite. Most Christians baptize using the Trinitarian formula \"in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit\" (following the Great Commission), but Oneness Pentecostals baptize using Jesus' name only. The majority of Christians baptize infants; many others, such as Baptist Churches, regard only believer's baptism as true baptism. In certain denominations, such as the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Churches, the individual being baptized receives a cross necklace that is worn for the rest of their life, inspired by the Third Council of Constantinople.\nOutside of Christianity, Mandaeans undergo repeated baptism for purification instead of initiation. They consider John the Baptist to be their greatest prophet and name all rivers \"yardena\" after the Jordan River.\nThe term \"baptism\" has also been used metaphorically to refer to any ceremony, trial, or experience by which a person is initiated, purified, or given a name. Martyrdom was identified early in Christian church history as \"baptism by blood\", enabling the salvation of martyrs who had not been baptized by water. Later, the Catholic Church identified a baptism of desire, by which those preparing for baptism who die before actually receiving the sacrament are considered saved. In the Methodist tradition, Baptism with the Holy Spirit, has referred to the second work of grace, entire sanctification; in Pentecostalism, the term Baptism with the Holy Spirit is identified with speaking in tongues.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"baptism\" is derived indirectly through Latin from the neuter Greek concept noun (Greek , 'washing, dipping'), which is a neologism in the New Testament derived from the masculine Greek noun (), a term for ritual washing in Greek language texts of Hellenistic Judaism during the Second Temple period, such as the Septuagint. Both of these nouns are derived from the verb (, 'I wash' transitive verb), which is used in Jewish texts for ritual washing, and in the New Testament both for ritual washing and also for the apparently new rite of .\nThe Greek verb (), 'dip', from which the verb is derived, is in turn hypothetically traced to a reconstructed Indo-European root *\"g\u02b7abh-\", 'dip'.\nThe Greek words are used in a great variety of meanings. and in Hellenism had the general usage of \"immersion\", \"going under\" (as a material in a liquid dye) or \"perishing\" (as in a ship sinking or a person drowning), with the same double meanings as in English \"to sink into\" or \"to be overwhelmed by\", with bathing or washing only occasionally used and usually in sacral contexts.\nHistory.\nThe practice of baptism emerged from Jewish ritualistic practices during the Second Temple Period from which figures such as John the Baptist emerged. For example, various texts in the Dead Sea Scrolls (DSS) corpus at Qumran describe ritual practices involving washing, bathing, sprinkling, and immersing. One example of such a text is a DSS known as the Rule of the Community, which says \"And by the compliance of his soul with all the laws of God his flesh is cleansed by being sprinkled with cleansing waters and being made holy with the waters of repentance.\"\nThe Mandaeans, who are followers of John the Baptist, practice frequent full immersion baptism (\"masbuta\") as a ritual of purification. According to Mandaean sources, they left the Jordan Valley in the 1st century AD.\nJohn the Baptist, who is considered a forerunner to Christianity, used baptism as the central sacrament of his messianic movement. The apostle Paul distinguished between the baptism of John, (\"baptism of repentance\") and baptism in the name of Jesus, and it is questionable whether Christian baptism was in some way linked with that of John. However, according to Mark 1:8, John seems to connect his water baptism as a type of the true, ultimate baptism of Jesus, which is by the Spirit. Christians consider Jesus to have instituted the sacrament of baptism.\nThough some form of immersion was likely the most common method of baptism in the early church, many of the writings from the ancient church appeared to view this mode of baptism as inconsequential. The Didache 7.1\u20133 (AD 60\u2013150) allowed for affusion practices in situations where immersion was not practical. Likewise, Tertullian (AD 196\u2013212) allowed for varying approaches to baptism even if those practices did not conform to biblical or traditional mandates (cf. De corona militis 3; De baptismo 17). Finally, Cyprian (ca. AD 256) explicitly stated that the amount of water was inconsequential and defended immersion, affusion, and aspersion practices (Epistle 75.12). As a result, there was no uniform or consistent mode of baptism in the ancient church prior to the fourth century.\nBy the third and fourth centuries, baptism involved catechetical instruction as well as chrismation, exorcisms, laying on of hands, and recitation of a creed.\nIn the Early Middle Ages infant baptism became common and the rite was significantly simplified and increasingly emphasized. In Western Europe Affusion became the normal mode of baptism between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries, though immersion was still practiced into the sixteenth. In the medieval period, some radical Christians rejected the practice of baptism as a sacrament. Sects such as the Tondrakians, Cathars, Arnoldists, Petrobrusians, Henricans, Brethren of the Free Spirit and the Lollards were regarded as heretics by the Catholic Church. In the sixteenth century, Martin Luther retained baptism as a sacrament, but Swiss reformer Huldrych Zwingli considered baptism and the Lord's Supper to be symbolic. Anabaptists denied the validity of the practice of infant baptism, and rebaptized converts.\nMode and manner.\nBaptism is practiced in several different ways. Aspersion is the sprinkling of water on the head, and affusion is the pouring of water over the head. Traditionally, a person is sprinkled, poured, or immersed three times for each person of the Holy Trinity, with this ancient Christian practice called \"trine baptism\" or \"triune baptism\". \"The Didache\" specifies:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is how you should baptize: Having recited all these things, [the first half of the \"Teaching\", \"The Way of Life and the Way of Death\"] baptize in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, in running water. If you do not have running water, then baptize in still water. The water should be cold, but if you do not have cold water, then use warm. If you have neither, then just pour water on the head three times in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Both the one who is baptized and the one who baptizes should fast beforehand, along with any others who are able, the one that is baptized being told to fast for a day or two.\u2014\u200a\nThe word \"immersion\" is derived from late Latin \"immersio\", a noun derived from the verb \"immergere\" (\"in\" \u2013 \"into\" + \"mergere\" \"dip\"). In relation to baptism, some use the term to refer to any form of dipping, whether the body is put completely under water or only partially dipped in water. They thus speak of immersion as being either total or partial. Others, particularly within the Anabaptist traditions, use \"immersion\" to refer exclusively to plunging someone entirely under the surface of the water. The term \"immersion\" is also used of a form of baptism in which water is poured over someone standing in water, without fully submerging the person. For the three different meanings of the word \"immersion\", see Immersion baptism.\nWhen \"immersion\" is used in opposition to \"submersion\", it indicates the form of baptism in which the candidate stands or kneels in water and water is poured over the upper part of the body. Immersion in this sense has been employed in West and East since at least the 2nd century and is the form in which baptism is generally depicted in early Christian art. In the West, this method of baptism began to be replaced by affusion baptism from around the 8th century, but it continues in use in Eastern Christianity.\nThe word submersion comes from the late Latin (\"sub-\" \"under, below\" + \"mergere\" \"plunge, dip\") and is also sometimes called \"complete immersion\". It is the form of baptism in which the water completely covers the candidate's body. Submersion is practiced in the Orthodox and several other Eastern Churches. In the Latin Church of the Catholic Church, baptism by submersion is used in the Ambrosian Rite and is one of the methods provided in the Roman Rite of the baptism of infants. It is seen as obligatory among some groups that have arisen since the Protestant Reformation, such as Baptists.\nMeaning of the Greek verb \"baptizein\".\nThe Greek-English Lexicon of Liddell and Scott gives the primary meaning of the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\", from which the English verb \"baptize\" is derived, as \"dip, plunge\", and gives examples of plunging a sword into a throat or an embryo and for drawing wine by dipping a cup in the bowl; for New Testament usage it gives two meanings: \"baptize\", with which it associates the Septuagint mention of Naaman dipping himself in the Jordan River, and \"perform ablutions\", as in Luke 11:38.\nAlthough the Greek verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" does not exclusively mean dip, plunge or immerse (it is used with literal and figurative meanings such as \"sink\", \"disable\", \"overwhelm\", \"go under\", \"overborne\", \"draw from a bowl\"), lexical sources typically cite this as a meaning of the word in both the Septuagint and the New Testament.\n\"While it is true that the basic root meaning of the Greek words for baptize and baptism is immerse/immersion, it is not true that the words can simply be reduced to this meaning, as can be seen from Mark 10:38\u201339, Luke 12:50, Matthew 3:11, Luke 3:16, and Corinthians10:2.\"\nTwo passages in the Gospels indicate that the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" did not always indicate submersion. The first is Luke 11:38, which tells how a Pharisee, at whose house Jesus ate, \"was astonished to see that he did not first wash (\"\u1f10\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03c3\u03b8\u03b7\", aorist passive of \"\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9\"\u2014literally, \"was baptized\") before dinner\". This is the passage that Liddell and Scott cites as an instance of the use of ' to mean \"perform ablutions\". Jesus' omission of this action is similar to that of his disciples: \"Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash (') not their hands when they eat bread\". The other Gospel passage pointed to is: \"The Pharisees\u00a0... do not eat unless they wash (\"\", the ordinary word for washing) their hands thoroughly, observing the tradition of the elders; and when they come from the market place, they do not eat unless they wash themselves (literally, \"baptize themselves\"\u2014\"\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03c3\u03c9\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9\", passive or middle voice of \"\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9\")\".\nScholars of various denominations claim that these two passages show that invited guests, or people returning from market, would not be expected to immerse themselves (\"baptize themselves\") totally in water but only to practice the partial immersion of dipping their hands in water or to pour water over them, as is the only form admitted by present Jewish custom. In the second of the two passages, it is actually the hands that are specifically identified as \"washed\", not the entire person, for whom the verb used is \"bapt\u00edzomai\", literally \"be baptized\", \"be immersed\", a fact obscured by English versions that use \"wash\" as a translation of both verbs. Zodhiates concludes that the washing of the hands was done by immersing them. The Liddell\u2013Scott\u2013Jones Greek-English Lexicon (1996) cites the other passage (Luke 11:38) as an instance of the use of the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" to mean \"perform ablutions\", not \"submerge\". References to the cleaning of vessels which use \u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9 also refer to immersion.\nAs already mentioned, the lexicographical work of Zodhiates says that, in the second of these two cases, the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" indicates that, after coming from the market, the Pharisees washed their hands by immersing them in collected water. Balz &amp; Schneider understand the meaning of \u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9, used in place of \u1fe5\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03af\u03c3\u03c9\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9 (sprinkle), to be the same as \u03b2\u03ac\u03c0\u03c4\u03c9, to dip or immerse, a verb used of the partial dipping of a morsel held in the hand into wine or of a finger into spilled blood.\nA possible additional use of the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" to relate to ritual washing is suggested by Peter Leithart (2007) who suggests that Paul's phrase \"Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead?\" relates to Jewish ritual washing. In Jewish Greek the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" \"baptized\" has a wider reference than just \"baptism\" and in Jewish context primarily applies to the masculine noun \"baptism\u00f3s\" \"ritual washing\"\nThe verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" occurs four times in the Septuagint in the context of ritual washing, \"baptism\u00f3s\"; Judith cleansing herself from menstrual impurity, Naaman washing seven times to be cleansed from leprosy, etc.\nAdditionally, in the New Testament only, the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" can also relate to the neuter noun \"b\u00e1ptisma\" \"baptism\" which is a neologism unknown in the Septuagint and other pre-Christian Jewish texts.\nThis broadness in the meaning of \"bapt\u00edzein\" is reflected in English Bibles rendering \"wash\", where Jewish ritual washing is meant: for example Mark 7:4 states that the Pharisees \"except they wash (Greek \"baptize\"), they do not eat\", and \"baptize\" where \"b\u00e1ptisma\", the new Christian rite, is intended.\nDerived nouns.\nTwo nouns derived from the verb \"bapt\u00edz\u014d\" (\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9) appear in the New Testament: the masculine noun \"baptism\u00f3s\" (\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2) and the neuter noun \"b\u00e1ptisma\" (\u03b2\u03ac\u03c0\u03c4\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03b1):\nApparel.\nUntil the Middle Ages, most baptisms were performed with the candidates naked\u2014as is evidenced by most of the early portrayals of baptism (some of which are shown in this article), and the early Church Fathers and other Christian writers. Deaconesses helped female candidates for reasons of modesty.\nTypical of these is Cyril of Jerusalem who wrote \"On the Mysteries of Baptism\" in the 4th century (c. 350\u00a0AD):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do you not know, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into His death?\u00a0... for you are not under the Law, but under grace.\n1. Therefore, I shall necessarily lay before you the sequel of yesterday's Lecture, that you may learn of what those things, which were done by you in the inner chamber, were symbolic.\n2. As soon, then, as you entered, you put off your tunic; and this was an image of putting off the old man with his deeds. Having stripped yourselves, you were naked; in this also imitating Christ, who was stripped naked on the Cross, and by His nakedness put off from Himself the principalities and powers, and openly triumphed over them on the tree. For since the adverse powers made their lair in your members, you may no longer wear that old garment; I do not at all mean this visible one, but the old man, which waxes corrupt in the lusts of deceit. May the soul which has once put him off, never again put him on, but say with the Spouse of Christ in the Song of Songs, I have put off my garment, how shall I put it on? O wondrous thing! You were naked in the sight of all, and were not ashamed; for truly ye bore the likeness of the first-formed Adam, who was naked in the garden, and was not ashamed.\n3. Then, when you were stripped, you were anointed with exorcised oil, from the very hairs of your head to your feet, and were made partakers of the good olive-tree, Jesus Christ.\n4. After these things, you were led to the holy pool of Divine Baptism, as Christ was carried from the Cross to the Sepulchre which is before our eyes. And each of you was asked, whether he believed in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and you made that saving confession, and descended three times into the water, and ascended again; here also hinting by a symbol at the three days burial of Christ\u00a0... And at the self-same moment you were both dying and being born;\u2014\u200a\nThe symbolism is threefold:\n1. Baptism is considered to be a form of rebirth\u2014\"by water and the Spirit\"\u2014the nakedness of baptism (the second birth) paralleled the condition of one's original birth. For example, John Chrysostom calls the baptism \"\u03bb\u03bf\u03c7\u03b5\u03af\u03b1\u03bd\", i.e., giving birth, and \"new way of creation\u00a0... from water and Spirit\" (\"to John\" speech 25,2), and later elaborates:\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For nothing perceivable was handed over to us by Jesus; but with perceivable things, all of them however conceivable. This is also the way with the baptism; the gift of the water is done with a perceivable thing, but the things being conducted, i.e., the rebirth and renovation, are conceivable. For, if you were without a body, He would hand over these bodiless gifts as naked [gifts] to you. But because the soul is closely linked to the body, He hands over the perceivable ones to you with conceivable things. (Chrysostom to Matthew, speech 82, 4, c. 390\u00a0A.D.)\n2. The removal of clothing represented the \"image of putting off the old man with his deeds\" (as per Cyril, above), so the stripping of the body before for baptism represented taking off the trappings of sinful self, so that the \"new man\", which is given by Jesus, can be put on.\n3. As Cyril again asserts above, as Adam and Eve in scripture were naked, innocent and unashamed in the Garden of Eden, nakedness during baptism was seen as a renewal of that innocence and state of original sinlessness. Other parallels can also be drawn, such as between the exposed condition of Christ during His crucifixion, and the crucifixion of the \"old man\" of the repentant sinner in preparation for baptism.\nChanging customs and concerns regarding modesty probably contributed to the practice of permitting or requiring the baptismal candidate to either retain their undergarments (as in many Renaissance paintings of baptism such as those by da Vinci, Tintoretto, Van Scorel, Masaccio, de Wit and others) or to wear, as is almost universally the practice today, baptismal robes. These robes are most often white, symbolizing purity. Some groups today allow any suitable clothes to be worn, such as trousers and a T-shirt\u2014practical considerations include how easily the clothes will dry (denim is discouraged), and whether they will become see-through when wet.\nIn certain Christian denominations, the individual being baptized receives a cross necklace that is worn for the rest of their life as a \"sign of the triumph of Christ over death and our belonging to Christ\" (though it is replaced with a new cross pendant if lost or broken). This practice of baptized Christians wearing a cross necklace at all times is derived from Canon 73 and Canon 82 of the Sixth Ecumenical Council (Synod) of Constantinople, which declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nMeaning and effects.\nThere are differences in views about the effect of baptism for a Christian. Catholics, Orthodox, and most mainline Protestant groups assert baptism is a requirement for salvation and a sacrament, and speak of \"baptismal regeneration\". Its importance is related to their interpretation of the meaning of the \"Mystical Body of Christ\" as found in the New Testament. This view is shared by the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox denominations, and by churches formed early during the Protestant Reformation such as Lutheran and Anglican. For example, Martin Luther said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To put it most simply, the power, effect, benefit, fruit, and purpose of Baptism is to save. No one is baptized in order to become a prince, but as the words say, to \"be saved\". To be saved, we know, is nothing else than to be delivered from sin, death, and the devil and to enter into the kingdom of Christ and live with him forever.\u2014\u200a\nThe Churches of Christ,\" Jehovah's Witnesses, Christadelphians, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints espouse baptism as necessary for salvation.\nFor Catholics, baptism by water is a sacrament of initiation into the life of the children of God (\"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", 1212\u201313). It configures the person to Christ (CCC 1272), and obliges the Christian to share in the church's apostolic and missionary activity (CCC 1270). The Catholic holds that there are three types of baptism by which one can be saved: sacramental baptism (with water), baptism of desire (explicit or implicit desire to be part of the church founded by Jesus Christ), and baptism of blood (martyrdom). In his encyclical \"Mystici corporis Christi\" of June 29, 1943, Pope Pius XII spoke of baptism and profession of the true faith as what makes members of the one true church, which is the body of Jesus Christ himself, as God the Holy Spirit has taught through the Apostle Paul:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;:18\u00a0... Through the waters of Baptism those who are born into this world dead in sin are not only born again and made members of the Church, but being stamped with a spiritual seal they become able and fit to receive the other Sacraments.\u00a0...\n22 Actually only those are to be included as members of the Church who have been baptized and profess the true faith, and who have not been so unfortunate as to separate themselves from the unity of the Body, or been excluded by legitimate authority for grave faults committed. 'For in one spirit' says the Apostle, 'were we all baptized into one Body, whether Jews or Gentiles, whether bond or free.' As therefore in the true Christian community there is only one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, and one Baptism, so there can be only one faith. And therefore if a man refuse to hear the Church let him be considered\u2014so the Lord commands\u2014as a heathen and a publican. It follows that those who are divided in faith or government cannot be living in the unity of such a Body, nor can they be living the life of its one Divine Spirit.\u2014\u200a\nBy contrast, Anabaptist and Evangelical Protestants recognize baptism as an outward sign of an inward reality following on an individual believer's experience of forgiving grace. Reformed and Methodist Protestants maintain a link between baptism and regeneration, but believe that it is not automatic or mechanical, and that regeneration may occur at a different time than baptism. Churches of Christ teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God, and that God \"by the merits of Christ's blood, cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen of God's kingdom. Baptism is not a human work; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do.\" Thus, they see baptism as a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work; it \"is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God\".\nChristian traditions.\nThe liturgy of baptism for Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, Lutherans, Anglicans, and Methodists makes clear reference to baptism as not only a symbolic burial and resurrection, but an actual supernatural transformation, one that draws parallels to the experience of Noah and the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea divided by Moses. Thus, baptism is literally and symbolically not only cleansing, but also dying and rising again with Christ. Catholics believe baptism is necessary to cleanse the taint of original sin, and so commonly baptize infants.\nThe Eastern Churches (Eastern Orthodox Church and Oriental Orthodoxy) also baptize infants on the basis of texts, such as Matthew 19:14, which are interpreted as supporting full church membership for children. In these denominations, baptism is immediately followed by Chrismation and Communion at the next Divine Liturgy, regardless of age. Orthodox likewise believe that baptism removes what they call the ancestral sin of Adam. Anglicans believe that baptism is also the entry into the church. Most Methodists and Anglicans agree that it also cleanses the taint of what in the West is called original sin, in the East ancestral sin.\nEastern Orthodox Christians usually practice complete threefold immersion as both a symbol of death and rebirth into Christ, and as a washing away of sin. Latin Church Catholics generally baptize by affusion (pouring); Eastern Catholics usually by submersion, or at least partial immersion. However, submersion is gaining in popularity within the Latin Church. In newer church sanctuaries, the baptismal font may be designed to expressly allow for baptism by immersion. Anglicans baptize by immersion or affusion.\nAccording to evidence which can be traced back to about the year 200, sponsors or godparents are present at baptism and vow to uphold the Christian education and life of the baptized.\nBaptists argue that the Greek word originally meant \"to immerse\". They interpret some Biblical passages concerning baptism as requiring submersion of the body in water. They also state that only submersion reflects the symbolic significance of being \"buried\" and \"raised\" with Christ. Baptist Churches baptize in the name of the Trinity\u2014the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. However, they do not believe that baptism is necessary for salvation; but rather that it is an act of Christian obedience.\nSome \"Full Gospel\" charismatic churches such as Oneness Pentecostals baptize only in the name of Jesus Christ, citing Peter's preaching baptism in the name of Jesus as their authority.\nEcumenical statements.\nIn 1982 the World Council of Churches published the ecumenical paper \"Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry\". The preface of the document states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Those who know how widely the churches have differed in doctrine and practice on baptism, Eucharist and ministry, will appreciate the importance of the large measure of agreement registered here. Virtually all the confessional traditions are included in the Commission's membership. That theologians of such widely different denominations should be able to speak so harmoniously about baptism, Eucharist and ministry is unprecedented in the modern ecumenical movement. Particularly noteworthy is the fact that the Commission also includes among its full members theologians of the Catholic and other churches which do not belong to the World Council of Churches itself.\u2014\u200a\nA 1997 document, \"Becoming a Christian: The Ecumenical Implications of Our Common Baptism\", gave the views of a commission of experts brought together under the aegis of the World Council of Churches. It states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0according to Acts 2:38, baptisms follow from Peter's preaching baptism in the name of Jesus and lead those baptized to the receiving of Christ's Spirit, the Holy Ghost, and life in the community: \"They devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching and fellowship, to the breaking of bread and the prayers\" as well as to the distribution of goods to those in need.\nThose who heard, who were baptized and entered the community's life, were already made witnesses of and partakers in the promises of God for the last days: the forgiveness of sins through baptism in the name of Jesus and the outpouring of the Holy Ghost on all flesh. Similarly, in what may well be a baptismal pattern, 1 Peter testifies that proclamation of the resurrection of Jesus Christ and teaching about new life lead to purification and new birth. This, in turn, is followed by eating and drinking God's food, by participation in the life of the community\u2014the royal priesthood, the new temple, the people of God\u2014and by further moral formation. At the beginning of 1 Peter the writer sets this baptism in the context of obedience to Christ and sanctification by the Spirit. So baptism into Christ is seen as baptism into the Spirit. In the fourth gospel Jesus' discourse with Nicodemus indicates that birth by water and Spirit becomes the gracious means of entry into the place where God rules.\nValidity considerations by some churches.\nThe vast majority of Christian denominations believe theologically that baptism is a sacrament, that has actual spiritual, holy and salvific effects. Certain key criteria must be complied with for it to be valid, i.e., to actually have those effects. If these key criteria are met, violation of some rules regarding baptism, such as varying the authorized rite for the ceremony, renders the baptism illicit (contrary to the church's laws) but still valid.\nOne of the criteria for validity is use of the correct form of words. The Catholic Church teaches that the use of the verb \"to baptize\" is essential. Catholics of the Latin Church, Anglicans and Methodists use the form \"I baptize you in the name of\u00a0...\". The passive voice is used by Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Catholics, the form being \"The Servant of God is baptized in the name of\u00a0...\".\nUse of the Trinitarian formula (\"in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit\") is also considered essential; thus these churches do not accept as valid baptisms of non-Trinitarian churches such as Oneness Pentecostals.\nAnother essential condition is use of water. A baptism in which some liquid that would not usually be called water, such as wine, milk, soup or fruit juice, was used would not be considered valid.\nAnother requirement is that the celebrant intends to perform baptism. This requirement entails the intention \"to do what the Church does\", not necessarily to have Christian faith, since it is not the person baptizing, but the Holy Spirit working through the sacrament, who produces the effects of the sacrament. Doubt about the faith of the baptizer is thus no ground for doubt about the validity of the baptism.\nSome conditions expressly do not affect validity\u2014for example, whether submersion, immersion, affusion (pouring) or aspersion (sprinkling) is used. However, if water is sprinkled, there is a danger that the water may not touch the skin of the unbaptized. As has been stated, \"it is not sufficient for the water to merely touch the candidate; it must also flow, otherwise there would seem to be no real ablution. At best, such a baptism would be considered doubtful. If the water touches only the hair, the sacrament has probably been validly conferred, though in practice the safer course must be followed. If only the clothes of the person have received the aspersion, the baptism is undoubtedly void.\" For many communions, validity is not affected if a single submersion or pouring is performed rather than a triple, but in Orthodoxy this is controversial.\nAccording to the Catholic Church, baptism imparts an indelible \"seal\" upon the soul of the baptized and therefore a person who has already been baptized cannot be validly baptized again. This teaching was affirmed against the Donatists who practiced rebaptism. The grace received in baptism is believed to operate \"ex opere operato\" and is therefore considered valid even if administered in heretical or schismatic groups.\nRecognition by other denominations.\nThe Catholic, Orthodox, Lutheran, Anglican, Presbyterian, and Methodist Churches accept baptism performed by other denominations within this group as valid, subject to certain conditions, including the use of the Trinitarian formula. It is only possible to be baptized once, so people with valid baptisms from other denominations may not be baptized again upon conversion or transfer. For Catholics, this is affirmed in the Canon Law 864, in which it is written that \"[e]very person not yet baptized and only such a person is capable of baptism.\" Such people are accepted upon making a profession of faith, and if they have not yet validly received the sacrament/rite of confirmation or chrismation, by being confirmed. Specifically, \"Methodist theologians argued that since God never abrogated a covenant made and sealed with proper intentionality, rebaptism was never an option, unless the original baptism had been defective by not having been made in the name of the Trinity.\" In some cases, it can be difficult to decide if the original baptism was in fact valid; if there is doubt, conditional baptism is administered, with a formula on the lines of \"If you are not yet baptized, I baptize you\u00a0...\".\nThe Catholic Church ordinarily recognizes as valid the baptisms of Christians of the Eastern Orthodox, Churches of Christ, Congregationalist, Anglican, Lutheran, Old Catholic, Polish National Catholic, Reformed, Baptist, Brethren, Methodist, Presbyterian, Waldensian, and United Protestant denominations; Christians of these traditions are received into the Catholic Church through the sacrament of Confirmation. Some individuals of the Mennonite, Pentecostal and Adventist traditions who wish to be received into the Catholic Church may be required to receive a conditional baptism due to concerns about the validity of the sacraments in those traditions. The Catholic Church has explicitly denied the validity of the baptism conferred in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Reformed Churches recognize as valid, baptisms administered in the Catholic Church, among other churches using the Trinitarian formula.\nPractice in the Eastern Orthodox Church for converts from other communions is not uniform. However, generally, baptisms performed in the name of the Holy Trinity are accepted by the Orthodox Christian Church; Christians of the Oriental Orthodox, Catholic, Lutheran, Old Catholic, Moravian, Anglican, Methodist, Reformed, Presbyterian, Brethren, Assemblies of God, or Baptist traditions can be received into the Eastern Orthodox Church through the sacrament of Chrismation. If a convert has not received the sacrament (mysterion) of baptism, he or she must be baptized in the name of the Holy Trinity before they may enter into communion with the Orthodox Church. If he or she has been baptized in another Christian confession (other than Orthodox Christianity) his or her previous baptism is considered retroactively filled with grace by chrismation or, in rare circumstances, confession of faith alone, as long as the baptism was done in the name of the Holy Trinity (Father, Son and Holy Spirit). The exact procedure is dependent on local canons and is the subject of some controversy.\nOriental Orthodox Churches recognize the validity of baptisms performed within the Eastern Orthodox Communion. Some also recognize baptisms performed by Catholic Churches. Any supposed baptism not performed using the Trinitarian formula is considered invalid.\nIn the eyes of the Catholic Church, all Orthodox Churches, Anglican, and Lutheran Churches, the baptism conferred by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is invalid. An article published together with the official declaration to that effect gave reasons for that judgment, summed up in the following words: \"The Baptism of the Catholic Church and that of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints differ essentially, both for what concerns faith in the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in whose name Baptism is conferred, and for what concerns the relationship to Christ who instituted it.\"\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stresses that baptism must be administered by one having proper authority; consequently, the church does not recognize the baptism of any other church as effective.\nJehovah's Witnesses do not recognise any other baptism occurring after 1914 as valid, as they believe that they are now the one true church of Christ, and that the rest of \"Christendom\" is false religion.\nOfficiant.\nThere is debate among Christian churches as to who can administer baptism. Some claim that the examples given in the New Testament only show apostles and deacons administering baptism. Ancient Christian churches interpret this as indicating that baptism should be performed by the clergy except \"in extremis\", i.e., when the one being baptized is in immediate danger of death. Then anyone may baptize, provided, in the view of the Eastern Orthodox Church, the person who does the baptizing is a member of that church, or, in the view of the Catholic Church, that the person, even if not baptized, intends to do what the church does in administering the rite. Many Protestant churches see no specific prohibition in the biblical examples and permit any believer to baptize another.\nIn the Catholic Church, canon law for the Latin Church lays down that the ordinary minister of baptism is a bishop, priest or deacon, but its administration is one of the functions \"especially entrusted to the parish priest\". If the person to be baptized is at least fourteen years old, that person's baptism is to be referred to the bishop, so that he can decide whether to confer the baptism himself. If no ordinary minister is available, a catechist or some other person whom the local ordinary has appointed for this purpose may licitly do the baptism; indeed in a case of necessity any person (irrespective of that person's religion) who has the requisite intention may confer the baptism By \"a case of necessity\" is meant imminent danger of death because of either illness or an external threat. \"The requisite intention\" is, at the minimum level, the intention \"to do what the Church does\" through the rite of baptism.\nIn the Eastern Catholic Churches, a deacon is not considered an ordinary minister. Administration of the sacrament is reserved to the parish priest or to another priest to whom he or the local hierarch grants permission, a permission that can be presumed if in accordance with canon law. However, \"in case of necessity, baptism can be administered by a deacon or, in his absence or if he is impeded, by another cleric, a member of an institute of consecrated life, or by any other Christian faithful; even by the mother or father, if another person is not available who knows how to baptize.\"\nThe discipline of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy and the Assyrian Church of the East is similar to that of the Eastern Catholic Churches. They require the baptizer, even in cases of necessity, to be of their own faith, on the grounds that a person cannot convey what he himself does not possess, in this case membership in the church. The Latin Catholic Church does not insist on this condition, considering that the effect of the sacrament, such as membership of the church, is not produced by the person who baptizes, but by the Holy Spirit. For the Orthodox, while Baptism \"in extremis\" may be administered by a deacon or any lay-person, if the newly baptized person survives, a priest must still perform the other prayers of the Rite of Baptism, and administer the Mystery of Chrismation.\nThe discipline of Anglicanism and Lutheranism is similar to that of the Latin Catholic Church. For Methodists and many other Protestant denominations, the ordinary minister of baptism is an ordained or appointed minister.\nNewer movements of Protestant Evangelical churches, particularly non-denominational, allow laypeople to baptize.\nIn The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, only a man who has been ordained to the Aaronic priesthood holding the priesthood office of priest or higher office in the Melchizedek priesthood may administer baptism.\nA Jehovah's Witnesses baptism is performed by a \"dedicated male\" adherent. Only in extraordinary circumstances would a \"dedicated\" baptizer be unbaptized (see section \"Jehovah's Witnesses\").\nPractitioners.\nProtestantism.\nAnabaptist.\nEarly Anabaptists were so named because they re-baptized those who they did not recognise as baptized, believing infant baptism to be invalid.\nThe traditional form of Anabaptist baptism was pouring, the form commonly used in Western Christianity in the early 16th century when they emerged. Pouring continues to be normative in Mennonite, Amish and Hutterite traditions of Anabaptist Christianity. The Mennonite Brethren Church, Schwarzenau Brethren and River Brethren denominations of Anabaptist Christianity practice immersion. The Schwarzenau church immerses in the forward position three times, for each person of the Holy Trinity and because \"the Bible says Jesus bowed his head (letting it fall forward) and died. Baptism represents a dying of the old, sinful self.\" Today all modes of baptism (such as pouring and immersion) can be found among Anabaptists.\nConservative Mennonite Anabaptists count baptism to be one of the seven ordinances. In Anabaptist theology, baptism is a part of the process of salvation. For Anabaptists, \"believer's baptism consists of three parts, the Spirit, the water, and the blood\u2014these three witnesses on earth.\" According to Anabaptist theology: (1) In believer's baptism, the Holy Spirit witnesses the candidate entering into a covenant with God. (2) God, in believer's baptism, \"grants a baptized believer the water of baptism as a sign of His covenant with them\u2014that such a one indicates and publicly confesses that he wants to live in true obedience towards God and fellow believers with a blameless life.\" (3) Integral to believer's baptism is the candidate's mission to witness to the world even unto martyrdom, echoing Jesus' words that \"they would be baptized with His baptism, witnessing to the world when their blood was spilled.\"\nBaptist.\nFor the majority of Baptists, Christian baptism is the immersion of a believer in water in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Baptism does not accomplish anything in itself, but is an outward personal sign that the person's sins have already been washed away by the blood of Christ's cross.\nFor a new convert the general practice is that baptism also allows the person to be a registered member of the local Baptist congregation (though some churches have adopted \"new members classes\" as an additional mandatory step for congregational membership).\nRegarding rebaptism the general rules are:\nFor newborns, there is a ceremony called child dedication.\nTennessee antebellum Methodist circuit rider and newspaper publisher William G. Brownlow stated within his 1856 book \"The Great Iron Wheel Examined; or, Its False Spokes Extracted, and an Exhibition of Elder Graves, Its Builder\" that the immersion baptism practiced within the Baptist churches as found within the United States did not extend in a \"regular line of succession...from John the Baptist\u2014but from old Zeke Holliman and his true yoke-fellow, Mr. [Roger] Williams\" as during 1639 Holliman and Williams first immersion baptized each other and then immersion baptized the ten other members of the first Baptist church in British America at Providence, Rhode Island.\nChurches of Christ.\nBaptism in Churches of Christ is performed only by full bodily immersion, based on the Koine Greek verb \"baptizo\" which means to dip, immerse, submerge or plunge. Submersion is seen as more closely conforming to the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus than other modes of baptism. Churches of Christ argue that historically immersion was the mode used in the 1st century, and that pouring and sprinkling later emerged as secondary modes when immersion was not possible. Over time these secondary modes came to replace immersion. Only those mentally capable of belief and repentance are baptized (i.e., infant baptism is not practiced because the New Testament has no precedent for it).\nChurches of Christ have historically had the most conservative position on baptism among the various branches of the Restoration Movement, understanding baptism by immersion to be a necessary part of conversion. The most significant disagreements concerned the extent to which a correct understanding of the role of baptism is necessary for its validity. David Lipscomb insisted that if a believer was baptized out of a desire to obey God, the baptism was valid, even if the individual did not fully understand the role baptism plays in salvation. Austin McGary contended that to be valid, the convert must also understand that baptism is for the forgiveness of sins. McGary's view became the prevailing one in the early 20th century, but the approach advocated by Lipscomb never totally disappeared. As such, the general practice among churches of Christ is to require rebaptism by immersion of converts, even those who were previously baptized by immersion in other churches.\nMore recently, the rise of the International Churches of Christ has caused some to reexamine the issue.\nChurches of Christ consistently teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God, and that God \"by the merits of Christ's blood, cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen of God's kingdom. Baptism is not a human work; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do.\" Baptism is a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work; it \"is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God.\" While Churches of Christ do not describe baptism as a \"sacrament\", their view of it can legitimately be described as \"sacramental\". They see the power of baptism coming from God, who chose to use baptism as a vehicle, rather than from the water or the act itself, and understand baptism to be an integral part of the conversion process, rather than just a symbol of conversion.\nA recent trend is to emphasize the transformational aspect of baptism: instead of describing it as just a legal requirement or sign of something that happened in the past, it is seen as \"the event that places the believer 'into Christ' where God does the ongoing work of transformation.\" There is a minority that downplays the importance of baptism to avoid sectarianism, but the broader trend is to \"reexamine the richness of the biblical teaching of baptism and to reinforce its central and essential place in Christianity.\"\nBecause of the belief that baptism is a necessary part of salvation, some Baptists hold that the Churches of Christ endorse the doctrine of baptismal regeneration. However, members of the Churches of Christ reject this, arguing that since faith and repentance are necessary, and that the cleansing of sins is by the blood of Christ through the grace of God, baptism is not an inherently redeeming ritual. Rather, their inclination is to point to the biblical passage in which Peter, analogizing baptism to Noah's flood, posits that \"likewise baptism doth also now save us\" but parenthetically clarifies that baptism is \"\"not\" the putting away of the filth of the flesh but the \"response of a good conscience\" toward God\" (1 Peter 3:21). One author from the churches of Christ describes the relationship between faith and baptism this way, \"\"Faith\" is the \"reason why\" a person is a child of God; \"baptism\" is the \"time at which\" one is incorporated into Christ and so becomes a child of God\" (italics are in the source). Baptism is understood as a confessional expression of faith and repentance, rather than a \"work\" that earns salvation.\nLutheranism.\nIn Lutheran Christianity, baptism is a sacrament that regenerates the soul. Upon one's baptism, one receives the Holy Spirit and becomes a part of the church. According to Martin Luther's Small Catechism, it is the word and command of God \"in and with the water\" that gives baptism its power, which \"works forgiveness of sins, delivers from death and the devil, and gives eternal salvation to all who believe this, as the words and promises of God declare\". In Lutheran theology, baptism is not viewed as a work that the baptizer performs in obedience to the law, but rather a work of God that is received by faith, which \"clings to the water\".\nMethodism.\nThe Methodist Articles of Religion, with regard to baptism, teach:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhile baptism imparts grace, Methodists teach that a personal acceptance of Jesus Christ (the first work of grace) is essential to one's salvation; during the second work of grace, entire sanctification, a believer is purified of original sin and made holy. As such, in the Methodist tradition, Baptism with the Holy Spirit has referred to the second work of grace, entire sanctification (Christian perfection).\nIn the Methodist Churches, baptism is a sacrament of initiation into the visible Church. Wesleyan covenant theology further teaches that baptism is a sign and a seal of the covenant of grace:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Of this great new-covenant blessing, baptism was therefore eminently the \"sign\"; and it represented \"the \"pouring out\"\" of the Spirit, \"the \"descending\"\" of the Spirit, the \"falling\" of the Spirit \"upon men\", by the mode in which it was administered, the pouring of water from above upon the subjects baptized. As a seal, also, or \"confirming\" sign, baptism answers to circumcision.\nMethodists recognize three modes of baptism as being valid\u2014\"immersion, sprinkling, or pouring\" in the name of the Holy Trinity.\nMoravianism.\nThe Moravian Church teaches that baptism is a sign and a seal, recognizing three modes of baptism as being valid: immersion, aspersion, and affusion.\nReformed Protestantism.\nIn Reformed baptismal theology, baptism is seen as primarily God's offer of union with Christ and all his benefits to the baptized. This offer is believed to be intact even when it is not received in faith by the person baptized. Reformed theologians believe the Holy Spirit brings into effect the promises signified in baptism. Baptism is held by almost the entire Reformed tradition to effect regeneration, even in infants who are incapable of faith, by effecting faith which would come to fruition later. Baptism also initiates one into the visible church and the covenant of grace. Baptism is seen as a replacement of circumcision, which is considered the rite of initiation into the covenant of grace in the Old Testament.\nReformed Christians believe that immersion is not necessary for baptism to be properly performed, but that pouring or sprinkling are acceptable. Only ordained ministers are permitted to administer baptism in Reformed churches, with no allowance for emergency baptism, though baptisms performed by non-ministers are generally considered valid. Reformed churches, while rejecting the baptismal ceremonies of the Catholic church, accept the validity of baptisms performed with them and do not rebaptize.\nUnited Protestants.\nIn United Protestant Churches, such as the United Church of Canada, Church of North India, Church of Pakistan, Church of South India, Protestant Church in the Netherlands, Uniting Church in Australia and United Church of Christ in Japan, baptism is a sacrament.\nCatholicism.\nIn Catholic teaching, baptism is stated to be \"necessary for salvation by actual reception or at least by desire\". Catholic discipline requires the baptism ceremony to be performed by deacons, priests, or bishops, but in an emergency such as danger of death, anyone can licitly baptize. This teaching is based on the Gospel according to John which says that Jesus proclaimed: \"Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.\" It dates back to the teachings and practices of 1st-century Christians, and the connection between salvation and baptism was not, on the whole, an item of major dispute until Huldrych Zwingli denied the necessity of baptism, which he saw as merely a sign granting admission to the Christian community. The Catechism of the Catholic Church states that \"Baptism is necessary for salvation for those to whom the Gospel has been proclaimed and who have had the possibility of asking for this sacrament.\" The Council of Trent also states in the \"Decree Concerning Justification\" from session six that baptism is necessary for salvation. A person who knowingly, willfully and unrepentantly rejects baptism has no hope of salvation. However, if knowledge is absent, \"those also can attain to salvation who through no fault of their own do not know the Gospel of Christ or His Church, yet sincerely seek God and moved by grace strive by their deeds to do His will as it is known to them through the dictates of conscience.\"\nThe Catechism of the Catholic Church also states: \"Since Baptism signifies liberation from sin and from its instigator the devil, one or more exorcisms are pronounced over the candidate\". In the Roman Rite of the baptism of a child, the wording of the prayer of exorcism is: \"Almighty and ever-living God, you sent your only Son into the world to cast out the power of Satan, spirit of evil, to rescue man from the kingdom of darkness and bring him into the splendour of your kingdom of light. We pray for this child: set him (her) free from original sin, make him (her) a temple of your glory, and send your Holy Spirit to dwell with him (her). Through Christ our Lord.\"\nIn the Catholic Church by baptism all sins are forgiven, original sin and all personal sins. Baptism not only purifies from all sins, but also makes the neophyte \"a new creature\", an adopted son of God, who has become a \"partaker of the divine nature\", member of Christ and co-heir with him, and a temple of the Holy Spirit. Given once for all, baptism cannot be repeated: just as a man can be born only once, so he is baptized only once. For this reason the holy Fathers added to the Nicene Creed the words \"We acknowledge one Baptism\". Sanctifying grace, the grace of justification, given by God by baptism, erases the original sin and personal actual sins.\nThe power of Baptism consists in cleansing a man from all his sins as regards both guilt and punishment, for which reason no penance is imposed on those who receive Baptism, no matter how great their sins may have been. And if they were to die immediately after Baptism, they would rise at once to eternal life.\nIn the Latin Church of the Catholic Church a valid baptism requires, according to Canon 758 of the 1917 Code of Canon Law, the baptizer to pronounce the formula \"I baptize you in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit\" while putting the baptized in contact with water. The contact may be immersion, \"affusion\" (pouring), or \"aspersion\" (sprinkling). The formula requires \"name\" to be singular, emphasizing the monotheism of the Trinity. It is claimed that Pope Stephen I, Ambrose and Pope Nicholas I declared that baptisms in the name of \"Jesus\" only as well as in the name of \"Father, Son and Holy Spirit\" were valid. The correct interpretation of their words is disputed. Current canonical law requires the Trinitarian formula and water for validity. The formula requires \"I baptize\" rather than \"we baptize\", as clarified by a responsum of June 24, 2020. In 2022 the Diocese of Phoenix accepted the resignation of a parish priest whose use of \"we baptize\" had invalidated \"thousands of baptisms over more than 20 years\". Note that in the Byzantine Rite the formula is in the passive voice, \"The servant of God N. is baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.\"\nOffspring of practicing Catholic parents are typically baptized as infants. Baptism is part of the Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults, provided for converts from non-Christian backgrounds and others not baptized as infants. Baptism by non-Catholic Christians is valid if the formula and water are present, and so converts from other Christian denominations are not given a Catholic baptism.\nThe church recognizes two equivalents of baptism with water: \"baptism of blood\" and \"baptism of desire\". Baptism of blood is that undergone by unbaptized individuals who are martyred for their faith, while baptism of desire generally applies to catechumens who die before they can be baptized. The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes these two forms:\nThe Church has always held the firm conviction that those who suffer death for the sake of the faith without having received Baptism are baptized by their death for and with Christ. This \"Baptism of blood\", like the desire for Baptism, brings about the fruits of Baptism without being a sacrament.\n\u2014 1258\nFor catechumens who die before their Baptism, their explicit desire to receive it, together with repentance for their sins, and charity, assures them the salvation that they were not able to receive through the sacrament.\n\u2014 1259\nThe Catholic Church holds that those who are ignorant of Christ's Gospel and of the church, but who seek the truth and do God's will as they understand it, may be supposed to have an implicit desire for baptism and can be saved: \"'Since Christ died for all, and since all men are in fact called to one and the same destiny, which is divine, we must hold that the Holy Spirit offers to all the possibility of being made partakers, in a way known to God, of the Paschal mystery.' Every man who is ignorant of the Gospel of Christ and of his Church, but seeks the truth and does the will of God in accordance with his understanding of it, can be saved. It may be supposed that such persons would have desired Baptism explicitly if they had known its necessity.\" As for unbaptized infants, the church is unsure of their fate; \"the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God\".\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nIn Eastern Orthodoxy, baptism is considered a sacrament and mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one, where the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. In Greek and Russian Orthodox traditions, it is taught that through Baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming an official member of the Orthodox Church. During the service, the Orthodox priest blesses the water to be used. The catechumen (the one baptized) is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the \"old man\" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection. Properly a new name is given, which becomes the person's name.\nBabies of Orthodox families are normally baptized shortly after birth. Older converts to Orthodoxy are usually rebaptized if the need arises. Those who choose to convert from a different religion to Eastern Orthodoxy typically undergo Chrismation, known as confirmation in the Catholic Church.\nProperly and generally, the Mystery of Baptism is administered by bishops and other priests; however, in emergencies any Orthodox Christian can baptize.278 In such cases, should the person survive the emergency, it is likely that the person will be properly baptized by a priest at some later date. This is not considered to be a second baptism, nor is it imagined that the person is not already Orthodox, but rather it is a fulfillment of the proper form.\nThe service of baptism in Greek Orthodox (and other Eastern Orthodox) churches has remained largely unchanged for over 1500 years. This fact is witnessed to by Cyril of Jerusalem (d. 386), who, in his \"Discourse on the Sacrament of Baptism\", describes the service in much the same way as is currently in use.\nOther groups.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses believe that baptism should be performed by complete immersion (submersion) in water and only when an individual is old enough to understand its significance. They believe that water baptism is an outward symbol that a person has made an unconditional dedication through Jesus Christ to do the will of God. Only after baptism is a person considered a full-fledged Witness and an official member of the Christian Congregation. They consider baptism to constitute ordination as a minister.\nProspective candidates for baptism must express their desire to be baptized well in advance of a planned baptismal event, to allow for congregation elders to assess their suitability (regarding true repentance and conversion). Elders approve candidates for baptism if the candidates are considered to understand what is expected of members of the religion and to demonstrate sincere dedication to the faith.\nMost baptisms among Jehovah's Witnesses are performed at scheduled assemblies and conventions by elders and ministerial servants, in special pools, or sometimes oceans, rivers, or lakes, depending on circumstances, and rarely occur at local Kingdom Halls. Prior to baptism, at the conclusion of a pre-baptism talk, candidates must affirm two questions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# On the basis of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ, have you repented of your sins and dedicated yourself to Jehovah to do his will?\nOnly baptized males (elders or ministerial servants) may baptize new members. Baptizers and candidates wear swimsuits or other informal clothing for baptism, but are directed to avoid clothing that is considered undignified or too revealing. Generally, candidates are individually immersed by a single baptizer, unless a candidate has special circumstances such as a physical disability. In circumstances of extended isolation, a qualified candidate's dedication and stated intention to become baptized may serve to identify him as a member of Jehovah's Witnesses, even if immersion itself must be delayed. In rare instances, unbaptized males who had stated such an intention have reciprocally baptized each other, with both baptisms accepted as valid. Individuals who had been baptized in the 1930s and 1940s by female Witnesses due to extenuating circumstances, such as in concentration camps, were later re-baptized but still recognized their original baptism dates.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nIn The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), baptism is recognized as the first of several ordinances (rituals) of the gospel. In Mormonism, baptism has the main purpose of remitting the sins of the participant. It is followed by confirmation, which inducts the person into membership in the church and constitutes a baptism with the Holy Spirit. Latter-day Saints believe that baptism must be by full immersion, and by a precise ritualized ordinance: if some part of the participant is not fully immersed, or the ordinance was not recited verbatim, the ritual must be repeated. It typically occurs in a baptismal font.\nIn addition, members of the LDS Church do not believe a baptism is valid unless it is performed by a Latter-day Saint one who has proper authority (a priest or elder). Authority is passed down through a form of apostolic succession. All new converts to the faith must be baptized or re-baptized. Baptism is seen as symbolic both of Jesus' death, burial and resurrection and is also symbolic of the baptized individual discarding their \"natural\" self and donning a new identity as a disciple of Jesus.\nAccording to Latter-day Saint theology, faith and repentance are prerequisites to baptism. The ritual does not cleanse the participant of original sin, as Latter-day Saints do not believe the doctrine of original sin. Mormonism rejects infant baptism and baptism must occur after the age of accountability, defined in Latter-day Saint scripture as eight years old.\nLatter-day Saint theology also teaches baptism for the dead in which deceased ancestors are baptized vicariously by the living, and believe that their practice is what Paul wrote of in Corinthians 15:29. This occurs in Latter-day Saint temples.\nFreemasonry.\nDue to tensions between the Catholic Church and Freemasons in France in the aftermath of the French Revolution, French Freemasons developed rituals to replace those of the Church, including baptism. Chr\u00e9tien-Guillaume Riebesthal's \"Rituel Ma\u00e7onnique pour tous les Rites\" (Masonic Ritual for All Rites), published in Strasbourg in 1826, includes one such baptismal rite.https:// Lodges in Louisiana and Wisconsin performed baptism ceremonies in 1859, though they were widely condemned by their Grand Lodges.\nIn 1865, Albert Pike publicly performed a ceremony of Masonic baptism in New York City. The ceremony was greeted with skepticism by many American Masons including Albert Mackey. A ceremony for Masonic baptism was published by Charles T. McClenechan in 1884.\nNonpractitioners.\nQuakers.\nQuakers (members of the Religious Society of Friends) do not believe in the baptism of either children or adults with water, rejecting all forms of outward sacraments in their religious life. Robert Barclay's \"Apology for the True Christian Divinity\" (a historic explanation of Quaker theology from the 17th century), explains Quakers' opposition to baptism with water thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Here John mentions two manners of baptizings and two different baptisms, the one with water, and the other with the Spirit, the one whereof he was the minister of, the other whereof Christ was the minister of: and such as were baptized with the first were not therefore baptized with the second: \"I indeed baptize you, but he shall baptize you.\" Though in the present time they were baptized with the baptism of water, yet they were not as yet, but were to be, baptized with the baptism of Christ.\u2014\u200a\nBarclay argued that water baptism was only something that happened until the time of Christ, but that now, people are baptized inwardly by the spirit of Christ, and hence there is no need for the external sacrament of water baptism, which Quakers argue is meaningless.\nSalvation Army.\nThe Salvation Army does not practice water baptism, or indeed other outward sacraments. William Booth and Catherine Booth, the founders of the Salvation Army, believed that many Christians had come to rely on the outward signs of spiritual grace rather than on grace itself. They believed what was important was spiritual grace itself. However, although the Salvation Army does not practice baptism, they are not opposed to baptism within other Christian denominations.\nHyperdispensationalism.\nThere are some Christians termed \"Hyperdispensationalists\" (Mid-Acts dispensationalism) who accept only Paul's Epistles as directly applicable for the church today. They do not accept water baptism as a practice for the church since Paul who was God's apostle to the nations was not sent to baptize. Ultradispensationalists (Acts 28 dispensationalism) who do not accept the practice of the Lord's supper, do not practice baptism because these are not found in the Prison Epistles. Both sects believe water baptism was a valid practice for covenant Israel. Hyperdispensationalists also teach that Peter's gospel message was not the same as Paul's. Hyperdispensationalists assert:\nWater baptism found early in the Book of Acts is, according to this view, now supplanted by the one baptism foretold by John the Baptist. Others make a distinction between John's prophesied baptism by Christ with the Holy Spirit and the Holy Spirit's baptism of the believer into the body of Christ; the latter being the one baptism for today. The one baptism for today, it is asserted, is the \"baptism of the Holy Spirit\" of the believer into the Body of Christ church.\nMany in this group also argue that John's promised baptism by fire is pending, referring to the destruction of the world by fire.\nOther Hyperdispensationalists believe that baptism was necessary until mid-Acts.\nDebaptism.\nMost Christian churches see baptism as a once-in-a-lifetime event that can be neither repeated nor undone. They hold that those who have been baptized remain baptized, even if they renounce the Christian faith by adopting a non-Christian religion or by rejecting religion entirely. But some other organizations and individuals are practicing debaptism.\nComparative summary.\nA comparative summary of the practice of baptism throughout various Christian denominations is given below. (This section does not give a complete listing of denominations, and therefore, it only mentions a fraction of the churches practicing \"believer's baptism\".)\nBaptism of objects.\nThe word \"baptism\" or \"christening\" is sometimes used to describe the naming or inauguration of certain objects for use.\nBoats and ships.\n\"Baptism of Ships\": since at least the time of the Crusades, rituals have contained a blessing for ships. The priest asks God to bless the vessel and protect those who sail on it. The ship is usually sprinkled with holy water.\nChurch bells.\nThe name \"Baptism of Bells\" has been given to the blessing of (musical, especially church) bells, at least in France, since the 11th century. It is derived from the washing of the bell with holy water by the bishop, before he anoints it with the oil of the infirm without and with chrism within; a fuming censer is placed under it and the bishop prays that these sacramentals of the church may, at the sound of the bell, put the demons to flight, protect from storms, and call the faithful to prayer.\nDolls.\n\"Baptism of Dolls\": the custom of 'dolly dunking' was once a common practice in parts of the United Kingdom, particularly in Cornwall where it has been revived in recent years.\nOther initiation ceremonies.\nMany cultures practice or have practiced initiation rites, with or without the use of water, including the ancient Egyptian, the Hebraic/Jewish, the Babylonian, the Mayan, and the Norse cultures. The modern Japanese practice of Miyamairi is such a ceremony that does not use water. In some, such evidence may be archaeological and descriptive in nature, rather than a modern practice.\nMystery religion initiation rites.\nMany scholars have drawn parallels between rites from mystery religions and baptism in Christianity. Apuleius, a 2nd-century Roman writer, described an initiation into the mysteries of Isis. The initiation was preceded by a normal bathing in the public baths and a ceremonial sprinkling by the priest of Isis, after which the candidate was given secret instructions in the temple of the goddess. The candidate then fasted for ten days from meat and wine, after which he was dressed in linen and led at night into the innermost part of the sanctuary, where the actual initiation took place, the details of which were secret. On the next two days, dressed in the robes of his consecration, he participated in feasting. Apuleius describes also an initiation into the cult of Osiris and yet a third initiation, of the same pattern as the initiation into the cult of Isis, without mention of a preliminary bathing. The water-less initiations of Lucius, the character in Apuleius's story who had been turned into an ass and changed back by Isis into human form, into the successive degrees of the rites of the goddess was accomplished only after a significant period of study to demonstrate his loyalty and trustworthiness, akin to catechumenal practices preceding baptism in Christianity.\nJan Bremmer has written on the putative connection between rites from mystery religions and baptism:\nThere are thus some verbal parallels between early Christianity and the Mysteries, but the situation is rather different as regards early Christian ritual practice. Much ink was spilled around 1900 arguing that the rituals of baptism and of the Last Supper derived from the ancient Mysteries, but Nock and others after him have easily shown that these attempts grossly misinterpreted the sources. Baptism is clearly rooted in Jewish purificatory rituals, and cult meals are so widespread in antiquity that any specific derivation is arbitrary. It is truly surprising to see how long the attempts to find some pagan background to these two Christian sacraments have persevered. Secularizing ideologies clearly played an important part in these interpretations but, nevertheless, they have helped to clarify the relations between nascent Christianity and its surroundings.\nThus the practice is derivative, whether from Judaism, the Mysteries or a combination (see the reference to Hellenistic Judaism in the Etymology section.)\nGnostic Catholicism and Thelema.\nThe Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica, or Gnostic Catholic Church (the ecclesiastical arm of Ordo Templi Orientis), offers its Rite of Baptism to any person at least 11\u00a0years old.\nMandaean baptism.\nMandaeans revere John the Baptist and practice frequent baptism (\"masbuta\") as a ritual of purification, not of initiation. They are possibly the earliest people to practice baptism. Mandaeans undergo baptism on Sundays (\"Habshaba\"), wearing a white sacral robe (\"rasta\"). Baptism for Mandaeans consists of a triple full immersion in water, a triple \"signing\" of the forehead with water and a triple drinking of water. The priest (\"Rabbi\") then removes a ring made of myrtle worn by the baptized and places it on their forehead. This is then followed by a handshake (\"kushta\", \"hand of truth\") with the priest. The final blessing involves the priest laying his right hand on the baptized person's head. \"Living water\" (fresh, natural, flowing water) is a requirement for baptism, therefore can only take place in rivers. All rivers are named Jordan (\"yardena\") and are believed to be nourished by the \"World of Light\". By the river bank, a Mandaean's forehead is anointed with sesame oil (\"misha\") and partakes in a communion of bread (\"pihta\") and water. Baptism for Mandaeans allows for salvation by connecting with the \"World of Light\" and for forgiveness of sins.\nSethian baptism.\nThe Sethian baptismal rite is known as the Five Seals, in which the initiate is immersed five times in running water.\nYazidi baptism.\nYazidi baptism is called \"mor kirin\" (literally: \"to seal\"). Traditionally, Yazidi children are baptized at birth with water from the \"Kaniya Sip\u00ee\" (\"White Spring\") at Lalish. It essentially consists of pouring holy water from the spring on the child's head three times.\nIslamic practice of wudu.\nMany Islamic scholars such as Shaikh Bawa Muhaiyaddeen have compared the Islamic practice of wudu to a baptism. Wudu is a practice that Muslims practice to go from ritual impurity to ritual purity. Ritual purity is required for Salah (praying) and also to hold a physical copy of the Qur\u2019an, and so wudu is often done before salah. However, it is permissible to pray more than one salah without repeating wudu, as long as ritual purity is not broken, for example by using the bathroom.\nAnother similar purification ritual is ghusl, which takes someone from major ritual impurity (janabah) to lesser ritual impurity, which is then purified by wudu. If one is in a state of janabah, both ghusl and wudu are required if one wants to pray.\nAlthough original sin does not exist in Islam, wudu is widely regarded to remove sins. In a Sahih hadith, Muhammad says \"Whenever a man performs his ablution intending to pray and he washes his hands, the sins of his hands fall down with the first drop. When he rinses his mouth and nose, the sins of his tongue and lips fall down with the first drop. When he washes his face, the sins of his hearing and sight fall down with the first drop. When he washes his arms to his elbows and his feet to his ankles, he is purified from every sin and fault like the day he was born from his mother. If he stands for prayer, Allah will raise his status by a degree. If he sits, he will sit in peace.\"\nBaptism in the Yadav community.\nPeople of the Yadav community of Hindu religion follow baptism, where it is called Karah Pujan. In this, the person who is being baptized is bathed in boiling Milk. The newborn baby is also included in this process, in which he is bathed with boiling milk and then he is garlanded with flowers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4300", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4300", "title": "Bocce", "text": "Ball sport\n (, or , ), sometimes anglicized as bocce ball, bocci, or boccie, is a ball sport belonging to the boules family of games. Developed into its present form in Italy, it is closely related to English bowls and French , with a common ancestry from ancient games played in the Roman Empire. Bocce is played around Western, Southern, and Southeastern Europe, as well as in overseas areas with historical Italian immigrant population, including Australia, North and South America, principally Argentina and the southern Brazilian states of Paran\u00e1, Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina. Initially only played by Italian immigrants, the game has slowly gained popularity among descendant generations and outside the Italian diaspora.\nHistory.\nHaving developed from games played in the Roman Empire, bocce developed into its present form in Italy, where it is called ', the plural of the Italian word ' which means 'bowl' in the general sporting sense. It spread around Europe and also in regions to which Italians have migrated. The first form of regulation was described in the book \"Gioco delle bocchie\" by Raffaele Bisteghi in 1753. In South America it is known as ', or \"bolas criollas\" ('Criollo balls') in Venezuela, and ' in southern Brazil. The accessibility of bocce to people of all ages and abilities has seen it grow in popularity among Special Olympics programmes globally, and it is now the third most-played sport among Special Olympics athletes.\nGeographical spread.\nThe sport is also very popular on the eastern side of the Adriatic, especially in Croatia, Serbia, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the sport is known in Croatian as ' ('playing '') or ' (colloquially also '). In Slovenia the sport is known as ' or colloquially 'playing '', or ' (from Italian ' and Venetian \"\", meaning 'balls'). There are numerous bocce leagues in the United States (USA).\nBocce was brought to Venezuela between 1498 and 1510 by a Spanish friar or by Priest Sojo, great-uncle of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar. The Venezuelan modality became popular during the 1930s and is played in several Caribbean islands, including Aruba, Cura\u00e7ao and Bonaire. In 1946, bocce was included in the first Venezuelan National Sports Games, and in 1956 the National Venezuelan Federation of Creole Bocce was founded.\nBocce is also played in Brazil. The sport was brought between 1880 and 1930 by the Italian families of Baggio, Zanetti, Tedesco, Merlin, Pazello, Bolisenha, Ricetti, Fressatos and Dorigos. The sport became popular on Curitiba and in 1952 the families created the bocci club Sociedade 25 de Maio. The city has also developed their own modality of bocce, \"bocha cl\u00e1ssico\" (classic bocce). On 25 May, the city celebrates the bocce day.\nBrazil is also notorious in the paralympic bocce modality. During the 2012 Summer Paralympics, the country conquered three gold medals and one bronze medal in the BC2 and BC4 categories. Brazil hosted the paralympic bocce world championship twice. On Rio 2016, Brazil conquered a gold medal and a silver medal in the BC3 and BC4 categories. On 2022, the World Championship was hosted again on Rio de Janeiro, and Brazil conquered one gold, three silver and three bronze medals. In 2025, Curitiba hosted the Youth Bocce World Cup.\nBocce culture in Valdese, North Carolina.\nIn Valdese, North Carolina, the sport was brought by Waldensian immigrants in 1893 and remains a cornerstone of local heritage. Le Phare des Alpes (LPDA)\u2014a mutual aid society founded in 1909\u2014operates a modern bocce complex featuring three covered, lighted clay courts, with tournament scoring managed by an electronic web-based system. The society hosts an annual regional bocce tournament in August as part of the Waldensian Festival, as well as an annual \u201cState Bocce Tournament\u201d each September, drawing teams from across North Carolina. The LPDA bocce courts are regarded by enthusiasts as \u201cthe finest bocce complex in North Carolina,\u201d and Valdese is playfully referred to as \u201cthe bocce capital of the world.\u201d\nRules and play.\nBocce is traditionally played on a natural soil or asphalt court up to in length and wide. While the court walls are traditionally made of wood or stone, many social leagues and Special Olympics programs now use inflatable 'Packabocce' PVC courts due to their portability and ease of storage. Bocce balls can be made of wood (traditional), metal, baked clay, or various kinds of plastic. Unlike lawn bowls, bocce balls are spherical and have no inbuilt bias.\nA game can be conducted between two players, or two teams of two, three, or four. A match is started by a randomly chosen side being given the opportunity to throw a smaller ball, the jack (called a ' ('little bocce') or ' ('bullet' or 'little ball') in Italian, depending on local custom), from one end of the court into a zone in length, ending from the far end of the court. If the first team misses twice, the other team is awarded the opportunity to place the jack anywhere they choose within the prescribed zone. Casual play is common in reasonably flat areas of parks and yards lacking a bocce court, but players should agree to the minimum and maximum distance the jack may be thrown before play begins.\nThe side that first attempted to place the jack is given the opportunity to bowl first. Once the first bowl has taken place, the other side has the opportunity to bowl. From then on, the side which does \"not\" have the ball closest to the jack has a chance to bowl, up until one side or the other has used their four balls. At that point, the other side bowls its remaining balls. The object of the game is for a team to get as many of its balls as possible closer to the target ball (jack, boccino, pallino) than the opposing team. The team with the closest ball to the jack is the only team that can score points in any frame. The scoring team receives one point for each of their balls that is closer to the jack than the closest ball of the other team. The length of a game varies by region but is typically from 7 to 13 points.\nPlayers are permitted to throw the ball in the air using an underarm action only. This is generally used to knock either the jack or another ball away to attain a more favorable position. Tactics can get quite complex when players have sufficient control over the ball to throw or roll it accurately.\nVariants.\nPunto raffa volo.\nAlso known as PRV, punto raffa volo is the main international competition form of bocce. The name refers to the three legal types of throws in the game: punto, or lagging the ball toward the pallino; raffa, shooting a ball with an aerial throw that hits the ground and rolls toward the target; and volo, hitting a ball on the fly or a short hop. The rules of PRV are strict and reward precision and accuracy. Rules violations allow the opposing team to keep the result or reset the game to its set-up before the rules violation (and pulling the foul ball off the court). This reset is accomplished by marking the ground with chalk to indicate the placement of each ball and the pallino.\nRules include (but are not limited to):\nOpen bocce.\nPlayed mainly in the U.S. and Canada, open bocce features a basic set of rules as compared with PRV. In open bocce, there are fewer limitations on lagging (side walls are live, balls can be moved any distance), and missed targets while shooting are allowed. Some clubs play with the back wall live, while other clubs play with the back wall as dead if a ball hits the back wall on the fly without striking a ball or the pallino. Other variations include angled corners and gutters at the end of the court rather than a back wall.\nBocce volo.\nA variation called ' uses a metal ball, which is thrown overhand (palm down), after a run-up to the throwing line. In that latter respect, it is similar to the French boules game ' also known as ' which is internationally called sport-boules. Another French variant of the game is called ', and (lacking the run-up) is more similar in some respects to traditional \".\nBoccia.\nAnother development, for persons with disabilities, is called \". It is a shorter-range game, played with leather balls on an indoor, smooth surface. Boccia was first introduced to the Paralympics at the 1984 New York/Stoke Mandeville Summer Games and is one of the only two Paralympic sports that do not have an Olympic counterpart (the other being goalball).\nClassic bocce.\nA Brazilian variety of bocce where the ball is rolled on the floor instead of thrown.\nCreole bocce.\nA Venezuelan variety of bocce, where 4 red balls, 4 green balls and one 5 cm ball (called Mingo) are thrown at once in the field.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4301", "revid": "140244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4301", "title": "Beatmatching", "text": "DJing technique of manipulating an adjacent track to match the tempo of the current track\nBeatmatching or pitch cue is a DJ technique of pitch shifting or time stretching an upcoming track to match its tempo to that of the currently playing track, and to adjust them such that the beats (and, usually, the bars) are synchronized\u2014e.g. the kicks and snares in two house records hit at the same time when both records are played simultaneously. Beatmatching is a component of beatmixing which employs beatmatching combined with equalization, attention to phrasing and track selection in an attempt to make a single mix that flows together and has a good structure.\nBeatmatching is a core technique for DJing electronic dance music, and it is standard practice in clubs to keep a constant beat throughout the night, even if DJs change in the middle.\nTechnique.\nThe beatmatching technique consists of the following steps:\nOne of the key things to consider when beatmatching is the tempo of both songs, and the musical theory behind the songs. Attempting to beatmatch songs with completely different beats per minute (BPM) will result in one of the songs sounding too fast or too slow.\nWhen beatmatching, a popular technique is to vary the equalization of both tracks. For example, when the kicks are occurring on the same beat, a more seamless transition can occur if the lower frequencies are taken out of one of the songs, and the lower frequencies of the other song is boosted. Doing so creates a smoother transition.\nPitch and tempo.\nThe pitch and tempo of a track are normally linked together: spin a disc 5% faster and both pitch and tempo will be 5% higher. However, some modern DJ software can change pitch and tempo independently using time-stretching and pitch-shifting, allowing harmonic mixing. There is also a feature in modern DJ software which may be called \"master tempo\" or \"key adjust\" which changes the tempo while keeping the original pitch.\nHistory.\nFrancis Grasso was one of the first people to beatmatch in the late 1960s, being taught the technique by Bob Lewis.\nThese days beat-matching is considered central to DJing, and features making it possible are a requirement for DJ-oriented players. In 1978, the Technics SL-1200MK2 turntable was released, whose comfortable and precise sliding pitch control and high torque direct drive motor made beat-matching easier and it became the standard among DJs. With the advent of the compact disc, DJ-oriented compact disc players with pitch control and other features enabling beat-matching (and sometimes scratching), dubbed CDJs, were introduced by various companies. More recently, software with similar capabilities has been developed to allow manipulation of digital audio files stored on computers using turntables with special vinyl records (e.g. Final Scratch, M-Audio Torq, Serato Scratch Live) or computer interface (e.g. Traktor DJ Studio, Mixxx, VirtualDJ). Other software including algorithmic beat-matching is Ableton Live, which allows for realtime music manipulation and deconstruction. Freeware software such as Rapid Evolution can detect the beats per minute and determine the percent BPM difference between songs.\nMost modern DJ hardware and software now offer a \"sync\" feature which automatically adjusts the tempo between tracks being mixed so the DJ no longer needs to beatmatch manually.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4303", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4303", "title": "Brighton University", "text": ""}
{"id": "4306", "revid": "50875000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4306", "title": "Beltane", "text": "Gaelic May Day festival\nBeltane ( ) or Bealtaine () is the Gaelic May Day festival, marking the beginning of summer. It is traditionally held on 1 May, or about midway between the spring equinox and summer solstice. \nHistorically, it was widely observed in Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man. In Ireland, the name for the festival in both Irish and English is (). In Scottish Gaelic it is called (), and in Manx Gaelic or . It is one of the four main Gaelic seasonal festivals\u2014along with Samhain, Imbolc, and Lughnasadh\u2014and is similar to the Welsh .\nBeltane is mentioned in the earliest Irish literature and is associated with important events in Irish mythology. Also known as ('first of summer'), it marked the beginning of summer and was when cattle were driven out to the summer pastures. Rituals were performed to protect cattle, people and crops, and to encourage growth. Special bonfires were kindled, whose flames, smoke and ashes were believed to have protective powers. The people and their cattle would walk around or between bonfires and sometimes leap over the flames or embers. All household fires would be doused and then relit from the Beltane bonfire. \nThese gatherings were accompanied by a feast, and some of the food and drink would be offered to the . Doors, windows, byres and livestock would be decorated with yellow May flowers, perhaps because they evoked fire. In parts of Ireland, people made a May Bush: typically a thorn bush or branch decorated with flowers, ribbons, bright shells and rushlights. Holy wells were also visited, while Beltane dew was thought to bring beauty and maintain youthfulness. Many of these customs were part of May Day or Midsummer festivals in parts of Great Britain and Europe.\nPublic celebrations of Beltane fell out of popularity by the 20th century, though some customs continue to be revived as local cultural events. Since the late 20th century, Celtic neopagans and Wiccans have observed a festival based on Beltane as a religious holiday. Neopagans in the Southern Hemisphere may mark the festival on 1 November.\nName.\nIn Old Irish, the name was usually or . In modern Irish, the festival is usually called (\"day of Beltane\"), while the month of May is (\"month of Beltane\"). In Scottish Gaelic, the festival is . Sometimes the older Scottish Gaelic spelling is used. The term (Scottish) or (Irish), \"the bright or yellow day of Beltane\", means the first of May. In Ireland it is referred to in a common folk tale as ; the first day of the week (Monday/) is added to highlight the first day of summer.\nThe name is anglicised as Beltane, Beltain, Beltaine, Beltine and Beltany.\nAnother Old Irish name for the festival was or , probably meaning 'first of summer'. \u00d3 Duinn\u00edn's Irish dictionary (1904) gives this as or in modern Irish. It survives in the Scottish Gaelic name for the month of May, , and matches the Welsh . These have all been derived from proto-Celtic (first + summer).\nEtymology.\n\"Beltane\" is proposed to derive from a proto-Celtic , meaning 'bright fire'. The element might be cognate with the English word \"bale\" (as in ) meaning 'white', 'bright' or 'shining'. The absence of syncope (Irish sound laws rather predict a **\"Beltne\" form) can be explained by the popular belief that \"Beltaine\" was a compound of the word for 'fire', \"tene\".\nToponymy.\nThere are place names in Ireland containing the word , indicating places where Beltane festivities were once held. It is often anglicised as \"Beltany\". There are three Beltanys in County Donegal, including the Beltany stone circle, and two in County Tyrone. In County Armagh there is a place called Tamnaghvelton/ ('the Beltane field'). Lisbalting/ ('the Beltane ringfort') is in County Tipperary, while Glasheennabaultina/ ('the Beltane stream') is the name of a stream joining the River Galey in County Limerick.\nHistorical customs.\nBeltane was one of four Gaelic seasonal festivals: Samhain (1 November), Imbolc (1 February), Beltane (1 May), and Lughnasadh (1 August). Beltane marked the beginning of the pastoral summer season, when livestock were driven out to the summer pastures. Rituals were held at that time to protect them from harm, both natural and supernatural, and this mainly involved the \"symbolic use of fire\". There were also rituals to protect crops, dairy products and people, and to encourage growth. The (often referred to as spirits or fairies) were thought to be especially active at Beltane (as at Samhain), and the goal of many Beltane rituals was to appease them. Most scholars see the as remnants of the pagan gods and nature spirits. Beltane was a \"spring time festival of optimism\" during which \"fertility ritual again was important, perhaps connecting with the waxing power of the sun\".\nAncient and medieval.\nBeltane (the beginning of summer) and Samhain (the beginning of winter) are thought to have been the most important of the four Celtic festivals. Sir James George Frazer wrote in \"The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion\" that the times of Beltane and Samhain are of little importance to European crop-growers, but of great importance to herdsmen practising seasonal transhumance. Thus, he suggests that the festival has pastoral origins.\nThe earliest mention of Beltane is in Old Irish literature from Gaelic Ireland. The early-10th century text (Cormac's Glossary) has an entry for \"Belltaine\" and derives it from \"bil-tene\", \"lucky fire\". It says that to protect cattle from disease, the druids used to light two fires \"with great incantations\" and drive the cattle between them. In another entry, \"Sanas Cormaic\" says that Belltaine means \"fire of Bel\", explaining that Bel, Bil or Bial was a god and that \"a fire was kindled in his name at the beginning of summer\". Some scholars suggest that this might have been the Celtic healing god Belenos, although there is no other mention of Bel in Old Irish writings. Other scholars suggest that the writer was attempting to link the druidic fires with the Biblical god Baal.\nThe medieval tale (The Wooing of Emer) gives the same description of Beltaine. It says that it marks the beginning of summer, and calls Beltaine and Samhain (the beginning of winter) the two main divisions of the year.\nAccording to 17th-century historian Geoffrey Keating, there was a great gathering at the hill of Uisneach each Beltane in medieval Ireland, where a sacrifice was made to a god named Beil. Keating wrote that two bonfires would be lit in every district of Ireland, and cattle would be driven between them to protect them from disease. There is no reference to such a gathering in the annals, but the medieval \"Dindsenchas\" (lore of places) includes a tale of a hero lighting a holy fire on Uisneach that blazed for seven years. Ronald Hutton writes that this may \"preserve a tradition of Beltane ceremonies there\", but adds \"Keating or his source may simply have conflated this legend with the information in \"Sanas Chormaic\" to produce a piece of pseudo-history\". Nevertheless, excavations at Uisneach in the 20th century found evidence of large fires and charred bones, and showed it to have been a place of ritual since ancient times. Evidence suggests it was \"a sanctuary-site, in which fire was kept burning perpetually, or kindled at frequent intervals\", where animal sacrifices were offered.\nBeltane is also mentioned in medieval Scottish literature. An early reference is found in the poem 'Peblis to the Play', contained in the Maitland Manuscripts of 15th- and 16th-century Scots poetry, which describes the celebration in the town of Peebles.\nModern era.\nFrom the late 18th century to the mid 20th century, many accounts of Beltane customs were recorded by folklorists and other writers. For example John Jamieson, in his \"Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language\" (1808), describes some of the Beltane customs which persisted in the 18th and early 19th centuries in parts of Scotland, which he noted were beginning to die out.\nBonfires.\nBonfires continued to be a key part of the festival in the modern era. All hearth fires would be doused before the bonfire was lit, generally on a hill. Ronald Hutton writes that \"To increase the potency of the holy flames, in Britain at least they were often kindled by the most primitive of all means, of friction between wood.\" This is known as a need-fire, or \"tein' \u00e8iginn\" in Gaelic. It was a sacred fire that could be kindled only with a wooden drill, by a group of certain people (usually nine men), after they had removed all metal and after all other fires in the area had been doused. Nineteenth-century writers record such fires being kindled at Beltane in the Scottish Highlands, and also in Wales. Its flames were believed to guard against sickness, supernatural harm and witchcraft.\nIn the 19th century, cattle were still driven over flames or between two fires\u2014as described in \"Sanas Cormaic\" almost 1000 years before\u2014in parts of Ireland and Scotland. Sometimes the cattle would be driven around a bonfire or be made to leap over flames or embers. The people themselves did likewise for good luck and protection. On the Isle of Man, people ensured that the smoke blew over them and their cattle.\nWhen the bonfire died down, people would daub themselves with its ashes and sprinkle it over their crops and livestock. Burning torches from the bonfire would be taken home, carried around the house or boundary of the farmstead, and used to re-light the hearth. From these rituals, it is clear that the fire was seen as having protective powers. Similar rituals were part of May Day or Midsummer customs in some other parts of the British Isles and mainland Europe. Frazer believed the fire rituals are a kind of imitative or sympathetic magic. He suggests they were meant to mimic the Sun and \"ensure a needful supply of sunshine for men, animals, and plants\", as well as to symbolically \"burn up and destroy all harmful influences\".\nFood was also cooked at the bonfire and there were rituals involving it. In the Scottish Highlands, Alexander Carmichael recorded that there was a feast featuring lamb, and that formerly this lamb was sacrificed. In 1769, Thomas Pennant wrote of Beltane bonfires in Perthshire, where a caudle made from eggs, butter, oatmeal and milk was cooked. Some of the mixture was poured on the ground as a libation. Everyone would then take an oatmeal cake, called a or \"Beltane bannock\", which had nine knobs on it. Each person would face the fire, break off a knob one-by-one and throw it over their shoulder, offering them to the spirits to protect their livestock (one to protect the horses, one to protect the sheep, and so forth) and to the predators that might harm their livestock (one to the fox, one to the eagle, and so forth). Afterwards, they would drink the caudle.\nAccording to 18th-century writers, in parts of Scotland there was another ritual involving the Beltane bannock. The cake would be cut and one of the slices marked with charcoal. The slices would then be put in a bonnet and everyone would take one out while blindfolded. According to one writer, whoever got the marked piece had to leap through the fire three times. According to another, those present pretended to throw the person into the fire and, for some time afterwards, would speak of them as if they were dead. This \"may embody a memory of actual human sacrifice\", or it may have always been symbolic. There was an almost identical May Day (\"Calan Mai\") tradition in parts of Wales, and mock-burnings were part of spring and summer bonfire festivals in other parts of Europe.\nFlowers and May Bushes.\nYellow and white flowers such as primrose, rowan, hawthorn, gorse, hazel, and marsh marigold were traditionally placed at doorways and windows; this is documented in 19th century Ireland, Scotland and Mann. Sometimes loose flowers were strewn at doors and windows and sometimes they were made into bouquets, garlands or crosses and fastened to them. Cows would also be decorated with them, and they would be fastened to equipment for milking and butter making. It is likely that such flowers were used because they evoked fire. Similar May Day customs are found across Europe.\nThe May Bush or May Bough was popular in parts of Ireland until the late 19th century. This was a small tree or branch\u2014typically hawthorn, rowan, holly or sycamore\u2014decorated with bright flowers, ribbons, painted shells or eggshells from Easter Sunday, and so forth. The tree would either be decorated where it stood, or branches would be decorated and placed inside or outside the house (particularly above windows and doors, on the roof, and on barns). It was generally the responsibility of the oldest person of the house to decorate the May Bush, and the tree would remain up until 31 May. The tree would also be decorated with candles or rushlights. Sometimes a May Bush would be paraded through the town. In parts of southern Ireland, gold and silver hurling balls known as May Balls would be hung on these May Bushes and handed out to children or given to the winners of a hurling match. In Dublin and Belfast, May Bushes were brought into town from the countryside and decorated by the whole neighbourhood. Each neighbourhood vied for the most handsome tree and, sometimes, residents of one would try to steal the May Bush of another. This led to the May Bush being outlawed in Victorian times. In some places, it was customary to sing and dance around the May Bush, and at the end of the festivities it may be burnt in the bonfire. In some areas the May Bush or Bough has also been called the \"May Pole\", but it is the bush or tree described above, and not the more commonly-known European maypole.\nThorn trees are traditionally seen as special trees, associated with the . Frazer believed the customs of decorating trees or poles in springtime are a relic of tree worship and wrote: \"The intention of these customs is to bring home to the village, and to each house, the blessings which the tree-spirit has in its power to bestow.\" Emyr Estyn Evans suggests that the May Bush custom may have come to Ireland from England, because it seemed to be found in areas with strong English influence and because the Irish saw it as unlucky to damage certain thorn trees. However, \"lucky\" and \"unlucky\" trees varied by region, and it has been suggested that Beltane was the only time when cutting thorn trees was allowed. The practice of bedecking a May Bush with flowers, ribbons, garlands and bright shells is found among the Gaelic diaspora, most notably in Newfoundland, and in some Easter traditions on the East Coast of the United States.\nWarding-off harmful spirits.\nMany Beltane practices were designed to ward off harmful spirits or appease the \"aos s\u00ed\" (often referred to as the fairies) and prevent them from stealing dairy products, which were thought to be especially at risk. For example, May flowers were tied to milk pails or the tails of cattle to ensure the cattle's milk was not stolen, or three black coals might be placed under a butter churn to ensure the fairies did not steal the butter.\nOn the Isle of Man, small crosses made of rowan were worn, fastened over doorways, and tied to cattle, as protection against witchcraft and evil spirits. It was called a .\nFood was left or milk poured at the doorstep or places associated with the , such as 'fairy trees', as an offering. However, milk was never given to a neighbour on May Day because it was feared that the milk would be transferred to the neighbour's cow. \nIn Ireland, cattle would be brought to 'fairy forts', where a small amount of their blood would be collected. The owners would then pour it into the earth with prayers for the herd's safety. Sometimes the blood would be left to dry and then be burnt. \nTo protect farm produce and encourage fertility, farmers would lead a procession around the boundaries of their farm. They would \"carry with them seeds of grain, implements of husbandry, the first well water, and the herb vervain (or rowan as a substitute). The procession generally stopped at the four cardinal points of the compass, beginning in the east, and rituals were performed in each of the four directions\". People made the sign of the cross with milk for good luck on Beltane, and the sign of the cross was also made on the backsides of cattle.\nBeltane blessings.\nIn the 19th century, folklorist Alexander Carmichael (1832\u20131912), collected the Scottish Gaelic song (\"The Beltane Blessing\") in his \"Carmina Gadelica\", which he heard from a crofter in South Uist. The first two verses were sung as follows:\n&lt;poem&gt; (Bless, O Threefold true and bountiful,)\n (Myself, my spouse and my children,)\n (My tender children and their beloved mother at their head,)\n (On the fragrant plain, at the gay mountain shieling,)\n (On the fragrant plain, at the gay mountain shieling.)\n (Everything within my dwelling or in my possession,)\n (All kine and crops, all flocks and corn,)\n (From Hallow Eve to Beltane Eve,)\n (With goodly progress and gentle blessing,)\n (From sea to sea, and every river mouth,)\n (From wave to wave, and base of waterfall.)&lt;/poem&gt;\nOther customs.\nHoly wells were often visited at Beltane, and at the other Gaelic festivals of Imbolc and Lughnasadh. Visitors to holy wells would pray for health while walking sunwise (moving from east to west) around the well. They would then leave offerings; typically coins or clooties (see clootie well). The first water drawn from a well on Beltane was thought to be especially potent, and would bring good luck to the person who drew it. Beltane morning dew was also thought to bring good luck and health. At dawn or before sunrise on Beltane, maidens would roll in the dew or wash their faces with it. The dew was collected in a jar, left in sunlight, then filtered. The dew was thought to increase sexual attractiveness, maintain youthfulness, protect from sun damage (particularly freckles and sunburn) and help with skin ailments for the ensuing year. It was also thought that a man who washed his face with soap and water on Beltane will grow long whiskers on his face.\nIt was widely believed that no one should light a fire on May Day morning until they saw smoke rising from a neighbour's house. It was also believed to be bad luck to put out ashes or clothes on May Day, and to give away coal or ashes would cause the giver difficulty in lighting fires for the next year. Also, if the family owned a white horse, it should remain in the barn all day, and if any other horse was owned, a red rag should be tied to its tail. Any foal born on May Day was fated to kill a man, and any cow that calved on May Day would die. Any birth or marriage on May Day was generally believed to be ill-fated. On May Night a cake and a jug were left on the table, because it was believed that the Irish who had died abroad would return on May Day to their ancestral homes, and it was also believed that the dead returned on May Day to visit their friends. A robin that flew into the house on Beltane was believed to portend the death of a household member.\nThe festival persisted widely up until the 1950s, and in some places the celebration of Beltane continues today.\nRevival.\nAs a festival, Beltane had largely died out by the mid-20th century, although some of its customs continued and in some places it has been revived as a cultural event. In Ireland, Beltane fires were common until the mid-20th century, and has been revived as an annual festival in County Westmeath on the Hill of Uisneach since 2009. It culminates in a torchlit procession by participants in costume, some on horseback, and the lighting of a large bonfire at dusk. In 2017, the ceremonial fire was lit by the President of Ireland, Michael D. Higgins.\nThe lighting of a community Beltane fire from which each hearth fire is then relit is observed today in some parts of the Gaelic diaspora, though in most of these cases it is a cultural revival rather than an unbroken survival of the ancient tradition. In parts of Newfoundland, the custom of decorating the May Bush also survives. The town of Peebles in the Scottish Borders holds a traditional week-long Beltane Fair every year in June, when a local girl is crowned Beltane Queen on the steps of the parish church. Like other Borders festivals, it incorporates a Common Riding.\nSince 1988, a Beltane Fire Festival has been held every year on the night of 30 April on Calton Hill in Edinburgh, Scotland. While inspired by traditional Beltane, it is a modern celebration of summer's beginning which draws on many influences. The performance art event involves fire dances and a procession by costumed performers, led by the May Queen and the Green Man, culminating in the lighting of a bonfire.\nButser Ancient Farm, an open-air archaeology museum in Hampshire, England, has also held a Beltane festival since the 1980s. The festival mixes historical reenactment with folk influences, and features a May Queen and Green Man, living history displays, reenactor battles, demonstrations of traditional crafts, performances of folk music, and Celtic storytelling. The festival ends with the burning of a 30\u201340\u00a0ft wickerman, with a new historical or folk-inspired design each year. Butser Ancient Farm acknowledges that their Beltane celebrations are not an attempt to reconstruct authentic historical pagan practices.\nThe 1970 recording 'Ride a White Swan', written and performed by Marc Bolan and his band T.Rex, contains the line \"Ride a white Swan like the people of the Beltane\".\nNeopaganism.\nBeltane and Beltane-based festivals are held by some Neopagans. As there are many kinds of Neopaganism, their Beltane celebrations can be very different despite the shared name. Some try to emulate the historic festival as much as possible. Other Neopagans base their celebrations on many sources, the Gaelic festival being only one of them.\nNeopagans usually celebrate Beltane on 30 April \u2013 1 May in the Northern Hemisphere and 31 October \u2013 1 November in the Southern Hemisphere, beginning and ending at sunset. Some Neopagans celebrate it at the astronomical midpoint between the spring equinox and summer solstice (or the full moon nearest this point). In the Northern Hemisphere, this midpoint is when the ecliptic longitude of the Sun reaches 45 degrees.\nCeltic Reconstructionist.\nCeltic Reconstructionists strive to reconstruct ancient Celtic religion. Their religious practices are based on research and historical accounts, but modified to suit modern life. They avoid syncretism and eclecticism (i.e. combining practises from unrelated cultures).\nCeltic Reconstructionists usually celebrate Beltane when the local hawthorn trees are in bloom. Many observe the traditional bonfire rites, to whatever extent this is feasible where they live. This may involve passing themselves and their pets or livestock between two bonfires, and bringing home a candle lit from the bonfire. If they are unable to make a bonfire or attend a bonfire ceremony, candles may be used instead. They may decorate their homes with a May Bush, branches from blooming thorn trees, or equal-armed rowan crosses. Holy wells may be visited and offerings made to the spirits or deities of the wells. Traditional festival foods may also be prepared.\nWicca.\nWiccans use the name \"Beltane\" or \"Beltain\" for their May Day celebrations. It is one of the yearly Sabbats of their Wheel of the Year, following Ostara and preceding Midsummer. Unlike Celtic Reconstructionism, Wicca is syncretic and melds practices from many different cultures. In general, the Wiccan Beltane is more akin to the Germanic/English May Day festival, both in its significance (focusing on fertility) and its rituals (such as maypole dancing). Some Wiccans enact a ritual union of the May Lord and May Lady.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4312", "revid": "43698778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4312", "title": "Bethlehem", "text": "City in the West Bank, Palestine\nBethlehem is a city in the West Bank, Palestine, located about south of Jerusalem, and the capital of the Bethlehem Governorate. It had a population of people, as of 2017. The city's economy is strongly linked to tourism, especially during the Christmas period, when Christians embark on a pilgrimage to the Church of the Nativity, which is revered as the location of the birth of Jesus.\nA possible first mention of Bethlehem is in the Amarna correspondence of ancient Egypt, dated to 1350\u20131330 BCE, although that reading is uncertain. In the Hebrew Bible, the period of the Israelites is described; it identifies Bethlehem as the birthplace of David. In the New Testament, the city is identified as the birthplace of Jesus of Nazareth. Under the Roman Empire, the city of Bethlehem was destroyed by Hadrian, but later rebuilt by Constantine the Great, who commissioned the Church of the Nativity in 327 CE. In 529, the Church of the Nativity was heavily damaged by Samaritans involved in the Samaritan revolts; following the victory of the Byzantine Empire, it was rebuilt by Justinian I.\nLater, during the rule of several Caliphates, Bethlehem became part of Jund Filastin in 637. Muslims continued to rule the city until 1099, when it was conquered by the Crusaders, who replaced the local Christian Greek Orthodox clergy with Catholic ones. In the mid-13th century, Bethlehem's walls were demolished by the Mamluk Sultanate. However, they were rebuilt by the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century when it came to control the region. After the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire at the end of World War I, Bethlehem was part of Mandatory Palestine until 1948, and later of the West Bank that was annexed by Jordan following the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. During the 1967 Six-Day War, Bethlehem was occupied by Israel along with the rest of the West Bank. Since the Oslo Accords between Israel and the Palestinian National Authority, Bethlehem has been designated as part of Area A of the West Bank, nominally rendering it as being under Palestinian control, but it remains under Israeli occupation. Movement around the city is limited due to the Israeli West Bank barrier.\nHistorically, it was a city of Arab Christians, who made up about 86% of the population in 1950, but this community has dwindled significantly to 10% as of 2022, and now has a majority of Arab Muslims.\nEtymology.\nThe current name for Bethlehem in local languages is /B\u0113t la\u1e25m/ in Arabic (), literally meaning \"house of meat\", and \"\" in Hebrew (), literally \"house of bread\" or \"house of food.\" The city was called in and in . In Aramaic, the name of Bethlehem was simply the Hebrew name \u05d1\u05d9\u05ea \u05dc\u05d7\u05dd, and was pronounced as Beit Lekhem. Evidence for this spelling can be inferred based on the fact that the spelling \u0712\u071d\u072c\u0720\u071a\u0721 can be found in the Syriac Aramaic version of the bible in Matthew 2 as well as other parts of the book. The letters \u0712\u071d\u072c\u0720\u071a\u0721 transliterate to \u05d1\u05d9\u05ea\u05dc\u05d7\u05dd. Amarna letter EA290 makes reference to a town b\u012bt-ninurta which has been read as Bit-Lachmi by scholar W. F. Albright, following a proposal by Otto Schroeder in 1815 and making it a potential first historical reference to Bethlehem. This reading is, however, uncertain and has met with objections.\n\"House of the god Lahmu\".\nCanaanite and Israelite toponyms starting with \"beth\" are interpreted to mean \"house of\", with 'house' understood as 'temple' and the second part of the name indicating the deity the local temple was dedicated to. Accordingly, one longstanding suggestion in scholarship is that the name Bethlehem derives from the Mesopotamian or Canaanite fertility god La\u1e2bmu and his consort sister Lahamu, \"lahmo\" being the Chaldean word for \"fertility\". Biblical scholar William F. Albright believed that this hypothesis, first put forth by Otto Schr\u00f6der, was \"certainly accurate\". Albright noted that the pronunciation of the name had remained essentially the same for 3,500 years, even if the perceived meaning had shifted over time: \"'Temple of the God Lakhmu' in Canaanite, 'House of Bread' in Hebrew and Aramaic, 'House of Meat' in Arabic.\" While Schr\u00f6der's theory is not widely accepted, it continues to find favour in academic literature over the later literal translations.\n\"House of war\".\nAnother suggestion is an association with the root \"l-h-m\" \"to fight\", leading to the meaning of \"house of war\" or \"house of fighting\", but this is thought unlikely.\nHistory.\nCanaanite period.\nThe earliest reference to Bethlehem appears in the Amarna correspondence (c.\u20091400\u00a0BCE). In one of his six letters to Pharaoh, Abdi-Heba, the Egyptian-appointed governor of Jerusalem, appeals for aid in retaking \"Bit-La\u1e2bmi\" in the wake of disturbances by Apiru mercenaries: \"Now even a town near Jerusalem, Bit-Lahmi by name, a village which once belonged to the king, has fallen to the enemy... Let the king hear the words of your servant Abdi-Heba, and send archers to restore the imperial lands of the king!\"\nIt is thought that the similarity of this name to its modern forms indicates that it was originally a settlement of Canaanites who shared a Semitic cultural and linguistic heritage with the later arrivals. \"La\u1e2bmu\" was the Akkadian god of fertility, worshipped by the Canaanites as \"Le\u1e25em\". Some time in the third millennium BCE, Canaanites erected a temple on the hill now known as the Hill of the Nativity, probably dedicated to La\u1e2bmu. The temple, and subsequently the town that formed around it, was then known as \"Beit Lahama\", \"House (Temple) of Lahmu\". By 1200 BC, the area of Bethlehem, as well as much of the region, was conquered by the Philistines, which led the region to be known to the Greeks as \"Philistia\", later corrupted to \"Palestine\".\nA burial ground discovered in spring 2013, and surveyed in 2015 by a joint Italian\u2013Palestinian team found that the necropolis covered 3 hectares (more than 7 acres) and originally contained more than 100 tombs in use between roughly 2200 BCE and 650 BCE. The archaeologists were able to identify at least 30 tombs.\nIsraelite and Judean period.\nArchaeological confirmation of Bethlehem as a city in the Kingdom of Judah was uncovered in 2012 at the archaeological dig at the City of David in the form of a \"bulla\" (seal impression in dried clay) in ancient Hebrew script that reads \"From the town of Bethlehem to the King\". According to the excavators, it was used to seal the string closing a shipment of grain, wine, or other goods sent as a tax payment in the 8th or 7th century BCE.\nBiblical scholars believe Bethlehem, located in the \"hill country\" of Judea, may be the same as the Biblical Ephrath, which means \"fertile\", as there is a reference to it in the Book of Micah as Bethlehem Ephrathah or Bethlehem Ephratah. The Hebrew Bible also calls it Beth-Lehem Judah, and the New Testament describes it as the \"City of David\". It is first mentioned in the Bible as the place where the matriarch Rachel died and was buried \"by the wayside\" (). Rachel's Tomb, the traditional grave site, stands at the entrance to Bethlehem. According to the Book of Ruth, the valley to the east is where Ruth of Moab gleaned the fields and returned to town with Naomi. In the Books of Samuel, Bethlehem is mentioned as the home of Jesse, father of King David of Israel, and the site of David's anointment by the prophet Samuel. It was from the well of Bethlehem that three of his warriors brought him water when he was hiding in the cave of Adullam.\nWriting in the 4th century, the Pilgrim of Bordeaux reported that the sepulchers of David, Ezekiel, Asaph, Job, Jesse, and Solomon were located near Bethlehem.\nClassical period.\nThe Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke represent Jesus as having been born in Bethlehem, known in Aramaic by the Hebrew name (). However, modern scholars regard the two accounts as contradictory; the Gospel of Mark, the earliest gospel, mentions nothing about Jesus having been born in Bethlehem, saying only that he came from Nazareth. Current scholars are divided on the actual birthplace of Jesus: some believe he was actually born in Nazareth, while others still hold that he was born in Bethlehem.\nNonetheless, the tradition that Jesus was born in Bethlehem was prominent in the early church. Around 155, the apologist Justin Martyr recommended that those who doubted Jesus was really born in Bethlehem could go there and visit the very cave where he was supposed to have been born. The same cave is also referenced by the apocryphal Gospel of James and the fourth-century church historian Eusebius. After the Bar Kokhba revolt (c.\u2009132\u2013136\u00a0CE) was crushed, the Roman emperor Hadrian converted the Christian site above the Grotto into a shrine dedicated to the Greek god Adonis, to honour his favourite, the Greek youth Antinous.\nAround 395\u00a0CE, Jerome wrote in a letter: \"Bethlehem... belonging now to us... was overshadowed by a grove of Tammuz, that is to say, Adonis, and in the cave where once the infant Christ cried, the lover of Venus was lamented.\" Many scholars have taken this letter as evidence that the cave of the nativity over which the Church of the Nativity was later built had at one point been a shrine to the ancient Near Eastern fertility god Tammuz. Eusebius, however, mentions nothing about the cave having been associated with Tammuz and there are no other Patristic sources that suggest Tammuz had a shrine in Bethlehem. Peter Welten has argued that the cave was never dedicated to Tammuz and that Jerome misinterpreted Christian mourning over the Massacre of the Innocents as a pagan ritual over Tammuz's death. Joan E. Taylor has countered this contention by arguing that Jerome, as an educated man, could not have been so na\u00efve as to mistake Christian mourning over the Massacre of the Innocents as a pagan ritual for Tammuz.\nIn 326\u2013328, the empress Helena, widowed consort of Emperor Constantius Chlorus and mother of the ruling emperor, Constantine the Great, made a pilgrimage to Syria-Palaestina, in the course of which she visited the ruins of Bethlehem. The Church of the Nativity was built at her initiative over the cave where Jesus was purported to have been born. During the Samaritan revolt of 529, Bethlehem was sacked and its walls and the Church of the Nativity destroyed; they were rebuilt on the orders of the Emperor Justinian I. In 614, the Persian Sassanid Empire, supported by Jewish rebels, invaded Palestina Prima and captured Bethlehem. A story recounted in later sources holds that they refrained from destroying the church on seeing the magi depicted in Persian clothing in a mosaic.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 637, shortly after Jerusalem was captured by the Muslim armies, 'Umar ibn al-Khatt\u0101b, the second caliph, promised that the Church of the Nativity would be preserved for Christian use. A mosque dedicated to Umar was built upon the place in the city where he prayed, next to the church. Bethlehem then passed through the control of the Islamic caliphates of the Umayyads in the 8th century, then the Abbasids in the 9th century. A Persian geographer recorded in the mid-9th century that a well preserved and much venerated church existed in the town. In 985, the Arab geographer al-Muqaddasi visited Bethlehem, and referred to its church as the \"Basilica of Constantine, the equal of which does not exist anywhere in the country-round.\" In 1009, during the reign of the sixth Fatimid Caliph, al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, the Church of the Nativity was ordered to be demolished, but was spared by local Muslims, because they had been permitted to worship in the structure's southern transept.\nIn 1099, Bethlehem was captured by the Crusaders, who fortified it and built a new monastery and cloister on the north side of the Church of the Nativity. The Greek Orthodox clergy were removed from their sees and replaced with Latin clerics. Up until that point the official Christian presence in the region was Greek Orthodox. On Christmas Day 1100, Baldwin I, first king of the Frankish Kingdom of Jerusalem, was crowned in Bethlehem, and that year a Latin episcopate was also established in the town.\nIn 1187, Saladin, the Sultan of Egypt and Syria who led the Muslim Ayyubids, captured Bethlehem from the Crusaders. The Latin clerics were forced to leave, allowing the Greek Orthodox clergy to return. Saladin agreed to the return of two Latin priests and two deacons in 1192. However, Bethlehem suffered from the loss of the pilgrim trade, as there was a sharp decrease of European pilgrims. William IV, Count of Nevers had promised the Christian bishops of Bethlehem that if Bethlehem should fall under Muslim control, he would welcome them in the small town of Clamecy in present-day Burgundy, France. As a result, the Bishop of Bethlehem duly took up residence in the hospital of Panthenor, Clamecy, in 1223. Clamecy remained the continuous 'in partibus infidelium' seat of the Bishopric of Bethlehem for almost 600 years, until the French Revolution in 1789.\nBethlehem, along with Jerusalem, Nazareth, and Sidon, was briefly ceded to the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem by a treaty between Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II and Ayyubid Sultan al-Kamil in 1229, in return for a ten-year truce between the Ayyubids and the Crusaders. The treaty expired in 1239, and Bethlehem was recaptured by the Muslims in 1244. In 1250, with the coming to power of the Mamluks under Rukn al-Din Baibars, tolerance of Christianity declined. Members of the clergy left the city, and in 1263 the town walls were demolished. The Latin clergy returned to Bethlehem the following century, establishing themselves in the monastery adjoining the Basilica of the Nativity. The Greek Orthodox were given control of the basilica and shared control of the Milk Grotto with the Latins and the Armenians.\nOttoman era.\nFrom 1517, during the years of Ottoman control, custody of the Basilica was bitterly disputed between the Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches. By the end of the 16th century, Bethlehem had become one of the largest villages in the District of Jerusalem, and was subdivided into seven quarters. The Basbus family served as the heads of Bethlehem among other leaders during this period. The Ottoman tax record and census from 1596 indicates that Bethlehem had a population of 1,435, making it the 13th largest village in Palestine at the time. Its total revenue amounted to 30,000 akce.\nBethlehem paid taxes on wheat, barley and grapes. The Muslims and Christians were organized into separate communities, each having its own leader. Five leaders represented the village in the mid-16th century, three of whom were Muslims. Ottoman tax records suggest that the Christian population was slightly more prosperous or grew more grain than grapes (the former being a more valuable commodity).\nFrom 1831 to 1841, Palestine was under the rule of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty of Egypt. During this period, the town suffered an earthquake as well as the destruction of the Muslim quarter in 1834 by Egyptian troops, apparently as a reprisal for the murder of a favored loyalist of Ibrahim Pasha, during the Peasants' revolt in Palestine. In 1841, Bethlehem came under Ottoman rule once again and remained so until the end of World War I. Under the Ottomans, Bethlehem's inhabitants faced unemployment, compulsory military service, and heavy taxes, resulting in mass emigration, particularly to South America. An American missionary in the 1850s reported a population of under 4,000, nearly all of whom belonged to the Greek Church. He also noted that a lack of water limited the town's growth.\nSocin found from an official Ottoman village list from about 1870 that Bethlehem had a population of 179 Muslims in 59 houses, 979 \"Latins\" in 256 houses, 824 \"Greeks\" in 213 houses, and 41 Armenians in 11 houses, a total of 539 houses. The population count only included men. Hartmann found that Bethlehem had 520 houses.\nModern era.\nBethlehem was part of Mandatory Palestine from 1920 to 1948. In the United Nations General Assembly's 1947 resolution to partition Palestine, Bethlehem was included in the international enclave of Jerusalem to be administered by the United Nations. Jordan captured the city during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. Many refugees from areas captured by Israeli forces in 1947\u201348 fled to the Bethlehem area, primarily settling in what became the official refugee camps of 'Azza (Beit Jibrin) and 'Aida in the north and Dheisheh in the south. The influx of refugees significantly transformed Bethlehem's Christian majority into a Muslim one.\nJordan retained control of the city until the Six-Day War in 1967, when Bethlehem was captured by Israel, along with the rest of the West Bank. Following the Six-Day War, Israel took control of the city.\nDuring the early months of First Intifada, on 5 May 1989, Milad Anton Shahin, aged 12, was shot dead by Israeli soldiers. Replying to a Member of Knesset in August 1990 Defence Minister Yitzak Rabin stated that a group of reservists in an observation post had come under attack by stone throwers. The commander of the post, a senior non-commissioned officer, fired two plastic bullets in deviation of operational rules. No evidence was found that this caused the boy's death. The officer was found guilty of illegal use of a weapon and sentenced to 5 months imprisonment, two of them actually in prison doing public service. He was also demoted.\nOn December 21, 1995, Israeli troops withdrew from Bethlehem, and three days later the city came under the administration and military control of the Palestinian National Authority in accordance with the Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. During the Second Palestinian Intifada in 2000\u20132005, Bethlehem's infrastructure and tourism industry were damaged. In 2002, it was a primary combat zone in Operation Defensive Shield, a major military counteroffensive by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF). The IDF besieged the Church of the Nativity, where dozens of Palestinian militants had sought refuge. The siege lasted 39 days. Several militants were killed. It ended with an agreement to exile 13 of the militants to foreign countries.\nToday, the city is surrounded by two bypass roads for Israeli settlers, leaving the inhabitants squeezed between thirty-seven Jewish enclaves, where a quarter of all West Bank settlers, roughly 170,000, live; the gap between the two roads is closed by the 8-metre high Israeli West Bank barrier, which cuts Bethlehem off from its sister city Jerusalem. Christian families that have lived in Bethlehem for hundreds of years are being forced to leave as land in Bethlehem is seized, and homes bulldozed, for construction of thousands of new Israeli homes. Land seizures for Israeli settlements have also prevented construction of a new hospital for the inhabitants of Bethlehem, as well as the barrier separating dozens of Palestinian families from their farmland and Christian communities from their places of worship. Christians have reportedly suffered persecution under the Palestinian Authority, leading to emigration.\nGeography.\nBethlehem is located at an elevation of about above sea level, higher than nearby Jerusalem. Bethlehem is situated on the Judean Mountains.\nThe city is located northeast of Gaza City and the Mediterranean Sea, west of Amman, Jordan, southeast of Tel Aviv, Israel and south of Jerusalem. Nearby cities and towns include Beit Safafa and Jerusalem to the north, Beit Jala to the northwest, Husan to the west, al-Khadr and Artas to the southwest, and Beit Sahour to the east. Beit Jala and the latter form an agglomeration with Bethlehem. The Aida and Azza refugee camps are located within the city limits.\nIn the center of Bethlehem is its old city. The old city consists of eight quarters, laid out in a mosaic style, forming the area around the Manger Square. The quarters include the Christian an-Najajreh, al-Farahiyeh, al-Anatreh, al-Tarajmeh, al-Qawawsa and Hreizat quarters and al-Fawaghreh\u2014the only Muslim quarter. Most of the Christian quarters are named after the Arab Ghassanid clans that settled there. Al-Qawawsa Quarter was formed by Arab Christian emigrants from the nearby town of Tuqu' in the 18th century. There is also a Syriac quarter outside of the old city, whose inhabitants originate from Midyat and Ma'asarte in Turkey. The total population of the old city is about 5,000.\nClimate.\nBethlehem has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"), with hot and dry summers and mild, wetter winters. Winter temperatures (mid-December to mid-March) can be cool and rainy. January is the coldest month, with temperatures ranging from 1\u00a0to\u00a013\u00a0degree Celsius (33\u201355\u00a0\u00b0F). From May through September, the weather is warm and sunny. August is the hottest month, with a high of 30 degrees Celsius (86\u00a0\u00b0F). Bethlehem receives an average of of rainfall annually, 70% between November and January.\nBethlehem's average annual relative humidity is 60% and reaches its highest rates between January and February. Humidity levels are at their lowest in May. Night dew may occur in up to 180 days per year. The city is influenced by the Mediterranean Sea breeze that occurs around mid-day. However, Bethlehem is affected also by annual waves of hot, dry, sandy and dust \"Khamaseen\" winds from the Arabian Desert, during April, May and mid-June.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nAccording to Ottoman tax records, Christians made up roughly 60% of the population in the early 16th century, while the Christian and Muslim populations became equal by the middle of that century. However, there were no Muslim inhabitants counted by the end of the century, with a recorded population of 287 adult male taxpayers. Christians, like all non-Muslims throughout the Ottoman Empire, were required to pay the jizya tax. In 1867, an American visitor describes the town as having a population of 3,000 to 4,000, of whom about 100 were Protestant, 300 were Muslim and \"the remainder belonging to the Latin and Greek Churches with a few Armenians.\" Another report from the same year puts the Christian population at 3,000, with an additional 50 Muslims. An 1885 source put the population at approximately 6,000 of \"principally Christians, Latins and Greeks\" with no Jewish inhabitants.\nThe census of 1922 lists Bethlehem as having 6,658 residents (5,838 Christians, 818 Muslims, and two Jews), increasing in 1931 to 6,804 (5,588 Christians, 1,219 Muslims, five with no religion, and two Jews) with 506 in nearby suburbs (251 Muslims, 216 Christians, and 39 Jews).\nThe 1938 village statistics list the population as 7,520 with 499 in nearby suburbs (including 42 Jews). The 1945 village statistics list Bethlehem's population as 8,820 (6,430 Christians, 2,370 Muslims, and 20 \"other\").\nIn 1948, the religious makeup of the city was 85% Christian, mostly of the Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholic denominations, and 13% Muslim. In the 1967 census taken by Israel authorities, the town of Bethlehem proper numbered 14,439 inhabitants, its 7,790 Muslim inhabitants represented 53.9% of the population, while the Christians of various denominations numbered 6,231 or 46.1%.\nIn the PCBS's 1997 census, the city had a population of 21,670, including a total of 6,570 refugees, accounting for 30.3% of the city's population. In 1997, the age distribution of Bethlehem's inhabitants was 27.4% under the age of 10, 20% from 10 to 19, 17.3% from 20 to 29, 17.7% from 30 to 44, 12.1% from 45 to 64 and 5.3% above the age of 65. There were 11,079 males and 10,594 females. In the 2007 PCBS census, Bethlehem had a population of 25,266, of which 12,753 were males and 12,513 were females. There were 6,709 housing units, of which 5,211 were households. The average household consisted of 4.8 family members. By 2017, the population was 28,591.\nChristian population.\nAfter the Muslim conquest of the Levant in the 630s, the local Christians were Arabized even though large numbers were ethnically Arabs of the Ghassanid clans. Bethlehem's two largest Arab Christian clans trace their ancestry to the Ghassanids, including al-Farahiyyah and an-Najajreh. The former have descended from the Ghassanids who migrated from Yemen and from the Wadi Musa area in present-day Jordan and an-Najajreh descend from Najran. Another Bethlehem clan, al-Anatreh, also trace their ancestry to the Ghassanids.\nThe percentage of Christians in the town has been in a steady decline since the mid-twentieth century. In 1947, Christians made up 85% of the population, but by 1998, the figure had declined to 40%. In 2005, the mayor of Bethlehem, Victor Batarseh, explained that \"due to the stress, either physical or psychological, and the bad economic situation, many people are emigrating, either Christians or Muslims, but it is more apparent among Christians, because they already are a minority.\" The Palestinian Authority is officially committed to equality for Christians, although there have been incidents of violence against them by the Preventive Security Service and militant factions.\nIn 2006, a Zogby poll that interviewed more than 1,000 Palestinian Christians from Bethlehem found that 79% of the respondents cited the Israeli occupation as source of difficulties leading the emigration of their community. In the same year, the Palestinian Centre for Research and Cultural Dialogue conducted a poll among the city's Christians according to which 90% said they had had Muslim friends, 73.3% agreed that the PNA treated Christian heritage in the city with respect and 78% attributed the exodus of Christians to the Israeli blockade. The only mosque in the Old City is the Mosque of Omar, located in the Manger Square. By 2016, the Christian population of Bethlehem had declined to only 16%. The Christian population's proportion of Bethlehem fell from 87% in the 1950s to 12% in 2016.\nA study by Pew Research Center concluded that the decline in the Arab Christian population of the area was partially a result of a lower birth rate among Christians than among Muslims, but also partially due to the fact that Christians were more likely to emigrate from the region than any other religious group. The seizure of Christian land by Muslim mafias and the bias of the Palestinian Judicial system have been cited as reasons leading to emigration. Amon Ramnon, a researcher at the Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research, stated that the reason why more Christians were emigrating than Muslims is because it is easier for Arab Christians to integrate into western communities than for Arab Muslims, since many of them attend church-affiliated schools, where they are taught European languages. A higher percentage of Christians in the region are urban-dwellers, which also makes it easier for them to emigrate and assimilate into western populations. A statistical analysis of the Christian exodus cited lack of economic and educational opportunity, especially due to the Christians' middle-class status and higher education. Since the Second Intifada, 10% of the Christian population have left the city. However, it is likely that there are many other factors, most of which are shared with the Palestinian population as a whole.\nEconomy.\nShopping is a major attraction, especially during the Christmas season. The city's main streets and old markets are lined with shops selling Palestinian handicrafts, Middle Eastern spices, jewelry and oriental sweets such as baklawa. Olive wood carvings are the item most purchased by tourists visiting Bethlehem. Religious handicrafts include ornaments handmade from mother-of-pearl, as well as olive wood statues, boxes, and crosses. Other industries include stone and marble-cutting, textiles, furniture and furnishings. Bethlehem factories also produce paints, plastics, synthetic rubber, pharmaceuticals, construction materials and food products, mainly pasta and confectionery.\nCremisan Wine, founded in 1885, is a winery run by monks in the Monastery of Cremisan. The grapes are grown mainly in the al-Khader district. In 2007, the monastery's wine production was around 700,000\u00a0liters per year.\nIn 2008, Bethlehem hosted the largest economic conference to date in the Palestinian territories. It was initiated by Palestinian Prime Minister and former Finance Minister Salam Fayyad to convince more than a thousand businessmen, bankers and government officials from throughout the Middle East to invest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A total of 1.4\u00a0billion US dollars was secured for business investments in the Palestinian territories. Tourism is Bethlehem's main industry. Unlike other Palestinian localities prior to 2000, the majority of the employed residents did not have jobs in Israel. More than 20% of the working population is employed in the industry. Tourism accounts for approximately 65% of the city's economy and 11% of the Palestinian National Authority. The city has more than two million visitors every year. Tourism in Bethlehem ground to a halt for over a decade after the Second Intifada, but gradually began to pick back up in the early 2010s. Schneider Electric operates a facility in the Multidisciplinary Industrial Park of Bethlehem, which was developed by the Palestinian government and France.\nThe Church of the Nativity is one of Bethlehem's major tourist attractions and a magnet for Christian pilgrims. It stands in the center of the city \u2014 a part of the Manger Square \u2014 over a grotto or cave called the Holy Crypt, where Jesus is believed to have been born. Nearby is the Milk Grotto where the Holy Family took refuge on their Flight to Egypt and next door is the cave where St. Jerome spent thirty years creating the Vulgate, the dominant Latin version of the Bible until the Reformation. There are over thirty hotels in Bethlehem. Jacir Palace, built in 1910 near the church, is one of Bethlehem's most successful hotels and its oldest. It was closed down in 2000 due to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but reopened in 2005 as the Jacir Palace InterContinental at Bethlehem. The hotel is managed by world renowned international brand \u2014 the Intercontinental Hotel Group (IHG) and is second IHG hotel in the country after IHG in Jerusalem.\nReligious significance and commemoration.\nBirthplace of Jesus.\nIn the New Testament, the Gospel of Luke says that Jesus' parents traveled from Nazareth to Bethlehem, where Jesus was born. The Gospel of Matthew mentions Bethlehem as the place of birth, and adds that King Herod was told that a 'King of the Jews' had been born in the town, prompting Herod to order the killing of all the boys who were two years old or under in the town and surrounding area. Joseph, warned of Herod's impending action by an angel of the Lord, decided to flee to Egypt with his family and then later settled in Nazareth after Herod's death.\nEarly Christian traditions describe Jesus as being born in Bethlehem: in one account, a verse in the Book of Micah is interpreted as a prophecy that the Messiah would be born there. The second century Christian apologist Justin Martyr stated in his \"Dialogue with Trypho\" (written c. 155\u2013161) that the Holy Family had taken refuge in a cave outside of the town and then placed Jesus in a manger. Origen of Alexandria, writing around the year 247, referred to a cave in the town of Bethlehem which local people believed was the birthplace of Jesus. This cave was possibly one which had previously been a site of the cult of Tammuz. The Gospel of Mark and the Gospel of John do not include a nativity narrative, but refer to him only as being from Nazareth. In a 2005 article in \"Archaeology\" magazine, archaeologist Aviram Oshri points to an absence of evidence for the settlement of Bethlehem near Jerusalem at the time when Jesus was born, and postulates that Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Galilee. However, other archaeologists argue that there is evidence that Bethlehem of Judea was inhabited at that time. In a 2011 article in \"Biblical Archaeology Review\" magazine, Jerome Murphy-O'Connor argues for the traditional position that Jesus was born in Bethlehem near Jerusalem.\nChristmas celebrations.\nChristmas rites are held in Bethlehem on three different dates: December 25 is the traditional date by the Roman Catholic and Protestant denominations, but Greek, Coptic and Syrian Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas on January 6 and Armenian Orthodox Christians on January 19. Most Christmas processions pass through Manger Square, the plaza outside the Basilica of the Nativity. Roman Catholic services take place in St. Catherine's Church and Protestants often hold services at Shepherds' Fields.\nOther religious festivals.\nBethlehem celebrates festivals related to saints and prophets associated with Palestinian folklore. One such festival is the annual Feast of Saint George (al-Khadr) on May 5\u20136. During the celebrations, Greek Orthodox Christians from the city march in procession to the nearby town of al-Khader to baptize newborns in the waters around the Monastery of St. George and sacrifice a sheep in ritual. The Feast of St. Elijah is commemorated by a procession to Mar Elias, a Greek Orthodox monastery north of Bethlehem.\nCulture.\nEmbroidery.\nThe women embroiderers of Bethlehem were known for their bridalwear. Bethlehem embroidery was renowned for its \"strong overall effect of colors and metallic brilliance.\" Less formal dresses were made of indigo fabric with a sleeveless coat (\"bisht\") from locally woven wool worn over top. Dresses for special occasions were made of striped silk with winged sleeves with a short \"taqsireh\" jacket known as the Bethlehem jacket. The taqsireh was made of velvet or broadcloth, usually with heavy embroidery.\nBethlehem work was unique in its use of couched gold or silver cord, or silk cord onto the silk, wool, felt or velvet used for the garment, to create stylized floral patterns with free or rounded lines. This technique was used for \"royal\" wedding dresses (\"thob malak\"), taqsirehs and the \"shatwehs\" worn by married women. It has been traced by some to Byzantium, and by others to the formal costumes of the Ottoman Empire's elite. As a Christian village, local women were also exposed to the detailing on church vestments with their heavy embroidery and silver brocade.\nMother-of-pearl carving.\nThe art of mother-of-pearl carving is said to have been a Bethlehem tradition since the 15th century when it was introduced by Franciscan friars from Italy. A constant stream of pilgrims generated a demand for these items, which also provided jobs for women. The industry was noted by Richard Pococke, who visited Bethlehem in 1727.\nCultural centers and museums.\nBethlehem is home to the Palestinian Heritage Center, established in 1991. The center aims to preserve and promote Palestinian embroidery, art and folklore. The International Center of Bethlehem is another cultural center that concentrates primarily on the culture of Bethlehem. It provides language and guide training, woman's studies and arts and crafts displays, and training.\nThe Bethlehem branch of the Edward Said National Conservatory of Music has about 500 students. Its primary goals are to teach children music, train teachers for other schools, sponsor music research, and the study of Palestinian folklore music.\nBethlehem has several museums: The Crib of the Nativity Theatre and Museum offers visitors 31 three-dimensional models depicting the significant stages of the life of Jesus. Its theater presents a 20-minute animated show. The Badd Giacaman Museum, located in the Old City of Bethlehem, dates back to the 18th century and is primarily dedicated to the history and process of olive oil production. Baituna al-Talhami Museum, established in 1972, contains displays of Bethlehem culture. The International Museum of Nativity was built by United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) to exhibit \"high artistic quality in an evocative atmosphere\". The Palestine Museum of Natural History is the first of its kind and is based on Bethlehem University campus.\nLocal government.\nBethlehem is the \"muhfaza\" (seat) or district capital of the Bethlehem Governorate.\nBethlehem held its first municipal elections in 1876, after the \"mukhtars\" (\"heads\") of the quarters of Bethlehem's Old City (excluding the Syriac Quarter) made the decision to elect a local council of seven members to represent each clan in the town. A Basic Law was established so that if the victor for mayor was a Catholic, his deputy should be of the Greek Orthodox community.\nThroughout, Bethlehem's rule by the British and Jordan, the Syriac Quarter was allowed to participate in the election, as were the Ta'amrah Bedouins and Palestinian refugees, hence ratifying the number of municipal members in the council to 11. In 1976, an amendment was passed to allow women to vote and become council members and later the voting age was increased from 21 to 25.\nThere are several branches of political parties on the council, including Communist, Islamist, and secular. The leftist factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) such as the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and the Palestinian People's Party (PPP) usually dominate the reserved seats. Hamas gained the majority of the open seats in the 2005 Palestinian municipal elections.\nMayors.\nIn the October 2012 municipal elections, Fatah member Vera Baboun won, becoming the first female mayor of Bethlehem.\nEducation.\nAccording to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), in 1997, approximately 84% of Bethlehem's population over the age of 10 was literate. Of the city's population, 10,414 were enrolled in schools (4,015 in primary school, 3,578 in secondary and 2,821 in high school). About 14.1% of high school students received diplomas. There were 135 schools in the Bethlehem Governorate in 2006; 100 run the Education Ministry of the Palestinian National Authority, seven by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and 28 were private.\nBethlehem is home to Bethlehem University, a Catholic Christian co-educational institution of higher learning founded in 1973 in the Lasallian tradition, open to students of all faiths. Bethlehem University is the first university established in the West Bank, and can trace its roots to 1893 when the De La Salle Christian Brothers opened schools throughout Palestine and Egypt.\nTransportation.\nBethlehem has three bus stations owned by private companies which offer service to Jerusalem, Beit Jala, Beit Sahour, Hebron, Nahalin, Battir, al-Khader, al-Ubeidiya and Beit Fajjar. There are two taxi stations that make trips to Beit Sahour, Beit Jala, Jerusalem, Tuqu' and Herodium. There are also two car rental departments: Murad and 'Orabi. Buses and taxis with West Bank licenses are not allowed to enter Israel, including Jerusalem, without a permit.\nThe Israeli construction of the West Bank barrier has affected Bethlehem politically, socially, and economically. The barrier is located along the northern side of the town's built-up area, within distance of houses in the Aida refugee camp on one side, and the Jerusalem municipality on the other. Most entrances and exits from the Bethlehem agglomeration to the rest of the West Bank are currently subjected to Israeli checkpoints and roadblocks. The level of access varies based on Israeli security directives. Travel for Bethlehem's Palestinian residents from the West Bank into Jerusalem is regulated by a permit-system. Palestinians require a permit to enter the Jewish holy site of Rachel's Tomb. Israeli citizens are barred from entering Bethlehem and the nearby biblical Solomon's Pools.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBethlehem is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4313", "revid": "48658564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4313", "title": "Benjamin", "text": "Biblical figure and son of Jacob and Rachel\nBenjamin ( \"B\u012bny\u0101m\u012bn\"; \"Son of (the) right\") was the younger of the two sons of Jacob and Rachel, and Jacob's twelfth and youngest son overall in Jewish, Christian and Islamic tradition. He was also considered the progenitor of the Israelite Tribe of Benjamin. Unlike Rachel's first son, Joseph, Benjamin was born in Canaan according to biblical narrative.\nIn the Samaritan Pentateuch, Benjamin's name appears as \"\" (Samaritan Hebrew: , \"son of days\"). In the Quran, Benjamin is referred to as a righteous young child, who remained with Jacob when the older brothers plotted against Joseph. Later rabbinic traditions name him as one of four ancient Israelites who died without sin, the other three being Chileab, Jesse and Amram.\nName.\nThe name is first mentioned in letters from King S\u00een-k\u0101\u0161id of Uruk (1801\u20131771 BC), who called himself \u201cKing of Amnanum\u201d and was a member of the Amorite tribal group the \u201cBinu-Jamina\u201d (single name \u201cBinjamin\u201d; Akkadian ). This name means \"Sons/Son of the South\" and is linguistically related to the Old Testament name \"Benjamin\".\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Benjamin's name arose when Jacob deliberately changed the name \"Benoni\", the original name of Benjamin, since Benoni was an allusion to Rachel's dying just after she had given birth, as it means \"son of my pain\". Textual scholars regard these two names as fragments of naming narratives coming from different sources - one being the Jahwist and the other being the Elohist.\nUnusual for one of the 12 tribes of Israel, the Bible does not explain the etymology of Benjamin's name. Medieval commentator Rashi gives two different explanations, based on Midrashic sources. \"Son of the south\", with south derived from the word for the right hand side, referring to the birth of Benjamin in Canaan, as compared with the birth of all the other sons of Jacob in Aram. Modern scholars have proposed that \"son of the south\" / \"right\" is a reference to the tribe being subordinate to the more dominant tribe of Ephraim. Alternatively, Rashi suggests it means \"son of days\", meaning a son born in Jacob's old age. The Samaritan Pentateuch consistently spells his name \"\u05d1\u05e0\u05d9\u05de\u05d9\u05dd\", with a terminal mem, (\"Binyamim\"), which could be translated literally as \"spirit man\" but is in line with the interpretation that the name was a reference to the advanced age of Jacob when Benjamin was born.\nAccording to classical rabbinical sources, Benjamin was only born after Rachel had fasted for a long time, as a religious devotion with the hope of a new child as a reward. By then Jacob had become over 100 years old. Benjamin is treated as a young child in most of the Biblical narrative, but at one point is abruptly described as the father of ten sons. Textual scholars believe that this is the result of the genealogical passage, in which his children are named, being from a much later source than the Jahwist and Elohist narratives, which make up most of the Joseph narrative, and which consistently describe Benjamin as a child.\nBy allusion to the biblical Benjamin, in French, Polish and Spanish, \"Benjamin\" (/ /, respectively) is a common noun meaning the youngest child of a family, especially a particularly favoured one (with a similar connotation to \"baby of the family\").\nIsraelites in Egypt.\nThe Torah's Joseph narrative, at a stage when Joseph is unrecognised by his brothers, describes Joseph as testing whether his brothers have reformed by secretly planting a silver cup in Benjamin's bag. Then, publicly searching the bags for it, and after \"finding\" it in Benjamin's possession, demanding that Benjamin become his slave as a punishment.\nThe narrative goes on to state that when Judah (on behalf of the other brothers) begged Joseph not to enslave Benjamin and instead enslave him, since enslavement of Benjamin would break Jacob's heart. This caused Joseph to recant and reveal his identity. The midrashic book of Jasher argues that prior to revealing his identity, Joseph asked Benjamin to find his missing brother (i.e. Joseph) via astrology, using an astrolabe-like tool. It continues by stating that Benjamin divined that the \"man on the throne\" was Joseph, so Joseph identified himself to Benjamin (but not the other brothers), and revealed his scheme (as in the Torah) to test how fraternal the other brothers were.\nSome classical rabbinical sources argue that Joseph identified himself for other reasons. In these sources, Benjamin swore an oath, on the memory of Joseph, that he was innocent of theft, and, when challenged about how believable the oath would be, explained that remembering Joseph was so important to him that he had named his sons in Joseph's honour. These sources go on to state that Benjamin's oath touched Joseph so deeply that Joseph was no longer able to pretend to be a stranger.\nIn the narrative, just prior to this test, when Joseph had first met all of his brothers (but not identified himself to them), he had held a feast for them; the narrative heavily implies that Benjamin was Joseph's favorite brother, since he is overcome with tears when he first meets Benjamin in particular, and he gives Benjamin five times as much food as he apportions to the others. According to textual scholars, this is really the Jahwist's account of the reunion after Joseph identifies himself, and the account of the threat to enslave Benjamin is just the Elohist's version of the same event, with the Elohist being more terse about Joseph's emotions towards Benjamin, merely mentioning that Benjamin was given five times as many gifts as the others.\nJacob's blessing.\nUpon his death, the patriarch Jacob blesses his youngest son: \"Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; In the morning he consumes the foe, And in the evening he divides the spoil\" (Genesis 49:27). This wolf symbolism has been interpreted to refer to several elements of the Tribe of Benjamin, including its heroic members like King Saul and Mordecai, the tribe's often warlike nature, and the tribe's jurisdiction over the Temple in Jerusalem in which sacrifices were 'devoured' by flame.\nOrigin.\nBiblical scholars believe, due to their geographic overlap and their treatment in older passages, that Ephraim and Manasseh were originally considered one tribe, that of \"Joseph\". According to several biblical scholars, Benjamin was also originally part of this single tribe, but the biblical account of Joseph as his father became lost.\nThe description of Benjamin being born after the arrival in Canaan is thought by some scholars to refer to the tribe of Benjamin coming into existence by branching from the Joseph group after the tribe had settled in Canaan. A number of biblical scholars suspect that the distinction of the \"Joseph tribes\" (including Benjamin) is that they were the only Israelites which went to Egypt and returned, while the main Israelite tribes simply emerged as a subculture from the Canaanites and had remained in Canaan throughout.\nAccording to this view, the story of Jacob's visit to Laban to obtain a wife originated as a metaphor for this migration, with the property and family which were gained from Laban representing the gains of the Joseph tribes by the time they returned from Egypt. According to textual scholars, the Jahwist version of the Laban narrative only mentions the Joseph tribes and Rachel, and does not mention the other tribal matriarchs whatsoever.\nBenjamin's sons.\nAccording to Genesis 46:21, Benjamin had ten sons: Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard. The name of his wife/wives are not given, but the Book of Jubilees calls his wife Ijasaka and the Book of Jasher mentions two wives, Mechalia the daughter of Aram and Aribath the daughter of Shomron. The classical rabbinical tradition adds that each son's name honors Joseph: \nThere is a disparity between the list given in Genesis 46 and that in Numbers 26, where the sons of Benjamin are listed along with the tribes they are the progenitors of.\nBecher, Gera, Ehi, and Rosh are omitted from the second list. Ard and Naaman, who are the sons of Benjamin according to Numbers 26, are listed as the sons of Belah and are the progenitors of the Ardites and the Naamites respectively.\nIn Islam.\nThough not named in the Quran, Benjamin ( Biny\u0101m\u012bn) is referred to as the righteous youngest son of Jacob, in the narrative of Joseph in Islamic tradition. Apart from that, however, Islamic tradition does not provide much detail regarding Benjamin's life, and refers to him as being born from Jacob's wife Rachel. As with Jewish tradition, it also further links a connection between the names of Benjamin's children and Joseph.\nNear Jenin, in Al-Yamun, there is a tomb-shrine known as the \"Maqam of Nabi Yamin\" or \"A-Nabi Binyamin,\" which is traditionally believed by locals to be the burial site of Benjamin.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4314", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4314", "title": "Black Sabbath", "text": "English heavy metal band\nBlack Sabbath were an English heavy metal band formed in Birmingham in 1968 by guitarist Tony Iommi, drummer Bill Ward, bassist Geezer Butler and vocalist Ozzy Osbourne. After adopting the Black Sabbath name in 1969 (the band were previously named Polka Tulk Blues Band and then Earth), they distinguished themselves through occult themes with horror-inspired lyrics and down-tuned guitars. Their first three albums, \"Black Sabbath\", \"Paranoid\" (both 1970), and \"Master of Reality\" (1971), were commercially successful, and are cited as pioneering albums in the development of heavy metal. Subsequent albums \"Vol. 4\" (1972), \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\" (1973), \"Sabotage\" (1975), \"Technical Ecstasy\" (1976), and \"Never Say Die!\" (1978) saw the band explore more experimental and progressive styles.\nOsbourne was fired from Black Sabbath in 1979 and replaced by former Rainbow vocalist Ronnie James Dio, who recorded three albums with the band, \"Heaven and Hell\" (1980), \"Mob Rules\" (1981), and their first authorised live album \"Live Evil\" (1983), the last two featuring drummer Vinny Appice replacing Ward. Following Dio and Appice's departures, Iommi and Butler recorded \"Born Again\" (1983) with Ward returning on drums, and Ian Gillan, then-formerly of Deep Purple, on vocals. By 1984, Butler, Ward, and Gillan had all departed, leaving Iommi to assemble a new version of Black Sabbath. For the next thirteen years, the band endured many personnel changes that included vocalists Glenn Hughes (another former Deep Purple member, who sang on Black Sabbath's 1986 album \"Seventh Star\") and Tony Martin, as well as several bassists and drummers. Of the vocalists during these years, Martin's tenure was the longest, joining in 1987 and recording three albums \u2013 \"The Eternal Idol\" (1987), \"Headless Cross\" (1989), and \"Tyr\" (1990) \u2013 before his initial departure in 1991. That same year, Iommi reunited with Butler, Dio and Appice to record \"Dehumanizer\" (1992), though Dio and Appice both departed again by the end of 1992. Martin returned for two more studio albums, \"Cross Purposes\" (1994) and \"Forbidden\" (1995), and one live album, \"Cross Purposes Live\" (1995), before the band went on a one-year hiatus.\nThe original line-up of Iommi, Osbourne, Butler and Ward reunited in 1997, releasing a live album, \"Reunion\" (1998), and touring sporadically until 2005. The following year, the \"Mob Rules\" line-up (Iommi, Butler, Dio, Appice) reunited as Heaven &amp; Hell, touring during the late 2000s and releasing one studio album, \"The Devil You Know\" (2009), before disbanding after Dio's death in 2010. The original line-up resumed again in 2011, though Ward departed prior to the recording of their final studio album \"13\" (2013). To conclude their farewell tour, Black Sabbath played its for eight years in their home city in 2017. Occasional partial reunions have occurred, most notably when Osbourne and Iommi performed at the closing ceremony of the 2022 Commonwealth Games in Birmingham. The original line-up reunited for a final show for both the band and Osbourne as a solo artist, titled Back to the Beginning, at Villa Park on 5 July 2025; Osbourne died seventeen days after the performance.\nBlack Sabbath had sold over 70 million records as of 2013, making them one of the most commercially successful heavy metal bands. The band have been referred to as being part of the \"unholy trinity of British hard rock and heavy metal in the early to mid-seventies\", along with Deep Purple and Led Zeppelin. Black Sabbath were ranked by MTV as the \"Greatest Metal Band of All Time\" and placed second on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\" list. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked them 85 on its \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\". They were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005 and Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006. They have won two Grammy Awards for Best Metal Performance, and received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.\nHistory.\n1968\u20131969: Formation and early days.\nFollowing the break-up of their previous band, Mythology, in 1968, guitarist Tony Iommi and drummer Bill Ward sought to form a heavy blues rock band in Aston, Birmingham. They enlisted bassist Geezer Butler and vocalist Ozzy Osbourne, who had played together in a band called Rare Breed; Osbourne having placed an advertisement in a local music shop: \"OZZY ZIG Needs Gig \u2013 has own PA\". The new group was initially named the Polka Tulk Blues Band, the name taken either from a brand of talcum powder or an Indian/Pakistani clothing shop; the exact origin is confused. The Polka Tulk Blues Band included slide guitarist Jimmy Phillips, a childhood friend of Osbourne's, and saxophonist Alan \"Aker\" Clarke. After shortening the name to Polka Tulk, the band again changed their name to Earth. Iommi became concerned that Phillips and Clarke lacked the necessary dedication and were not taking the band seriously. Rather than asking them to leave, they instead decided to break up and then quietly reformed the band as a four-piece. While the band was performing under the Earth moniker, they recorded several demos written by Norman Haines such as \"The Rebel\", \"When I Came Down\" and \"Song for Jim\", the latter of which being a reference to Jim Simpson, who was a manager for the bands Bakerloo Blues Line and Tea &amp; Symphony, as well as the trumpet player for the group Locomotive. Simpson had recently started a new club named Henry's Blueshouse at The Crown Hotel in Birmingham and offered to let Earth play there after they agreed to waive the usual support band fee in return for free T-shirts. The audience response was positive and Simpson agreed to manage Earth.\nIn December 1968, Iommi abruptly left Earth to join Jethro Tull. Although his stint with the band would be short-lived, Iommi made an appearance with Jethro Tull on \"The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus\" TV show. Unsatisfied with the direction of Jethro Tull, Iommi returned to Earth by the end of the month. \"It just wasn't right, so I left\", Iommi said. \"At first I thought Tull were great, but I didn't much go for having a leader in the band, which was Ian Anderson's way. When I came back from Tull, I came back with a new attitude altogether. They taught me that to get on, you got to work for it.\"\nWhile playing shows in England in 1969, the band discovered they were being mistaken for another English group named Earth, so they decided to change their name again (this name change would give rise to the well-known debate about the alleged aesthetic influence of Coven, which the British band always denied). A cinema across the street from the band's rehearsal room was showing the 1963 Italian horror film \"Black Sabbath,\" starring Boris Karloff and directed by Mario Bava. While watching people line up to see the film, Butler noted that it was \"strange that people spend so much money to see scary movies\". Following that, Osbourne and Butler wrote the lyrics for a song called \"Black Sabbath\", which was inspired by the work of horror and adventure-story writer Dennis Wheatley, along with a vision that Butler had of a black silhouetted figure standing at the foot of his bed. Making use of the musical tritone, also known as \"the Devil's Interval\", the song's ominous sound and dark lyrics pushed the band in a darker direction, a stark contrast to the popular music of the late 1960s, which was dominated by flower power, folk music and hippie culture. Judas Priest frontman Rob Halford has called the track \"probably the most evil song ever written\". Inspired by the new sound, the band changed their name to Black Sabbath in August 1969, and made the decision to focus on writing similar material in an attempt to create the musical equivalent of horror films.\n1969\u20131971: \"Black Sabbath\" and \"Paranoid\".\nThe band's first show as Black Sabbath took place on 30 August 1969 in Workington, England. They signed to Philips Records in November 1969.\nThey recorded their first single, \"Evil Woman\" (a cover of a song by the band Crow), at Trident Studios. \"Evil Woman\" was released on 9 January 1970 through Philips subsidiary Fontana Records. Later releases were handled by Philips' newly formed progressive rock label, Vertigo Records. \"Evil Woman\" failed to chart. The band were afforded two days of studio time in November 1969 to record their debut album with producer Rodger Bain. Iommi recalls recording live: \"We thought, 'We have two days to do it, and one of the days is mixing.' So we played live. Ozzy was singing at the same time; we just put him in a separate booth and off we went. We never had a second run of most of the stuff\". On 11 November 1969 Black Sabbath recorded a four-song session for John Peel's \"Top Gear\" radio show broadcast on BBC Radio 1. The four songs were \"Black Sabbath\", \"N.I.B.\", \"Behind the Wall of Sleep\" and \"Sleeping Village\". Broadcast on 29 November 1969, this gave them their first exposure to a UK wide audience.\nTheir debut album \"Black Sabbath\" was released on Friday the 13th, February 1970, and reached number eight in the UK Albums Chart. Following its US and Canadian release in May 1970 by Warner Bros. Records, the album reached number 23 on the \"Billboard\" 200, where it remained for over a year. The album was given negative reviews by many critics. Lester Bangs dismissed it in a \"Rolling Stone\" review as \"discordant jams with bass and guitar reeling like velocitised speedfreaks all over each other's musical perimeters, yet never quite finding synch\". It sold in substantial numbers despite being panned, giving the band their first mainstream exposure. It has since been certified Platinum in both US by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and in the UK by British Phonographic Industry (BPI), and is now generally accepted as the first heavy metal album.\nThe band returned to the studio in June 1970, just four months after \"Black Sabbath\" was released. The new album was initially set to be named \"War Pigs\" after the song \"War Pigs\", which was critical of the Vietnam War; however, Warner changed the title of the album to \"Paranoid\". Most of this album's songs were originally created in the fall of 1969 in a music club in Zurich, Switzerland. Black Sabbath's engagement there included seven 45-minute sets per day for six weeks. They played at what was then known as the 'Beat Club' (also called the Hirschen Club) on the ground floor of the Hotel Hirschen in Zurich's old town. Most of the songs on \"Paranoid\" evolved during onstage improvisational jams there. The album's lead single, \"Paranoid\", was written in the studio at the last minute. Ward explains: \"We didn't have enough songs for the album, and Tony just played the [Paranoid] guitar lick and that was it. It took twenty, twenty-five minutes from top to bottom.\" The single was released in September 1970 and reached number four on the UK singles chart, remaining Black Sabbath's only top 10 hit. The album followed in the UK in October 1970, where, pushed by the success of the \"Paranoid\" single, it reached number one on the UK Albums Chart.\nThe US release was held off until January 1971, as the \"Black Sabbath\" album was still on the chart at the time of \"Paranoid\"'s UK release. The album reached No. 12 in the US in March 1971, and would go on to sell four million copies in the US with virtually no radio airplay. Like \"Black Sabbath\", the album was panned by rock critics of the era, but modern-day reviewers such as AllMusic's Steve Huey cite \"Paranoid\" as \"one of the greatest and most influential heavy metal albums of all time\", which \"defined the sound and style of heavy metal more than any other record in rock history\". The album was ranked at number 131 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. \"Paranoid\"'s chart success allowed the band to tour the US for the first time \u2013 their first US show was at a club called Ungano's at 210 West 70th Street in New York City \u2013 and spawned the release of the album's second single, \"Iron Man\". Although the single failed to reach the top 40, it remains one of Black Sabbath's most popular songs, as well as the band's highest-charting US single until 1998's \"Psycho Man\".\n1971\u20131973: \"Master of Reality\" and \"Vol. 4\".\nIn February 1971, after a one-off performance at the Myponga Pop Festival in Australia, Black Sabbath returned to the studio to begin work on their third album. Following the chart success of \"Paranoid\", the band were afforded more studio time, along with a \"briefcase full of cash\" to buy drugs. \"We were getting into coke, big time\", Ward explained. \"Uppers, downers, Quaaludes, whatever you like. It got to the stage where you come up with ideas and forget them, because you were just so out of it.\"\nProduction completed in April 1971, and in July the band released \"Master of Reality\", just six months after the US release of \"Paranoid\". The album reached the top 10 in the US and the United Kingdom, and was certified Gold in less than two months, eventually receiving Platinum certification in the 1980s and Double Platinum in the early 21st century. It contained Sabbath's first acoustic songs, alongside fan favourites such as \"Children of the Grave\" and \"Sweet Leaf\". Critical response of the era was generally unfavourable, with Lester Bangs delivering an ambivalent review of \"Master of Reality\" in \"Rolling Stone\", describing the closing \"Children of the Grave\" as \"na\u00efve, simplistic, repetitive, absolute doggerel \u2013 but in the tradition [of rock 'n' roll] ... The only criterion is excitement, and Black Sabbath's got it\". (In 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" would place the album at number 300 on their 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list.) Following the \"Master of Reality\" world tour in 1972, the band took their first break in three years. As Ward explained: \"The band started to become very fatigued and very tired. We'd been on the road non-stop, year in and year out, constantly touring and recording. I think \"Master of Reality\" was kind of like the end of an era, the first three albums, and we decided to take our time with the next album.\"\nIn June 1972, the band reconvened in Los Angeles to begin work on their next album at the Record Plant. With more time in the studio, the album saw the band experimenting with new textures, such as strings, piano, orchestration and multi-part songs. Recording was plagued with problems, many as a result of substance abuse issues. Struggling to record the song \"Cornucopia\" after \"sitting in the middle of the room, just doing drugs\", Ward was nearly fired. \"I hated the song, there were some patterns that were just ... horrible,\" the drummer said. \"I nailed it in the end, but the reaction I got was the cold shoulder from everybody. It was like, 'Well, just go home; you're not being of any use right now.' I felt like I'd blown it, I was about to get fired\". Butler thought that the end product \"was very badly produced, as far as I was concerned. Our then-manager insisted on producing it, so he could claim production costs\".\nThe album was originally titled \"Snowblind\" after the song of the same name, which deals with cocaine abuse. The record company changed the title at the last minute to \"Black Sabbath Vol. 4\". Ward observed, \"There was no Volume 1, 2 or 3, so it's a pretty stupid title, really\". \"Vol. 4\" was released in September 1972, and while critics were dismissive, it achieved Gold status in less than a month, and was the band's fourth consecutive release to sell a million in the US. \"Tomorrow's Dream\" was released as a single \u2013 the band's first since \"Paranoid\" \u2013 but failed to chart. Following an extensive tour of the US, in 1973 the band travelled again to Australia, followed by a tour for the first time to New Zealand, before moving onto mainland Europe. \"The band were definitely in their heyday\", recalled Ward, \"in the sense that nobody had burnt out quite yet\".\n1973\u20131976: \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\" and \"Sabotage\".\nFollowing the \"Vol. 4\" world tour, Black Sabbath returned to Los Angeles to begin work on their next release. Pleased with the \"Vol. 4\" album, the band sought to recreate the recording atmosphere, and returned to the Record Plant studio in Los Angeles. With new musical innovations of the era, the band were surprised to find that the room they had used previously at the Record Plant was replaced by a \"giant synthesiser\". The band rented a house in Bel Air and began writing in the summer of 1973, but in part because of substance issues and fatigue, they were unable to complete any songs. \"Ideas weren't coming out the way they were on \"Vol. 4\", and we really got discontent\", Iommi said. \"Everybody was sitting there waiting for me to come up with something. I just couldn't think of anything. And if I didn't come up with anything, nobody would do anything\".\nAfter a month in Los Angeles with no results, the band opted to return to England. They rented Clearwell Castle in The Forest of Dean. \"We rehearsed in the dungeons and it was really creepy, but it had some atmosphere, it conjured up things and stuff started coming out again\". While working in the dungeon, Iommi stumbled onto the main riff of \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\", which set the tone for the new material. Recorded at Morgan Studios in London by Mike Butcher and building off the stylistic changes introduced on \"Vol. 4\", new songs incorporated synthesisers, strings and complex arrangements. Yes keyboardist Rick Wakeman was brought in as a session player, appearing on \"Sabbra Cadabra\".\nIn November 1973, Black Sabbath began to receive positive reviews in the mainstream press after the release of \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\", with Gordon Fletcher of \"Rolling Stone\" calling the album \"an extraordinarily gripping affair\" and \"nothing less than a complete success\". Later reviewers such as AllMusic's Eduardo Rivadavia cite the album as a \"masterpiece, essential to any heavy metal collection\", while also displaying \"a newfound sense of finesse and maturity\". The album marked the band's fifth consecutive Platinum-selling album in the US, reaching number four on the UK Albums Chart and number 11 in the US.\nThe band began a world tour in January 1974, which culminated at the California Jam festival in Ontario, California, on 6 April 1974. Attracting over 200,000 fans, Black Sabbath appeared alongside popular 1970s rock and pop bands Deep Purple, Eagles, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, Rare Earth, Seals &amp; Crofts, Black Oak Arkansas and Earth, Wind &amp; Fire. Portions of the show were telecast on ABC Television in the US, exposing the band to a wider American audience. In the same year, the band shifted management, signing with notorious English manager Don Arden. The move caused a contractual dispute with Black Sabbath's former management, and while on stage in the US, Osbourne was handed a subpoena that led to two years of litigation.\nBlack Sabbath began work on their sixth album in February 1975, again in England at Morgan Studios in Willesden, this time with a decisive vision to differ the sound from \"Sabbath, Bloody Sabbath\". \"We could've continued and gone on and on, getting more technical, using orchestras and everything else which we didn't particularly want to. We took a look at ourselves, and we wanted to do a rock album \u2013 \"Sabbath, Bloody Sabbath\" wasn't a rock album, really\". Produced by Black Sabbath and Mike Butcher, \"Sabotage\" was released in July 1975. As with its precursor, the album initially saw favourable reviews, with \"Rolling Stone\" stating \"\"Sabotage\" is not only Black Sabbath's best record since \"Paranoid\", it might be their best ever\", although later reviewers such as AllMusic noted that \"the magical chemistry that made such albums as \"Paranoid\" and \"Volume 4\" so special was beginning to disintegrate\".\n\"Sabotage\" reached the top 20 in both the US and the United Kingdom, but was the band's first release not to achieve Platinum status in the US, only achieving Gold certification. Although the album's only single \"Am I Going Insane (Radio)\" failed to chart, \"Sabotage\" features fan favourites such as \"Hole in the Sky\" and \"Symptom of the Universe\". Black Sabbath toured in support of \"Sabotage\" with openers Kiss, but were forced to cut the tour short in November 1975, following a motorcycle accident in which Osbourne ruptured a muscle in his back. In December 1975, the band's record companies released a greatest hits album without input from the band, titled \"We Sold Our Soul for Rock 'n' Roll\". The album charted throughout 1976, eventually selling two million copies in the US\n1976\u20131979: \"Technical Ecstasy\", \"Never Say Die!\", and Osbourne's departure.\nBlack Sabbath began work for their next album at Criteria Studios in Miami, Florida, in June 1976. To expand their sound, the band added keyboard player Gerald Woodroffe, who also had appeared to a lesser extent on \"Sabotage\". During the recording of \"Technical Ecstasy\", Osbourne admitted that he began losing interest in Black Sabbath and began to consider the possibility of working with other musicians. Recording of \"Technical Ecstasy\" was difficult; by the time the album was completed, Osbourne was admitted to Stafford County Asylum in Britain. It was released on 22 October 1976 to mixed reviews, and \u2013 for the first time \u2013 later music critics gave the album less favourable retrospective reviews; two decades after its release, AllMusic gave the album two stars, and noted that the band was \"unravelling at an alarming rate\". The album featured less of the doomy, ominous sound of previous efforts, and incorporated more synthesisers and uptempo rock songs. \"Technical Ecstasy\" failed to reach the top 50 in the US and was the band's second consecutive release not to achieve Platinum status, although it was later certified Gold in 1997. The album included \"Dirty Women\", which remains a live staple, as well as Ward's first lead vocal on the song \"It's Alright\". Touring in support of \"Technical Ecstasy\" began in November 1976, with openers Boston and Ted Nugent in the US, and completed in Europe with AC/DC in April 1977.\nIn late 1977, while in rehearsal for their next album and just days before the band was set to enter the studio, Osbourne abruptly quit the band. Iommi called vocalist Dave Walker, a longtime friend of the band who had previously been a member of Fleetwood Mac and Savoy Brown, and informed him that Osbourne had left the band. Walker, who was at that time fronting a band called Mistress, flew to Birmingham from California in late 1977 to write material and rehearse with Black Sabbath. On 8 January 1978, Walker made his only live performance with Black Sabbath, on vocals, when they played an excerpt of \"War Pigs\" and an early version of \"Junior's Eyes\" on the BBC West Midlands Television programme \"Look! Hear!\" Walker later recalled that, while in Birmingham, he had bumped into Osbourne in a pub and came to the conclusion that Osbourne was not fully committed to leaving Black Sabbath. \"The last Sabbath albums were just very depressing for me\", Osbourne said. \"I was doing it for the sake of what we could get out of the record company, just to get fat on beer and put a record out.\" Walker has said that he wrote a lot of lyrics during his brief time in the band, but none of them were ever used. If any recordings of this version of the band other than the \"Look! Hear!\" footage still exist, Walker says that he is not aware of them.\nOsbourne initially set out to form a solo project featuring former Dirty Tricks members John Frazer-Binnie, Terry Horbury and Andy Bierne. As the new band were in rehearsals in January 1978, Osbourne had a change of heart and rejoined Black Sabbath. \"Three days before we were due to go into the studio, Ozzy wanted to come back to the band\", Iommi explained. \"He wouldn't sing any of the stuff we'd written with the other guy (Walker), so it made it very difficult. We went into the studio with basically no songs. We'd write in the morning so we could rehearse and record at night. It was so difficult, like a conveyor belt, because you couldn't get time to reflect on stuff. 'Is this right? Is this working properly?' It was very difficult for me to come up with the ideas and putting them together that quick\".\nThe band spent five months at Sounds Interchange Studios in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, writing and recording what would become \"Never Say Die!\". \"It took quite a long time\", Iommi said. \"We were getting really drugged out, doing a lot of dope. We'd go down to the sessions, and have to pack up because we were too stoned, we'd have to stop. Nobody could get anything right, we were all over the place, everybody's playing a different thing. We'd go back and sleep it off, and try again the next day\". The album was released on 29 September 1978, reaching number 12 in the United Kingdom and number 69 in the US. The press response was unfavourable and did not improve over time, with Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic stating two decades after its release that the album's \"unfocused songs perfectly reflected the band's tense personnel problems and drug abuse\". The album featured the singles \"Never Say Die\" and \"Hard Road\", both of which cracked the top 40 in the United Kingdom. The band also made their second appearance on the BBC's \"Top of the Pops\", performing \"Never Say Die\". It took nearly 20 years for the album to be certified Gold in the US\nTouring in support of \"Never Say Die!\" began in May 1978 with openers Van Halen. Reviewers called Black Sabbath's performance \"tired and uninspired\", a stark contrast to the \"youthful\" performance of Van Halen, who were touring the world for the first time. The band filmed a performance at the Hammersmith Odeon in June 1978, which was later released on DVD as \"Never Say Die\". The final show of the tour \u2013 and Osbourne's last appearance with the band until later reunions \u2013 was in Albuquerque, New Mexico, on 11 December.\nFollowing the tour, Black Sabbath returned to Los Angeles and again rented a house in Bel Air, where they spent nearly a year working on new material for the next album. The entire band were abusing both alcohol and other drugs, but Iommi says Osbourne \"was on a totally different level altogether\". The band would come up with new song ideas, but Osbourne showed little interest and would refuse to sing them. Pressure from the record label and frustrations with Osbourne's lack of input coming to a head, Iommi made the decision to fire Osbourne in 1979. Iommi believed the only options available were to fire Osbourne or break the band up completely. \"At that time, Ozzy had come to an end\", Iommi said. \"We were all doing a lot of drugs, a lot of coke, a lot of everything, and Ozzy was getting drunk so much at the time. We were supposed to be rehearsing and nothing was happening. It was like, 'Rehearse today? No, we'll do it tomorrow.' It really got so bad that we didn't do anything. It just fizzled out\". Ward, who was close with Osbourne, was chosen by Iommi to break the news to the singer on 27 April 1979. \"I hope I was professional, I might not have been, actually. When I'm drunk I am horrible, I am horrid\", Ward said. \"Alcohol was definitely one of the most damaging things to Black Sabbath. We were destined to destroy each other. The band were toxic, very toxic\".\n1979\u20131982: Dio joins, \"Heaven and Hell\" and \"Mob Rules\".\nWhile Don Arden was trying to convince Osbourne to rejoin Black Sabbath, as he viewed the original line-up as the most profitable, the band hired former Rainbow frontman Ronnie James Dio as Osbourne's replacement, and they began writing their next album. With a notably different vocal style from Osbourne's, Dio's addition to the band marked a change in Black Sabbath's sound. \"They were totally different altogether\", Iommi explains. \"Not only voice-wise, but attitude-wise. Ozzy was a great showman, but when Dio came in, it was a different attitude, a different voice and a different musical approach, as far as vocals. Dio would sing \"across\" the riff, whereas Ozzy would follow the riff, like in \"Iron Man\". Ronnie came in and gave us another angle on writing.\"\nButler temporarily left the band in September 1979 to deal with the divorce from his first wife. According to Dio, the band initially hired Craig Gruber, with whom Dio had previously played while in Elf and Rainbow, on bass to assist with writing the new album. Gruber was soon replaced by Geoff Nicholls of Quartz. The new line-up returned to Criteria Studios in November to begin recording work, with Butler returning to the band in January 1980 and Nicholls moving to keyboards. Produced by Martin Birch, \"Heaven and Hell\" was released on 25 April 1980, to critical acclaim. Over a decade after its release, AllMusic said the album was \"one of Sabbath's finest records, the band sounds reborn and re-energised throughout\". \"Heaven and Hell\" peaked at number nine in the United Kingdom and number 28 in the US, the band's highest-charting album since \"Sabotage\". The album eventually sold a million copies in the US, and the band embarked on an extensive world tour, making their first live appearance with Dio in Germany on 17 April 1980.\nBlack Sabbath toured the US throughout 1980 with Blue \u00d6yster Cult on the \"Black and Blue\" tour, with a show at Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York, filmed for Don Kirshner's Rock Concert and later released theatrically in 1981 as \"Black and Blue\". On 26 July 1980, the band played to 75,000 fans at a sold-out Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum with Journey, Cheap Trick and Molly Hatchet. The next day, the band appeared at the 1980 Day on the Green at Oakland Coliseum. While on tour, Black Sabbath's former label in England issued a live album culled from a seven-year-old performance, titled \"Live at Last\" without any input from the band. The album reached number five on the UK chart and saw the re-release of \"Paranoid\" as a single, which reached the top 20.\nOn 18 August 1980, after a show in Bloomington, Minnesota, Ward quit the band. \"It was intolerable for me to get on the stage without Ozzy. And I drank 24 hours a day, my alcoholism accelerated\". Butler stated that after Ward's final show, the drummer came in drunk, stating that \"he might as well be a Martian\". Ward then got angry, packed his things and got on a bus to leave. Following Ward's sudden departure, the group hired drummer Vinny Appice. Further trouble for the band came during their 9 October 1980 concert at the Milwaukee Arena, which degenerated into a riot that caused $10,000 in damages to the arena and resulted in 160 arrests. According to the Associated Press: \"The crowd of mostly adolescent males first became rowdy in a performance by the Blue Oyster Cult\" and then grew restless while waiting an hour for Black Sabbath to begin playing. A member of the audience threw a beer bottle that struck Butler and effectively ended the show. \"The band then abruptly halted its performance and began leaving\" as the crowd rioted.\nThe band completed the \"Heaven and Hell\" world tour in February 1981 and returned to the studio to begin work on their next album. Black Sabbath's second studio album that was produced by Martin Birch and featured Ronnie James Dio as vocalist, \"Mob Rules\", was released in October 1981 and was well received by fans, but less so by critics. \"Rolling Stone\" reviewer J. D. Considine gave the album one star, claiming \"\"Mob Rules\" finds the band as dull-witted and flatulent as ever\". Like most of the band's earlier work, time helped to improve the opinions of the music press. A decade after its release, AllMusic's Eduardo Rivadavia called \"Mob Rules\" \"a magnificent record\". The album was certified Gold and reached the top 20 on the UK chart. The album's title track, \"The Mob Rules\", which was recorded at John Lennon's old house in England, was also featured in the 1981 animated film \"Heavy Metal\", although the film version is an alternate take and differs from the album version.\nUnhappy with the quality of 1980's \"Live at Last\", the band recorded another live album \u2013 titled \"Live Evil \u2013\" during the \"Mob Rules\" world tour, across the United States in Dallas, San Antonio and Seattle, in 1982. During the mixing process for the album, Iommi and Butler had a falling-out with Dio. Misinformed by their then-current mixing engineer, Iommi and Butler accused Dio of sneaking into the studio at night to raise the volume of his vocals. In addition, Dio was not satisfied with the pictures of him in the artwork. Butler also accused Dio and Appice of working on a solo album during the album's mixing without telling the other members of Black Sabbath. \"Ronnie wanted more say in things\", Iommi said. \"And Geezer would get upset with him and that is where the rot set in. \"Live Evil\" is when it all fell apart. Ronnie wanted to do more of his own thing, and the engineer we were using at the time in the studio didn't know what to do, because Ronnie was telling him one thing and we were telling him another. At the end of the day, we just said, 'That's it, the band is over'\". \"When it comes time for the vocal, nobody tells me what to do. Nobody! Because they're not as good as me, so I do what I want to do\", Dio later said. \"I refuse to listen to \"Live Evil\", because there are too many problems. If you look at the credits, the vocals and drums are listed off to the side. Open up the album and see how many pictures there are of Tony, and how many there are of me and Vinny\".\nRonnie James Dio left Black Sabbath in November 1982 to start his own band and took drummer Vinny Appice with him. \"Live Evil\" was released in January 1983, but was overshadowed by Ozzy Osbourne's Platinum-selling album \"Speak of the Devil\".\n1982\u20131984: Gillan as singer and \"Born Again\".\nThe remaining original members, Iommi and Butler, began auditioning singers for the band's next release. Deep Purple and Whitesnake's David Coverdale, Samson's Nicky Moore and Lone Star's John Sloman were all considered, and Iommi states in his autobiography that Michael Bolton auditioned, though this claim has been disputed, with Butler suggesting that Iommi concocted the story as \"a joke\" and Bolton insisting it was \"only a rumour\". The band settled on then-former Deep Purple vocalist Ian Gillan to replace Dio in December 1982. The project was initially not to be called Black Sabbath, but pressure from the record label forced the group to retain the name. The band entered The Manor Studios in Shipton-on-Cherwell, Oxfordshire, in June 1983 with a returned and newly sober Bill Ward on drums. \"That was the very first album that I ever did clean and sober,\" Ward recalled. \"I only got drunk \"after\" I finished all my work on the album \u2013 which wasn't a very good idea... Sixty to seventy per cent of my energy was taken up on learning how to get through the day without taking a drink and learning how to do things without drinking, and thirty per cent of me was involved in the album.\"\n\"Born Again\" (9 September 1983) was panned on release by critics. Despite this negative reception, it reached number four in the UK, and number 39 in the US Even three decades after its release, AllMusic's Eduardo Rivadavia called the album \"dreadful\", noting that \"Gillan's bluesy style and humorous lyrics were completely incompatible with the lords of doom and gloom\".\nUnable to tour because of the pressures of the road, Ward quit the band. \"I fell apart with the idea of touring,\" he later explained. \"I got so much fear behind touring, I didn't talk about the fear, I drank behind the fear instead and that was a big mistake.\" He was replaced by former Move and Electric Light Orchestra drummer Bev Bevan for the \"Born Again\" '83\u2013'84 world tour, (often unofficially referred to as the 'Feighn Death Sabbath '83\u2013'84' World Tour) which began in Europe with Diamond Head, and later in the US with Quiet Riot and Night Ranger. The band headlined the 1983 Reading Festival in England, adding Deep Purple's \"Smoke on the Water\" to their encore.\nThe tour in support of \"Born Again\" included a giant set of the Stonehenge monument. In a move later parodied in the mockumentary \"This Is Spinal Tap\", the band made a mistake in ordering the set piece. Butler explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We had Sharon Osbourne's dad, Don Arden, managing us. He came up with the idea of having the stage set be Stonehenge. He wrote the dimensions down and gave it to our tour manager. He wrote it down in metres but he meant to write it down in feet. The people who made it saw fifteen metres instead of fifteen feet. It was 45 feet high and it wouldn't fit on any stage anywhere so we just had to leave it in the storage area. It cost a fortune to make but there was not a building on earth that you could fit it into.\n1984\u20131987: Hiatus, Hughes as singer, \"Seventh Star\", and Gillen as singer.\nFollowing the completion of the \"Born Again\" tour in March 1984, vocalist Ian Gillan left Black Sabbath to re-join Deep Purple, which was reforming after a long hiatus. Bevan left at the same time, and Gillan remarked that he and Bevan were made to feel like \"hired help\" by Iommi. The band then recruited an unknown Los Angeles vocalist named David Donato and Ward once again rejoined the band. The new line-up wrote and rehearsed throughout 1984, and eventually recorded a demo with producer Bob Ezrin in October. Unhappy with the results, the band parted ways with Donato shortly after. Disillusioned with the band's revolving line-up, Ward left shortly after stating \"This isn't Black Sabbath\". Butler would quit Sabbath next in November 1984 to form a solo band. \"When Ian Gillan took over that was the end of it for me,\" he said. \"I thought it was just a joke and I just totally left. When we got together with Gillan it was not supposed to be a Black Sabbath album. After we had done the album we gave it to Warner Bros. and they said they were going to put it out as a Black Sabbath album and we didn't have a leg to stand on. I got really disillusioned with it and Gillan was really pissed off about it. That lasted one album and one tour and then that was it.\"\nFollowing both Ward's and Butler's exits, sole remaining original member Iommi put Sabbath on hiatus, and began work on a solo album with long-time Sabbath keyboardist Geoff Nicholls. While working on new material, the original Sabbath line-up agreed to a spot at Bob Geldof's Live Aid on 13 July 1985, performing at the Philadelphia show. This event \u2013 which also featured reunions of the Who and Led Zeppelin \u2013 marked the first time the original line-up had appeared on stage since 1978. \"We were all drunk when we did Live Aid,\" recalled Geezer Butler, \"but we'd all got drunk separately.\"\nReturning to his solo work, Iommi enlisted bassist Dave Spitz (ex-Great White), drummer Eric Singer and initially intended to use multiple singers, including Rob Halford of Judas Priest, former Deep Purple and Trapeze vocalist Glenn Hughes, and former Sabbath vocalist Ronnie James Dio. This plan did not work as he forecasted. \"We were going to use different vocalists on the album, guest vocalists, but it was so difficult getting it together and getting releases from their record companies. Glenn Hughes came along to sing on one track and we decided to use him on the whole album.\"\nThe band spent the remainder of the year in the studio, recording what would become \"Seventh Star\" (1986). Warner Bros. refused to release the album as a Tony Iommi solo release, instead insisting on using the name Black Sabbath. Pressured by the band's manager, Don Arden, the two compromised and released the album as \"Black Sabbath featuring Tony Iommi\" in January 1986. \"It opened up a whole can of worms,\" Iommi explained. \"If we could have done it as a solo album, it would have been accepted a lot more.\" \"Seventh Star\" sounded little like a Sabbath album, incorporating instead elements popularised by the 1980s Sunset Strip hard rock scene. It was panned by the critics of the era, although later reviewers such as AllMusic gave album verdicts, calling the album \"often misunderstood and underrated\".\nThe new line-up rehearsed for six weeks preparing for a full world tour, although the band were eventually forced to use the Sabbath name. \"I was into the 'Tony Iommi project', but I wasn't into the Black Sabbath moniker,\" Hughes said. \"The idea of being in Black Sabbath didn't appeal to me \"whatsoever\". Glenn Hughes singing in Black Sabbath is like James Brown singing in Metallica. It wasn't gonna work.\" Just four days before the start of the tour, Hughes got into a bar fight with the band's production manager John Downing which splintered the singer's orbital bone. The injury interfered with Hughes' ability to sing, and the band brought in vocalist Ray Gillen to continue the tour with W.A.S.P. and Anthrax, although nearly half of the US dates would be cancelled because of poor ticket sales.\nBlack Sabbath began work on new material in October 1986 at AIR Studios in Montserrat with producer Jeff Glixman. The recording was fraught with problems from the beginning, as Glixman left after the initial sessions to be replaced by producer Vic Coppersmith-Heaven. Bassist Dave Spitz quit over \"personal issues\", and former Rainbow and Ozzy Osbourne bassist Bob Daisley was brought in. Daisley re-recorded all of the bass tracks, and wrote the album's lyrics, but before the album was complete, he left to join Gary Moore's backing band, taking drummer Eric Singer with him. After problems with second producer Coppersmith-Heaven, the band returned to Morgan Studios in England in January 1987 to work with new producer Chris Tsangarides. While working in the United Kingdom, new vocalist Ray Gillen abruptly left Black Sabbath to form Blue Murder with guitarist John Sykes (ex-Tygers of Pan Tang, Thin Lizzy, Whitesnake) and then Badlands with former Osbourne guitarist Jake E. Lee. The band auditioned a number of singers, including Jon Oliva of Savatage.\n1987\u20131990: Martin joins, \"The Eternal Idol\", \"Headless Cross\", and \"Tyr\".\nThe band enlisted heavy metal vocalist Tony Martin to re-record Gillen's tracks, and Bevan rejoined to complete a few percussion overdubs. Before the release of the new album, Black Sabbath accepted an offer to play six shows at Sun City, South Africa, during the apartheid era. The band drew criticism from activists and artists involved with Artists United Against Apartheid, who had been boycotting South Africa since 1985. Bevan refused to play the shows, and was replaced by Terry Chimes, formerly of the Clash, while Dave Spitz returned on bass.\nAfter nearly a year in production, \"The Eternal Idol\" was released in November 1987 and ignored by contemporary reviewers. On-line internet era reviews were mixed. AllMusic said that \"Martin's powerful voice added new fire\" to the band, and the album contained \"some of Iommi's heaviest riffs in years\". \"Blender\" gave the album two stars, claiming the album was \"Black Sabbath in name only\". The album would stall at No. 66 in the United Kingdom, while peaking at 168 in the US The band toured in support of \"Eternal Idol\" in Germany, Italy and for the first time, Greece. In part due to a backlash from promoters over the South Africa incident, other European shows were cancelled. Bassist Dave Spitz left the band again shortly before the tour, and was replaced by Jo Burt, formerly of Virginia Wolf.\nFollowing the poor commercial performance of \"The Eternal Idol\", Black Sabbath were dropped by both Vertigo Records and Warner Bros. Records, and signed with I.R.S. Records. The band took time off in 1988, returning in August to begin work on their next album. As a result of the recording troubles with \"Eternal Idol\", Tony Iommi opted to produce the band's next album himself. \"It was a completely new start\", Iommi said. \"I had to rethink the whole thing, and decided that we needed to build up some credibility again\". Iommi enlisted former Rainbow drummer Cozy Powell, long-time keyboardist Nicholls and session bassist Laurence Cottle, and rented a \"very cheap studio in England\".\nBlack Sabbath released \"Headless Cross\" in April 1989, and it was also ignored by contemporary reviewers, although AllMusic contributor Eduardo Rivadavia gave the album four stars and called it \"the finest non-Ozzy or Dio Black Sabbath album\". Anchored by the number 62 charting single \"Headless Cross\", the album reached number 31 on the UK chart, and number 115 in the US Queen guitarist Brian May, a good friend of Iommi's, played a guest solo on the song \"When Death Calls\". Following the album's release the band added touring bassist Neil Murray, formerly of Colosseum II, National Health, Whitesnake, Gary Moore's backing band, and Vow Wow.\nThe unsuccessful \"Headless Cross\" US tour began in May 1989 with openers Kingdom Come and Silent Rage, but because of poor ticket sales, the tour was cancelled after just eight shows. The European leg of the tour began in September, where the band were enjoying chart success. After a string of Japanese shows the band embarked on a 23 date Russian tour with Girlschool. Black Sabbath was one of the first bands to tour Russia, after Mikhail Gorbachev opened the country to western acts for the first time in 1989.\nThe band returned to the studio in February 1990 to record \"Tyr\", the follow-up to \"Headless Cross\". While not technically a concept album, some of the album's lyrical themes are loosely based on Norse mythology. \"Tyr\" was released on 6 August 1990, reaching number 24 on the UK albums chart, but was the first Black Sabbath release not to break the \"Billboard\" 200 in the US The album would receive mixed internet-era reviews, with AllMusic noting that the band \"mix myth with metal in a crushing display of musical synthesis\", while \"Blender\" gave the album just one star, claiming that \"Iommi continues to besmirch the Sabbath name with this unremarkable collection\". The band toured in support of \"Tyr\" with Circus of Power in Europe, but the final seven United Kingdom dates were cancelled because of poor ticket sales. For the first time in their career, the band's touring cycle did not include US dates.\n1990\u20131992: Dio rejoins and \"Dehumanizer\".\nWhile on his \"Lock Up the Wolves\" US tour in August 1990, former Sabbath vocalist Ronnie James Dio was joined onstage at the Roy Wilkins Auditorium by Geezer Butler to perform \"Neon Knights\". Following the show, the two expressed interest in rejoining Sabbath. Butler convinced Iommi, who in turn broke up the current line-up, dismissing vocalist Tony Martin and bassist Neil Murray. \"I do regret that in a lot of ways,\" Iommi said. \"We were at a good point then. We decided to [reunite with Dio] and I don't even know why, really. There's the financial aspect, but that wasn't it. I seemed to think maybe we could recapture something we had.\"\nDio and Butler joined Iommi and Cozy Powell in autumn 1990 to begin the next Sabbath release. While rehearsing in November, Powell suffered a broken hip when his horse died and fell on the drummer's legs. Unable to complete the album, Powell was replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice, reuniting the \"Mob Rules\" line-up, and the band entered the studio with producer Reinhold Mack. The year-long recording was plagued with problems, primarily stemming from writing tension between Iommi and Dio. Songs were rewritten multiple times. \"It was just hard work,\" Iommi said. \"We took too long on it, that album cost us a million dollars, which is bloody ridiculous.\" Dio recalled the album as difficult, but worth the effort: \"It was something we had to really wring out of ourselves, but I think that's why it works. Sometimes you need that kind of tension, or else you end up making the Christmas album\".\nThe resulting \"Dehumanizer\" was released on 22 June 1992. In the US, the album was released on 30 June 1992 by Reprise Records, as Dio and his namesake band were still under contract to the label at the time. While the album received mixed , it was the band's biggest commercial success in a decade. Anchored by the top 40 rock radio single \"TV Crimes\", the album peaked at number 44 on the \"Billboard 200.\" The album also featured \"Time Machine\", a version of which had been recorded for the 1992 film \"Wayne's World\". Additionally, the perception among fans of a return of some semblance of the \"real\" Sabbath provided the band with much needed momentum.\nSabbath began touring in support of \"Dehumanizer\" in July 1992 with Testament, Danzig, Prong, and Exodus. While on tour, former vocalist Ozzy Osbourne announced his first retirement, and invited Sabbath to open for his solo band at the final two shows of his \"No More Tours\" tour in Costa Mesa, California. The band agreed, aside from Dio, who told Iommi, \"I'm not doing that. I'm not supporting a clown.\" Dio spoke of the situation years later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDio quit Sabbath following a show in Oakland, California on 13 November 1992, one night before the band were set to appear at Osbourne's retirement show. Judas Priest vocalist Rob Halford stepped in at the last minute, performing two nights with the band. Iommi and Butler joined Osbourne and former drummer Ward on stage for the first time since 1985's Live Aid concert, performing a brief set of Sabbath songs. This set the stage for a longer-term reunion of the original line-up, though that plan proved short-lived. \"Ozzy, Geezer, Tony and Bill announced the reunion of Black Sabbath \u2013 again,\" remarked Dio. \"And I thought that it was a great idea. But I guess Ozzy didn't think it was such a great idea... I'm never surprised when it comes to whatever happens with them. Never at all. They are very predictable. They don't talk.\"\n1992\u20131997: Martin rejoins, \"Cross Purposes\", and \"Forbidden\".\nDrummer Vinny Appice left the band following the reunion show to rejoin Ronnie James Dio's solo band, later appearing on Dio's \"Strange Highways\" and \"Angry Machines\". Iommi and Butler enlisted former Rainbow drummer Bobby Rondinelli, and reinstated former vocalist Tony Martin. The band returned to the studio to work on new material, although the project was not originally intended to be released under the Black Sabbath name. As Geezer Butler explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It wasn't even supposed to be a Sabbath album; I wouldn't have even done it under the pretence of Sabbath. That was the time when the original band were talking about getting back together for a reunion tour. Tony and myself just went in with a couple of people, did an album just to have, while the reunion tour was (supposedly) going on. It was like an Iommi/Butler project album.\nUnder pressure from their record label, the band released their seventeenth studio album, \"Cross Purposes\", on 8 February 1994, under the Black Sabbath name. The album received mixed reviews, with \"Blender\" giving the album two stars, calling Soundgarden's 1994 album \"Superunknown\" \"a far better Sabbath album than this by-the-numbers potboiler\". AllMusic's Bradley Torreano called \"Cross Purposes\" \"the first album since \"Born Again\" that actually sounds like a real Sabbath record\". The album just missed the Top 40 in the UK reaching number 41, and also reached 122 on the \"Billboard\" 200 in the US \"Cross Purposes\" contained the song \"Evil Eye\", which was co-written by Van Halen guitarist Eddie Van Halen, although uncredited because of record label restrictions. Touring in support of \"Cross Purposes\" began in February with Morbid Angel and Mot\u00f6rhead in the US The band filmed a live performance at the Hammersmith Apollo on 13 April 1994, which was released on VHS accompanied by a CD, titled \"Cross Purposes Live\". After the European tour with Cathedral and Godspeed in June 1994, drummer Bobby Rondinelli quit the band and was replaced by original Black Sabbath drummer Ward for five shows in South America.\nFollowing the touring cycle for \"Cross Purposes\", bassist Geezer Butler quit the band for the second time. \"I finally got totally disillusioned with the last Sabbath album, and I much preferred the stuff I was writing to the stuff Sabbath were doing\". Butler formed a solo project called GZR, and released \"Plastic Planet\" in 1995. The album contained the song \"Giving Up the Ghost\", which was critical of Tony Iommi for carrying on with the Black Sabbath name, with the lyrics: \"You plagiarised and parodied / the magic of our meaning / a legend in your own mind / left all your friends behind / you can't admit that you're wrong / the spirit is dead and gone\" (\"I heard it's something about me...\" said Iommi. \"I had the album given to me a while back. I played it once, then somebody else had it, so I haven't really paid any attention to the lyrics... It's nice to see him doing his own thing \u2013 getting things off his chest. I don't want to get into a rift with Geezer. He's still a friend.\"\nFollowing Butler's departure, newly returned drummer Ward once again left the band. Iommi reinstated former members Neil Murray on bass and Cozy Powell on drums, effectively reuniting the 1990 \"Tyr\" line-up. The band enlisted Body Count guitarist Ernie C to produce the new album, which was recorded in London in autumn of 1994. The album featured a guest vocal on \"Illusion of Power\" by Body Count vocalist Ice-T. The resulting \"Forbidden\" was released on 8 June 1995, but failed to chart in the US The album was widely panned by critics; AllMusic's Bradley Torreano said \"with boring songs, awful production, and uninspired performances, this is easily avoidable for all but the most enthusiastic fan\"; while \"Blender\" magazine called \"Forbidden\" \"an embarrassment... the band's worst album\".\nBlack Sabbath embarked on a world tour in July 1995 with openers Mot\u00f6rhead and Tiamat, but two months into the tour, drummer Cozy Powell left the band, citing health issues, and was replaced by former drummer Bobby Rondinelli. \"The members I had in the last lineup \u2013 Bobby Rondinelli, Neil Murray \u2013 they're great, great characters...\" Iommi told Sabbath fanzine \"Southern Cross\". \"That, for me, was an ideal lineup. I wasn't sure vocally what we should do, but Neil Murray and Bobby Rondinelli I really got on well with.\"\nAfter completing Asian dates in December 1995, Tony Iommi put the band on hiatus, and began work on a solo album with former Black Sabbath vocalist Glenn Hughes, and former Judas Priest drummer Dave Holland. The album was not officially released following its completion, although a widely traded bootleg called \"Eighth Star\" surfaced soon after. The album was officially released in 2004 as \"The 1996 DEP Sessions\", with Holland's drums re-recorded by session drummer Jimmy Copley.\nIn 1997, Tony Iommi disbanded the current line-up to officially reunite with Ozzy Osbourne and the original Black Sabbath line-up. Vocalist Tony Martin claimed that an original line-up reunion had been in the works since the band's brief reunion at Ozzy Osbourne's 1992 Costa Mesa show, and that the band released subsequent albums to fulfill their record contract with I.R.S. Records. Martin later recalled \"Forbidden\" as a \"filler album that got the band out of the label deal, rid of the singer, and into the reunion. However I wasn't privy to that information at the time\". I.R.S. Records released a compilation album in 1996 to fulfill the band's contract, titled \"The Sabbath Stones\", which featured songs from \"Born Again\" (1983) to \"Forbidden\".\n1997\u20132006: Osbourne rejoins and \"Reunion\".\nIn the summer of 1997, Iommi, Butler and Osbourne reunited to coheadline the Ozzfest tour alongside Osbourne's solo band. The line-up featured Osbourne's drummer Mike Bordin filling in for Ward. \"It started off with me going off to join Ozzy for a couple of numbers,\" explained Iommi, \"and then it got into Sabbath doing a short set, involving Geezer. And then it grew as it went on... We were concerned in case Bill couldn't make it \u2013 couldn't do it \u2013 because it was a lot of dates, and important dates... The only rehearsal that we had to do was for the drummer. But I think if Bill had come in, it would have took a lot more time. We would have had to focus a lot more on him.\"\nIn December 1997, the group was joined by Ward, marking the first reunion of the original quartet since Osbourne's 1992 \"retirement show\". This line-up recorded two shows at the Birmingham NEC, released as the double album \"Reunion\" on 20 October 1998. The album reached number eleven on the \"Billboard\" 200, went platinum in the US and spawned the single \"Iron Man\", which won Sabbath their first Grammy Award in 2000 for Best Metal Performance, 30 years after the song was originally released. \"Reunion\" featured two new studio tracks, \"Psycho Man\" and \"Selling My Soul\", both of which cracked the top 20 of the \"Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks\" chart.\nShortly before a European tour in the summer of 1998, Ward had a heart attack and was temporarily replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice. Ward returned for a US tour with openers Pantera, which began in January 1999 and continued through the summer, headlining the annual Ozzfest tour. Following these appearances, the band was put on hiatus while members worked on solo material. Iommi released his first official solo album, \"Iommi\", in 2000, while Osbourne continued work on \"Down to Earth\" (2001).\nSabbath returned to the studio to work on new material with all four original members and producer Rick Rubin in the spring of 2001, but the sessions were halted when Osbourne was called away to finish tracks for his solo album in the summer. \"It just came to an end...\" Iommi said. \"It's a shame because [the songs] were really Iommi commented on the difficulty getting all the members together to work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's quite different recording now. We've all done so much in between. In [the early] days there was no mobile phone ringing every five seconds. When we first started, we had nothing. We all worked for the same thing. Now everybody has done so many other things. It's great fun and we all have a good chat, but it's just different, trying to put an album together.\nIn March 2002, Osbourne's Emmy-winning reality show \"The Osbournes\" debuted on MTV, and quickly became a worldwide hit. The show introduced Osbourne to a broader audience and, to capitalise, the band's back catalogue label Sanctuary Records released a double live album, \"Past Lives\" (2002), which featured concert material recorded in the 1970s, including the \"Live at Last\" (1980) album. The band remained on hiatus until the summer of 2004 when they returned to headline Ozzfest 2004 and 2005. In November 2005, Black Sabbath were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame, and in March 2006, after eleven years of eligibility\u2014Osbourne famously refused the Hall's \"meaningless\" initial nomination in 1999\u2014the band were inducted into the US Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. At the awards ceremony Metallica played two Sabbath songs, \"Hole in the Sky\" and \"Iron Man\" in tribute.\n2006\u20132010: \"The Dio Years\" and Heaven and Hell.\nWhile Ozzy Osbourne was working on new solo album material in 2006, Rhino Records released \"\", a compilation of songs culled from the four Black Sabbath releases featuring Ronnie James Dio. For the release, Iommi, Butler, Dio, and Appice reunited to write and record three new songs as Black Sabbath. \"The Dio Years\" was released on 3 April 2007, reaching number 54 on the \"Billboard\" 200, while the single \"The Devil Cried\" reached number 37 on the \"Mainstream Rock Tracks\" chart. Pleased with the results, Iommi and Dio decided to reunite the Dio era line-up for a world tour. While the line-up of Osbourne, Butler, Iommi, and Ward was still officially called Black Sabbath, the new line-up opted to call themselves Heaven &amp; Hell, after the album of the same title, to avoid confusion. When asked about the name of the group, Iommi stated \"it really is Black Sabbath, whatever we do... so everyone knows what they're getting [and] so people won't expect to hear 'Iron Man' and all those songs. We've done them for so many years, it's nice to do just all the stuff we did with Ronnie again.\" Ward was initially set to participate, but dropped out before the tour began due to musical differences with \"a couple of the band members\". He was replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice, effectively reuniting the line-up that had featured on the \"Mob Rules\" (1981) and \"Dehumanizer\" (1992) albums.\nHeaven &amp; Hell toured the US with openers Megadeth and Machine Head, and recorded a live album and DVD in New York on 30 March 2007, titled \"Live from Radio City Music Hall\". In November 2007, Dio confirmed that the band had plans to record a new studio album, which was recorded in the following year. In April 2008 the band announced the upcoming release of a new box set and their participation in the Metal Masters Tour, alongside Judas Priest, Mot\u00f6rhead and Testament. The box set, \"The Rules of Hell\", featuring remastered versions of all the Dio fronted Black Sabbath albums, was supported by the Metal Masters Tour. In 2009, the band announced the title of their debut studio album, \"The Devil You Know\", released on 28 April.\nOn 26 May 2009, Osbourne filed suit in a federal court in New York against Iommi alleging that he illegally claimed the band name. Iommi noted that he had been the only constant band member for its full 41-year career and that his bandmates relinquished their rights to the name in the 1980s, therefore claiming more rights to the name of the band. Although in the suit, Osbourne was seeking 50% ownership of the trademark, he said that he hoped the proceedings would lead to equal ownership among the four original members.\nIn March 2010, Black Sabbath announced that along with Metallica they would be releasing a limited edition single together to celebrate Record Store Day. It was released on 17 April 2010. Ronnie James Dio died on 16 May 2010 from stomach cancer. In June 2010, the legal battle between Ozzy Osbourne and Tony Iommi over the trademarking of the Black Sabbath name ended, but the terms of the settlement have not been disclosed.\n2010\u20132014: Second Osbourne reunion and \"13\".\nIn a January 2010 interview while promoting his biography \"I Am Ozzy\", Osbourne stated that although he would not rule it out, he was doubtful there would be a reunion with all four original members of the band. Osbourne stated: \"I'm not gonna say I've written it out forever, but right now I don't think there's any chance. But who knows what the future holds for me? If it's my destiny, fine.\" In July, Butler said that there would be no reunion in 2011, as Osbourne was already committed to touring with his solo band. However, by that August they had already met up to rehearse together, and continued to do so through the autumn. On 11 November 2011, Iommi, Butler, Osbourne, and Ward announced that they were reuniting to record a new album with a full tour in support beginning in 2012. Guitarist Iommi was diagnosed with lymphoma on 9 January 2012, which forced the band to cancel all but two shows (Download Festival, and Lollapalooza Festival) of a previously booked European tour. It was later announced that an intimate show would be played in their hometown Birmingham. It was the first concert since the reunion and the only indoors concerts that year. In February 2012, drummer Ward announced that he would not participate further in the band's reunion until he was offered a \"signable contract\".\nOn 21 May 2012, at the O2 Academy in Birmingham, Black Sabbath played their first concert since 2005, with Tommy Clufetos playing the drums. In June, they performed at the Download Festival at the Donington Park motorsports circuit in Leicestershire, England, followed by the last concert of the short tour at Lollapalooza Festival in Chicago. Later that month, the band started recording an album. On 13 January 2013, the band announced that the album would be released in June under the title \"13\". Brad Wilk (formerly of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave) was chosen as the drummer, and Rick Rubin was chosen as the producer. Mixing of the album commenced in February. On 12 April 2013, the band released the album's track listing. The standard version of the album features eight new tracks, and the deluxe version features three bonus tracks.\nThe band's first single from \"13\", \"God Is Dead?\", was released on 19 April 2013. On 20 April 2013, Black Sabbath commenced their first Australia/New Zealand tour in 40 years followed by a North American Tour in Summer 2013. The second single of the album, \"End of the Beginning\", debuted on 15 May in a \"\" episode, where all three members appeared. In June 2013, \"13\" topped both the UK Albums Chart and the US \"Billboard\" 200, becoming their first album to reach number one on the latter chart. In 2014, Black Sabbath received their first Grammy Award since 2000 with \"God Is Dead?\" winning Best Metal Performance.\nIn July 2013, Black Sabbath embarked on a North American Tour (for the first time since July 2001), followed by a Latin American tour in October 2013. In November 2013, the band started their European tour which lasted until December 2013. In March and April 2014, they made 12 stops in North America (mostly in Canada) as the second leg of their North American Tour before embarking in June 2014 on the second leg of their European tour, which ended with a concert at London's Hyde Park.\n2014\u20132017: Cancelled twentieth album, \"The End\", and disbandment.\nOn 29 September 2014, Osbourne told \"Metal Hammer\" that Black Sabbath would begin work on their twentieth studio album in early 2015 with producer Rick Rubin, followed by a final tour in 2016. In an April 2015 interview, however, Osbourne said that these plans \"could change\", and added, \"We all live in different countries and some of them want to work and some of them don't want to, I believe. But we are going to do another tour together.\"\nOn 3 September 2015, it was announced that Black Sabbath would embark on their final tour, titled The End, from January 2016 to February 2017. Numerous dates and locations across the US, Canada, Europe, Australia and New Zealand were announced. The final shows of The End tour took place at the Genting Arena in their home city of Birmingham, England on 2 and 4 February 2017. On 26 October 2015, it was announced the band consisting of Osbourne, Iommi and Butler would be returning to the Download Festival on 11 June 2016. Despite earlier reports that they would enter the studio before their farewell tour, Osbourne stated that there would not be another Black Sabbath studio album. However, an 8-track CD entitled \"The End\" was sold at dates on the tour. Along with some live recordings, the CD includes four unused tracks from the \"13\" sessions.\nOn 4 March 2016, Iommi discussed future re-releases of the Tony Martin-era catalogue: \"We've held back on the reissues of those albums because of the current Sabbath thing with Ozzy Osbourne, but they will certainly be happening... I'd like to do a couple of new tracks for those releases with Tony Martin... I'll also be looking at working on \"Cross Purposes\" and \"Forbidden\".\" Martin had suggested that this could coincide with the 30th anniversary of \"The Eternal Idol\", in 2017. In an interview that August, Martin added \"[Iommi] still has his cancer issues of course and that may well stop it all from happening but if he wants to do something I am ready.\" On 10 August 2016, Iommi revealed that his cancer was in remission.\nAsked in November 2016 about his plans after Black Sabbath's final tour, Iommi replied, \"I'll be doing some writing. Maybe I'll be doing something with the guys, maybe in the studio, but no touring.\" The band played their final concert on 4 February 2017 in Birmingham. The final song was streamed live on the band's Facebook page and fireworks went off as the band took their final bow. The band's final tour was not an easy one, as longstanding tensions between Osbourne and Iommi returned to the surface. Iommi stated that he would not rule out the possibility of one-off shows, \"I wouldn't write that off, if one day that came about. That's possible. Or even doing an album, 'cause then, again, you're in one place. But I don't know if that would happen.\" In an April 2017 interview, Butler revealed that Black Sabbath had considered making a blues album as the follow-up to \"13\", but added that, \"the tour got in the way.\"\nOn 7 March 2017, Black Sabbath announced their disbandment through posts made on their official social media accounts.\n2017\u20132024: Post-final tour activities.\nIn a June 2018 interview with ITV News, Osbourne expressed interest in reuniting with Black Sabbath for a performance at the 2022 Commonwealth Games which would be held in their home city Birmingham. Iommi said that performing at the event as Black Sabbath would be \"a great thing to do to help represent Birmingham. I'm up for it. Let's see what happens.\" He also did not rule out the possibility for the band to reform only for a one-off performance rather than a full-length tour. Iommi was later announced to be part of the opening ceremony for the 2022 Commonwealth Games alongside Duran Duran. On 8 August 2022, Osbourne and Iommi made a surprise reunion to end the closing ceremony of the 2022 Commonwealth Games at the Alexander Stadium in Birmingham. They were joined by 2017 Black Sabbath touring musicians Tommy Clufetos and Adam Wakeman for a medley of \"Iron Man\" and \"Paranoid\".\nIn September 2020, Osbourne stated in an interview that he was no longer interested in a reunion: \"Not for me. It's done. The only thing I do regret is not doing the last farewell show in Birmingham with Bill Ward. I felt really bad about that. It would have been so nice. I don't know what the circumstances behind it were, but it would have been nice. I've talked to Tony a few times, but I don't have any of the slightest interest in doing another gig. Maybe Tony's getting bored now.\" Butler also ruled out the possibility of any future Black Sabbath performances in an interview with Eonmusic on 10 November 2020, stating that the band were over: \"There will definitely be no more Sabbath. It's done.\" Iommi however, pondered the possibility of another reunion tour in an interview with \"The Mercury News\", stating that he \"would like to play with the guys again\" and that he missed the audiences and stage. Ward stated in an interview with Eddie Trunk that he no longer had the ability or chops to perform with Black Sabbath in concert, but expressed that he would love to make another album with Osbourne, Butler and Iommi.\nDespite ruling out the possibility of another Black Sabbath reunion, Osbourne revealed in an episode of \"Ozzy Speaks\" on Ozzy's Boneyard that he was working with Iommi, who appeared as one of the guests for his thirteenth solo album, \"Patient Number 9\" (2022). In an October 2021 interview with the \"Metro\", Ward revealed that he had kept \"in contact\" with his former bandmates and stated that he was \"very open-minded\" to the possibility of recording another Black Sabbath album: \"I haven't spoken to the guys about it, but I have talked to a couple of people in management about the possibility of making a recording.\"\nOn 30 September 2020, Black Sabbath announced a new Dr. Martens shoe collection. The partnership with the British footwear company celebrated the 50th anniversaries of the band's \"Black Sabbath\" and \"Paranoid\" albums, with the boots depicting artwork from the former. On 13 January 2021, the band announced that they would reissue both \"Heaven &amp; Hell\" and \"Mob Rules\" as expanded deluxe editions on 5 March 2021, with unreleased material included.\nIn September 2022, Osbourne reiterated that he was unwilling to reunite with Black Sabbath, stating that if the band were to make another album, he would not sing on it. However, he remained open to working with Iommi on more solo projects following the latter's involvement on \"Patient Number 9\". Osbourne later retired from touring in February 2023 after not sufficiently recovering from medical treatment, putting the possibility of another Black Sabbath reunion in concert in further doubt. Butler, who had retired in June 2023, insisted that Black Sabbath had been \"put to bed\", until August 2023 when he stated that he was open to performing a one-off show, but expressed that he had \"no desire to tour again\" with Black Sabbath. According to Iommi, the band were offered, but turned down, a reunion at Power Trip in October 2023, where Osbourne was initially scheduled to headline the festival's second date; he eventually cancelled his appearance and was replaced by Judas Priest, due to health issues. In May 2024, Osbourne renewed interest in a reunion of the original line-up, admitting he was sad that Ward was not part of the final tour and that \"it wasn't Black Sabbath that finished it. It's unfinished. If they wanted to do one more gig with Bill, I would jump at the chance.\" Iommi, Butler and Ward all later expressed interest in the possibility of a one-off reunion show featuring the original line-up.\nThe Birmingham Royal Ballet presented \"Black Sabbath: The Ballet\" which premiered at the Birmingham Hippodrome in September 2023, before touring to Theatre Royal, Plymouth and Sadler's Wells Theatre in October.\nA box set of Tony Martin-era albums, \"Anno Domini 1989\u20131995\", was released on 31 May 2024 and includes remasters of \"Headless Cross\", \"Tyr\" and \"Cross Purposes\" and a remixed version of \"Forbidden\"; each disc of the box set (except \"Tyr\") includes one bonus track.\n2025: Final reunion and death of Osbourne.\nOn 5 February 2025, Osbourne announced that the original line-up of Black Sabbath would reform for one final charity show at Villa Park, Birmingham on 5 July. Titled Back to the Beginning, it was the final gig for both Osbourne and the group. It was Black Sabbath's first concert in eight years and also marked the first time in twenty years that the original line-up of the band had performed together. Proceeds from the show went to support Cure Parkinsons, Birmingham Children's Hospital and Acorns Children's Hospice. Tom Morello was the show's musical director. Osbourne said, \"I'm not going to get up there and do a half-hearted Ozzy looking for sympathy. What's the fucking point in that? I'm not going up there in a fucking wheelchair.\" In addition to a solo performance by Osbourne, the supporting acts for the show included Metallica, Guns N' Roses, Tool, Slayer, Pantera, Gojira, Alice in Chains, Halestorm, Lamb of God, Anthrax, Mastodon and Rival Sons, and included \"additional performances from\" Morello, Steven Tyler, Billy Corgan, Slash, David Draiman, Sammy Hagar, Fred Durst, former Judas Priest guitarist K. K. Downing, former Megadeth bassist David Ellefson, and three former members of Osbourne's solo band (Rudy Sarzo, Jake E. Lee and Mike Bordin). Despite being billed as a final concert, Iommi, Butler and Ward did not rule out recording new music as Black Sabbath. A 100-minute concert film of the show, titled \"Back to the Beginning: Ozzy's Final Bow\", will receive a theatrical release in early 2026, and will be released to DVD and Blu-ray later that same year.\nOne week before the concert, the four original band members were made Freemen of the City of Birmingham. Run by Central BID, the event was supported by two exhibitions. One was in Victoria Square, in place from 25 June to 28 September, featuring boards showcasing the band's origins, history, success, as well as album covers and unseen photos of the group. The other was a painted mural on the wall on Navigation Street, on the bridge over the track entering Birmingham New Street station.\nOsbourne died of a heart attack on 22 July 2025, seventeen days after his final performance. Eight days later, on 30 July, his funeral procession passed through Broad Street, stopping at Black Sabbath Bridge, for Sharon Osbourne and family to mourn and read messages left by supporters. A documentary, \"Ozzy Osbourne: No Escape from Now\", was streamed on Paramount+ on 7 October 2025, covering the final six years of Osbourne's life including his final performance with Black Sabbath. The documentary was in the works prior to Osbourne's death.\nMusical style.\nBlack Sabbath were a heavy metal band. The band have also been cited as a key influence on genres including stoner rock, grunge, doom metal, and sludge metal. Early on, Black Sabbath were influenced by Cream, the Beatles, Fleetwood Mac, Jimi Hendrix, John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers, Blue Cheer, Golden Earring, Led Zeppelin, Jethro Tull, and Iron Butterfly.\nAlthough Black Sabbath went through many line-ups and stylistic changes, their core sound focused on ominous lyrics and doomy music, often making use of the musical tritone, also called the \"devil's interval\". While their Ozzy-era albums such as \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\" (1973) had slight compositional similarities to the progressive rock genre that was growing in popularity at the time, standing in stark contrast to popular music of the early 1970s, Black Sabbath's dark sound was dismissed by rock critics of the era. Much like many of their early heavy metal contemporaries, the band received virtually no airplay on rock radio.\nAs the band's primary songwriter, Tony Iommi wrote the majority of Black Sabbath's music, while Osbourne would write vocal melodies, and bassist Geezer Butler would write lyrics. The process was sometimes frustrating for Iommi, who often felt pressured to come up with new material: \"If I didn't come up with anything, nobody would do anything.\" On Iommi's influence, Osbourne later said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Black Sabbath never used to write a structured song. There'd be a long intro that would go into a jazz piece, then go all folky... and it worked. Tony Iommi\u2014and I have said this a zillion times\u2014should be up there with the greats. He can pick up a guitar, play a riff, and you say, \"He's gotta be out now, he can't top that.\" Then you come back, and I bet you a billion dollars, he'd come up with a riff that'd knock your fucking socks off.\nBeginning with their third album, \"Master of Reality\" (1971), Black Sabbath began to feature tuned-down guitars. In 1965, before forming Black Sabbath, guitarist Tony Iommi suffered an accident while working in a sheet metal factory, losing the tips of two fingers on his right hand. Iommi almost gave up music, but was urged by the factory manager to listen to Django Reinhardt, a jazz guitarist who lost the use of two fingers in a fire. Inspired by Reinhardt, Iommi created two thimbles made of plastic and leather to cap off his missing fingertips. The guitarist began using lighter strings, and detuning his guitar, to press the strings with his prosthesis more comfortably. Early in the band's history Iommi experimented with different dropped tunings, including C\u266f tuning, or 3 semitones down, before settling on E\u266d/D\u266f tuning, or a half-step down from standard tuning.\nLegacy.\nBlack Sabbath have sold over 70 million records worldwide, including a RIAA-certified 15 million in the US. They are one of the most influential heavy metal bands of all time. The band helped to create the genre with groundbreaking releases such as \"Paranoid\" (1970), an album that \"Rolling Stone\" magazine said \"changed music forever\", calling them \"the Beatles of heavy metal\". \"Time\" magazine called \"Paranoid\" \"the birthplace of heavy metal\", placing it in their Top 100 Albums of All Time.\nMTV placed Black Sabbath at number one on their Top Ten Heavy Metal Bands and VH1 placed them at number two on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock. VH1 ranked Black Sabbath's \"Iron Man\" the number one song on their 40 Greatest Metal Songs countdown. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked the band number 85 in their list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\". AllMusic's William Ruhlmann said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Black Sabbath has been so influential in the development of heavy metal rock music as to be a defining force in the style. The group took the blues-rock sound of late '60s acts like Cream, Blue Cheer, and Vanilla Fudge to its logical conclusion, slowing the tempo, accentuating the bass, and emphasising screaming guitar solos and howled vocals full of lyrics expressing mental anguish and macabre fantasies. If their predecessors clearly came out of an electrified blues tradition, Black Sabbath took that tradition in a new direction, and in so doing helped give birth to a musical style that continued to attract millions of fans decades later.\nAccording to \"Rolling Stone\"'s Holly George-Warren, \"Black Sabbath was the heavy metal king of the 1970s.\" Although initially \"despised by rock critics and ignored by radio programmers\", the group sold more than 8 million albums by the end of that decade. \"\"The\" heavy metal band...\" marvelled Ronnie James Dio. \"A band that didn't apologise for coming to town; it just stepped on buildings when it came to town.\"\nInfluence and innovation.\nBlack Sabbath have influenced many acts including Judas Priest, Iron Maiden, Diamond Head, Slayer, Metallica, Korn, Black Flag, Mayhem, Venom, Guns N' Roses, Body Count, Alice in Chains, Anthrax, Disturbed, Death, Bathory, Opeth, Pantera, Megadeth, Sepultura, the Smashing Pumpkins, Slipknot, Foo Fighters, Testament, Fear Factory, Candlemass, Godsmack, Corrosion of Conformity, and Van Halen. Two Gold-selling tribute albums have been released, \"Nativity in Black Volume 1 &amp; 2\", including covers by Sepultura, White Zombie, Type O Negative, Faith No More, Machine Head, Primus, System of a Down, and Monster Magnet.\nMetallica's Lars Ulrich, who, along with bandmate James Hetfield inducted Black Sabbath into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006, said \"Black Sabbath is and always will be synonymous with heavy metal\", while Hetfield said \"Sabbath got me started on all that evil-sounding shit, and it's stuck with me. Tony Iommi is the king of the heavy riff.\" Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash said of the \"Paranoid\" album: \"There's just something about that whole record that, when you're a kid and you're turned onto it, it's like a whole different world. It just opens up your mind to another dimension...\"Paranoid\" is the whole Sabbath experience; very indicative of what Sabbath meant at the time. Tony's playing style\u2014doesn't matter whether it's off \"Paranoid\" or if it's off \"Heaven and Hell\"\u2014it's very distinctive.\" Anthrax guitarist Scott Ian said \"I always get the question in every interview I do, 'What are your top five metal albums?' I make it easy for myself and always say the first five Sabbath albums.\"\nLamb of God's Chris Adler said: \"If anybody who plays heavy metal says that they weren't influenced by Black Sabbath's music, then I think that they're lying to you. I think all heavy metal music was, in some way, influenced by what Black Sabbath did.\" Judas Priest vocalist Rob Halford commented: \"They were and still are a groundbreaking band...you can put on the first Black Sabbath album and it still sounds as fresh today as it did 30-odd years ago. And that's because great music has a timeless ability: To me, Sabbath are in the same league as the Beatles or Mozart. They're on the leading edge of something extraordinary.\" On Black Sabbath's standing, Rage Against the Machine guitarist Tom Morello states: \"The heaviest, scariest, coolest riffs and the apocalyptic Ozzy wail are without peer. You can hear the despair and menace of the working-class Birmingham streets they came from in every kick-ass, evil groove. Their arrival ground hippy, flower-power psychedelia to a pulp and set the standard for all heavy bands to come.\" Phil Anselmo of Pantera and Down stated that \"Only a fool would leave out what Black Sabbath brought to the heavy metal genre\".\nAccording to Tracii Guns of L.A. Guns and former member of Guns N' Roses, the main riff of \"Paradise City\" by Guns N' Roses, from \"Appetite for Destruction\" (1987), was influenced by the song \"Zero the Hero\" from the \"Born Again\" album. King Diamond guitarist Andy LaRocque affirmed that the clean guitar part of \"Sleepless Nights\" from \"Conspiracy\" (1989) is inspired by Tony Iommi's playing on \"Never Say Die!\".\nIn addition to being pioneers of heavy metal, they also have been credited for laying the foundations for heavy metal subgenres stoner rock, sludge metal, thrash metal, black metal and doom metal. Sabbath has had a significant impact on alternative music, being cited as an influence by Nirvana, Soundgarden, and Dinosaur Jr.. Rock critic Simon Reynolds writes that when late 1980s bands such as Tad and the Butthole Surfers \"revived Black Sabbath's ponderous riffs, it felt like a daring challenge to the approved canon of underground rock\", and that \"Sabbath-style heaviness\" became the norm after the commercial emergence of grunge.\nTony Iommi has been credited as the pioneer of lighter gauge guitar strings. The tips of his fingers were severed in a steel factory, and while using thimbles (artificial finger tips) he found that standard guitar strings were too difficult to bend and play. He found that there was only one size of strings available, so after years with Sabbath he had strings custom made.\nCulturally, Black Sabbath have exerted a huge influence in both television and literature and have in many cases become synonymous with heavy metal. In the film \"Almost Famous\", Lester Bangs gives the protagonist an assignment to cover the band with the immortal line: 'Give me 500 words on Black Sabbath'. Contemporary music and arts publication \"Trebuchet Magazine\" has put this to practice by asking all new writers to write a short piece (500 words) on Black Sabbath as a means of proving their creativity and voice on a well documented subject.\nBand members.\nOriginal line-up\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTours.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4315", "revid": "10734192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4315", "title": "Buffalo Bills", "text": "National Football League franchise in Orchard Park, New York\nThe Buffalo Bills are a professional American football team based in the Buffalo\u2013Niagara Falls metropolitan area. The Bills compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member of the American Football Conference (AFC) East division. The team plays its home games at Highmark Stadium in Orchard Park, New York, and is building a new stadium located across the street from the existing Highmark Stadium which will be completed in 2026.\nFounded in 1959 as a charter member of the American Football League (AFL), the team joined the NFL in 1970 after the AFL\u2013NFL merger. The team's name is taken from an All-America Football Conference (AAFC) franchise from Buffalo that was named after western frontiersman Buffalo Bill. Drawing much of its fanbase from western New York and neighboring southern Ontario, the Bills are the only NFL team that plays home games in the state of New York. The franchise is owned by Terry Pegula, who purchased the Bills after the death of the original owner Ralph Wilson in 2014, and a coalition of private equity funds and investors who purchased a minority stake in the team in 2024.\nThe Bills advanced to the AFL Championship Game three years in a row from 1964 to 1966, winning the first two\u2014the only major professional sports championships for a team representing Buffalo. They struggled heavily in the latter years of the AFL and for much of their first two decades in the NFL, tallying only five winning seasons and three postseason berths from 1967 to 1987. They became perennial postseason contenders in the late 1980s; from 1990 to 1993, they appeared in a record four consecutive Super Bowls and lost each one. From the early 2000s to the mid-2010s, the Bills endured the longest playoff drought in the four major North American professional sports, a 17-year span that made them the last franchise in the four leagues to qualify for the postseason in the 21st century. They returned to consistent postseason contention by the late 2010s, but not the Super Bowl. Their four Super Bowl appearances are the most among NFL franchises that have not won the Super Bowl, a record they share with the Minnesota Vikings.\nIn 2024, the Bills became one of the first NFL teams to sell part of their franchise to outside private equity investors. 20.6% of the team interest was sold at a valuation of $5.6 billion, including 10% to the American investment group Arctos Partners LP.\nHistory.\nThe Bills began competitive play in 1960 as a charter member of the American Football League led by head coach Buster Ramsey and joined the NFL as part of the AFL\u2013NFL merger in 1970. In the first two seasons, the Bills went 5\u20138\u20131 and 6\u20138 under Ramsey. The Bills won two consecutive American Football League titles in 1964 and 1965 with quarterback Jack Kemp and coach Lou Saban, but the club has yet to win a league championship since.\nOnce the AFL\u2013NFL merger took effect, the Bills became the second NFL team to represent the city; they followed the Buffalo All-Americans, a charter member of the league. Buffalo had been left out of the league since the All-Americans (by that point renamed the Bisons) folded in 1929; the Bills were no less than the third professional non-NFL team to compete in the city before the merger, After the Indians/Tigers of the early 1940s and an earlier team named the Bills, originally the Bisons, in the late 1940s in the All-America Football Conference (AAFC).\nAfter the AFL\u2013NFL merger, the Bills were generally mediocre in the 1970s but featured All-Pro running back O. J. Simpson. After being pushed to the brink of failure in the mid-1980s, the collapse of the United States Football League and a series of highly drafted players such as Jim Kelly (who initially played for the USFL instead of the Bills), Thurman Thomas, Bruce Smith and Darryl Talley allowed the Bills to rebuild into a perennial contender in the late 1980s through the mid-1990s under head coach Marv Levy, a period in which the team won four consecutive AFC Championships; the team nevertheless lost all four subsequent Super Bowls, records in both categories that still stand.\nThe rise of the division rival New England Patriots under Bill Belichick and Tom Brady, along with numerous failed attempts at rebuilding in the 2000s and 2010s, helped prevent the Bills from reaching the playoffs in seventeen consecutive seasons between 2000 and 2016, a 17-year drought that was the longest active playoff drought in all major professional sports at the time.\nMike Mularkey coached the Bills in the 2004 and 2005 seasons. He went 9\u20137 but missed the postseason in 2004 and 5\u201311 in 2005. He resigned from the team after the 2005 season.\nFrom 2006 to 2009, the Bills were coached by Dick Jauron. After three consecutive 7\u20139 seasons, Jauron was dismissed after a 3\u20136 start to his fourth season. Perry Fewell finished out the season as interim with a 3\u20134 mark.\nFrom 2010 to 2012, the Bills were coached by Chan Gailey. The team had Ryan Fitzpatrick as their quarterback in those seasons. Gailey was fired after three consecutive last place finishes in the AFC East.\nDoug Marrone was hired to be the Bills' head coach before the 2013 season. The Bills went 6\u201310 in the 2013 season and improved to 9\u20137 in the 2014 season. Marrone decided to step down as head coach after the season. On October 8, 2014, Buffalo Sabres owners Terry and Kim Pegula received unanimous approval to acquire the Bills during the NFL owners' meetings, becoming the second ownership group of the team after team founder Ralph Wilson.\nBefore the 2015 season, the team hired former Jets' head coach Rex Ryan to become the next head coach of the Bills. The team went 8\u20138 in 2015 and 7\u20139 in 2016. Ryan was dismissed with one game remaining in the 2016 season, with Anthony Lynn finishing the season as interim.\nSean McDermott era (2017\u2013present).\nUnder head coach Sean McDermott, the Bills broke the playoff drought, appearing in the playoffs for seven of the next eight seasons. The team drafted Wyoming quarterback Josh Allen with the seventh overall pick in the first round of the 2018 NFL draft. The team earned its first division championship and playoff wins since 1995 during the 2020 season, attributed to the Bills' own development of a core talent including Allen, Stefon Diggs, Matt Milano, and Tre'Davious White. In the 2020 season, the Bills reached the AFC Championship for the first time since the 1993 season. However, their run ended with a 38\u201324 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs. The Bills won the AFC East with a 11\u20136 record in the 2021 season. The Bills defeated the Patriots 47\u201317 in the Wild Card Round before falling to the Kansas City Chiefs 42\u201336 in overtime.\nIn the 2022 season, the Bills won the AFC East with a 13\u20133 record. The season saw a cancelled game against the Bengals due to a near-fatal medical episode with Damar Hamlin, who eventually recovered and returned to football activities the following season. The team defeated the Miami Dolphins in the Wild Card Round 34\u201331 before falling to the Cincinnati Bengals 27\u201310 in the Divisional Round. In the 2023 season, the Bills won the AFC East for the fourth consecutive season. In the Wild Card Round, they defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers 31\u201317 before falling to the Kansas City Chiefs in the Divisional Round 27\u201324. In the 2024 season, the Bills finished with a 13\u20134 record and won another AFC East title. After wins over the Denver Broncos in the Wild Card Round and the Baltimore Ravens in the Divisional Round, the Bills lost to the Kansas City Chiefs in the AFC Championship.\nAfter Kim Pegula was incapacitated by a 2022 vascular brain injury, a portion of her stake in the team was transferred to her stepdaugher Laura, with a 20% stake in the team sold to a coalition of private equity investors and former Toronto athletes Jozy Altidore, Vince Carter and Tracy McGrady in December 2024. The Bills announced plans to build a new stadium to replace Highmark Stadium to be ready by 2026.\nLogos and uniforms.\nFor their first two seasons, the Bills wore uniforms based on those of the Detroit Lions at the time. Ralph Wilson had been a minority owner of the Lions before founding the Bills, and the Bills' predecessors in the AAFC had also worn blue and silver uniforms.\nThe team's original colors were Honolulu blue, silver, and white, and the helmets were silver with no striping. There was no logo on the helmet, which displayed the players' numbers on each side.\nIn 1962, the standing red bison was designated as the logo and took its place on a white helmet. In 1962, the team's colors also changed to red, white, and blue. The team switched to blue jerseys with red and white shoulder stripes, similar to the Buffalo Bisons AHL hockey team of the same era. The helmets were white with a red center stripe. The jerseys again saw a change in 1964 when the shoulder stripes were replaced by a distinctive stripe pattern on the sleeves consisting of four stripes, two thicker inner stripes and two thinner outer stripes all bordered by red piping. By 1965, red and blue center stripes were put on the helmets.\nThe Bills introduced blue pants worn with the white jerseys in 1973, the last year of the standing buffalo helmet. The blue pants remained through 1985. The face mask on the helmet was blue from 1974 through 1986 before changing to white.\nThe standing bison logo was replaced by a blue charging one with a red slanting stripe streaming from its horn. The newer emblem, still the primary one used by the franchise, was designed by aerospace designer Stevens Wright in 1974.\nIn 1984, the helmet's shell color was changed from white to red, primarily to help Bills quarterback Joe Ferguson distinguish them more readily from three of their division rivals at that time, the Baltimore Colts, the Miami Dolphins, and the New England Patriots, who all also wore white helmets at that point. Ferguson said, \"Everyone we played had white helmets at that time. Our new head coach Kay Stephenson just wanted to get more of a contrast on the field that may help spot a receiver down the field.\" (The Patriots have worn silver helmets since 1993, the Colts have since been realigned to the AFC South, and in 2019 the New York Jets have since switched back to green-colored helmets, after playing 20 years with white ones.)\nIn 2002, under the direction of general manager Tom Donahoe, the Bills' uniforms went through radical changes. A darker shade of blue was introduced as the primary jersey color, and nickel gray was introduced as an accent color. Both the blue and white jerseys featured red side panels. The white jerseys included a dark blue shoulder yoke and royal blue numbers. The helmet remained primarily red with one navy blue, two nickel, two royal blue, two white stripes, and a white face mask. A new logo, a stylized \"B\" consisting of two bullets and a more detailed buffalo head on top, was proposed and had been released (it can be seen on a few baseball caps that were released for sale), but fan backlash led to the team retaining the running bison logo. The helmet logo adopted in 1974\u2014a charging royal blue bison with a red streak, white horn, and eyeball\u2014remained unchanged.\nIn 2005, the Bills revived the standing bison helmet and uniform of the mid-1960s as a throwback uniform.\nThe Bills usually wore the all-blue combination at home and the all-white combination on the road when not wearing the throwback uniforms. They stopped wearing blue-on-white after 2006, while the white-on-blue was not worn after 2007.\nFor the 2011 season, the Bills unveiled a new uniform design, an updated rendition of the 1975\u201383 design. This change includes a return to the white helmets with \"charging buffalo\" logo, and a return to royal blue instead of navy. The set initially featured striped socks, but by 2021, the Bills gradually reduced its usage and began wearing either all-white or all-blue hosiery without stripes in most games.\nBuffalo sporadically wore white at home in the 1980s, including all eight home games in 1984, but stopped doing so beginning in 1987. On November 6, 2011, against the New York Jets, the Bills wore white at home for the first time since 1986. Since 2011, the Bills have worn white for home games, either with their primary uniform or a throwback set.\nThe Bills' uniform received minor alterations as part of the league's new uniform contract with Nike. The new Nike uniform was unveiled on April 3, 2012.\nOn November 12, 2015, the Bills and the New York Jets became the first two teams to participate in the NFL's Color Rush uniform initiative, with Buffalo wearing an all-red combination for the first time in team history. Like the primary uniforms, the set initially had red socks with white and blue stripes, but in 2020, it was replaced with red socks without stripes.\nA notable use of the Bills' uniforms outside of football was in the 2018 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships when the United States men's national junior ice hockey team wore Bills-inspired uniforms in their outdoor game against Team Canada on December 29, 2017. This game was also played at the Bills' home stadium, Highmark Stadium.\nOn April 1, 2021, the team announced they would wear white face masks during the upcoming season and beyond.\nOn December 22, 2024, the team debuted a brand new uniform combination consisting of their red Color Rush uniform and white pants.\nOn July 22, 2025, the Bills brought back the 1984\u20132010 red \"charging buffalo\" helmet as an alternate, which they would wear January 4, 2026 against the New York Jets with the primary blue uniforms. Additionally, after last wearing the \"standing buffalo\" throwback in 2021, the Bills brought back the design for two home games to mark original Highmark Stadium's final season.\nOn August 28, 2025, the Bills unveiled a \"Rivalries\" uniform, which they would wear once per season at home against each of their AFC East opponents over a three-year period. The all-white uniform, dubbed the \"Cold Front\", featured silver numbers trimmed in blue and a modified \"charging buffalo\" in silver with blue trim, along with silver and blue stripes on the helmet. Red was not featured in the uniform, as it signified warmth.\nRivalries.\nThe Bills have rivalries with their three AFC East opponents (the Miami Dolphins, New England Patriots, and New York Jets) and with the Baltimore/Indianapolis Colts (a former divisional opponent), Kansas City Chiefs, Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans, Jacksonville Jaguars, and Dallas Cowboys.\nThe Cleveland Browns shared a rivalry with the Bills' predecessors in the All-America Football Conference. The current teams have a more friendly relationship and have played sporadically since the AFL\u2013NFL merger.\nDivisional.\nMiami Dolphins.\nThis is often considered Buffalo's most famous rivalry. The Bills were one of the original eight American Football League, while the Dolphins began playing in 1966 as an expansion team. The rivalry first gained prominence when the Dolphins won every matchup against the Bills in the 1970s, and the first of the 1980s, for an NFL-record 20 straight wins against a single opponent. Fortunes changed in the following decades with the rise of Jim Kelly as Buffalo's franchise quarterback. Though Kelly and Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino shared a competitive rivalry in the 1980s and 1990s, the Bills became dominant in the 1990s. Things cooled down after the retirements of Kelly and Marino and the rise of the New England Patriots in the 2000s and 2010s, but Miami remains a fierce rival of the Bills, coming in second place in a recent poll of Buffalo's primary rival, and the two teams have typically been close to each other in win\u2013loss records. They have often competed for the division title since Tua Tagovailoa became Miami's quarterback, despite Buffalo's 13\u20132 record over the Dolphins under Josh Allen. Miami leads the overall series 62\u201361\u20131 as of 2025, but Buffalo has the advantage in the playoffs at 4\u20131, including a win in the 1992 AFC Championship Game.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe rivalry with the New England Patriots began when both teams were original franchises in the American Football League (AFL) before the NFL\u2013AFL merger, but did not gain notability until the emergence of New England quarterback Tom Brady in 2001. The teams were very competitive before the 2000s. However, Brady's arrival in the early 2000s led to the Patriots dominating the AFC East, including the Bills, for two decades. As a result, New England replaced the Dolphins as Buffalo's most hated rival. The Bills have taken an 8\u20133 edge since Brady's departure in 2020, which included consecutive AFC East titles from 2020 to 2024 and a season sweep of the Patriots in two of the first three years. In 2021, the Bills dominated in a 47\u201317 victory against the Patriots in the two teams' first playoff match-up in 59 years, which saw the Bills score a touchdown on every offensive drive throughout the entire game and, as such, is the only \"perfect offensive game\" in NFL history. Overall, the Patriots lead the series 79\u201351\u20131 as of 2024, but trail the Bills by a 48\u201347\u20131 margin without Brady on the field.\nSeveral players have played for both teams, including Drew Bledsoe, Doug Flutie, Lawyer Milloy, Brandon Spikes, Scott Chandler, Chris Hogan, Mike Gillislee, Stephon Gilmore, and Stefon Diggs.\nNew York Jets.\nThe Bills and Jets, both original AFL teams, represent the state of New York, though the Jets have played their home games in East Rutherford, New Jersey, since 1984. While the rivalry represents the differences between New York City and Western New York, it has historically not been as intense as Buffalo's rivalries with the Dolphins and Patriots. When not playing one another, the teams' fan bases either have grudging respect or low-key annoyance for each other (stemming more from the broader upstate-downstate tensions than the teams or sport). The Bills-Jets rivalry has often become characterized by ugly games and shared mediocrity, but it has had a handful of competitive moments. The series heated up recently when former Jets head coach Rex Ryan became the Bills' head coach for two seasons and had become notable again as Bills quarterback Josh Allen and former Jets quarterback Sam Darnold, both drafted in the same year, maintained a friendly rivalry with one another. Buffalo leads the series 72\u201358 as of 2025, including a playoff win in 1981.\nConference.\nKansas City Chiefs.\nThe Kansas City Chiefs, another original franchise in the AFL, have a long history against the Bills, despite the two teams never being in the same division. Buffalo currently leads the series 30\u201326\u20131, which has included seven playoff meetings, four of which were AFL/AFC Championship Games; Kansas City won the 1966 AFL Championship Game that determined the AFL's representative in the first Super Bowl against the NFL champion Green Bay Packers, in addition to the 2020 and 2024 AFC Championship Games that saw the team advance to its second and fifth Super Bowl appearances in six years, respectively, while Buffalo defeated Kansas City in the 1993 AFC Championship Game to advance to its fourth straight Super Bowl appearance. However, after each victory in the AFC Championship Game, the Chiefs or the Bills went on to lose the ensuing Super Bowl. Despite a lull in the series in the 2000s and 2010s, the rivalry gained attention as the Bills and Chiefs met in nine of ten years from 2008 to 2017.\nAfter a two-year hiatus in the series, a rivalry between Bills quarterback Josh Allen and Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes developed, particularly in the post-season, drawing comparisons to Jim Kelly's rivalry with Dan Marino as well as the rivalry between Tom Brady and Peyton Manning. Since 2019, four high-profile postseason matchups occurred between the Bills and Chiefs. The four playoff games include the aforementioned 2020 Championship Game and the 2021 Divisional round game, the latter of which is now considered one of the greatest playoff games of all time, but was also controversial due to the league's overtime rules. In , Bills lost to the Chiefs 24\u201327 as Bills kicker Tyler Bass missed the game-tying field goal attempt wide right, a play that evoked memories of Scott Norwood missing the game-winning field goal attempt in Super Bowl XXV. In the 2024 AFC Championship Game, Bills failed to convert two 4th downs in the fourth quarter: the first was a 4th and inches quarterback sneak by Allen that was controversially ruled short of the line of gain and the second was a 4th and 5 pass from Allen that the tight end Kincaid dropped while sliding. The Chiefs went on to win 32\u201329. In the four playoff matchups between Allen and Mahomes, Mahomes leads the series 4\u20130.\nJacksonville Jaguars.\nA new rivalry emerged between the Bills and the Jacksonville Jaguars after former Bills head coach Doug Marrone, who had quit the team after the 2014 season, was hired as a coaching assistant for Jacksonville and eventually rose to become the Jaguars' head coach. The first game between the Marrone-led Jaguars was a London game in of the 2015 season, which saw the Jaguars' win 34\u201331. The most important game of this series was an ugly, low-scoring game in 2017 that saw the Jaguars win 10\u20133. This game is notable as it was the first Bills playoff appearance in 17 seasons. Before this, Jacksonville had handed Buffalo its first playoff loss in Bills Stadium in 1996. The Bills and Jaguars have since met three times. The first was a \"rematch\" game in of the 2018 season; the Bills won 24\u201321. The teams brawled after trash talk from former Jaguars players such as Jalen Ramsey. The second time was in of the 2021 season. By now, the \"point\" of the rivalry, Marrone's feud with the Bills organization, and the personal drama between Bills and Jaguars players no longer applied as Marrone had been fired and replaced by Urban Meyer and all the players from the 2017 Jaguars team have since moved on to other teams or retired. Regardless, this game was the seventh-largest upset at the time in NFL history: the 15.5-point favorite Bills lost 9\u20136. The most recent meeting between the two teams was a 47\u201310 Bills win on Monday Night Football in 2024. The series is tied at 10\u201310.\nHouston Oilers/Tennessee Titans.\nThe Tennessee Titans (formerly the Houston Oilers) also share an extended history with the Bills, with both teams being original AFL clubs and rivals in that league's East Division before the AFL-NFL merger. Matchups were intense in the 1980s and 1990s, with quarterback Warren Moon leading the Oilers against Jim Kelly's Bills. Memorable playoff moments between the teams in the 1990s include The Comeback, in which the Frank Reich-led Bills overcame a 35\u20133 deficit to stun the Oilers 41\u201338 in 1992, and the Music City Miracle, in which the now-Titans scored on a near-last-minute kickoff return with a controversial lateral pass ruling to beat the Bills 22\u201316 in 1999. To add insult to injury, the Music City Miracle was Buffalo's last playoff appearance until 2017, leading to resentment by Bills fans towards the Titans.\nAfter both teams failed to reach the same success in the late 2000s to early 2010s, they returned to consistent playoff contention starting in 2017, resulting in several high-profile games, in addition to a brief resurgence of the rivalry based on shared success and mutual respect between 2018 and 2022, when the Titans were led by head coach Mike Vrabel (a former Patriots player) and running back Derrick Henry. The Titans currently lead the series 30\u201321, but the Bills lead in postseason meetings 2\u20131.\nNotable players.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Buffalo Bills have retired three numbers: No. 12 for Jim Kelly, No. 34 for Thurman Thomas, and No. 78 for Bruce Smith. Other numbers are no longer issued or are in reduced circulation.\nSince the team's earliest days, the number 31 was not supposed to be issued to any other player. The Bills had stationery and various other team merchandise showing a running player wearing that number, and it was not supposed to represent any specific person but the 'spirit of the team.' In the first three decades of the team's existence, the number 31 was only seen once. In 1969, when reserve running back Preston Ridlehuber damaged his number 36 jersey during a game, equipment manager Tony Marchitte gave him the number 31 jersey to wear while repairing the number 36. The number 31 was not reissued until 1990 when first-round draft choice James Williams wore it for his first two seasons; it has since been returned to general circulation. Cornerback Rasul Douglas most recently wore the number through the 2024 season.\nNumber 32 had been withdrawn from circulation but not retired after O. J. Simpson. Former owner Ralph Wilson insisted on not reissuing the number, even after Simpson's highly publicized murder case and later robbery conviction. The number was placed back into circulation in 2019 with Senorise Perry wearing the number that year; it was most recently worn by linebacker Nicholas Morrow until he was waived in January 2025.\nNumber 15 was historically only issued sparingly after the retirement of Jack Kemp. It was last worn by kicker Matt Prater in 2025 and previously by wide receiver Marquez Valdes-Scantling in 2024, before he was released on October 15, 2024. Other numbers that have been historically issued only on rare circumstances included the 44 of Elbert Dubenion (worn as of 2024 by Joe Andreessen) and the 66 of Billy Shaw (worn since 2023 by Connor J. McGovern), each of which were typically only issued to players not expected to make the team's regular season roster.\nNumber 1 has also rarely been used for reasons yet to be explained. While there is no proper explanation, Tommy Hughitt was a player-coach for the early Buffalo teams in the New York Pro Football League and NFL from 1918 to 1924 and was both a major on-field success and a fixture in Buffalo culture after his retirement as a politician and auto salesman. Hughitt was reported to wear number 1 during this time. Wide receiver Curtis Samuel currently wears the number; before Emmanuel Sanders's one-year stint with the Bills in 2021, it had been 19 years since it had been worn in the regular season when kicker Mike Hollis wore it in 2002.\nNumber 95 has not been reissued since the retirement of Kyle Williams in 2019.\nRalph C. Wilson Jr. Distinguished Service Award recipients.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* 1986 \u2013 Ben Williams\nSilver Anniversary Team.\nOn April 27, 1984, Bills announced the Silver Anniversary team to commemorate its 25th anniversary.\nCoaching staff.\nHead coaches.\nThe Bills have had twenty coaches serve as head coach in franchise history.\nRadio and television.\nThe Buffalo Bills Radio Network is flagshipped at WGR AM 550 in Buffalo, with sister station WWKB AM 1520 simulcasting all home games. Chris Brown is the team's current play-by-play announcer, having taken over from John Murphy (the announcer from 2003 to 2022 and color commentator most years from 1984 to 2003) after Murphy suffered a stroke. Former Bills center Eric Wood is the color analyst.\nIn 2018, the team signed an agreement with Nexstar Media Group to carry Bills preseason games across its network of stations in the region. As of 2020, WIVB-TV serves as the flagship station of the network, which includes WJET-TV in Erie, WROC-TV in Rochester, WSYR-TV in Syracuse, WUTR in Utica, WETM-TV in Elmira and WIVT in Binghamton. Steve Tasker does color commentary on these games; the play-by-play position is rotated between Andrew Catalon and Rob Stone. WROC-TV reporter Thad Brown is the sideline reporter. Since 2008, preseason games have been broadcast in high definition.\nBeginning in the 2016 season, as per a new rights deal that covers rights to the team as well as its sister NHL franchise, the Buffalo Sabres, most team-related programming, including studio programming and the coach's show, was re-located to MSG Western New York\u2014a joint venture of MSG and the team ownership. Preseason games will continue to air in simulcast on broadcast television.\nIn the event that regular season games are broadcast by ESPN, in accordance with the league's television policies, a local Buffalo station will broadcast the game. From 2014 to 2017, WKBW-TV held the broadcast rights to that contest, with the station winning back the rights to cable games after WBBZ-TV held the rights for 2012 and 2013.\nMascots, cheerleaders, and marching band.\nThe Bills' official mascot is Billy Buffalo, an eight-foot-tall, anthropomorphic blue American bison who wears the jersey \"number\" BB.\nThe Bills do not have cheerleaders. The Bills operated a cheerleading squad named the Buffalo Jills from 1967 to 1985; from 1986 to 2013, the Jills operated as an independent organization sponsored by various companies. The Jills suspended operations before the 2014 season due to legal actions. The Bills and Jills were previously involved in a legal battle, in which the Jills alleged they were employees, not independent contractors, and sought back pay. On March 3, 2022, a settlement was reached where the Bills agreed to pay the Jills $3.5 million, while Cumulus Media paid $4 million in stock options of the company while admitting no wrongdoing.\nThe Bills are one of six teams in the NFL to designate an official marching band or drumline (the others being the Baltimore Ravens, Washington Commanders, New York Jets, Carolina Panthers and Seattle Seahawks). Since the last game of the 2013 season, this position has been served by the Stampede Drumline, known outside of Buffalo as Downbeat Percussion.\nThe Bills have several theme songs associated with them. The most popular is a variation of the Isley Brothers hit \"Shout,\" recorded by Scott Kemper, which served as the Bills' official promotional song from 1987 through 1990s. It can be heard at every Bills home game after a field goal or touchdown and at the game's end if the Bills win. The Bills' unofficial fight song, \"Go Bills,\" was penned by Bills head coach Marv Levy in the mid-1990s on a friendly wager with his players that he will write the song if the team won a particular game. In 2024, the Bills offensive players began a tradition of singing along to \"Mr. Brightside\" by The Killers as a hype song, usually in the fourth quarter; the Bills were undefeated at home in 2024 after the song was introduced.\nSupporters.\nThe \"Bills Backers\" are the official fan organization of the Buffalo Bills. It has over 200 chapters across North America, Europe, and Oceania. Also notable is the \"Bills Mafia,\" organized via Twitter beginning in 2010 by Del Reid, Leslie Wille, and Breyon Harris; the phrase \"Bills Mafia\" had by 2017 grown to unofficially represent the broad community surrounding and encompassing the team as a whole, and players who join the Bills often speak of joining the Bills Mafia. Outsiders frequently treat the Bills' fan base in derogatory terms, especially since the 2010s, partly because of negative press coverage of select fans' wilder antics. In 2020, the Bills filed to trademark the \"Bills Mafia\" name.\nBills fans are particularly well known for their wearing of Zubaz zebra-printed sportswear; so much is the association between Bills fans and Zubaz that when a revival of the company opened its first brick-and-mortar storefront, it chose Western New York as its first location. The \"wing hat,\" a hat shaped like a spicy chicken wing (much in the same style as the Green Bay Packers' Cheesehead hats), can also frequently be seen atop Bills fans' heads, having originated as promotional merchandise by the Anchor Bar, the purported inventors of the modern chicken wing as a delicacy. Another hat associated with the Bills fandom is the water buffalo hat, resembling the headgear of the fictional Loyal Order of Water Buffaloes seen in the TV series \"The Flintstones\"; this hat gained particular popularity with the Water Buffalo Club 716, a community of over 2,000 Bills supporters from around the world founded in 2021 by Therese Forton-Barnes. In 1982, a local grocery store introduced the Whammy Weenie as a promotional item, a maraca-like hot dog-shaped device, painted green (which was not a Bills color, but instead painted as such in reference to a military slang term), that Bills fans were supposed to shake at the team's opponents; Bills owner Ralph Wilson, after having seen a Whammy Weenie dangled in front of his suite in the midst of a disappointing season, ordered the Whammy Weenie to be discontinued due to the double entendre it posed.\nBills Mafia members are also well known for jumping off of elevated surfaces (often cars or RVs) into folding tables, in the style of professional wrestlers, during the pregame tailgate. Bills Mafia fans do this in tradition as to be closer to the players as to get similar injuries they get during the game without playing football.\nBills fans are noted for their frequent support for charitable causes, especially helping charities run by players from opposing teams. After the Bills received help in breaking their 17-year playoff drought through a last-minute Cincinnati Bengals victory, Bills fans crowdfunded the charities of Bengals players Andy Dalton and Tyler Boyd with hundreds of thousands of dollars as a gesture of thanks. Also in 2020, after a November 8 upset win over the Seattle Seahawks led by one of the best-ever performances by quarterback Josh Allen, news emerged that Allen had taken the field the day after his grandmother's death. Fans showed support for their team and community by donating nearly $700,000 to the Oishei Children's Hospital, an organization supported by Allen during his time in Buffalo. After the Bills' defeat of the Baltimore Ravens in the Divisional round of the 2020\u201321 NFL playoffs and an injury to Ravens quarterback Lamar Jackson late in that game, Bills fans crowdfunded Jackson's favorite charity, Blessings in a Backpack. After a 2024 game between the Bills and Miami Dolphins, Bills fans helped raise $18,000 for Dolphins quarterback Tua Tagovailoa's charity, The Tua Foundation, after Tagovailoa suffered a concussion during the game.\nThe Bills are one of the favorite teams of ESPN announcer Chris Berman, who picked the Bills to reach the Super Bowl nearly every year in the 1990s. Berman often uses the catchphrase, \"No one circles the wagons like the Buffalo Bills!\" Berman gave the induction speech for Bills owner Ralph Wilson when Wilson was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2009.\nThe Bills were also the favorite team of late NBC political commentator Tim Russert, a South Buffalo native, who often referred to the Bills on his Sunday morning talk show, \"Meet the Press\". (His son, Luke, is also a notable fan of the team.) CNN's Wolf Blitzer, also a Buffalo native, has proclaimed he is also a fan, as has \"CBS Evening News\" lead anchor and Tonawanda native Jeff Glor and DNC Chairman Tom Perez.\nESPN anchor Kevin Connors has been a Bills fan since he attended Ithaca College. Actor Nick Bakay, a Buffalo native, is also a well-known Bills fan; he has discussed the team in segments of \"NFL Top 10\". Character actor William Fichtner, raised in Cheektowaga, is a fan; did a commercial for the team in 2014. In 2015, Fichtner narrated the ESPN \"30 for 30\" documentary on the Bills' four Super Bowl appearances, \"Four Falls of Buffalo\". Former Olympic swimmer Summer Sanders (an in-law to former Bills kicker Todd Schlopy) has professed her fandom of the team. Actor Christopher McDonald, who was raised in Romulus, New York, is a fan of the team.\nPersons notable almost entirely for their Bills fandom include Ken \"Pinto Ron\" Johnson, whose antics while appearing at every Bills home and away game since 1994 earned enough scrutiny that his tailgate parties were banned from stadium property on order of the league; John Lang, an Elvis impersonator who carries a large guitar that he uses as a billboard; Marc Miller, whose professional wrestling promo-style interview with WGRZ before Super Bowl XXVII (distinguished by the line \"Dallas is going down, Gary!\" and picked up at the time by \"The George Michael Sports Machine\") was rediscovered in 2019; and Ezra Castro, also known as \"Pancho Billa\", a native of El Paso, Texas who wore a large sombrero and lucha mask in Bills colors. Castro was diagnosed with a spinal tumor that had metastasized in 2017; he was invited on stage during the 2018 NFL draft to read one of the Bills' selections. Castro died on May 14, 2019.\nIn popular culture.\nSeveral former Buffalo Bills players earned a name in politics in the late 20th century after their playing careers had ended, nearly always as members of the Republican Party. The most famous of these was quarterback Jack Kemp, who was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Western New York in 1971\u2014two years after his playing career ended; he remained in Congress for nearly two decades, serving as the Republican Party nominee for Vice President of the United States under Bob Dole in 1996. Kemp's backup, Ed Rutkowski, served as county executive of Erie County from 1979 to 1987. Former tight end Jay Riemersma, nose tackle Fred Smerlas and defensive end Phil Hansen have all run for Congress, though all three either lost or withdrew from their respective races.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "4318", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4318", "title": "Big Dig", "text": "1991\u20132007 megaproject in Boston, Massachusetts\nThe Big Dig was a megaproject in Boston that rerouted the elevated Central Artery of Interstate 93 into the O'Neill Tunnel and built the Ted Williams Tunnel to extend Interstate 90 to Logan International Airport. Those two projects were the origin of the official name, the Central Artery/Tunnel Project (CA/T Project). The megaproject constructed the Zakim Bunker Hill Bridge over the Charles River, created the Rose Kennedy Greenway in the space vacated by the previous elevated roadway and funded more than a dozen projects to improve the region's public transportation system. Planning began in 1982 and construction was carried out between 1991 and 2006. The project concluded in December 2007. \nThe project's general contractor was Bechtel, with Parsons Brinckerhoff as the engineers, who worked as a consortium, both overseen by the Massachusetts Highway Department. The Big Dig was the most expensive highway project in the United States, and was plagued by cost overruns, delays, leaks, design flaws, accusations of poor execution and use of substandard materials, criminal charges and arrests, and the death of one motorist. \nThe project was originally scheduled to be completed in 1998 at an estimated cost of $2.8 billion, US$7.4 billion adjusted for inflation as of 2020[ [update]]. The project was completed in December 2007 at a $14.6 billion, a cost overrun of about 97% when adjusted for inflation. As a result of a death, leaks, and other design flaws, the Parsons Brinckerhoff and Bechtel consortium agreed to pay $407 million in restitution, and several smaller companies agreed to pay a combined sum of approximately $51 million.\nOrigin.\nThis project was developed in response to the persistent and growing problem of traffic congestion on Boston's historically tangled and narrow streets, many of which were laid out centuries before the invention of the automobile. The layout, originally designed for horse-drawn carriages and pedestrian traffic, was never intended to accommodate modern vehicles, leading to chronic bottlenecks and delays that frustrated commuters and residents alike. As early as 1930, the city's Planning Board recognized the urgent need to address these traffic issues and recommended the construction of a raised express highway running north\u2013south through the downtown district. The goal was to create a faster, more direct route that would allow through-traffic to bypass the congested city streets, reducing travel times and improving the flow of vehicles throughout the area.\nBuilding on these early recommendations, Commissioner of Public Works William Callahan actively promoted detailed plans for what would become the Central Artery, an elevated expressway designed to run between the downtown district and the waterfront. The project was envisioned as a major infrastructure improvement that could transform urban mobility in Boston by separating local traffic from longer-distance through-traffic. Ultimately, the elevated expressway was constructed according to these plans, dramatically altering the cityscape while addressing some of the long-standing traffic challenges. Its development marked a pivotal moment in Boston's urban planning history, reflecting both the ambitions of city planners to modernize the transportation system and the broader nationwide trend during the mid-20th century toward building elevated highways through urban centers.\nIn the 1950s, Governor John Volpe interceded to change the design of the last section of the Central Artery, putting it underground through the Dewey Square Tunnel. While traffic moved somewhat better, the other problems remained. There was chronic congestion on the Central Artery (I-93), the elevated six-lane highway through the center of downtown Boston, which was, in the words of Pete Sigmund, \"like a funnel full of slowly-moving, or stopped, cars (and swearing motorists).\"\nIn 1959, the road section carried approximately 75,000 vehicles a day. By the 1990s, this had grown to 190,000 vehicles a day. Traffic jams of 16 hours were predicted for 2010.\nThe expressway had tight turns, an excessive number of entrances and exits, entrance ramps without merge lanes, and as the decades passed and other planned expressways were cancelled, continually escalating vehicular traffic that was well beyond its design capacity. Local businesses again wanted relief, city leaders sought a reuniting of the waterfront with the city, and nearby residents desired removal of the matte green-painted elevated road, which mayor Thomas Menino called Boston's \"other Green Monster\", as an unfavorable comparison to Fenway Park's famed left-field wall. MIT engineers Bill Reynolds, and eventual state Secretary of Transportation Frederick P. Salvucci envisioned moving the whole expressway underground.\nCancellation of the Inner Belt project.\nAnother important motivation for the final form of the Big Dig was the abandonment of the Massachusetts Department of Public Works' intended expressway system through and around Boston. The Central Artery, as part of Mass. DPW's Master Plan of 1948, was originally planned to be the downtown Boston stretch of Interstate 95, and was signed as such. A bypass road called the Inner Belt, was subsequently renamed Interstate 695. The law establishing the Interstate highway system was enacted in 1956.\nThe Inner Belt District was to pass to the west of the downtown core, through the neighborhood of Roxbury and the cities of Brookline, Cambridge, and Somerville. Earlier controversies over impact of the Boston extension of the Massachusetts Turnpike, particularly on the heavily populated neighborhood of Brighton, and the additional large amount of housing that would have had to be destroyed, led to massive community opposition to both the Inner Belt and the Boston section of I-95.\nBy 1970, building demolition and land clearances had been completed along the I-95 right of way through the neighborhoods of Roxbury, Jamaica Plain, the South End and Roslindale. This led to secession threats by Hyde Park, Boston's youngest and southernmost neighborhood, which I-95 was also slated to go through. By 1972, with relatively little work done on the Southwest Corridor portion of I-95 and none on the potentially massively disruptive Inner Belt, Governor Francis Sargent put a moratorium on highway construction within the Route\u00a0128 corridor, except for the final short stretch of Interstate 93. In 1974, the remainder of the Master Plan was canceled.\nWith ever-increasing traffic volumes funneled onto I-93 alone, the Central Artery became chronically gridlocked. The Sargent moratorium led to the rerouting of I-95 away from Boston around the Route\u00a0128 beltway, and the conversion of the cleared land in the southern part of the city into the Southwest Corridor linear park, and a new right-of-way for the Orange Line subway and Amtrak. Parts of the planned I-695 right-of-way remain unused and under consideration for future mass-transit projects.\nThe original 1948 Master Plan included a Third Harbor Tunnel plan that was hugely controversial in its own right, because it would have disrupted the Maverick Square area of East Boston. It was never built.\nMixing of traffic.\nA major reason for the all-day congestion was that the Central Artery carried north\u2013south traffic and east\u2013west traffic. Boston's Logan Airport lies across Boston Harbor in East Boston. Before the Big Dig, the only access to the airport from downtown was through the paired Callahan and Sumner tunnels. Traffic on the major highways from west of Boston\u2014the Massachusetts Turnpike and Storrow Drive\u2014mostly traveled on portions of the Central Artery to reach these tunnels. Getting between the Central Artery and the tunnels involved short diversions onto city streets, increasing local congestion.\nMass transit.\nA number of public transportation projects were included as part of an environmental mitigation for the Big Dig. The most expensive was the building of the Phase II Silver Line tunnel under Fort Point Channel, done in coordination with Big Dig construction. Silver Line buses now use this tunnel and the Ted Williams Tunnel to link South Station and Logan Airport.\nConstruction of the MBTA Green Line extension beyond Lechmere to Medford/Tufts station opened in December 2022. As of 2023[ [update]], promised projects to connect the Red and Blue subway lines, and to restore the Green Line streetcar service to the Arborway in Jamaica Plain have not been completed. The Red and Blue subway line connection underwent initial design, but no funding has been designated for the project. The Arborway Line restoration has been abandoned, following a final court decision in 2011.\nThe original Big Dig plan included the North-South Rail Link, which would have connected North and South Stations, the major passenger train stations in Boston. This aspect of the project was dropped by the state transportation administration early in the Dukakis administration. Negotiations with the federal government had led to an agreement to widen some of the lanes in the new harbor tunnel, and accommodating these would require the tunnel to be deeper and mechanically vented. This left no room for the rail lines. Diesel trains, then in use, passing through the tunnel would have substantially increased the cost of the ventilation system.\nEarly planning.\nThe project was conceived in the 1970s by the Boston Transportation Planning Review to replace the rusting elevated six-lane Central Artery. The expressway separated downtown from the waterfront, and was increasingly choked with bumper-to-bumper traffic. Business leaders were more concerned about access to Logan Airport, and pushed instead for a third harbor tunnel.\nIn 1982, planning for the Big Dig as a project officially began. In 1983, environmental impact studies started. In 1987, after years of extensive lobbying for federal dollars, a public works bill appropriating funding for the Big Dig was passed by the US Congress, but it was vetoed by President Ronald Reagan for being too expensive. When Congress overrode the veto, the project had its green light. In 1991, ground was first broken.\nIn 1997, the state legislature created the Metropolitan Highway System and transferred responsibility for the Central Artery and Tunnel \"CA/T\" Project from the Massachusetts Highway Department and the Massachusetts Governor's Office to the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority (MTA).\nThe MTA, which had little experience in managing an undertaking of the scope and magnitude of the CA/T Project, hired a joint venture to provide preliminary designs, manage design consultants and construction contractors, track the project's cost and schedule, advise MTA on project decisions, and, in some instances, act as the MTA's representative. Eventually, MTA combined some of its employees with joint venture employees in an integrated project organization. This was intended to make management more efficient, but it hindered MTA's ability to independently oversee project activities because MTA and the joint venture had effectively become partners in the project.\nObstacles.\nIn addition to political and financial difficulties, the project received resistance from residents of Boston's historic North End, who in the 1950s had seen 20% of the neighborhood's businesses displaced by development of the Central Artery. In 1993, the North End Waterfront Central Artery Committee (NEWCAC) created, co-founded by Nancy Caruso, representing residents, businesses, and institutions in the North End and Waterfront neighborhoods of Boston. The NEWCAC Committee's goal included lessening the impact of the Central Artery/Tunnel Project on the community, representing the neighborhoods to government agencies, keeping the community informed, developing a list of priorities of immediate neighborhood concerns, and promoting responsible and appropriate development of the post-construction artery corridor in the North End and Waterfront neighborhoods.\nThe political, financial and residential obstacles were magnified when several environmental and engineering obstacles occurred. The downtown area through which the tunnels were to be dug was largely land fill, and included existing Red Line and Blue Line subway tunnels as well as innumerable pipes and utility lines that would have to be replaced or moved. Tunnel workers encountered many unexpected geological and archaeological barriers, ranging from glacial debris to foundations of buried houses and a number of sunken ships lying within the reclaimed land.\nThe project received approval from state environmental agencies in 1991, after satisfying concerns including release of toxins by the excavation and the possibility of disrupting the homes of millions of rats, causing them to roam the streets of Boston in search of new housing. By the time the federal environmental clearances were delivered in 1994, the process had taken some seven years, during which time inflation greatly increased the project's original cost estimates.\nReworking such a busy corridor without seriously restricting traffic flow required a number of state-of-the-art construction techniques. Because the old elevated highway, which remained in operation throughout the construction process, rested on pylons located throughout the designated dig area, engineers first utilized slurry wall techniques to create concrete walls upon which the highway could rest. These concrete walls also stabilized the sides of the site, preventing cave-ins during the continued excavation process.\nThe multi-lane Interstate highway also had to pass under South Station's seven railroad tracks, which carried over 40,000 commuters and 400 trains per day. To avoid multiple relocations of train lines while the tunneling advanced, as had been initially planned, a specially designed jack was constructed to support the ground and tracks to allow the excavation to take place below. Construction crews also used ground freezing (an artificial induction of permafrost) to help stabilize surrounding ground as they excavated the tunnel. This was the largest tunneling project undertaken beneath railroad lines anywhere in the world. The ground freezing enabled safer, more efficient excavation, and also assisted in environmental issues, as less contaminated fill needed to be exported than if a traditional cut-and-cover method had been applied.\nOther challenges included existing subway tunnels crossing the path of the underground highway. To build slurry walls past these tunnels, it was necessary to dig beneath the tunnels and to build an underground concrete bridge to support the tunnels' weight, without interrupting rail service.\nConstruction phase.\nThe project was managed by the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, with the Big Dig and the Turnpike's Boston Extension from the 1960s being financially and legally joined by the legislature as the Metropolitan Highway System. Design and construction was supervised by a joint venture of Bechtel Corporation and Parsons Brinckerhoff. Because of the enormous size of the project\u2014too large for any company to undertake alone\u2014the design and construction of the Big Dig was broken up into dozens of smaller subprojects with well-defined interfaces between contractors. Major heavy-construction contractors on the project included Jay Cashman, Modern Continental, Obayashi Corporation, Perini Corporation, Peter Kiewit Sons' Incorporated, J. F. White, and the Slattery division of Skanska USA. Of those, Modern Continental was awarded the greatest gross value of contracts, joint ventures included.\nThe nature of the Charles River crossing had been a source of major controversy throughout the design phase of the project. Many environmental advocates preferred a river crossing entirely in tunnels, but this, along with 27 other plans, was rejected as too costly. With a deadline looming to begin construction on a separate project that would connect the Tobin Bridge to the Charles River crossing, Salvucci overrode the objections and chose a variant of the plan known as \"Scheme Z\". This plan was considered to be reasonably cost-effective, but had the drawback of requiring highway ramps stacked up as high as immediately adjacent to the Charles River.\nThe city of Cambridge objected to the visual impact of the chosen Charles River crossing design. The city sued to revoke the project's environmental certificate and forced the project planners to redesign the river crossing again.\nSwiss engineer Christian Menn took over the design of the bridge. He suggested a cradle cable-stayed bridge that would carry ten lanes of traffic. The plan was accepted and construction began on the Leonard P. Zakim Bunker Hill Memorial Bridge. The bridge employed an asymmetrical design and a hybrid of steel and concrete was used to construct it. The distinctive bridge, designed by Boston-based architect Miguel Rosales, is supported by two forked towers connected to the span by cables and girders. It was the first bridge in the country to employ this method and it was, at the time, the widest cable-stayed bridge in the world, having since been surpassed by the Eastern span replacement of the San Francisco\u2013Oakland Bay Bridge.\nMeanwhile, construction continued on the Tobin Bridge approach. By the time all parties agreed on the I-93 design, construction of the Tobin connector, today known as the \"City Square Tunnel\" for a Charlestown area it bypasses, was far along, significantly adding to the cost of constructing the US Route 1 interchange and retrofitting the tunnel. \nBoston blue clay and other soils extracted from the path of the tunnel were used to cap many local landfills, fill in the Granite Rail Quarry in Quincy, and restore the surface of Spectacle Island in the Boston Harbor Islands National Recreation Area.\nThe Storrow Drive Connector, a companion bridge to the Zakim, began carrying traffic from I-93 to Storrow Drive in 1999. The project had been under consideration for years, but was opposed by the wealthy residents of the Beacon Hill neighborhood. It was finally accepted because it would funnel traffic bound for Storrow Drive and downtown Boston away from the mainline roadway. The Connector ultimately used a pair of ramps that had been constructed for Interstate 695, enabling the mainline I-93 to carry more traffic that would have used I-695 under the original Master Plan.\nWhen construction began, the project cost, including the Charles River crossing, was estimated at $5.8 billion. Eventual cost overruns were so high that the chairman of the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, James Kerasiotes, was fired in 2000. His replacement had to commit to an $8.55 billion cap on federal contributions. The total expenses eventually passed $15 billion. Interest brought this cost to $21.93 billion.\nEngineering methods and details.\nSeveral unusual engineering challenges arose during the project, requiring unusual solutions and methods to address them. At the beginning of the project, engineers had to figure out the safest way to build the tunnel without endangering the existing elevated highway above. Eventually, they created horizontal braces as wide as the tunnel, then cut away the elevated highway's struts, and lowered it onto the new braces.\nThree alternative construction methods were studied with their corresponding structural design to address existing conditions, safety measures, and constructability. In addition to codified loads, construction loads were computed to support final design and field execution.\nFinal phases.\nOn January 18, 2003, the opening ceremony was held for the I-90 Connector Tunnel, extending the Massachusetts Turnpike (Interstate 90) east into the Ted Williams Tunnel, and onwards to Boston Logan International Airport. The Ted Williams tunnel had been completed and was in limited use for commercial traffic and high-occupancy vehicles since late 1995. The westbound lanes opened on the afternoon of January 18 and the eastbound lanes on January 19.\nThe northbound lanes of the I-93 tunnel opened on March 29, 2003. A temporary ramp from I-90 westbound to I-93 southbound opened on December 6, 2003, as did Cross Street on the surface. The southbound lanes of the I-93 tunnel opened on December 20, 2003. A tunnel underneath Leverett Circle connecting eastbound Storrow Drive to I-93 North and the Tobin Bridge opened December 19, 2004, easing congestion at the circle. All southbound lanes of I-93 opened to traffic on March 5, 2005, including the left lane of the Zakim Bridge, and all of the refurbished Dewey Square Tunnel.\nBy the end of December 2004, 95% of the Big Dig was completed. Major construction remained on the surface, including construction of final ramp configurations in the North End and in the South Bay interchange, and reconstruction of the surface streets.\nThe final ramp downtown \u2014 exit 16A (formerly 20B) from I-93 south to Albany Street \u2014 opened January 13, 2006.\nIn 2006, the two Interstate 93 tunnels were dedicated as the Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. Tunnel, after the former Democratic speaker of the House of Representatives from Massachusetts who pushed to have the Big Dig funded by the federal government.\nCoordinated projects.\nThe Commonwealth of Massachusetts was required under the Federal Clean Air Act to mitigate air pollution generated by the highway improvements. Secretary of Transportation Fred Salvucci signed an agreement with the Conservation Law Foundation in 1990 enumerating 14 specific projects the state agreed to build. This list was affirmed in a 1992 lawsuit settlement.\nProjects which have been completed include:\nHowever, some projects were removed:\nSurface treatments.\nSome surface treatments that were part of the original project plan were dropped due to the massive cost overruns on the highway portion of the project.\n$99.1 million was allocated for mitigating improvements to the Charles River Basin, including the construction of North Point Park in Cambridge and Paul Revere Park in Charlestown. The North Bank Bridge, providing pedestrian and bicycle connectivity between the parks, was not funded until the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009. Nashua Street Park on the Boston side was completed in 2003, by McCourt Construction with $7.9 million in funding from MassDOT.\nAs of 2017, $30.5 million had been transferred to the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation to complete five projects. Another incomplete but required project is the South Bank Bridge over the MBTA Commuter Rail tracks at North Station (connecting Nashua Street Park to the proposed South Bank Park, which is currently a parking lot under the Zakim Bridge at the Charles River locks).\nImprovements in the lower Charles River Basin include the new walkway at Lovejoy Wharf (constructed by the developer of 160 North Washington Street, the new headquarters of Converse), the Lynch Family Skate Park (constructed in 2015 by the Charles River Conservancy), rehabilitation of historic operations buildings for the Charles River Dam and lock, a maintenance facility, and a planned pedestrian walkway across the Charles River next to the MBTA Commuter Rail drawbridge at North Station (connecting Nashua Street Park and North Point Park). MassDOT is funding the South Bank Park, and replacement of the North Washington Street Bridge (construction Aug 2018\u201323).\nEF Education is funding public greenspace improvements as part of its three-phase expansion at North Point. Remaining funding may be used to construct the North Point Inlet pedestrian bridge, and a pedestrian walkway over Leverett Circle. Before being replaced with surface access during the reconstruction of the Science Park MBTA Green Line station, Leverett Circle had pedestrian bridges with stairs that provided elevated access between the station, the Charles River Parks, and the sidewalk to the Boston Museum of Science. The replacement ramps would comply with Americans with Disabilities Act requirements and allow easy travel by wheelchair or bicycle over the busy intersection.\nPublic art.\nWhile not a legally mandated requirement, public art was part of the urban design planning process, and later design development work, through the Artery Arts Program. The intent of the program was to integrate public art into highway infrastructure (retaining walls, fences, and lighting) and the essential elements of the pedestrian environment (walkways, park landscape elements, and bridges). As overall project costs increased, the Artery Arts Program was seen as a potential liability, even though there was support and interest from the public and professional arts organizations in the area.\nAt the beginning of the highway design process, a temporary arts program was initiated, and over 50 proposals were selected. Development began on only a few projects before funding for the program was cut. Permanent public art that was funded includes: super graphic text and facades of former West End houses cast into the concrete elevated highway abutment support walls near North Station by artist Sheila Levrant de Bretteville; Harbor Fog, a sensor-activated mist, light and sound sculptural environment by artist Ross Miller in parcel 17; a historical sculpture celebrating the 18th and 19th century shipbuilding industry and a bust of shipbuilder Donald McKay in East Boston; blue interior lighting of the Zakim Bridge; and the Miller's River Littoral Way walkway and lighting under the loop ramps north of the Charles River.\nExtensive landscape planting, as well as a maintenance program to support the plantings, was requested by many community members during public meetings. \nImpact on traffic.\nThe Big Dig separated the co-mingled traffic from the Massachusetts Turnpike and the Sumner and Callahan tunnels. While only one net lane in each direction was added to the north\u2013south I-93, several new east\u2013west lanes became available. East\u2013west traffic on the Massachusetts Turnpike/I-90 now proceeds directly through the Ted Williams Tunnel to Logan Airport and Route 1A beyond. Traffic between Storrow Drive and the Callahan and Sumner Tunnels still uses a short portion of I-93, but additional lanes and direct connections are provided for this traffic.\nThe result was a 62% reduction in vehicle hours of travel on I-93, the airport tunnels, and the connection from Storrow Drive, from an average 38,200 hours per day before construction (1994\u20131995) to 14,800 hours per day in 2004\u20132005, after the project was largely complete. The savings for travelers was estimated at $166 million annually in the same 2004\u20132005 time frame. Travel times on the Central Artery northbound during the afternoon peak hour were reduced 85.6%.\nA 2008 \"Boston Globe\" report asserted that waiting time for the majority of trips actually increased as a result of demand induced by the increased road capacity. Because more drivers were opting to use the new roads, traffic bottlenecks were only pushed outward from the city, not reduced or eliminated (although some trips are now faster). The report states, \"Ultimately, many motorists going to and from the suburbs at peak rush hours are spending more time stuck in traffic, not less.\" The \"Globe\" also asserted that their analysis provides a fuller picture of the traffic situation than a state-commissioned study done two years earlier, in which the Big Dig was credited with helping to save at least $167 million a year by increasing economic productivity and decreasing motor vehicle operating costs. That study did not look at highways outside the Big Dig construction area and did not take into account new congestion elsewhere.\nImpact on property values.\nTowards the end of the Big Dig in 2003, it was estimated that the demolition of the Central Artery highway would cause a $732 million increase in property value in Boston's financial district, with the replacement parks providing an additional $252 million in value. As a result of the Big Dig, a large amount of waterfront space was opened up, which is now a high-rent residential and commercial area called the Seaport District. The development of Seaport alone was estimated to create $7 billion in private investment and 43,000 jobs.\nOperations Control Center (OCC).\nAs part of the project, an elaborate Operations Control Center (OCC) control room was constructed in South Boston. Staffed on a \"24/7/365\" basis, this center monitors and reports on traffic congestion, and responds to emergencies. Continuous video surveillance is provided by hundreds of cameras, and thousands of sensors monitor traffic speed and density, air quality, water levels, temperatures, equipment status, and other conditions inside the tunnel. The OCC can activate emergency ventilation fans, change electronic display signs, and dispatch service crews when necessary.\nProblems.\nLeaks.\nAs far back as 2001, Turnpike Authority officials and contractors knew of thousands of leaks in ceiling and wall fissures, extensive water damage to steel supports and fireproofing systems, and overloaded drainage systems. Many of the leaks were a result of Modern Continental and other subcontractors failing to remove gravel and other debris before pouring concrete. This information was not made public until engineers at MIT (volunteer students and professors) performed several experiments and found serious problems with the tunnel.\nOn September 15, 2004, a major leak in the Interstate 93 north tunnel forced the closure of the tunnel while repairs were conducted. This also forced the Turnpike Authority to release information regarding its non-disclosure of prior leaks. A follow-up reported on \"extensive\" leaks that were more severe than state authorities had previously acknowledged. The report went on to state that the tunnel system had more than 400 leaks. A \"Boston Globe\" report countered that by stating there were nearly 700 leaks in a single section of tunnel beneath South Station. Turnpike officials also stated that the number of leaks being investigated was down from 1,000 to 500.\nThe problem of leaks is further aggravated by the fact that many of them involve corrosive salt water. This is caused by the proximity of Boston Harbor and the Atlantic Ocean, causing a mix of salt and fresh water leaks in the tunnel. The situation is made worse by road salt spread in the tunnel to melt ice during freezing weather, or brought in by vehicles passing through. Salt water and salt spray are well-known issues that must be dealt with in any marine environment. It has been reported that \"hundreds of thousands of gallons of salt water are pumped out monthly\" in the Big Dig, and a map has been prepared showing \"hot spots\" where water leakage is especially serious. Salt-accelerated corrosion has caused ceiling light fixtures to fail (see below), but can also cause rapid deterioration of embedded rebar and other structural steel reinforcements holding the tunnel walls and ceiling in place.\nSubstandard materials.\nMassachusetts State Police searched the offices of Aggregate Industries, the largest concrete supplier for the underground portions of the project, in June 2005. They seized evidence that Aggregate delivered concrete that did not meet contract specifications. In March 2006 Massachusetts Attorney General Tom Reilly announced plans to sue project contractors and others because of poor work on the project. Over 200 complaints were filed by the state of Massachusetts as a result of leaks, cost overruns, quality concerns, and safety violations. In total, the state has sought approximately $100 million from the contractors ($1 for every $141 spent).\nIn May 2006, six employees of the company were arrested and charged with conspiracy to defraud the United States. The employees were accused of reusing old concrete and double-billing loads. In July 2007, Aggregate Industries settled the case with an agreement to pay $50 million. $42 million of the settlement went to civil cases and $8 million was paid in criminal fines. The company will provide $75 million in insurance for maintenance as well as pay $500,000 toward routine checks on areas suspected to contain substandard concrete.\nIn July 2009, two of the accused, Gerard McNally and Keith Thomas, both managers, pled guilty to charges of conspiracy, mail fraud, and filing false reports. The following month, the remaining four, Robert Prosperi, Mark Blais, Gregory Stevenson, and John Farrar, were found guilty on conspiracy and fraud charges. The four were sentenced to probation and home confinement and Blais and Farrar were additionally sentenced to community service.\nFatal ceiling collapse.\nA fatal accident raised safety questions and closed part of the project for most of the summer of 2006. On July 10, 2006, concrete ceiling panels and debris weighing and measuring fell on a car traveling on the two-lane ramp connecting northbound I-93 to eastbound I-90 in South Boston, killing Milena Del Valle, who was a passenger, and injuring her husband, Angel Del Valle, who was driving.\nImmediately following the fatal ceiling collapse, Governor Mitt Romney ordered a \"stem-to-stern\" safety audit conducted by the engineering firm of Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. to look for additional areas of risk. Said Romney: \"We simply cannot live in a setting where a project of this scale has the potential of threatening human life, as has already been seen\".\nThe collapse and closure of the tunnel greatly snarled traffic in the city. The resulting traffic jams are cited as contributing to the death of another person, a heart attack victim who died en route to Boston Medical Center when his ambulance was caught in one such traffic jam two weeks after the collapse. On September 1, 2006, one eastbound lane of the connector tunnel was re-opened to traffic.\nFollowing extensive inspections and repairs, Interstate 90 east- and westbound lanes reopened in early January 2007. The final piece of the road network, a high occupancy vehicle lane connecting Interstate 93 north to the Ted Williams Tunnel, reopened on June 1, 2007.\nOn July 10, 2007, after a lengthy investigation, the National Transportation Safety Board found that epoxy glue used to hold the roof in place during construction was not appropriate for long-term bonding. This was determined to be the cause of the roof collapse. The Power-Fast Epoxy Adhesive used in the installation was designed for short-term loading, such as wind or earthquake loads, not long-term loading, such as the weight of a panel.\nPowers Fasteners, the makers of the adhesive, revised their product specifications on May 15, 2007, to increase the safety factor from 4 to 10 for all of their epoxy products intended for use in overhead applications. The safety factor on Power-Fast Epoxy was increased from 4 to 16. On December 24, 2007, the Del Valle family announced they had reached a settlement with Powers Fasteners that would pay the family $6 million. In December 2008, Powers Fasteners agreed to pay $16 million to the state to settle manslaughter charges.\n\"Ginsu guardrails\".\nPublic safety workers have called the walkway safety handrails in the Big Dig tunnels \"ginsu guardrails\", because the squared-off edges of the support posts have caused mutilations and deaths of passengers ejected from crashed vehicles. After an eighth reported death involving the safety handrails, MassDOT officials announced plans to cover or remove the allegedly dangerous fixtures, but only near curves or exit ramps. This partial removal of hazards has been criticized by a safety specialist, who suggests that the handrails are just as dangerous in straight sections of the tunnel.\nLighting fixtures.\nIn March 2011, it became known that senior MassDOT officials had failed to disclose an issue with the lighting fixtures in the O'Neill tunnel. In early February 2011, a maintenance crew found a fixture lying in the middle travel lane in the northbound tunnel. Assuming it to be simple road debris, the maintenance team picked it up and brought it back to its home facility. The next day, a supervisor passing through the yard realized that the fixture was not road debris but was in fact one of the fixtures used to light the tunnel itself. Further investigation revealed that the fixture's mounting apparatus had failed, due to galvanic corrosion of incompatible metals, caused by having aluminum in direct contact with stainless steel, in the presence of salt water. The electrochemical potential difference between stainless steel and aluminum is in the range of 0.5 to 1.0V, depending on the exact alloys involved, and can cause considerable corrosion within months under unfavorable conditions.\nAfter the discovery of the reason why the fixture had failed, a comprehensive inspection of the other fixtures in the tunnel revealed that numerous other fixtures were also in the same state of deterioration. Some of the worst fixtures were temporarily shored up with plastic ties. Moving forward with temporary repairs, members of the MassDOT administration team decided not to let the news of the systemic failure and repair of the fixtures be released to the public or to Governor Deval Patrick's administration.\nAs of April\u00a02012[ [update]], it appeared that all of the 25,000 light fixtures would have to be replaced, at an estimated cost of $54 million. The replacement work was mostly done at night, and required lane closures or occasional closing of the entire tunnel for safety, and was estimated to take up to two years to complete.\nSee also.\nInternational:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4319", "revid": "1021097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4319", "title": "Books of Chronicles", "text": "Final books of the Hebrew Bible\nThe Book of Chronicles ( , \"words of the days\") is a book in the Hebrew Bible, found as two books (1\u20132 Chronicles) in the Christian Old Testament. Chronicles is the final book of the Hebrew Bible, concluding the third section of the Jewish Tanakh, the Ketuvim (\"Writings\"). It contains a genealogy starting with Adam and a history of ancient Judah and Israel up to the Edict of Cyrus in 539 BC.\nThe book was translated into Greek and divided into two books in the Septuagint in the mid-3rd century BC. In Christian contexts Chronicles is referred to in the plural as the Books of Chronicles, after the Latin name given to the text by Jerome, but is also referred to by its Greek name as the Books of Paralipomenon. In Christian Bibles, they usually follow the two Books of Kings and precede Ezra\u2013Nehemiah, the last history-oriented book of the Protestant Old Testament.\nSummary.\nThe Chronicles narrative begins with Adam, Seth and Enosh, and the story is then carried forward, almost entirely through genealogical lists, down to the founding of the United Kingdom of Israel in the \"introductory chapters\", 1 Chronicles 1\u20139. The bulk of the remainder of 1 Chronicles, after a brief account of Saul in chapter 10, is concerned with the reign of David. The next long section concerns David's son Solomon, and the final part is concerned with the Kingdom of Judah, with occasional references to the northern Kingdom of Israel (2 Chronicles 10\u201336). The final chapter covers briefly the reigns of the last four kings, until Judah is destroyed and the people taken into exile in Babylon. In the two final verses, identical to the opening verses of the Book of Ezra, the Persian king Cyrus the Great conquers the Neo-Babylonian Empire, and authorises the restoration of the Temple in Jerusalem and the return of the exiles.\nStructure.\nOriginally a single work, Chronicles was divided into two in the Septuagint, a Greek translation produced in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC. It has three broad divisions: \nWithin this broad structure there are signs that the author has used various other devices to structure his work, notably through drawing parallels between David and Solomon (the first becomes king, establishes the worship of Israel's God in Jerusalem, and fights the wars that will enable the Temple to be built, then Solomon becomes king, builds and dedicates the Temple, and reaps the benefits of prosperity and peace).\n1 Chronicles is divided into 29 chapters and 2 Chronicles into 36 chapters. Biblical commentator C. J. Ball suggests that the division into two books introduced by the translators of the Septuagint \"occurs in the most suitable place\", namely with the conclusion of David's reign as king and the initiation of Solomon's reign.\nThe Talmud considered Chronicles one book.\nComposition.\nOrigins.\nThe last events recorded in Chronicles take place in the reign of Cyrus the Great, the Persian king who conquered Babylon in 539\u00a0BC; this sets the earliest possible date for this passage of the book.\nChronicles appears to be largely the work of a single individual. The writer was probably male, probably a Levite (temple priest), and probably from Jerusalem. He was well-read, a skilled editor, and a sophisticated theologian. He aimed to use the narratives in the Torah and former prophets to convey religious messages to his peers, the literary and political elite of Jerusalem in the time of the Achaemenid Empire.\nJewish and Christian tradition identified this author as the 5th-century BC figure Ezra, who gives his name to the Book of Ezra; Ezra is also believed by the Talmudic sages to have written both his own book (i. e., Ezra\u2013Nehemiah) and Chronicles up to his own time, the latter having been finished by Nehemiah. Later critics, skeptical of the long-maintained tradition, preferred to call the author \"the Chronicler\". However, many scholars maintain support for Ezra's authorship, not only based on centuries of work by Jewish historians, but also due to the consistency of language and speech patterns between Chronicles and Ezra\u2013Nehemiah. Professor Emeritus Menahem Haran of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem explains, \"the overall unity of the Chronistic Work is \u2026 demonstrated by a common ideology, the uniformity of legal, cultic and historical conceptions and specific style, all of which reflect one opus.\"\nOne of the most striking, although inconclusive, features of Chronicles is that its closing sentence is repeated as the opening of Ezra\u2013Nehemiah. In antiquity, such repeated verses, like the \"catch-lines\" used by modern printers, often appeared at the end of a scroll to facilitate the reader's passing on to the correct second book-scroll after completing the first. This scribal device was employed in works that exceeded the scope of a single scroll and had to be continued on another scroll.\nThe latter half of the 20th century, amid growing skepticism in academia regarding history in the Biblical tradition, saw a reappraisal of the authorship question. Though there is a general lack of corroborating evidence, many now regard it as improbable that the author of Chronicles was also the author of the narrative portions of Ezra\u2013Nehemiah. These critics suggest that \"Chronicles\" was probably composed between 400 and 250 BC, with the period 350\u2013300 BC the most likely. This timeframe is achieved by estimates made based on genealogies appearing in the Greek Septuagint. This theory bases its premise on the latest person mentioned in Chronicles, Anani. Anani is an eighth-generation descendant of King Jehoiachin according to the Masoretic Text. This has persuaded many supporters of the Septuagint's reading to place Anani's likely date of birth a century later than what had been largely accepted for two millennia.\nSources.\nMuch of the content of Chronicles is a repetition of material from other books of the Bible, from Genesis to Kings, and so the usual scholarly view is that these books, or an early version of them, provided the author with the bulk of his material. It is, however, possible that the situation was rather more complex, and that books such as Genesis and Samuel should be regarded as contemporary with Chronicles, drawing on much of the same material, rather than a source for it. Despite much discussion of this issue, no agreement has been reached. It is also likely that Chronicles preserved ancient heterodox traditions regarding Israel's history.\nGenre.\nThe translators who created the Greek version of the Jewish Bible (the Septuagint) called this book \"Paralipomenon\", \"Things Left Out\", indicating that they thought of it as a supplement to another work, probably Genesis\u2013Kings, but the idea seems inappropriate, since much of Genesis\u2013Kings has been copied almost without change. Some modern scholars proposed that Chronicles is a midrash, or traditional Jewish commentary, on Genesis\u2013Kings, but again this is not entirely accurate since the author or authors do not comment on the older books so much as use them to create a new work. Recent suggestions have been that it was intended as a clarification of the history in Genesis\u2013Kings, or a replacement or alternative for it.\nThemes.\nPresbyterian theologian Paul K. Hooker argues that the generally accepted message the author wished to give to his audience was a theological reflection, not a \"history of Israel\":\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nTranslations\nIntroductions\nAudiobooks"}
{"id": "4320", "revid": "51062086", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4320", "title": "Binary search tree", "text": "Rooted binary tree data structure\nIn computer science, a binary search tree (BST), also called an ordered or sorted binary tree, is a rooted binary tree data structure with the key of each internal node being greater than all the keys in the respective node's left subtree and less than the ones in its right subtree. The time complexity of operations on the binary search tree is linear with respect to the height of the tree.\nBinary search trees allow binary search for fast lookup, addition, and removal of data items. Since the nodes in a BST are laid out so that each comparison skips about half of the remaining tree, the lookup performance is proportional to that of binary logarithm. BSTs were devised in the 1960s for the problem of efficient storage of labeled data and are attributed to Conway Berners-Lee and David Wheeler.\nThe performance of a binary search tree is dependent on the order of insertion of the nodes into the tree since arbitrary insertions may lead to degeneracy; several variations of the binary search tree can be built with guaranteed worst-case performance. The basic operations include: search, traversal, insert and delete. BSTs with guaranteed worst-case complexities perform better than an unsorted array, which would require linear search time.\nThe complexity analysis of BST shows that, on average, the insert, delete and search takes formula_1 for formula_2 nodes. In the worst case, they degrade to that of a singly linked list: formula_3. To address the boundless increase of the tree height with arbitrary insertions and deletions, self-balancing variants of BSTs are introduced to bound the worst lookup complexity to that of the binary logarithm. AVL trees were the first self-balancing binary search trees, invented in 1962 by Georgy Adelson-Velsky and Evgenii Landis.\nBinary search trees can be used to implement abstract data types such as dynamic sets, lookup tables and priority queues, and used in sorting algorithms such as tree sort.\nHistory.\nThe binary search tree algorithm was discovered independently by several researchers, including P.F. Windley, Andrew Donald Booth, Andrew Colin, Thomas N. Hibbard. The algorithm is attributed to Conway Berners-Lee and David Wheeler, who used it for storing labeled data in magnetic tapes in 1960. One of the earliest and popular binary search tree algorithm is that of Hibbard.\nThe time complexity of a binary search tree increases boundlessly with the tree height if the nodes are inserted in an arbitrary order, therefore self-balancing binary search trees were introduced to bound the height of the tree to formula_4. Various height-balanced binary search trees were introduced to confine the tree height, such as AVL trees, Treaps, and red\u2013black trees.\nOverview.\nA binary search tree is a rooted binary tree in which nodes are arranged in strict total order in which the nodes with keys greater than any particular node \"A\" is stored on the right sub-trees to that node \"A\" and the nodes with keys equal to or less than \"A\" are stored on the left sub-trees to \"A,\" satisfying the binary search property.298\nBinary search trees are also efficacious in sortings and search algorithms. However, the search complexity of a BST depends upon the order in which the nodes are inserted and deleted; since in worst case, successive operations in the binary search tree may lead to degeneracy and form a singly linked list (or \"unbalanced tree\") like structure, thus has the same worst-case complexity as a linked list.299-302 \nBinary search trees are also a fundamental data structure used in construction of abstract data structures such as sets, multisets, and associative arrays.\nOperations.\nSearching.\nSearching in a binary search tree for a specific key can be programmed recursively or iteratively.\nSearching begins by examining the root node. If the tree is nil, the key being searched for does not exist in the tree. Otherwise, if the key equals that of the root, the search is successful and the node is returned. If the key is less than that of the root, the search proceeds by examining the left subtree. Similarly, if the key is greater than that of the root, the search proceeds by examining the right subtree. This process is repeated until the key is found or the remaining subtree is formula_5. If the searched key is not found after a formula_5 subtree is reached, then the key is not present in the tree.\nRecursive search.\nThe following pseudocode implements the BST search procedure through recursion.\nThe recursive procedure continues until a formula_5 or the formula_8 being searched for are encountered.\nIterative search.\nThe recursive version of the search can be \"unrolled\" into a while loop. On most machines, the iterative version is found to be more efficient.\nSince the search may proceed till some leaf node, the running time complexity of BST search is formula_9 where formula_10 is the height of the tree. However, the worst case for BST search is formula_3 where formula_2 is the total number of nodes in the BST, because an unbalanced BST may degenerate to a linked list. However, if the BST is height-balanced the height is formula_4.\nSuccessor and predecessor.\nFor certain operations, given a node formula_14, finding the successor or predecessor of formula_14 is crucial. Assuming all the keys of a BST are distinct, the successor of a node formula_14 in a BST is the node with the smallest key greater than formula_14's key. On the other hand, the predecessor of a node formula_14 in a BST is the node with the largest key smaller than formula_14's key. The following pseudocode finds the successor and predecessor of a node formula_14 in a BST.\nOperations such as finding a node in a BST whose key is the maximum or minimum are critical in certain operations, such as determining the successor and predecessor of nodes. Following is the pseudocode for the operations.\nInsertion.\nOperations such as insertion and deletion cause the BST representation to change dynamically. The data structure must be modified in such a way that the properties of BST continue to hold. New nodes are inserted as leaf nodes in the BST. Following is an iterative implementation of the insertion operation.\nThe procedure maintains a \"trailing pointer\" formula_21 as a parent of formula_14. After initialization on line 2, the while loop along lines 4-11 causes the pointers to be updated. If formula_21 is formula_5, the BST is empty, thus formula_25 is inserted as the root node of the binary search tree formula_26, if it is not formula_5, insertion proceeds by comparing the keys to that of formula_21 on the lines 15-19 and the node is inserted accordingly.\nDeletion.\nThe deletion of a node, say formula_29, from the binary search tree formula_30 has three cases:295-297\nThe following pseudocode implements the deletion operation in a binary search tree.296-298\nThe formula_51 procedure deals with the 3 special cases mentioned above. Lines 2-3 deal with case 1; lines 4-5 deal with case 2 and lines 6-16 for case 3. The helper function formula_52 is used within the deletion algorithm for the purpose of replacing the node formula_53 with formula_54 in the binary search tree formula_30.298 This procedure handles the deletion (and substitution) of formula_53 from formula_30.\nTraversal.\nA BST can be traversed through three basic algorithms: inorder, preorder, and postorder tree walks.\nFollowing is a recursive implementation of the tree walks.\nBalanced binary search trees.\nWithout rebalancing, insertions or deletions in a binary search tree may lead to degeneration, resulting in a height formula_2 of the tree (where formula_2 is number of items in a tree), so that the lookup performance is deteriorated to that of a linear search. Keeping the search tree balanced and height bounded by formula_4 is a key to the usefulness of the binary search tree. This can be achieved by \"self-balancing\" mechanisms during the updation operations to the tree designed to maintain the tree height to the binary logarithmic complexity.50\nHeight-balanced trees.\nA tree is height-balanced if the heights of the left sub-tree and right sub-tree are guaranteed to be related by a constant factor. This property was introduced by the AVL tree and continued by the red\u2013black tree. The heights of all the nodes on the path from the root to the modified leaf node have to be observed and possibly corrected on every insert and delete operation to the tree.\nWeight-balanced trees.\nIn a weight-balanced tree, the criterion of a balanced tree is the number of leaves of the subtrees. The weights of the left and right subtrees differ at most by formula_61. However, the difference is bound by a ratio formula_62 of the weights, since a strong balance condition of formula_61 cannot be maintained with formula_4 rebalancing work during insert and delete operations. The formula_62-weight-balanced trees gives an entire family of balance conditions, where each left and right subtrees have each at least a fraction of formula_62 of the total weight of the subtree.\nTypes.\nThere are several self-balanced binary search trees, including T-tree, treap, red-black tree, B-tree, 2\u20133 tree, and Splay tree.\nExamples of applications.\nSort.\nBinary search trees are used in sorting algorithms such as tree sort, where all the elements are inserted at once and the tree is traversed at an in-order fashion. BSTs are also used in quicksort.\nPriority queue operations.\nBinary search trees are used in implementing priority queues, using the node's key as priorities. Adding new elements to the queue follows the regular BST insertion operation but the removal operation depends on the type of priority queue:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4321", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4321", "title": "Binary tree", "text": "Limited form of tree data structure\nIn computer science, a binary tree is a tree data structure in which each node has at most two children, referred to as the \"left child\" and the \"right child\". That is, it is a \"k\"-ary tree where \"k\" \n 2. A recursive definition using set theory is that a binary tree is a triple (\"L\", \"S\", \"R\"), where \"L\" and \"R\" are binary trees or the empty set and \"S\" is a singleton (a single\u2013element set) containing the root.\nFrom a graph theory perspective, binary trees as defined here are arborescences. A binary tree may thus be also called a bifurcating arborescence, a term which appears in some early programming books before the modern computer science terminology prevailed. It is also possible to interpret a binary tree as an undirected, rather than directed graph, in which case a binary tree is an ordered, rooted tree. Some authors use rooted binary tree instead of \"binary tree\" to emphasize the fact that the tree is rooted, but as defined above, a binary tree is always rooted.\nIn mathematics, what is termed \"binary tree\" can vary significantly from author to author. Some use the definition commonly used in computer science, but others define it as every non-leaf having exactly two children and don't necessarily label the children as left and right either.\nIn computing, binary trees can be used in two very different ways:\nDefinitions.\nRecursive definition.\nRecursive full tree definition.\nA simple, informal approach to describe a binary tree might be as follows:\n a binary tree has a root node, which has 0 or 2 children nodes (which in turn may have their 0 or 2 children, and so on).\nMore formally:\nThis definition implies two limitations: a full binary tree contains at least one node, and no node can have only one child. This is resolved with the next definition.\nRecursive extended tree definition.\nThe extended tree definition starts with the assumption the tree can be empty.\nTo be complete from the graph point of view, both definitions of a tree should be extended by a definition of the corresponding branches sets. Informally, the branches set can be described as a set of all ordered pairs of nodes (r, s) where r is a root node of any subtree appearing in the definition, and s is a root node of any of its T1 and T2 subtrees (in case the respective subtree is not empty).\nAnother way of imagining this construction (and understanding the terminology) is to consider instead of the empty set a different type of node\u2014for instance square nodes if the regular ones are circles.\nUsing graph theory concepts.\nA binary tree is a rooted tree that is also an ordered tree (a.k.a. plane tree) in which every node has at most two children. A rooted tree naturally imparts a notion of levels (distance from the root); thus, for every node, a notion of children may be defined as the nodes connected to it a level below. Ordering of these children (e.g., by drawing them on a plane) makes it possible to distinguish a left child from a right child. But this still does not distinguish between a node with left but not a right child from a node with right but no left child.\nThe necessary distinction can be made by first partitioning the edges; i.e., defining the binary tree as triplet (V, E1, E2), where (V, E1 \u222a E2) is a rooted tree (equivalently arborescence) and E1 \u2229 E2 is empty, and also requiring that for all \"j\" \u2208 { 1, 2 }, every node has at most one E\"j\" child. A more informal way of making the distinction is to say, quoting the Encyclopedia of Mathematics, that \"every node has a left child, a right child, neither, or both\" and to specify that these \"are all different\" binary trees.\nTypes of binary trees.\nTree terminology is not well-standardized and therefore may vary among examples in the available literature.\nCombinatorics.\nIn combinatorics, one considers the problem of counting the number of full binary trees of a given size. Here the trees have no values attached to their nodes (this would just multiply the number of possible trees by an easily determined factor), and trees are distinguished only by their structure; however, the left and right child of any node are distinguished (if they are different trees, then interchanging them will produce a tree distinct from the original one). The size of the tree is taken to be the number \"n\" of internal nodes (those with two children); the other nodes are leaf nodes and there are \"n\" + 1 of them. The number of such binary trees of size \"n\" is equal to the number of ways of fully parenthesizing a string of \"n\" + 1 symbols (representing leaves) separated by \"n\" binary operators (representing internal nodes), to determine the argument subexpressions of each operator. For instance for \"n\" \n 3 one has to parenthesize a string like &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which is possible in five ways:\n formula_29\nThe correspondence to binary trees should be obvious, and the addition of redundant parentheses (around an already parenthesized expression or around the full expression) is disallowed (or at least not counted as producing a new possibility).\nThere is a unique binary tree of size 0 (consisting of a single leaf), and any other binary tree is characterized by the pair of its left and right children; if these have sizes \"i\" and \"j\" respectively, the full tree has size \"i\" + \"j\" + 1. Therefore, the number formula_30 of binary trees of size \"n\" has the following recursive description formula_31, and formula_32 for any positive integer \"n\". It follows that formula_30 is the Catalan number of index \"n\".\nThe above parenthesized strings should not be confused with the set of words of length 2\"n\" in the Dyck language, which consist only of parentheses in such a way that they are properly balanced. The number of such strings satisfies the same recursive description (each Dyck word of length 2\"n\" is determined by the Dyck subword enclosed by the initial '(' and its matching ')' together with the Dyck subword remaining after that closing parenthesis, whose lengths 2\"i\" and 2\"j\" satisfy \"i\" + \"j\" + 1 \n \"n\"); this number is therefore also the Catalan number formula_30. So there are also five Dyck words of length 6:\nThese Dyck words do not correspond to binary trees in the same way. Instead, they are related by the following recursively defined bijection: the Dyck word equal to the empty string corresponds to the binary tree of size 0 with only one leaf. Any other Dyck word can be written as (formula_35)formula_36, where formula_35,formula_36 are themselves (possibly empty) Dyck words and where the two written parentheses are matched. The bijection is then defined by letting the words formula_35 and formula_36 correspond to the binary trees that are the left and right children of the root.\nA bijective correspondence can also be defined as follows: enclose the Dyck word in an extra pair of parentheses, so that the result can be interpreted as a Lisp list expression (with the empty list () as only occurring atom); then the dotted-pair expression for that proper list is a fully parenthesized expression (with NIL as symbol and '.' as operator) describing the corresponding binary tree (which is, in fact, the internal representation of the proper list).\nThe ability to represent binary trees as strings of symbols and parentheses implies that binary trees can represent the elements of a free magma on a singleton set.\nMethods for storing binary trees.\nBinary trees can be constructed from programming language primitives in several ways.\nNodes and references.\nIn a language with records and references, binary trees are typically constructed by having a tree node structure which contains some data and references to its left child and its right child. Sometimes it also contains a reference to its unique parent. If a node has fewer than two children, some of the child pointers may be set to a special null value, or to a special sentinel node.\nThis method of storing binary trees wastes a fair bit of memory, as the pointers will be null (or point to the sentinel) more than half the time; a more conservative representation alternative is threaded binary tree.\nIn languages with tagged unions such as ML, a tree node is often a tagged union of two types of nodes, one of which is a 3-tuple of data, left child, and right child, and the other of which is a \"leaf\" node, which contains no data and functions much like the null value in a language with pointers. For example, the following line of code in OCaml (an ML dialect) defines a binary tree that stores a character in each node.\ntype chr_tree = Empty | Node of char * chr_tree * chr_tree\nArrays.\nBinary trees can also be stored in breadth-first order as an implicit data structure in arrays, and if the tree is a complete binary tree, this method wastes no space. In this compact arrangement, if a node has an index \"i\", its children are found at indices formula_41 (for the left child) and formula_42 (for the right), while its parent (if any) is found at index \"formula_43\" (assuming the root has index zero). Alternatively, with a 1-indexed array, the implementation is simplified with children found at formula_44 and formula_45, and parent found at formula_46.\nThis method benefits from more compact storage and better locality of reference, particularly during a preorder traversal. It is often used for binary heaps.\nEncodings.\nSuccinct encodings.\nA succinct data structure is one which occupies close to minimum possible space, as established by information theoretical lower bounds. The number of different binary trees on formula_47 nodes is formula_48, the formula_47th Catalan number (assuming we view trees with identical \"structure\" as identical). For large formula_47, this is about formula_51; thus we need at least about formula_52 bits to encode it. A succinct binary tree therefore would occupy 2\"n\"+o(\"n\") bits (with 'o()' being the Little-o notation).\nOne simple representation which meets this bound is to visit the nodes of the tree in preorder, outputting \"1\" for an internal node and \"0\" for a leaf. If the tree contains data, we can simply simultaneously store it in a consecutive array in preorder. This function accomplishes this:\n function EncodeSuccinct(\"node\" n, \"bitstring\" structure, \"array\" data) {\n if n = \"nil\" then\n append 0 to structure;\n else\n append 1 to structure;\n append n.data to data;\n EncodeSuccinct(n.left, structure, data);\n EncodeSuccinct(n.right, structure, data);\nThe string \"structure\" has only formula_53 bits in the end, where formula_47 is the number of (internal) nodes; we don't even have to store its length. To show that no information is lost, we can convert the output back to the original tree like this:\n function DecodeSuccinct(\"bitstring\" structure, \"array\" data) {\n remove first bit of \"structure\" and put it in \"b\"\n if b = 1 then\n create a new node \"n\"\n remove first element of data and put it in n.data\n n.left = DecodeSuccinct(structure, data)\n n.right = DecodeSuccinct(structure, data)\n return n\n else\n return nil\nMore sophisticated succinct representations allow not only compact storage of trees but even useful operations on those trees directly while they're still in their succinct form.\nEncoding ordered trees as binary trees.\nThere is a natural one-to-one correspondence between ordered trees and binary trees. It allows any ordered tree to be uniquely represented as a binary tree, and vice versa:\nLet \"T\" be a node of an ordered tree, and let \"B\" denote \"T's\" image in the corresponding binary tree. Then \"B's\" \"left\" child represents \"T's\" first child, while the \"B's right\" child represents \"T\"'s next sibling. \nFor example, the ordered tree on the left and the binary tree on the right correspond:\nIn the pictured binary tree, the black, left, edges represent \"first child\", while the blue, right, edges represent \"next sibling\".\nThis representation is called a left-child right-sibling binary tree.\nCommon operations.\nThere are a variety of different operations that can be performed on binary trees. Some are mutator operations, while others simply return useful information about the tree.\nInsertion.\nNodes can be inserted into binary trees in between two other nodes or added after a leaf node. In binary trees, a node that is inserted is specified as to whose child it will be.\nLeaf nodes.\nTo add a new node after leaf node A, A assigns the new node as one of its children and the new node assigns node A as its parent.\nInternal nodes.\nInsertion on internal nodes is slightly more complex than on leaf nodes. Say that the internal node is node A and that node B is the child of A. (If the insertion is to insert a right child, then B is the right child of A, and similarly with a left child insertion.) A assigns its child to the new node and the new node assigns its parent to A. Then the new node assigns its child to B and B assigns its parent as the new node.\nDeletion.\nDeletion is the process whereby a node is removed from the tree. Only certain nodes in a binary tree can be removed unambiguously.\nNode with zero or one children.\nSuppose that the node to delete is node A. If A has no children, deletion is accomplished by setting the child of A's parent to null. If A has one child, set the parent of A's child to A's parent and set the child of A's parent to A's child.\nNode with two children.\nIn a binary tree, a node with two children cannot be deleted unambiguously. However, in certain binary trees (including binary search trees) these nodes \"can\" be deleted, though with a rearrangement of the tree structure.\nTraversal.\nPre-order, in-order, and post-order traversal visit each node in a tree by recursively visiting each node in the left and right subtrees of the root. Below are the brief descriptions of above mentioned traversals.\nPre-order.\nIn pre-order, we always visit the current node; next, we recursively traverse the current node's left subtree, and then we recursively traverse the current node's right subtree. The pre-order traversal is a topologically sorted one, because a parent node is processed before any of its child nodes is done.\nIn-order.\nIn in-order, we always recursively traverse the current node's left subtree; next, we visit the current node, and lastly, we recursively traverse the current node's right subtree.\nPost-order.\nIn post-order, we always recursively traverse the current node's left subtree; next, we recursively traverse the current node's right subtree and then visit the current node. Post-order traversal can be useful to get postfix expression of a binary expression tree.\nDepth-first order.\nIn depth-first order, we always attempt to visit the node farthest from the root node that we can, but with the caveat that it must be a child of a node we have already visited. Unlike a depth-first search on graphs, there is no need to remember all the nodes we have visited, because a tree cannot contain cycles. Pre-order is a special case of this. See depth-first search for more information.\nBreadth-first order.\nContrasting with depth-first order is breadth-first order, which always attempts to visit the node closest to the root that it has not already visited. See breadth-first search for more information. Also called a \"level-order traversal\".\nIn a complete binary tree, a node's breadth-index (\"i\" \u2212 (2\"d\" \u2212 1)) can be used as traversal instructions from the root. Reading bitwise from left to right, starting at bit \"d\" \u2212 1, where \"d\" is the node's distance from the root (\"d\" = \u230alog2(\"i\"+1)\u230b) and the node in question is not the root itself (\"d\" &gt; 0). When the breadth-index is masked at bit \"d\" \u2212 1, the bit values 0 and 1 mean to step either left or right, respectively. The process continues by successively checking the next bit to the right until there are no more. The rightmost bit indicates the final traversal from the desired node's parent to the node itself. There is a time-space trade-off between iterating a complete binary tree this way versus each node having pointer(s) to its sibling(s).\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4322", "revid": "35019008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4322", "title": "Borel measure", "text": "Measure defined on all open sets of a topological space\nIn mathematics, specifically in measure theory, a Borel measure on a topological space is a measure that is defined on all open sets (and thus on all Borel sets). Some authors require additional restrictions on the measure, as described below.\nFormal definition.\nLet formula_1 be a locally compact Hausdorff space, and let formula_2 be the smallest \u03c3-algebra that contains the open sets of formula_1; this is known as the \u03c3-algebra of Borel sets. A Borel measure is any measure formula_4 defined on the \u03c3-algebra of Borel sets. A few authors require in addition that formula_4 is locally finite, meaning that every point has an open neighborhood with finite measure. For Hausdorff spaces, this implies that formula_6 for every compact set formula_7; and for locally compact Hausdorff spaces, the two conditions are equivalent. If a Borel measure formula_4 is both inner regular and outer regular, it is called a regular Borel measure. If formula_4 is both inner regular, outer regular, and locally finite, it is called a Radon measure. Alternatively, if a regular Borel measure formula_4 is tight, it is a Radon measure.\nIf formula_1 is a separable complete metric space, then every Borel measure formula_4 on formula_1 is a Radon measure.\nOn the real line.\nThe real line formula_14 with its usual topology is a locally compact Hausdorff space; hence we can define a Borel measure on it. In this case, formula_15 is the smallest \u03c3-algebra that contains the open intervals of formula_14. While there are many Borel measures \"\u03bc\", the choice of Borel measure that assigns formula_17 for every half-open interval formula_18 is sometimes called \"the\" Borel measure on formula_14. This measure turns out to be the restriction to the Borel \u03c3-algebra of the Lebesgue measure formula_20, which is a complete measure and is defined on the Lebesgue \u03c3-algebra. The Lebesgue \u03c3-algebra is actually the \"completion\" of the Borel \u03c3-algebra, which means that it is the smallest \u03c3-algebra that contains all the Borel sets and can be equipped with a complete measure. Also, the Borel measure and the Lebesgue measure coincide on the Borel sets (i.e., formula_21 for every Borel measurable set, where formula_4 is the Borel measure described above). This idea extends to finite-dimensional spaces formula_23 (the Cram\u00e9r\u2013Wold theorem, below) but does not hold, in general, for infinite-dimensional spaces. Infinite-dimensional Lebesgue measures do not exist.\nProduct spaces.\nIf \"X\" and \"Y\" are second-countable, Hausdorff topological spaces, then the set of Borel subsets formula_24 of their product coincides with the product of the sets formula_25 of Borel subsets of \"X\" and \"Y\". That is, the Borel functor \n formula_26 \nfrom the category of second-countable Hausdorff spaces to the category of measurable spaces preserves finite products.\nApplications.\nLebesgue\u2013Stieltjes integral.\nThe Lebesgue\u2013Stieltjes integral is the ordinary Lebesgue integral with respect to a measure known as the Lebesgue\u2013Stieltjes measure, which may be associated to any function of bounded variation on the real line. The Lebesgue\u2013Stieltjes measure is a regular Borel measure, and conversely every regular Borel measure on the real line is of this kind.\nLaplace transform.\nOne can define the Laplace transform of a finite Borel measure \"\u03bc\" on the real line by the Lebesgue integral\n formula_27\nAn important special case is where \"\u03bc\" is a probability measure or, even more specifically, the Dirac delta function. In operational calculus, the Laplace transform of a measure is often treated as though the measure came from a distribution function \"f\". In that case, to avoid potential confusion, one often writes\n formula_28\nwhere the lower limit of 0\u2212 is shorthand notation for\n formula_29\nThis limit emphasizes that any point mass located at 0 is entirely captured by the Laplace transform. Although with the Lebesgue integral, it is not necessary to take such a limit, it does appear more naturally in connection with the Laplace\u2013Stieltjes transform.\nMoment problem.\nOne can define the moments of a finite Borel measure \"\u03bc\" on the real line by the integral\n formula_30\nFor formula_31 these correspond to the Hamburger moment problem, the Stieltjes moment problem and the Hausdorff moment problem, respectively. The question or problem to be solved is, given a collection of such moments, is there a corresponding measure? For the Hausdorff moment problem, the corresponding measure is unique. For the other variants, in general, there are an infinite number of distinct measures that give the same moments.\nHausdorff dimension and Frostman's lemma.\nGiven a Borel measure \"\u03bc\" on a metric space \"X\" such that \"\u03bc\"(\"X\") &gt; 0 and \"\u03bc\"(\"B\"(\"x\", \"r\")) \u2264 \"rs\" holds for some constant \"s\" &gt; 0 and for every ball \"B\"(\"x\", \"r\") in \"X\", then the Hausdorff dimension dimHaus(\"X\") \u2265 \"s\". A partial converse is provided by the Frostman lemma:\nLemma: Let \"A\" be a Borel subset of R\"n\", and let \"s\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00. Then the following are equivalent:\nformula_32 \nholds for all \"x\"\u00a0\u2208\u00a0R\"n\" and \"r\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00.\nCram\u00e9r\u2013Wold theorem.\nThe Cram\u00e9r\u2013Wold theorem in measure theory states that a Borel probability measure on formula_33 is uniquely determined by the totality of its one-dimensional projections. It is used as a method for proving joint convergence results. The theorem is named after Harald Cram\u00e9r and Herman Ole Andreas Wold.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4326", "revid": "50689564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4326", "title": "Blackadder", "text": "British TV sitcom (1983\u20131989)\nBlackadder is a series of four period British sitcoms\u2014\"The Black Adder\", \"Blackadder II\", \"Blackadder the Third\" and \"Blackadder Goes Forth\u2014\"plus several one-off instalments, which originally aired on BBC1 from 1983 to 1989. All episodes starred Rowan Atkinson as the antihero Edmund Blackadder and Tony Robinson as Blackadder's servant Baldrick. Each series was set in a different historical period, with the two protagonists accompanied by different characters, though several reappear in one series or another, including Tim McInnerny as Percy and Darling, Stephen Fry as Melchett, and Hugh Laurie as George.\nThe first series was written by Atkinson and Richard Curtis, while the subsequent three series were written by Curtis and Ben Elton. All four series were produced by John Lloyd. In 2000, \"Blackadder Goes Forth\" ranked at 16 in the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes, a list created by the British Film Institute. In a 2001 poll by Channel 4, Edmund Blackadder was ranked third on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. In the 2004 TV poll to find Britain's Best Sitcom, \"Blackadder\" (all four series combined) was voted the second-best British sitcom of all time, topped by \"Only Fools and Horses\". It was also ranked as the ninth-best TV show of all time by \"Empire\" magazine in 2009. Atkinson has said \"Blackadder\" was \"the least stressful\" of all his work, due to the \"feeling of shared responsibility among a lot of really good actors\".\nPremise.\nEach series comprises six half-hour episodes and is set in a different period of British history. The first series, made in 1983, was titled \"The Black Adder\" and was set in the fictional reign of \"Richard IV\". The second series, \"Blackadder II\" (1986), was set during the reign of Elizabeth I. \"Blackadder the Third\" (1987) was set in the late 18th and early 19th centuries during the reign of George III. \"Blackadder Goes Forth\" (1989) was set in 1917 in the trenches of the Great War.\n\"Blackadder\" follows the misfortunes of Edmund Blackadder (played by Atkinson). It is implied in each series that the Blackadder character is a descendant of the previous one. The end theme lyrics of the series 2 episode \"Head\" specify that he is the great-grandson of the previous incarnation, although it is never specified how or when any of the Blackadders (who are usually bachelors) manage to father children.\nIn series 1, Edmund Blackadder is not particularly bright, and is much the intellectual inferior of his servant, Baldrick (played by Tony Robinson). However, in subsequent series, the positions are reversed: Blackadder is clever, shrewd, scheming and manipulative while Baldrick is extremely dim.\nEach incarnation of Blackadder and Baldrick is also saddled with tolerating the presence of a dimwitted aristocrat. In the first two series, this is Percy, played by Tim McInnerny. Hugh Laurie plays the role in the third and fourth series, as George. Characters of a higher organisational standing, such as Stephen Fry's Melchett in series 2 and 4, and McInnerny's other character, Darling, in series 4, provide antagonistic figures for Blackadder to deal with.\nEpisodes.\nSeries 1: \"The Black Adder\".\n\"The Black Adder\", the first series of \"Blackadder\", was written by Richard Curtis and Rowan Atkinson and produced by John Lloyd, who would also produce the subsequent three series. It originally aired on BBC1 from 15 June to 20 July 1983, and was a joint production with the Australian Seven Network.\nSet in 1485 at the end of the British Middle Ages, the series is written as an alternative history in which Richard III won the Battle of Bosworth Field only to be mistaken for someone else and assassinated, and is succeeded by Richard IV (Brian Blessed), one of the Princes in the Tower. The series follows the exploits of Richard IV's unfavoured second son Prince Edmund, the Duke of Edinburgh (who calls himself \"The Black Adder\") (played by Atkinson) in his various attempts to increase his standing with his father and his eventual quest to overthrow him. Other regular characters in this series are Edmund's mother Gertrude, Queen of Flanders (Elspet Gray), his brother Harry, Prince of Wales (Robert East), his sidekick Lord Percy Percy, the Duke of Northumberland (Tim McInnerny), and his squire Baldrick (Tony Robinson). Guest appearances in this series include Peter Cook as King Richard III, Russell Enoch as the Duke of Winchester, Miriam Margolyes as the Infanta Maria Escalosa of Spain (with Jim Broadbent as her interpreter), Frank Finlay as the Witchsmeller Pursuivant, Valentine Dyall as Lord Angus, Stephen Frost and Mark Arden as guards, and Rik Mayall as Mad Gerald.\nConceived while Atkinson and Curtis were working on \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\", the series dealt comically with a number of aspects of medieval life in Britain: witchcraft, royal succession, European relations, the Crusades, and the conflict between the Church and the Crown. Along with the secret history, many historical events portrayed in the series were anachronistic (for example, Constantinople had already fallen to the Ottoman Empire in 1453, predating the events in the episode by 32 years); this dramatic license would continue in the subsequent three \"Blackadder\" series. The filming of the series was highly ambitious, with a large cast and much location shooting. The series also featured Shakespearean dialogue, often adapted for comic effect; the end credits featured the words \"Additional Dialogue by William Shakespeare\".\nSeries 2: \"Blackadder II\".\n\"Blackadder II\", the second series of \"Blackadder\", was written by Richard Curtis and Ben Elton, the team who would also write the subsequent two series, and originally aired on BBC1 from 9 January to 20 February 1986. The series is set in England during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I (1558\u20131603), often referred to as \"Queenie\", who is portrayed by Miranda Richardson. The principal character is Edmund, Lord Blackadder (Rowan Atkinson), the great-grandson of the original Black Adder. During the series, he regularly deals with the Queen, her obsequious Lord Chamberlain Lord Melchett (Stephen Fry; his rival for the Queen's affections), his friend Lord Percy Percy (Tim McInnerny) and the Queen's demented former nanny Nursie (Patsy Byrne). Tony Robinson returned as Blackadder's servant Baldrick. Guest appearances in the series include Tom Baker as Captain Redbeard Rum, Simon Jones as Sir Walter Raleigh, Ronald Lacey as the Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Miriam Margoyles as Blackadder's aunt, Lady Whiteadder. The series also features two appearances by Hugh Laurie (as Simon Partridge, a friend of Blackadder's, in the episode \"Beer\", and as Prince Ludwig the Indestructible in the series' finale \"Chains\"), a returning Rik Mayall, this time as Lord Flashheart, and the first appearance of Gabrielle Glaister as Kate/\"Bob\" (a young woman who pretends to be a boy in order to achieve a well-paying job).\nFollowing the BBC's request for improvements (and a severe budget reduction), several changes were made. In addition to Ben Elton joining Richard Curtis as co-writer, this second series was the first to establish the familiar Blackadder character: cunning, shrewd and witty, in sharp contrast to the first series' bumbling Prince Edmund. To reduce the cost of production, it was shot with virtually no outdoor scenes (the first series was shot largely on location) and several frequently used indoor sets, such as the Queen's throne room and Blackadder's front room.\nA quote from this series ranked number three in a list of the top 25 television \"putdowns\" of the last 40 years by the \"Radio Times\" magazine: \"The eyes are open, the mouth moves, but Mr. Brain has long since departed, hasn't he, Percy?\"\nSeries 3: \"Blackadder the Third\".\n\"Blackadder the Third\", the third series of \"Blackadder\", originally aired on BBC1 from 17 September to 22 October 1987. The series is set in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, a period known as the Regency. In the series, Mr. Edmund Blackadder Esquire (Rowan Atkinson) is a butler to George IV, who at this time is the Prince Regent, played by Hugh Laurie as a buffoonish fop. Despite Edmund's respected intelligence and abilities, he has no personal fortune to speak of, apart from his frequently fluctuating wage packet from the Prince (\u201cIf I\u2019m running short of cash, all I have to do is go upstairs and ask Prince Fathead for a raise\u201d), and from (it seems) stealing the Prince's socks and selling them off. As usual, Blackadder also has his own servant Baldrick (Tony Robinson). The episode titles were puns on Jane Austen\u2019s novels \"Sense and Sensibility\" and \"Pride and Prejudice\".\nAlong with Atkinson, Robinson, and Laurie, this series also starred Helen Atkinson-Wood as Mrs. Miggins. The series features Dr. Samuel Johnson (Robbie Coltrane); William Pitt the Younger (Simon Osborne); the French Revolution (with Chris Barrie, Tim McInnerny as the Scarlet Pimpernel, and Nigel Planer); hammy theatrical actors (Kenneth Connor and Hugh Paddick); Samuel Taylor Coleridge (Jim Sweeney); Shelley (Lee Cornes); Lord Byron (Steve Steen); Amy Hardwood (aka \"The Shadow\") (Miranda Richardson); and the Duke of Wellington (Stephen Fry).\nSeries 4: \"Blackadder Goes Forth\".\n\"Blackadder Goes Forth\", the fourth and final series of \"Blackadder\", originally aired on BBC1 from 28 September to 2 November 1989. This series is set in 1917, on the Western Front of the First World War. Another \"big push\" is planned, and Captain Edmund Blackadder (Rowan Atkinson) has one goal\u2014to avoid being killed\u2014but his schemes always land him back in the trenches. Blackadder is joined by his batman Private S. Baldrick (Tony Robinson) and idealistic Edwardian twit Lieutenant George (Hugh Laurie). General Melchett (Stephen Fry) rallies his troops from a French ch\u00e2teau from the front, where he is aided and abetted by his assistant, Captain Kevin Darling (Tim McInnerny), pencil-pusher supreme and Blackadder's nemesis, whose last name is played on for maximum comedic value. Guest appearances in this series include Stephen Frost as the leader of a firing squad detail, Miranda Richardson as Nurse Mary Fletcher-Brown, two further appearances of Gabrielle Glaister as \"Bob\" (in this series, a young woman who pretends to be a boy in order to join the army), Rik Mayall as Royal Flying Corps Squadron Commander The Lord Flasheart, Adrian Edmondson as Baron Manfred von Richthofen (aka \"The Red Baron\"), and Geoffrey Palmer as Field Marshal Douglas Haig.\nThe series' tone is somewhat darker than the previous three series; it details the privations of trench warfare as well as the incompetence and life-wasting strategies of the top brass. For example, Baldrick is reduced to cooking rats and making coffee from mud, while General Melchett hatches a plan for the troops to walk very slowly toward the German lines, because \"it'll be the last thing Fritz will expect.\"\nThe final episode, \"Goodbyeee\", is known for being extraordinarily poignant for a comedy \u2013 especially the final scene, which sees four of the five main characters (Blackadder, Baldrick, George, and Darling) finally going \"over the top\" and charging off into the fog and smoke of no man's land, presumably to die. In a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes, drawn up by the British Film Institute in 2000 and voted for by industry professionals, \"Blackadder Goes Forth\" was placed 16th.\nSpecials.\nPilot episode.\nA pilot episode of \"The Black Adder\" was shot in 1982, but was never broadcast on TV until 15 June 2023, when it was shown as part of an 80-minute UKTV Gold documentary titled \"Blackadder: The Lost Pilot\", hosted by Sir Tony Robinson and featuring interviews with Ben Elton and Richard Curtis. Prior to this, only brief clips had been seen in the 2008 25th anniversary documentary \"Blackadder Rides Again\", shown on BBC1. One notable difference in the pilot, as in many pilots, is the casting. Baldrick is played not by Tony Robinson, but by Philip Fox. Another significant difference is that the character of Prince Edmund presented in the pilot is much closer to the intelligent, conniving Blackadder of the later series than the snivelling, weak buffoon of the original. Set in the year 1582, the script of the pilot is roughly the same as the episode \"Born to Be King\", albeit with some different jokes and some lines appearing in other episodes of the series.\n\"Blackadder: The Cavalier Years\".\nThis special, set in the English Civil War, was shown as part of Comic Relief's Red Nose Day on Friday 5 February 1988. The 15-minute episode is set in November 1648, during the last days of the Civil War. Sir Edmund Blackadder and his servant, Baldrick, are the last two men loyal to the defeated King Charles I of England (played by Stephen Fry), portrayed as a soft-spoken, ineffective, naive character, with the voice and mannerisms of Charles I's namesake, the then Prince of Wales (now Charles III). However, owing to a misunderstanding between Oliver Cromwell (guest-star Warren Clarke) and Baldrick, the King is arrested and sent to the Tower of London. The rest of the episode revolves around Blackadder's attempts to save the King as well as improve his own standing.\n\"Blackadder's Christmas Carol\".\nThe second special was broadcast on Friday 23 December 1988. In a twist on Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\", Ebenezer Blackadder is the \"kindest and loveliest\" man in England. The Spirit of Christmas shows Blackadder the contrary antics of his ancestors and descendants, and reluctantly informs him that if he turns evil his descendants will enjoy power and fortune, while if he remains the same a future Blackadder will live shamefully subjugated to a future incompetent Baldrick. This remarkable encounter causes him to proclaim, \"Bad guys have all the fun\", and adopt the personality with which viewers are more familiar.\n\"Blackadder: Back &amp; Forth\".\n\"Blackadder: Back &amp; Forth\" was originally shown in the Millennium Dome in 1999, followed by a screening on Sky One in 2000, and later on BBC1 in 2002. It is set on New Year\u2019s Eve 1999, and features Lord Blackadder placing a bet with his friends\u00a0\u2013 modern versions of Queenie (Miranda Richardson), Melchett (Stephen Fry), George (Hugh Laurie) and Darling (Tim McInnerny)\u00a0\u2013 that he has built a working time machine. While this is intended as a clever con trick, the machine surprisingly works, sending Blackadder and Baldrick back to the Cretaceous period, where they manage to cause the extinction of the dinosaurs through the use of Baldrick's best-worst-and-only pair of underpants as a weapon against a hungry T. Rex. Finding that Baldrick has forgotten to write dates on the machine's dials, the rest of the film follows their attempts to find their way back to 1999, often creating huge historical anomalies in the process that must be corrected before the end. Rik Mayall appears as Robin Hood, and the film also includes cameo appearances from Kate Moss as Maid Marian and Colin Firth as William Shakespeare.\n\"The Big Night In\".\nBroadcast in 2020 as part of Children in Need and Comic Relief's joint special \"The Big Night In\" during the COVID-19 pandemic, Fry resumed the role of Lord Melchett (an intellectually-brilliant version), Head of the Royal Household, under lockdown at Melchett Manor, to help Prince William deal with educating his children via Zoom and discussing \"Tiger King\", before they both step outside to clap for the National Health Service. Melchett is said to be isolating with Lord Blackadder, both grandsons to their First World War counterparts.\nLive stage performances.\nIn 1998, as part of Prince Charles' 50th Birthday Gala televised on ITV, Atkinson appeared as a Restoration Blackadder reading aloud a letter to the Privy Council of King Charles II. He colourfully refuses their invitation to stage a royal gala, calling such occasions \"very, very, very dull\" and asserting that there was \"more musical talent on display when my servant Baldrick breaks wind.\"\nIn 2000, on the BBC's annual Royal Variety Performance, Atkinson portrayed Blackadder as a present-day officer in \"Her Majesty's Royal Regiment of Shirkers\" and delivered a monologue titled \"Blackadder: The Army Years\", proposing that Britain regain her former greatness by invading (or at least buying) France.\nIn 2012, as part of the Prince's Trust charity show \"We Are Most Amused\", Atkinson and Robinson reprised their roles as Blackadder and Baldrick in a comedy sketch featuring Miranda Hart as leader of a government inquiry into the recent banking crisis. Blackadder, chief executive of a fictional British bank, appearing with Baldrick as his gardener, convinces the panel to publicly blame the entire crisis on Baldrick, to the latter's consternation.\nRed Nose Day 2023.\nBaldrick (Tony Robinson) returned in 2023 for a Red Nose Day sketch for the BBC. There was no involvement of Rowan Atkinson or a subsequent reboot, amid speculation.\nProduction.\nSeries development.\nRowan Atkinson and Richard Curtis developed the idea for the sitcom while working on \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\". Eager to avoid comparisons to the critically acclaimed \"Fawlty Towers\", they proposed the idea of a historical sitcom. A pilot episode was made in 1982, and a six-episode series was commissioned. The budget for the series was considerable, with much location shooting particularly at Alnwick Castle in Northumberland and the surrounding countryside in February 1983. The series also used large casts of extras, horses and expensive medieval-style costumes. Atkinson has said about the making of the first series:\nThe first series was odd, it was very extravagant. It cost a million pounds for the six programmes\u00a0... [which] was a lot of money to spend\u00a0... It looked great, but it wasn't as consistently funny as we would have liked.\nOwing to the high cost of the first series, the then-controller of programming of BBC1, Michael Grade, was reluctant to sign off a second series without major improvements to the show and drastic cost-cutting, leaving a gap of three years between the two series.\nA chance meeting between Richard Curtis and comedian Ben Elton led to the decision to collaborate on a new series of \"Blackadder\". Recognising the main faults of the first series, Curtis and Elton agreed that \"Blackadder II\" would be a studio-only production (along with the inclusion of a live audience during recording, instead of showing the episodes to an audience after taping). Besides adding a greater comedy focus, Elton suggested a major change in character emphasis: Baldrick would become the stupid sidekick, while Edmund Blackadder evolved into a cunning sycophant. This led to the familiar set-up that was maintained in the following series.\nOnly in the \"Back &amp; Forth\" millennium special was the shooting once again on location, because this was a production with a budget estimated at \u00a33\u00a0million, and was a joint venture between Tiger Aspect, Sky Television, the New Millennium Experience Company and the BBC, rather than the BBC alone.\nCasting.\nEach series tended to feature the same set of regular actors in different period settings, although throughout the four series and specials, only Blackadder and Baldrick were constant characters. Several regular cast members recurred as characters with similar names, implying, like Blackadder, that they were descendants.\nRecurring cast.\nVarious actors have appeared in more than one of the Blackadder series and/or specials. These are:\nGuest cast.\nBen Elton's arrival, from \"Blackadder II\" onwards, heralded the more frequent recruitment of comic actors from the alternative comedy era for guest appearances, including Robbie Coltrane, Rik Mayall (who had appeared in the final episode of \"The Black Adder\" as \"Mad Gerald\"), Adrian Edmondson, Nigel Planer, Mark Arden, Stephen Frost, Chris Barrie, Jim Sweeney, Steve Steen and Jeremy Hardy. Elton himself played an anarchist in \"Blackadder the Third\".\nGabrielle Glaister played Bob, an attractive girl who poses as a man, in both \"Blackadder II\" and \"Blackadder Goes Forth\", where in the latter her official title is Driver Parkhurst. One episode each of \"Blackadder II\" and \"Blackadder Goes Forth\" feature Rik Mayall as Lord Flashheart, a vulgar friend in his first appearance and then a successful rival of Blackadder in his second. He also played a decidedly Flashheart-like Robin Hood in \"Back &amp; Forth\". Lee Cornes appeared in one episode each of the Curtis/Elton-written series; as a guard in the \"Blackadder II\" episode \"Chains\"; as the poet Shelley in the \"Blackadder the Third\" episode \"Ink and Incapability\"; and as firing squad soldier Private Fraser in the \"Blackadder Goes Forth\" episode \"Corporal Punishment\".\nMore established actors, some at the veteran stage of their careers, were also recruited for roles. These included Peter Cook, Alex Norton, Jim Broadbent, Frank Finlay, Valentine Dyall, John Grillo, Simon Jones, Tom Baker, Ronald Lacey, Roger Blake, Denis Lill, Hugh Paddick, Kenneth Connor, Warren Clarke and Geoffrey Palmer, who played Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig in \"Goodbyeee\", the final episode of \"Blackadder Goes Forth\". Bill Wallis and Miriam Margolyes each played three different guest roles: Wallis played Sir Justin de Boinod in \"The Archbishop\" (\"The Black Adder\"), Mr. Ploppy in \"Head\" (\"Blackadder II\"), and Brigadier Sir Bernard Proudfoot Smith in \"General Hospital\" (\"Blackadder Goes Forth\"), while Margolyes played The Spanish Infanta in \"The Queen of Spain's Beard\" (\"The Black Adder\"), Lady Whiteadder in \"Beer\" (\"Blackadder II\"), and Queen Victoria in \"Blackadder's Christmas Carol\". Patrick Allen provided narration for all six episodes of \"The Black Adder\", and appeared as \"The Hawk\" in the last episode, \"The Black Seal\". Two episodes of \"The Black Adder\" feature Natasha King as Princess Leia of Hungary, while the second episode, \"Born to Be King\", features a brief, early screen appearance of Angus Deayton.\nUnusually for a sitcom based loosely on factual events and in the historical past, a man was recruited for one episode essentially to play himself. Political commentator Vincent Hanna played a character billed as \"his own great-great-great grandfather\" in the \"Blackadder the Third\" episode \"Dish and Dishonesty\". Hanna was asked to take part because the scene was of a by-election in which Baldrick was a candidate and, in the style of modern television, Hanna gave a long-running \"live\" commentary of events at the count (and interviewed candidates and election agents) to a crowd through the town hall window.\nTheme tune.\nHoward Goodall's theme tune has the same melody throughout all the series, but is played in roughly the style of the period in which it is set. It is performed mostly with trumpets and timpani in \"The Black Adder\", the fanfares used suggesting typical medieval court fanfares; with a combination of recorder, string quartet and electric guitar in \"Blackadder II\" (the end theme, with different lyrics each time reflecting on the episode's events, was sung by a countertenor); on oboe, cello and harpsichord (in the style of a minuet) for \"Blackadder the Third\"; by The Band of the 3rd Battalion, Royal Anglian Regiment in \"Blackadder Goes Forth\"; sung by carol singers in \"Blackadder's Christmas Carol\"; and by an orchestra in \"Blackadder: The Cavalier Years\" and \"Blackadder: Back &amp; Forth\".\nAwards.\nIn 2000, the fourth series, \"Blackadder Goes Forth\", ranked at 16 in the \"100 Greatest British Television Programmes\", a list created by the British Film Institute. In 2004, a BBC TV poll for \"Britain's Best Sitcom\", \"Blackadder\" was voted the second best British sitcom of all time, topped by \"Only Fools and Horses\". It was also ranked as the 20th Best TV Show of All Time by \"Empire\" magazine.\nFuture.\nDespite regular statements denying any plans for a fifth series, cast members are regularly asked about the possibility of a new series.\nIn January 2005, Tony Robinson told ITV's \"This Morning\" that Rowan Atkinson was more keen than he has been in the past to do a fifth series, set in the 1960s (centred on a rock band called the \"Black Adder Five\", with Baldrick\u00a0\u2013 a.k.a. 'Bald Rick'\u00a0\u2013 as the drummer). In the documentary \"Blackadder Rides Again\", Robinson stated that the series would present Blackadder as the bastard son of Queen Elizabeth II and running a Beatles-like rock band. Rowan Atkinson, Tony Robinson, Hugh Laurie, Stephen Fry, Tim McInnerny and Miranda Richardson would have reprised their roles, and reportedly, Brian Blessed, Elspet Gray and Robert East would have returned from the first series to play Blackadder's biological family. Robinson in a stage performance 1 June 2007, again mentioned this idea, but in the context of a film.\nOne idea mentioned by Curtis was that it was Baldrick who had accidentally assassinated John F. Kennedy. However, aside from a brief mention in June 2005,\nthere have been no further announcements from the BBC that a new series is being planned. Furthermore, in November 2005, Rowan Atkinson told \"BBC Breakfast\" that, although he would very much like to do a new series set in Colditz or another prisoner-of-war camp during World War II, something which both he and Stephen Fry reiterated at the end of \"Blackadder Rides Again\", the chances of it happening are extremely slim.\nThere were a couple of ideas that had previously floated for the fifth series. \"Batadder\" was intended to be a parody of \"Batman\" with Baldrick as the counterpart of Robin (suggested by John Lloyd). This idea eventually came to surface as part of the \"Comic Relief\" sketch \"Spider-Plant Man\" in 2005, with Atkinson as the title hero, Robinson as Robin, Jim Broadbent as Batman and Rachel Stevens as Mary Jane. \"Star Adder\" was to be set in space in the future (suggested by Atkinson).\nOn 10 April 2007, \"Hello!\" reported that Atkinson was moving forward with his ideas for a fifth series. He said, \"I like the idea of him being a prisoner of war in Colditz. That would have the right level of authority and hierarchy which is apparent in all the Blackadders.\"\nStephen Fry has expressed the view that, since the series went out on such a good \"high\", a film might not be a good idea.\nDuring his June 2007 stage performance, chronicled on the Tony Robinson's Cunning Night Out DVD, Robinson states that, after filming the \"Back &amp; Forth special\", the general idea was to reunite for another special in 2010. Robinson jokingly remarked that Hugh Laurie's success on \"House\" may make that difficult.\nOn 28 November 2012, Rowan Atkinson reprised the role at the \"We are most amused\" comedy gala for the Prince's Trust at the Royal Albert Hall. He was joined by Tony Robinson as Baldrick. The sketch involved Blackadder as CEO of Melchett, Melchett and Darling bank facing an enquiry over the banking crisis.\nIn August 2015, Tony Robinson said in an interview \"I do think a new series of Blackadder is on the cards. I have spoken to virtually all the cast about this now. The only problem is Hugh [Laurie]'s fee. He's a huge star now.\" However, in October 2018, Richard Curtis \"dashed hopes\" that the show would return for a fifth series.\nIn April 2017 at the BFI &amp; Radio Times Television Festival, Atkinson stated \"There are no plans to do anything\" and revealed a potential Russian Revolution themed series that never materialised:\n\"There was a plan twenty years ago that got nowhere which was called \"Redadder\" which I quite liked. It was set in Russia in 1917 and \"Blackadder\" and Baldrick were working for the Tsar. They had blue stripes around their caps and then the Revolution happened and Rik Mayall unsurprisingly was playing Rasputin.\"\nIn December 2020, Rowan Atkinson told the \"Radio Times\":\n\"I don't actually like the process of making anything \u2013 with the possible exception of \"Blackadder\". Because the responsibility for making that series funny was on many shoulders, not just mine. \"Blackadder\" represented the creative energy we all had in the '80s. To try to replicate that 30 years on wouldn't be easy.\"\nMost recently, in December 2024, Ben Elton poured doubt on a fifth series of \"Blackadder\":\n\"But there will not be a fifth series of \"Blackadder\", I think that\u2019s pretty much a certainty. I have no interest in doing it. I don\u2019t think any of us do, with the possible exception of Tony [Robinson]. But if we did, the world would be our oyster. We could have fun with any period.\"\nHome media.\nAll series and many of the specials are available on VHS tapes, DVDs &amp; Blu-rays. Many are also available on BBC audio cassette. As of 2008, a \"Best of BBC\" edition box set is available containing all four series together with \"Blackadder's Christmas Carol\" and \"Back &amp; Forth\". All four series and the Christmas special are also available for download on iTunes.\nVHS releases.\nOn 5 February 1990, BBC Enterprises Ltd released the first series on two single VHS tapes.\nOn 2 October 1989, BBC Enterprises Ltd released the second series on two single VHS tapes.\nOn 6 June 1988, 7 November 1988, and 6 February 1989, BBC Enterprises Ltd released the third series on two single VHS tapes.\nOn 10 September 1990, BBC Enterprises Ltd released the fourth and final series on two single VHS tapes.\nOn 7 September 1992, all eight single Blackadder VHS tapes were re-released as four double VHS sets. These four double sets were re-released as single VHS tapes on 2 October 1995 and again as double sets on 2 November 1998.\nOn 5 January 1998, five episodes of the first two series were released on a 15-rated VHS tape by BBC Worldwide Ltd.\nOn 4 November 1991, \"Blackadder's Christmas Carol\" was released on a single VHS tape release rated PG (Cat. No. BBCV 4646).\nLP box set.\nOn 19 October 2022 there was an announcement that there will be a LP box set release and collects the Blackadder soundtracks on vinyl for the first time.\nThe deluxe 12-disc LP collection with the title \"Blackadder's Historical Record\" was pressed on gold-coloured 140g vinyl, and released on 10 February 2023 by Demon Records. It also includes a frameable print of Baldrick, each hand signed by Sir Tony Robinson himself and a comprehensive full-colour booklet detailing the comedy series, the \"leather-look rigid box\"\nStamps.\nRoyal Mail issued a set of special stamps celebrating \"Blackadder\" on 17 May 2023.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4327", "revid": "47425405", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4327", "title": "Boii", "text": "Celtic tribe\nThe Boii (Latin plural, singular \"Boius\"; ) were a Celtic tribe of the later Iron Age, attested at various times in Cisalpine Gaul (present-day Northern Italy), Pannonia (present-day Austria and Hungary), present-day Bavaria, in and around present-day Bohemia (after whom the region is named in most languages; comprising the bulk of today's Czech Republic), parts of present-day Slovakia and Poland, and Gallia Narbonensis (located in modern Languedoc and Provence).\nIn addition, the archaeological evidence indicates that in the 2nd century BC Celts expanded from Bohemia through the K\u0142odzko Valley into Silesia, now part of Poland and the Czech Republic.\nThey first appear in history in connection with the Gallic invasion of northern Italy, 390 BC, when they made the Etruscan city of Felsina their new capital, Bononia (Bologna).\nAfter a series of wars, they were decisively beaten by the Romans in the Battle of Mutina (193 BC) and their territory became part of the Roman province of Cisalpine Gaul. According to Strabo, writing two centuries after the events, rather than being destroyed by the Romans like their Celtic neighbours,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Boii were merely driven out of the regions they occupied; and after migrating to the regions round about the Ister, lived with the Taurisci, and carried on war against the Daci until they perished, tribe and all\u2014and thus they left their country, which was a part of Illyria, to their neighbours as a pasture-ground for sheep.\nAround 60 BC, a group of Boii joined the ill-fated attempt of the Helvetii to conquer land in western Gaul and were defeated by Julius Caesar, along with their allies, in the Battle of Bibracte.\nCaesar settled the remnants of that group in Gorgobina, from where they sent 2,000 warriors to Vercingetorix's aid at the Battle of Alesia six years later. The eastern Boii on the Danube were incorporated into the Roman Empire in 8 AD.\nEtymology and name.\nFrom all the different names of the same Celtic people in literature and inscriptions, it is possible to abstract a Continental Celtic segment, .\nThere are two major derivations of this segment, both presupposing that it belongs to the family of Indo-European languages: from 'cow' and from 'warrior.' The Boii would thus be either 'the herding people' or 'the warrior people'.\nThe 'cow' derivation depends most immediately on the Old Irish legal term for 'outsider': \"ambue\", from Proto-Celtic (&lt;\"*an-bouios\"), 'not a cattle owner'.\nIn a reference to the first known historical Boii, Polybius relates that their wealth consisted of cattle and gold, that they depended on agriculture and war, and that a man's status depended on the number of associates and assistants he had. The latter were presumably the ', as opposed to the man of status, who was ', a cattle owner, and the \"\" were originally a class, 'the cattle owners'.\nThe 'warrior' derivation was adopted by the linguist Julius Pokorny, who presented it as being from Indo-European , , 'hit'; however, not finding any Celtic names close to it (except for the Boii), he adduces examples somewhat more widely from originals further back in time: \"phohiio-s-\", a Venetic personal name; \"Boioi\", an Illyrian tribe; \"Boi\u014dtoi\", a Greek tribal name (the Boeotians); and a few others.\nThe same wider connections can be hypothesized for the 'cow' derivation: the Boeotians have been known for well over a century as a people of kine, which might have been parallel to the meaning of Italy as 'land of calves'. Indo-European reconstructions can be made using 'cow' as a basis, such as ; the root may itself be an imitation of the sound a cow makes.\nOther ancient names which appear to be derived from the name of the Boii include \"Boiorix\" ('king of the Boii', one of the chieftains of the Cimbri) and \"Boiodurum\" ('gate/fort of the Boii', modern Passau) in Germany. Their memory also survives in the modern regional names of Bohemia (\"Boiohaemum\"), a mixed-language form from and Proto-Germanic , 'home': 'home of the Boii'. Bavaria, , is derived from the name of the \"Baiovarii\" tribe. The first component is most plausibly explained as a Germanic version of \"Boii\", while the second part is a common formational morpheme of Germanic tribal names, meaning 'dwellers', as in Old English \"-ware\".\nHistory.\nSettlement in north Italy.\nAccording to the ancient authors, the Boii arrived in northern Italy by crossing the Alps. While of the other tribes who had come to Italy along with the Boii, the Senones, Lingones and Cenomani are also attested in Gaul at the time of the Roman conquest. It remains therefore unclear where exactly the Central Europe origins of the Boii lay, if somewhere in Gaul, Southern Germany or in Bohemia.\nPolybius relates that the Celts were close neighbors of the Etruscan civilization and \"cast covetous eyes on their beautiful country\".\nInvading the Po Valley with a large army, they drove out the Etruscans and resettled it, the Boii taking the right bank in the center of the valley. Strabo confirms that the Boii emigrated from their lands across the Alps and were one of the largest tribes of the Celts. The Boii occupied the old Etruscan settlement of Felsina, which they named \"Bononia\" (modern Bologna). Polybius describes the Celtic way of life in Cisalpine Gaul as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe archaeological evidence from Bologna and its vicinity contradicts the testimony of Polybius and Livy on some points, who say the Boii expelled the Etruscans and perhaps some were forced to leave.\nIt indicates the Boii neither destroyed nor depopulated Felsinum, but simply moved in and became part of the population by intermarriage. \nThe cemeteries of the period in Bologna contain La T\u00e8ne weapons and other artifacts, as well as Etruscan items such as bronze mirrors. At Monte Bibele not far away one grave contained La T\u00e8ne weapons and a pot with an Etruscan female name scratched on it.\nWar against Rome.\nIn the second half of the 3rd century BC, the Boii allied with the other Cisalpine Gauls and the Etruscans against Rome. They also fought alongside Hannibal, killing the Roman general Lucius Postumius Albinus in 216 BC, whose skull was then turned into a sacrificial bowl.\nA short time earlier, they had been defeated at the Battle of Telamon in 225 BC, and were again at Placentia in 194 BC (modern Piacenza) and Mutina in 193 BC (modern Modena). Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica completed the Roman conquest of the Boii in 191 BC, celebrating a triumph for it. After their losses, according to Strabo, a large portion of the Boii left Italy.\nBoii on the Danube.\nContrary to the interpretation of the classical writers, the Pannonian Boii attested in later sources are not simply the remnants of those who had fled from Italy, but rather another division of the tribe, which had settled there much earlier.\nThe burial rites of the Italian Boii show many similarities with contemporary Bohemia, such as inhumation, which was uncommon with the other Cisalpine Gauls, or the absence of the typically western Celtic torcs.\nThis makes it much more likely that the Cisalpine Boii had actually originated from Bohemia rather than the other way round.\nHaving migrated to Italy from north of the Alps, some of the defeated Celts simply moved back to their kinsfolk.\nThe Pannonian Boii are mentioned again in the late 2nd century BC when they repelled the Cimbri and Teutones (Strabo VII, 2, 2). Later on, they attacked the city of Noreia (in modern Austria) shortly before a group of Boii (32,000 according to Julius Caesar) joined the Helvetii in their attempt to settle in western Gaul.\nAfter the Helvetian defeat at Bibracte, the influential Aedui tribe allowed the Boii survivors to settle on their territory, where they occupied the \"oppidum\" of Gorgobina. Although attacked by Vercingetorix during one phase of the war, they supported him with two thousand troops at the battle of Alesia (Caesar, \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\", VII, 75).\nAgain, other parts of the Boii had remained closer to their traditional home, and settled in the Slovak and Hungarian lowlands by the Danube and the Mura, with a centre at Bratislava. In July 2025 it was published that Czech archaeologists have uncovered a Celtic settlement near Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 in the Czech Republic, dating back to the La T\u00e8ne period. The site is around 65 acres, larger ten times larger than typical settlements in the region and is thought to have served as a major economic and administrative center for the Celtic Boii tribe, whose name gave rise to \u201cBohemia.\u201d Excavations revealed over 13,000 artifacts, including gold and silver coins, amber, ceramics, pottery kilns, glass workshops, and coin molds. This is evidence of sophisticated craftsmanship and trade along the ancient Amber Road. A rare ceramic shard engraved with a horse was also found. The settlement appears to have gradually declined without signs of conflict. The finds are currently being studied and will be featured in an upcoming museum exhibition.\nDacian Conquest.\nIn the middle of the 1st century BC, the Boii tried to expand eastwards into modern-day Hungary, but clashed with the rising power of the Dacians under their king Burebista and were defeated. This war is often dated to the 60s or 50s BC or even precisely to 60/59 BC, but cannot be dated with that certainty. The numismatic material suggests that the clash may in fact have only happened by 41/40 BC. The Dacians under Burebista likely used a combination of military force and political strategies to conquer the Boii and compel some of them to migrate.\nOnce the Boii were defeated or weakened, the Dacians would have annexed their territory, incorporating it into their expanding kingdom. If the early dating of the clash with Burebista is accepted, the migration of the Boii to Gaul and other parts of Europe may have been a consequence of their defeat and the Dacian occupation of their lands, as they sought new territories and opportunities elsewhere. However, specific details of this conquest and migration are often scarce in historical records, leaving much open to interpretation.\nWhen the Romans finally conquered Pannonia in 8 AD, the Boii seem not to have opposed them. Their former territory was now called \"deserta Boiorum\" (deserta meaning 'empty or sparsely populated lands').\nHowever, the Boii had not been exterminated: There was a \"civitas Boiorum et Azaliorum\" (the Azalii being a neighbouring tribe) which was under the jurisdiction of a prefect of the Danube shore (\"praefectus ripae Danuvii\"). This , a common Roman administrative term designating both a city and the tribal district around it, was later adjoined to the city of Carnuntum.\nThe Boii in ancient sources.\nPlautus.\nPlautus refers to the Boii in \"Captivi\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"At nunc Siculus non est, Boius est, Boiam terit\"\n(Translation:) But now he is not a Sicilian \u2013 he is a Boius, he has got a Boia woman.\nThere is a play on words: \"Boia\" means 'woman of the Boii', also 'convicted criminal's restraint collar'.\nLivy.\nIn volume 21 of his \"History of Rome\", Livy (59 BC \u2013 17 AD) claims that it was a Boio man that offered to show Hannibal the way across the Alps.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When, after the action had thus occurred, his own men returned to each general, Scipio could adopt no fixed plan of proceeding, except that he should form his measures from the plans and undertakings of the enemy: and Hannibal, uncertain whether he should pursue the march he had commenced into Italy, or fight with the Roman army which had first presented itself, the arrival of ambassadors from the Boii, and of a petty prince called Magalus, diverted from an immediate engagement; who, declaring that they would be the guides of his journey and the companions of his dangers, gave it as their opinion, that Italy ought to be attacked with the entire force of the war, his strength having been nowhere previously impaired.\nInscriptions.\nIn the first century BC, the Boii living in an oppidum of Bratislava minted Biatecs, high-quality coins with inscriptions (probably the names of kings) in Latin letters. At the oppidum of Manching there was a ceramic found bearing the labeling \"Boius\" or \"Baius\" which is being displayed at the local Celts and Romans museum.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4328", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4328", "title": "Boehmen", "text": ""}
{"id": "4329", "revid": "51054516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4329", "title": "Backgammon", "text": "Board and dice game for two players\nBackgammon is a two-player board game played with counters and dice on tables boards. It is the most widespread Western member of the large family of tables games, whose ancestors date back at least 1,600 years. The earliest record of backgammon itself dates to 17th-century England, being descended from the 16th-century game of Irish.\nArchaeological evidence shows that the earliest known forms of games similar to Backgammon originated in ancient Iran and Mesopotamia, dating back approximately 4,500\u20135,000 years. In Iran, the game was known as Nard (or Nardshir), which shares key characteristics with modern Backgammon, including the board layout, movement of pieces, and the use of dice. Many scholars therefore consider Nard to be the direct ancestor of Backgammon.\nFor more information, see Nard (game)\ufffc\nBackgammon is a two-player game of contrary movement in which each player has 15 pieces known traditionally as men (short for \"tablemen\"), but increasingly known as \"checkers\" in the United States in recent decades. The backgammon table pieces move along 24 \"points\" according to the roll of two dice. The objective of the game is to move the 15 pieces around the board and be first to \"bear off\", i.e., remove them from the board. The achievement of this while the opponent is still a long way behind results in a triple win known as a \"backgammon\", hence the name of the game.\nBackgammon involves a combination of strategy and luck from rolling of the dice. While the dice may determine the outcome of a single game, the better player will accumulate the better record over a series of many games. With each roll of the dice, players must choose from numerous options for moving their pieces and anticipate possible counter-moves by the opponent. The optional use of a doubling cube allows players to raise the stakes during the game.\nHistory.\nThe earliest specific reference to backgammon was in a letter dated 1635, when it was emerging as a variant of the popular medieval Anglo-Scottish game of Irish; the latter was described as a better game. By the 19th century, however, backgammon had spread to Europe, where it rapidly superseded other tables games like Trictrac in popularity, and also to America, where the doubling cube was introduced. In other parts of the world, different tables games such as Nard or Nardy are better known.\nTables games.\nBackgammon is a recent member of the large family of tables games that date back to ancient times. Its equipment is similar or identical to earlier tables games that have been depicted for centuries in art, leading to the mistaken belief that backgammon itself is much older.\nAncient history.\nThe history of board games can be traced back nearly 5,000 years to archaeological discoveries of the Jiroft culture, in Iran, the world's oldest game set having been discovered in the region with equipment comprising a dumbbell-shaped board, counters and dice. Although its precise rules are unknown, it has been termed the Game of 20 Squares and Irving Finkel has suggested a possible reconstruction. The Royal Game of Ur from 2600 BC may also be an ancestor or intermediate of modern-day table games like backgammon and is the oldest game for which rules have been handed down. It used tetrahedral dice. Various other board games spanning the 10th to 7th centuries BC have been found throughout modern day Iraq, Syria, Egypt and western Iran.\nSasanian Empire.\nThe Persian tables game of nard or nard\u0161ir emerged somewhere between the 3rd and 6th century AD, one text (\"K\u0101r-n\u0101mag \u012b Ardax\u0161\u0113r \u012b P\u0101pak\u0101n\") linking it with Ardashir I (r. 224\u201341), founder of the Sasanian dynasty, whereas another (\"Wi\u010d\u0101ri\u0161n \u012b \u010datrang ud nihi\u0161n \u012b n\u0113w-ardax\u0161\u0113r\") attributes it to Bozorgmehr Bokhtagan, the Vizier of Khosrow (r. 531\u201379), who is credited with the invention of the game.\nRoman and Byzantine Empires.\nThe earliest identifiable tables game, Tabula, meaning 'table' or 'board', is described in an epigram of Byzantine Emperor Zeno (AD 476\u2013491). The overall aim was to be first to bear one's pieces off; the board had the typical tables layout, with 24 points, 12 on each side; and there were 15 counters per player. However, unlike modern Western backgammon, there were three cubical dice not two, no bar nor doubling die, and all counters started off the board. Modern backgammon follows the same rules as tabula for hitting a blot and for bearing off; and the rules for re-entering pieces in backgammon are the same as those for initially entering pieces in tabula. The name Tavli () is still used in Greece for various tables games, which are frequently played in town plateias and cafes.\nThe of Emperor Zeno's time is believed to be a direct descendant of the earlier Roman \"ludus duodecim scriptorum\" ('Game of twelve lines') with the board's middle row of points removed, and only the two outer rows remaining. used a board with three rows of 12 points each, with the 15 pieces being moved in opposing directions by the two players across three rows according to the roll of the three cubical dice. Little specific text about the gameplay of has survived; it may have been related to the older Ancient Greek dice game \"Kubeia\". The earliest known mention of the game is in Ovid's \"Ars Amatoria\" ('The Art of Love'), written between 1 BC and 8 AD. In Roman times, this game was also known as \"alea\".\nWestern Europe.\nTables games first appeared in France during the 11th century and became a favourite pastime of gamblers. In 1254, Louis IX issued a decree prohibiting his court officials and subjects from playing. They were played in Germany in the 12th century, and had reached Iceland by the 13th century. In Spain, the Alfonso X manuscript \"Libro de los Juegos\", completed in 1283, describes rules for a number of dice and table games in addition to its discussion of chess. By the 17th century, games at tables had spread to Sweden. A wooden board and counters were recovered from the wreck of the \"Vasa\" among the belongings of the ship's officers. Tables games appear widely in paintings of this period, mainly those of Dutch and German painters, such as van Ostade, Jan Steen, Hieronymus Bosch, and Bruegel. Among surviving artworks are \"Cardsharps\" by Caravaggio.\nBackgammon.\nEarly backgammon.\nBackgammon's immediate predecessor was the 16th century tables game of Irish. Irish was the Anglo-Scottish equivalent of the French \"Toutes Tables\" and Spanish \"Todas Tablas\", the latter name first being used in the 1283 \"El Libro de los Juegos\", a translation of Arabic manuscripts by the Toledo School of Translators. Irish had been popular at the Scottish court of James IV and considered to be \"the more serious and solid game\" when the variant which became known as Backgammon began to emerge in the first half of the 17th century. In medieval Italy, Barail was played on a backgammon board, with the important difference that both players moved their pieces counter-clockwise and starting from the same side of the board. The game rules for Barail are recorded in a 13th-century manuscript held in the Italian National Library in Florence.\nThe earliest mention of backgammon, under the name \"Baggammon\", was by James Howell in a letter dated 1635. In English, the word \"backgammon\" is most likely derived from \"back\" and , meaning \"game\" or \"play\". Meanwhile, the first use documented by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" was in 1650. In 1666, it is reported that the \"old name for backgammon used by Shakespeare and others\" was Tables. However, it is clear from Willoughby that \"tables\" was a generic name and that the phrase \"playing at tables\" was used in a similar way to \"playing at cards\". The first known rules of \"Back Gammon\" were produced by Francis Willoughby around 1672; they were quickly followed by Charles Cotton in 1674.\nIn the 16th century, Elizabethan laws and church regulations had prohibited \"playing at tables\" in England, but by the 18th century, Backgammon had superseded Irish and become popular among the English clergy. Edmond Hoyle published \"A Short Treatise on the Game of Back-Gammon\" in 1753; this described rules and strategy for the game and was bound together with a similar text on whist.\nThe early form of backgammon was very similar to its predecessor, Irish. The aim, board, number of pieces or \"men\", direction of play and starting layout were the same as in the modern game. However, there was no doubling die, there was no bar on the board or the bar was not used (men simply being moved off the table when hit) and the scoring was different. The game was won double if either the winning throw was a doublet or the opponent still had men outside the home board. It was won triple if a player bore all men off before any of the opponent's men reached the home board; this was a \"back-gammon\". Some terminology, such as \"point\", \"hitting a blot\", \"home\", \"doublet\", \"bear off\" and \"men\" are recognisably the same as in the modern game; others, such as \"binding a man\" (adding a second man to a point) \"binding up the tables\" (taking all one's first 6 points), \"fore game\", \"latter game\", \"nipping a man\" (hitting a blot and playing it on forwards) \"playing at length\" (using both dice to move one man) are no longer in vogue.\nModern backgammon.\nBy no later than 1850, the rules of play had changed to those used today. Tables boards were now made with a \"bar\" in the centre and men that were hit went onto the bar. Winning double or by \"two hits\" was achieved by bearing all one's men off before the other has borne any\u200a\u2014\u200athis was now called a \"gammon\". If the winner bore off all men while the loser still had men in his adversary's table, it was a \"back-gammon\" and worth \"three hits\", i.e., triple.\nThe most recent major development in backgammon was the addition of the doubling cube. Doubles had originally been recorded by placing \"common parlour matches\" on the bar in the centre of the board. A doubling cube was first introduced in the 1920s in New York City among members of gaming clubs on the Lower East Side. The cube required players not only to select the best move in a given position, but also to estimate the probability of winning from that position, transforming backgammon into the expected value-driven game played in the 20th and 21st centuries.\nThe popularity of backgammon surged in the mid-1960s, in part due to the charisma of Prince Alexis Obolensky who became known as \"The Father of Modern Backgammon\". \"Obe\", as he was called by friends, co-founded the International Backgammon Association, which published a set of official rules. He also established the World Backgammon Club of Manhattan, devised a backgammon tournament system in 1963, then organized the first major international backgammon tournament in March 1964, which attracted royalty, celebrities and the press. The game became a huge fad and was played on college campuses, in discoth\u00e8ques and at country clubs; stockbrokers and bankers began playing at conservative men's clubs. People young and old all across the country dusted off their boards and pieces. Cigarette, liquor and car companies began to sponsor tournaments, and Hugh Hefner held backgammon parties at the Playboy Mansion. Backgammon clubs were formed and tournaments were held, resulting in a World Championship promoted in Las Vegas in 1967.\nIn the second half of the 20th century, new terms were introduced in America, such as 'beaver' and 'checkers' for men (although American backgammon experts Jacoby and Crawford continued to use both the older terms as well as the new ones).\nMost recently, the United States Backgammon Federation (USBGF) was organized in 2009 to repopularize the game in the United States. Board and committee members include many of the top players, tournament directors and writers in the worldwide backgammon community. The USBGF has recently created Standards of Ethical Practice to address issues on which tournament rules fail to touch.\nIn its country of origin, the UK Backgammon Federation is the national authority and runs a backgammon \u2009the Backgammon Galaxy UK Open \u2009as well as club championships, online leagues and knockout tournaments. Like the USBGF they are active members of the World Backgammon Federation (WBF) and their tournament rules have been adopted in their entirety by the WBF.\nSoftware.\nBackgammon entered the computer era in the 1990s when software was developed to play and analyze games, and for people to play one another over the internet.\nReal-time online play began with the First Internet Backgammon Server in July 1992, but there are now a range of options.\nRules.\nSince 2018, backgammon has been overseen internationally by the World Backgammon Federation who set the rules of play for international tournaments.\nBackgammon playing pieces may be termed men, checkers, draughts, stones, counters, pawns, discs, pips, chips, or nips. Checkers is a relatively modern American English term derived from another board game, draughts, which in US English is called checkers.\nThe objective is for players to bear off all their disc pieces from the board before their opponent can do the same. As the playing time for each individual game is short, it is often played in matches where victory is awarded to the first player to reach a certain number of points.\nBoard.\nThe dimensions of a board when opened, for a tournament game, should be at a minimum of 44\u00a0cm by 55\u00a0cm to a maximum of 66\u00a0cm by 88\u00a0cm.\nSetup.\nEach side of the board has a track of 12 isosceles triangles, called points. The points form a continuous track in the shape of a horseshoe, and are numbered from 1 to 24. In the most commonly used setup, each player begins with fifteen pieces; two are placed on their 24-point, three on their 8-point, and five each on their 13-point and their 6-point. The two players move their pieces in opposing directions, from the 24-point towards the 1-point.\nPoints 1 through 6 are called the home board or inner board, and points 7 through 12 are called the outer board. The 7-point is referred to as the bar point, and the 13-point as the midpoint. The 5-point for each player is sometimes called the \"golden point\".\nMovement.\nTo start the game, each player rolls one die, and the player with the higher number moves first using the numbers shown on both dice. If the players roll the same number, they must roll again until they roll different numbers. Both dice must land completely flat on the right-hand side of the gameboard. The players then take alternate turns, rolling two dice at the beginning of each turn.\nAfter rolling the dice, players must, if possible, move their pieces according to the number shown on each die. For example, if the player rolls a 6 and a 3 (denoted as \"6-3\"), the player must move one piece six points forward, and another or the same piece three points forward. The same piece may be moved twice, as long as the two moves can be made separately and legally: six and then three, or three and then six. If a player rolls two of the same number, called doubles, that player must play each die twice. For example, a roll of 5-5 allows the player to make four moves of five spaces each. On any roll, a player must move according to the numbers on both dice if it is at all possible to do so. If one or both numbers do not allow a legal move, the player forfeits that portion of the roll and the turn ends. If moves can be made according to either one die or the other, but not both, the higher number must be used. If one piece is unable to be moved, but such a move is made possible by the moving of the other piece, that move is compulsory.\nIn the course of a move, a piece may land on any point that is unoccupied or is occupied by one or more of the player's own pieces. It may also land on a point occupied by exactly one opposing piece, or \"blot\". In this case, the blot has been \"hit\" and is placed in the middle of the board on the bar that divides the two sides of the playing surface. A piece may never land on a point occupied by two or more opposing pieces; thus, no point is ever occupied by pieces from both players simultaneously. There is no limit to the number of pieces that can occupy a point or the bar at any given time.\nPieces placed on the bar must re-enter the game through the opponent's home board before any other move can be made. A roll of 1 allows the piece to enter on the 24-point (opponent's 1), a roll of 2 on the 23-point (opponent's 2), and so forth, up to a roll of 6 allowing entry on the 19-point (opponent's 6). Pieces may not enter on a point occupied by two or more opposing pieces. Pieces can enter on unoccupied points, or on points occupied by a single opposing piece; in the latter case, the single piece is hit and placed on the bar. A player may not move any other pieces until all pieces belonging to that player on the bar have re-entered the board. If a player has pieces on the bar, but rolls a combination that does not allow any of those pieces to re-enter, the player does not move. If the opponent's home board is completely \"closed\" (i.e. all six points are each occupied by two or more pieces), there is no roll that will allow a player to enter a piece from the bar, and that player stops rolling and playing until at least one point becomes open (occupied by one or zero pieces) due to the opponent's moves.\nA turn ends only when the player has removed his or her dice from the board. Prior to this moment, a move can be undone and replayed an unlimited number of times.\nBearing off.\nWhen all of a player's pieces are in that player's home board, that player may start removing them; this is called \"bearing off\". A roll of 1 may be used to bear off a piece from the 1-point, a 2 from the 2-point, and so on. If all of a player's pieces are on points lower than the number showing on a particular die, the player must use that die to bear off one piece from the highest occupied point. For example, if a player rolls a 6 and a 5, but has no pieces on the 6-point and two on the 5-point, then the 6 and the 5 must be used to bear off the two pieces from the 5-point. When bearing off, a player may also move a lower die roll before the higher even if that means the full value of the higher die is not fully utilized. For example, if a player has exactly one piece remaining on the 6-point, and rolls a 6 and a 1, the player may move the 6-point piece one place to the 5-point with the lower die roll of 1, and then bear that piece off the 5-point using the die roll of 6. As before, if there is a way to use all moves showing on the dice by moving pieces within the home board or by bearing them off, the player must do so. If a player's piece is hit while in the process of bearing off, that player may not bear off any others until it has been re-entered into the game and moved into the player's home board, according to the normal movement rules.\nThe first player to bear off all fifteen of their own pieces wins the game. When keeping score in backgammon, the points awarded depend on the scale of the victory. A player who bears off all fifteen pieces when the opponent has borne off at least one, wins a \"single game\" worth 1 point. If all fifteen have been borne off before the opponent gets at least one piece off, this is a \"gammon\" or \"double game\" worth 2 points. A \"backgammon\" or \"triple game\" is worth 3 points and occurs when the losing player has borne off no pieces and has one or more on the bar and/or in the winner's home table (inner board).\nDoubling cube.\nTo speed up match play and to provide an added dimension for strategy, a doubling cube is usually used. The doubling cube is not a die to be rolled, but rather a marker, with the numbers 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64 inscribed on its sides to denote the current stake. At the beginning of the game, the doubling cube is placed halfway between the players, either on the bar or at the side of the board, with the number 64 face up; the cube is then said to be \"centered, on 1\". When the cube is still centered, either player may start their turn by proposing that the game be played for twice the current stakes. Their opponent must either accept (\"take\") the doubled stakes or resign (\"drop\") the game immediately.\nWhenever a player accepts doubled stakes, the cube is placed on their side of the board with the corresponding power of two facing upward, to indicate that the right to redouble belongs exclusively to that player. If the opponent drops the doubled stakes, they lose the game at the current value of the doubling cube. For instance, if the cube showed the number 2 and a player wanted to redouble the stakes to put it at 4, the opponent choosing to drop the redouble would lose two, or twice the original stake. There is no limit on the number of redoubles. Although 64 is the highest number depicted on the doubling cube, the stakes may rise to 128, 256, and so on. \nIn money games, a player who accepts a double may immediately \"beaver\", doubling the value of the game again while retaining possession of the cube. The player who originally doubled may refuse the beaver, (resign the game and lose the current doubled stakes) or play on with the cube at 4 times its initial value. A player who is beavered may double the stakes once again (\"raccoon\"); the opponent then has the option of resigning or accepting the raccoon and playing with the cube at 8 times its initial value; in all cases the doubled player retains ownership of the cube. \nSome players use the \"automatic double rule\": If both opponents roll the same opening number, the doubling cube is incremented. When a player decides to double the opponent, the value is then a double of whatever face value is shown (e.g. if there was one automatic double putting the cube up to 2, the first in-game double will be for 4 points). Players usually agree to limit the number of automatic doubles to one per game. The automatic double rule is not an official rule in backgammon, and since it is not used in match play it is rarely, if ever, used in tournaments.\nThe \"Jacoby rule\", named after Oswald Jacoby, allows gammons and backgammons to count for their respective double and triple values only if the cube has already been offered and accepted. This encourages a player with a large lead to double, possibly ending the game, rather than to play it to conclusion hoping for a gammon or backgammon. The Jacoby rule is widely used in money play but is not used in match play.\nThe \"Crawford rule\", named after John R. Crawford, is designed to make match play more equitable for the player in the lead. If a player is one point away from winning a match, that player's opponent will always want to double as early as possible in order to catch up. Whether the game is worth one point or two, the trailing player must win to continue the match. To balance the situation, the Crawford rule requires that when a player first reaches a score one point short of winning, neither player may use the doubling cube for the following game, called the \"Crawford game\". After the Crawford game, normal use of the doubling cube resumes. The Crawford rule is routinely used in tournament match play. It is possible for a Crawford game to never occur in a match.\nIf the Crawford rule is in effect, then another option is the \"Holland rule\", named after Tim Holland, which stipulates that after the Crawford game, a player cannot double until after at least two rolls have been played by each side. It was common in tournament play in the 1980s, but is now rarely used.\nRelated games.\nMinor variations to the standard game are common among casual players in certain regions. For instance, only allowing a maximum of five men on any point (Britain) or disallowing \"hit-and-run\" in the home board (Middle East).\nThere are also many relatives of backgammon within the tables family with different aims, modes of play and strategies. Some are played primarily throughout one geographic region, and others add new tactical elements to the game. These other tables games commonly have a different starting position, restrict certain moves, or assign special value to certain dice rolls, but in some geographic games even the rules and direction of movement of the counters change, rendering them fundamentally different.\n\"Acey-deucey\" is a relative of backgammon in which players start with no counters on the board, and must enter them onto the board at the beginning of the game. The roll of 1-2 is given special consideration, allowing the player, after moving the 1 and the 2, to select any desired doubles move. A player also receives an extra turn after a roll of 1-2 or of doubles.\n\"Hypergammon\" is a game in which players have only three counters on the board, starting with one each on the 24, 23 and 22 points. With the aid of a computer this game was solved by Hugh Sconyers around 1994, meaning that exact equities for all cube positions are available for all 32 million possible positions.\n\"Nard\" is a traditional tables game from Persia which may be an ancestor of backgammon. It has a different opening layout in which all 15 pieces start on the 24th point. During play pieces may not be hit and there are no gammons or backgammons.\n\"Ban-sugoroku\" is a Japanese game that is a close relative of backgammon. It utilizes the same starting position but has slightly different rules.\n\"Russian backgammon\" is a variant described in 1895 as: \"much in vogue in Russia, Germany, and other parts of the Continent\". Players start with no counters on the board, and both players move in the same direction to bear off in a common home board. In this variant, doubles are powerful: four moves are played as in backgammon, followed by four moves according to the difference of the dice value from 7, and then the player has another turn (with the caveat that the turn ends if any portion of it cannot be completed).\n\"Gul bara\" and \"Tapa\" are tables games popular in south-eastern Europe and Turkey. The play will iterate among Backgammon, Gul Bara, and Tapa until one of the players reaches a score of 7 or 5. \n\"Coan ki\" is an ancient Chinese tables game.\n\"Plakoto\", \"Fevga\" and \"Portes\" are three varieties of tables games played in Greece. Together, the three are referred to as \"Tavli\" and are usually played one after the other; game being three, five, or seven points.\n\"Misere (backgammon to lose)\" is a variant of backgammon in which the objective is to lose the game.\n\"Tavla\" is a Turkish variation.\nStrategy and tactics.\nBackgammon is played in two principal variations, \"money\" and \"match\" play:\nThe format has a significant effect on strategy. In a match, the objective is not to win the maximum possible number of points, but rather to simply reach the score needed to win the match, so optimal play may depend on the match score. In money play, the theoretically correct piece play and cube action would never vary based on the score.\nBackgammon has an established opening theory, although it is less detailed than that of chess. The tree of positions expands rapidly because of the number of possible dice rolls and the moves available on each turn. Recent computer analysis has offered more insight on opening plays, but the midgame is reached quickly. After the opening, backgammon players frequently rely on some established general strategies, combining and switching among them to adapt to the changing conditions of a game.\nThere are several strategies or \"game plans\" to achieve a win:\nA \"backgame\" is a strategy that involves holding two or more anchors in an opponent's home board while being substantially behind in the race. The anchors obstruct the opponent's pieces and create opportunities to hit them as they move home. The backgame is generally used only to salvage a game wherein a player is already significantly behind. Using a backgame as an initial strategy is usually unsuccessful.\n\"Duplication\" refers to the placement of pieces such that one's opponent needs the same dice rolls to achieve different goals. For example, players may position all of their blots in such a way that the opponent must roll a 2 in order to hit any of them, reducing the probability of being hit more than once.\n\"Diversification\" refers to a complementary tactic of placing one's own pieces in such a way that more numbers are useful.\nThe \"pipcount\" is number of pips needed to move a player's pieces around and off the board. Many positions require a measurement of a player's standing in the race, for example, in making a doubling cube decision, or in determining whether to run home and begin bearing off. The difference between the two players' pip counts is a measure of the leader's racing advantage. For cube decisions, a number of formulas have been developed over the years, including the Thorpe count, the Ward count, the Keith count, and iSight. These calculations enable a player to determine whether to offer or take a double based on the pipcount in non-contact positions.\nCube handling.\nTwo theoretical models provide a basis for cube handling, i.e. when to offer a double and when to accept an offered double. Both ignore the effects of gammons and backgammons.\nIn practice, the takepoints and doubling points are somewhere in between, since while cube ownership cannot be ignored, assuming maximal efficiency for a re-cube is also not a valid assumption. Ignoring gammons and backgammons, the takepoint in money play is about 22%. All of the above ignores gammons and backgammons for either side, so in practice the calculation of takepoints is more complicated.\nEquity.\nA player's equity in a money or unlimited game is the average expected value that will be won or lost as a result of that game. For instance, if a player is certain to win but has no chance of a gammon or backgammon their equity is 1 and their opponent's equity is \u22121. If it is certain that the player will win a backgammon, their equity is 3 and their opponent's equity is \u22123. In Example 1 below, the player's winning chances are 75%, which corresponds to an equity of +0.5.\n\"Example 1\"\nSuppose there are only two pieces left on the board and the player on-roll has a piece on their six point and the opponent has a piece on their one point. The player on-roll will bear off with 27/36 rolls or 75% of the time. If the game was played from that position 100 times the on-roll player would win ~75 games and their opponent would win ~25 for a net win of ~50 points per 100 games. The on-roll player's equity would be .5 and their opponent's would be \u2212.5.\nIf the doubling cube was accessible they could offer the cube and increase their equity to 1: either their opponent passes the cube and the game is over, or their opponent takes the cube and loses 100 points per 100 games (instead of the 50 with the cube centered). This illustrates that the raw takepoint for money play is 25%.\n\"Example 2\"\nNow, suppose the on-roll player has two pieces, one on the five point and one on the one point while their opponent still has one on the one point. 23 rolls bear off both pieces so the winning percentage is 64% instead of 75% and the equities are about +0.28 ((64\u221236)/100) and \u22120.28. If the on-roll player offers the cube, their equity doubles to 0.56 and their opponent should take the cube because \u22120.56 is better than \u22121.\n\"Example 3\"\nThis example is more complicated, since there are gammons and backgammons to be had by both players and it is not the last chance to offer the cube. Computer analysis estimates the player with the black pieces wins 72.1% of games, plus 2.0% gammons, and 0.1% backgammons. Their opponent wins 27.9% of games, 2.0% gammons, and no backgammons. This adds up to the following equities:\nNo double 0.667\nDouble, take 0.684\nDouble, pass 1.000\nThe on-roll player should offer a double since their equity increases, and their opponent should take since they retain more equity by taking than passing.\nCheating.\nTo reduce the possibility of cheating, most good-quality backgammon sets use precision dice and a dice cup. This reduces the likelihood of loaded dice being used, which is the main way of cheating in face-to-face play. A common method of cheating online is the use of a computer program to find the optimal move on each turn; to combat this, many online sites use move-comparison software that identifies when a player's moves resemble those of a backgammon program. Online cheating has therefore become extremely difficult.\nSocial and competitive play.\nLegality.\nIn \"State of Oregon v. Barr\", a 1982 court case pivotal to the continued widespread organised playing of backgammon in the US, the State argued that backgammon is a game of chance and that it was therefore subject to Oregon's stringent gambling laws. Paul Magriel was a key witness for the defence, contradicting Roger Nelson, the expert prosecution witness, by saying, \"Game theory, however, really applies to games with imperfect knowledge, where something is concealed, such as poker. Backgammon is not such a game. Everything is in front of you. The person who uses that information in the most effective manner will win.\" After the closing arguments, Judge Stephen S. Walker concluded that backgammon is a game of skill, not a game of chance, and found the defendant, backgammon tournament director Ted Barr, not guilty of promoting gambling.\nClub and tournament play.\nPlayed \"ad hoc\" in caf\u00e9s and bars, clubs throughout Europe also host backgammon with informal gatherings to play throughout the day or in the evening as well as by way of social interaction. A few clubs offer specialized backgammon services, maintaining their own facilities or offering computer analysis of troublesome plays. Around 2003, some club leaders noticed a growth of interest in backgammon, and attributed it to the game's popularity on the internet.\nA backgammon chouette permits three or more players to participate in a single game, often for money. One player competes against a team of all the other participants, and positions rotate after each game. Chouette play often permits the use of multiple doubling cubes.\nBackgammon clubs may also organize tournaments. Large club tournaments sometimes draw competitors from other regions, with final matches viewed by hundreds of spectators. The top players at regional tournaments often compete in major national and international championships. Winners at major tournaments may receive prizes of tens of thousands of dollars.\nA successful triangular backgammon tournament, devised by UKBGF, was hosted in 2025 by the Walbrook Club versus the Haberdashers' &amp; Salters' Companies.\nInternational competition.\nThe first world championship competition in backgammon was held in Las Vegas, Nevada, in 1967. Tim Holland was declared the winner that year and at the tournament the following year. For unknown reasons, there was no championship in 1970, but in 1971, Tim Holland again won the title. The competition remained in Las Vegas until 1975, when it moved to Paradise Island in the Bahamas. The years 1976, 1977 and 1978 saw \"dual\" World Championships, one in the Bahamas attended by the Americans, and the \"European Open Championships\" in Monte Carlo with mostly European players. In 1979, Lewis Deyong, who had promoted the Bahamas World Championship for the prior three years, suggested that the two events be combined. Monte Carlo was universally acknowledged as the site of the World Backgammon Championship and has remained as such for thirty years. The Monte Carlo tournament draws hundreds of players and spectators, and is played over the course of a week.\nBy the 21st century, the largest international tournaments had established the basis of a tour for top professional players. Major tournaments are held yearly worldwide. PartyGaming sponsored the first World Series of Backgammon in 2006 from Cannes and later the \"Backgammon Million\" tournament held in the Bahamas in January 2007 with a prize pool of one million dollars, the largest for any tournament to date. In 2008, the World Series of Backgammon ran the world's largest international events in London, the UK Masters, the biggest tournament ever held in the UK with 128 international class players; the Nordic Open, which instantly became the largest in the world with around 500 players in all flights and 153 in the championship, and Cannes, which hosted the Riviera Cup, the traditional follow-up tournament to the World Championships. Cannes also hosted the WSOB championship, the WSOB finale, which saw 16 players play three-point shootout matches for \u20ac160,000. The event was recorded for television in Europe and aired on Eurosport.\nThe World Backgammon Association (WBA) has been holding the biggest backgammon tour on the circuit since 2007, the \"European Backgammon Tour\" (EBGT). In 2011, the WBA collaborated with the online backgammon provider Play65 for the 2011 season of the European Backgammon Tour and with \"Betfair\" in 2012. The 2013 season of the European Backgammon Tour featured 11 stops and 19 qualified players competing for \u20ac19,000 in a grand finale in Lefkosa, Northern Cyprus.\nGambling.\nWhen backgammon is played for money, the most common arrangement is to assign a monetary value to each point, and to play to a certain score, or until either player chooses to stop. The stakes are raised by gammons, backgammons, and use of the doubling cube. Backgammon is sometimes available in casinos. Before the commercialization of artificial neural network programs, proposition bets on specific positions were very common among backgammon players and gamblers. As with most gambling games, successful play requires a combination of luck and skill, as a single dice roll can sometimes significantly change the outcome of the game.\nMediterranean and West Asian cultural significance.\nBackgammon is considered the national game in many countries of the Eastern Mediterranean: Egypt, Turkey, Cyprus, Syria, Israel, Palestine, Lebanon and Greece.\nThe popularity of the game across the region is primarily an oral tradition, and appears to have been strengthened during the era of the Ottoman Empire, which controlled the whole Eastern Mediterranean in the early modern period. Afif Bahnassi, Syria's director of antiquities, stated in 1988: \"For some reason, backgammon became the rage of the Ottoman Empire. It really spread across the Arab world with the Turks, and it stayed behind when they left.\" The game is a common feature of coffeehouses throughout the region. Since at least the early 19th century, Damascus became well known as the preeminent location for Damascene-style wooden marquetry backgammon sets that have become famous throughout the region.\nA unique feature of backgammon throughout the region is players' use of mixed Persian and Turkish numbers to announce dice rolls, rather than Arabic or other local languages. Related to this phenomenon, the game is frequently referred to as \"Shesh Besh\", which is a rhyming combination \"shesh\", meaning \u2018six\u2019 in Persian (as well as many historical and current Iranian languages), and \"besh\", meaning five in Turkish. \"Shesh besh\" is commonly used to refer to when a player scores a 5 and 6 at the same time on dice. This language contains six types of irregular inflections:\nIn the early 20th century, as use of Classical Arabic was being promoted with the rise of Arab nationalism, efforts were made to replace the Persian-Turkish numbers used in backgammon play.\nStudies and analysis.\nBackgammon has been studied considerably by computer scientists. Neural networks and other approaches have offered significant advances to software for gameplay and analysis. With 15 white and 15 black counters and 24 possible positions, backgammon has 18 quintillion possible legal positions.\nThe first strong computer opponent was BKG 9.8. It was written by Hans Berliner in the late 1970s on a DEC PDP-10 as an experiment in evaluating board game positions. Early versions of BKG played badly even against poor players, but Berliner noticed that its critical mistakes were always at transitional phases in the game. He applied principles of fuzzy logic to improve its play between phases, and by July 1979, BKG 9.8 was strong enough to play against the reigning world champion Luigi Villa. It won the match 7\u20131, becoming the first computer program to defeat a world champion in any board game. Berliner stated that the victory was largely a matter of luck, as the computer received more favorable dice rolls.\nIn the late 1980s, backgammon programmers found more success with an approach based on artificial neural networks. TD-Gammon, developed by Gerald Tesauro of IBM, was the first of these programs to play near the expert level. Its neural network was trained using temporal difference learning applied to data generated from self-play. According to assessments by Bill Robertie and Kit Woolsey, TD-Gammon's play was at or above the level of the top human players in the world. Woolsey said of the program that \"There is no question in my mind that its positional judgment is far better than mine.\"\nTesauro proposed using rollout analysis to compare the performance of computer algorithms against human players. In this method, a Monte-Carlo evaluation of positions is conducted (typically thousands of trials) where different random dice sequences are simulated. The rollout score of the human (or the computer) is the difference of the average game results by following the selected move versus following the best move, then averaged for the entire set of taken moves.\nNeural network research has resulted in three modern proprietary programs, JellyFish, Snowie and eXtreme Gammon, as well as the shareware BGBlitz and the free software GNU Backgammon. These programs not only play the game, but offer tools for analyzing games and detailed comparisons of individual moves. The strength of these programs lies in their neural networks' weights tables, which are the result of months of training. Without them, these programs play no better than a human novice. For the bearoff phase, backgammon software usually relies on a database containing precomputed equities for all possible bearoff positions. There are 54,263 bearoff positions for each side. This means there are 542632 total bearoff positions (~3 billion positions). In 1981 Hugh Sconyers wrote a computer program that solved all positions with nine pieces or fewer for both sides. In the early 1990s Hugh extended his results to all bearoff positions. For each position there are four results: no cube, roller's cube, center cube and opponent's cube. So, Hugh's bearoff database contains the exact answers to ~12 billion bearoff situations.\nAnother neural network software developed by Nikolaos Papachristou is Palamedes that was developed in the early 2000s and it can also play variations like Hypergammon, Portes, Plakoto, Fevga, Narde and has multiple engines for each one.\nComputer-versus-computer competitions are also held at Computer Olympiad events.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4331", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4331", "title": "Book of Joshua", "text": "Sixth book of the Bible\nThe Book of Joshua is the sixth book in the Hebrew Bible and the Old Testament, and is the first book of the Deuteronomistic history, the story of Israel from the conquest of Canaan to the Babylonian exile. It tells of the campaigns of the Israelites in central, southern and northern Canaan, the destruction of their enemies, and the division of the land among the Twelve Tribes, framed by two set-piece speeches, the first by God commanding the conquest of the land, and, at the end, the second by Joshua warning of the need for faithful observance of the Law (\"torah\") revealed to Moses.\nThe consensus among scholars is that the Book of Joshua is historically problematic and should be treated with caution in reconstructing the history of early Israel. The earliest parts of the book are possibly chapters 2\u201311, the story of the conquest; these chapters were later incorporated into an early form of Joshua likely written late in the reign of king Josiah (reigned 640\u2013609\u00a0BC), but the book was not completed until after the fall of Jerusalem to the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 586\u00a0BC, and possibly not until after the return from the Babylonian exile in 539\u00a0BC.\nMany scholars interpret the book of Joshua as describing what would now be considered genocide. Other scholars counter that calling what the book of Joshua relates a \"genocide\" is anachronistic.\nContents.\nStructure.\nI. Transfer of leadership to Joshua (1:1\u201318)\nA. God's commission to Joshua (1:1\u20139)\nB. Joshua's instructions to the people (1:10\u201318)\nII. Entrance into and conquest of Canaan (2:1\u201312:24)\nA. Entry into Canaan\n1. Reconnaissance of Jericho (2:1\u201324)\n2. Crossing the River Jordan (3:1\u201317)\n3. Establishing a foothold at Gilgal (4:1\u20135:1)\n4. Circumcision and Passover (5:2\u201315)\nB. Victory over Canaan (6:1\u201312:24)\n1. Destruction of Jericho (6)\n2. Failure and success at Ai (7:1\u20138:29)\n3. Renewal of the covenant at Mount Ebal (8:30\u201335)\n4. Other campaigns in central Canaan. The Gibeonite Deception (9:1\u201327)\n5. Campaigns in southern Canaan (10:1\u201343)\n6. Campaigns in northern Canaan (11:1\u201315)\n7. Summary of lands conquered (11:16\u201323)\n8. Summary list of defeated kings (12:1\u201324)\nIII. Division of the land among the tribes (13:1\u201322:34)\nA. God's instructions to Joshua (13:1\u20137)\nB. Tribal allotments (13:8\u201319:51)\n1. Eastern tribes (13:8\u201333)\n2. Western tribes (14:1\u201319:51)\nC. Cities of refuge and levitical cities (20:1\u201321:42)\nD. Summary of conquest (21:43\u201345)\nE. De-commissioning of the eastern tribes (22:1\u201334)\nIV. Conclusion (23:1\u201324:33)\nA. Joshua's farewell address (23:1\u201316)\nB. Covenant at Shechem (24:1\u201328)\nC. Deaths of Joshua and Eleazar; burial of Joseph's bones (24:29\u201333)\nNarrative.\nGod's commission to Joshua (chapter 1).\nChapter 1 commences \"after the death of Moses\" and presents the first of three important moments in Joshua marked with major speeches and reflections by the main characters; here first God, and then Joshua, make speeches about the goal of conquest of the Promised Land; in chapter 12, the narrator looks back on the conquest; and in chapter 23 Joshua gives a speech about what must be done if Israel is to live in peace in the land.\nGod commissions Joshua to take possession of the land and warns him to keep faith with the Mosaic covenant. God's speech foreshadows the major themes of the book: the crossing of the Jordan River and conquest of the land, its distribution, and the imperative need for obedience to the Law. Joshua's own immediate obedience is seen in his speeches to the Israelite commanders and to the Transjordanian tribes, and the Transjordanians' affirmation of Joshua's leadership echoes Yahweh's assurances of victory.\nEntry into the land and conquest (chapters 2\u201312).\nRahab, a Canaanite woman of the Bible, sets in motion the entrance into Canaan by the Israelites. To avoid repeating failed attempts by Moses to have notable men of Israel predict the success rate of entry into Canaan mentioned in the book of Numbers, Joshua tasks two regular men with entering Jericho as spies. They arrive at Rahab's house and spend the night. The king of Jericho, having heard of possible Israelite spies, demands that Rahab reveal the men. She tells him that she is unaware of their whereabouts, when in reality, she hid them on her roof under flax. The next morning, Rahab professes her faith in God to the men and acknowledges her belief that Canaan was divinely reserved for the Israelites from the beginning. Because of Rahab's actions, the Israelites are able to enter Canaan.\nThe Israelites cross the Jordan River through a miraculous intervention of God with the Ark of the Covenant and are circumcised at Gibeath-Haaraloth (translated as \"hill of foreskins\"), renamed Gilgal in memory. \"Gilgal\" sounds like \"Gallothi\", \"I have removed\", but is more likely to translate as \"circle of standing stones\". The conquest begins with the battle of Jericho, followed by Ai (central Canaan), after which Joshua builds an altar to Yahweh at Mount Ebal in northern Canaan and renews the Covenant in a ceremony with elements of a divine land-grant ceremony, similar to ceremonies known from Mesopotamia.\nThe narrative then switches to the south. The Gibeonites trick the Israelites into entering an alliance with them by saying that they are not Canaanites. Despite this, the Israelites decide to keep the alliance by enslaving them instead. An alliance of Amorite kingdoms headed by the Canaanite king of Jerusalem attacks the Gibeonites but they are defeated with Yahweh's miraculous help of stopping the Sun and the Moon, and hurling down large hailstones (Joshua 10:10\u201314). The enemy kings were eventually hanged on trees. The Deuteronomist author may have used the then-recent 701\u00a0BC campaign of the Assyrian king Sennacherib in the Kingdom of Judah as his model; the hanging of the captured kings is in accordance with Assyrian practice of the 8th century BC.\nWith the south conquered the narrative moves to the northern campaign. A powerful multi-national (or more accurately, multi-ethnic) coalition headed by the king of Hazor, the most important northern city, is defeated at the Battle of the Waters of Merom with Yahweh's help. Hazor itself is then captured and destroyed. Chapter 11:16\u201323 summarises the extent of the conquest: Joshua has taken the entire land, almost entirely through military victories, with only the Gibeonites agreeing to peaceful terms with Israel. The land then \"had rest from war\" (Joshua 11:23, repeated at 14:15). Chapter 12 lists the vanquished kings on both sides of the Jordan River: the two kings who ruled east of the Jordan who were defeated under Moses' leadership (Joshua 12:1\u20136; cf. Numbers 21), and the 31 kings on the west of the Jordan who were defeated under Joshua's leadership (Joshua 12:7\u201324). The list of the 31 kings is quasi-tabular:\n\"the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one\";\n\"the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one\"; (etc.; Joshua 12:10\u201311).\nDivision of the land (chapters 13\u201322).\nHaving described how the Israelites and Joshua have carried out the first of their God's commands, the narrative now turns to the second: to \"put the people in possession of the land.\" Joshua is \"old, advanced (or stricken) in years\" by this time.\nThis land distribution is a \"covenantal land grant\": Yahweh, as king, is issuing each tribe its territory. The \"Cities of Refuge\" and Levitical cities are attached to the end, since it is necessary for the tribes to receive their grants before they allocate parts of it to others. The Transjordanian tribes are dismissed, affirming their loyalty to Yahweh.\nThe book reaffirms Moses' allocation of land east of the Jordan to the tribes of Reuben and Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and then describes how Joshua divided the newly conquered land of Canaan into parcels, and assigned them to the tribes by lot. Joshua 14:1 also makes reference to the role of Eleazar the priest (ahead of Joshua) in the distribution process. The description serves a theological function to show how the promise of the land was realized in the biblical narrative; its origins are unclear, but the descriptions may reflect geographical relations among the places named.\nThe wording of Joshua 18:1\u20134 suggests that the tribes of Reuben, Gad, Judah, Ephraim and Manasseh received their land allocation some time before the \"remaining seven tribes\", and a 21-member expedition set out to survey the remainder of the land with a view to organising the allocation to the tribes of Simeon, Benjamin, Asher, Naphtali, Zebulun, Issachar and Dan. Subsequently, 48 cities with their surrounding lands were allocated to the Tribe of Levi.\nOmitted in the Masoretic Text, but present in the Septuagint, is a statement that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Joshua completed the division of the land in its boundaries, and the children gave a portion to Joshua, by the commandment of the Lord. They gave to him the city for which he asked, Thamnath Sarach gave they him in Mount Ephraim, and Joshua built the city, and dwelt in it. And Joshua took the stone knives with which he had circumcised the children of Israel, which were in the way in the wilderness, and he placed them in Tamnath Sarach.\nBy the end of chapter 21, the narrative records that the fulfilment of God's promise of land, rest and supremacy over the enemies of the Israelites was complete. The tribes to whom Moses had granted land east of the Jordan are authorized to return home to Gilead (here used in the widest sense for the whole Transjordan district), having faithfully 'kept the charge' of supporting the tribes occupying Canaan. They are granted \"riches... with very much livestock, with silver, with gold, with bronze, with iron, and with very much clothing\" as a reward.\nJoshua's farewell speeches (chapters 23\u201324).\nJoshua, in his old age and conscious that he is \"going the way of all the earth\", gathers the leaders of the Israelites together and reminds them of Yahweh's great works for them, and of the need to love Yahweh. The Israelites are told \u2013 just as Joshua himself had been told \u2013 that they must comply with \"all that is written in the Book of the Law of Moses\", neither \"turn[ing] aside from it to the right hand or to the left\" (i.e. by adding to the law, or diminishing from it).\nJoshua meets again with all the people at Shechem in chapter 24 and addresses them a second time. He recounts the history of God's formation of the Israelite nation, beginning with \"Terah, the father of Abraham and Nahor, [who] lived beyond the Euphrates River and worshiped other gods.\" He invited the Israelites to choose between serving the Lord who had delivered them from Egypt, or the gods which their ancestors had served on the other side of the Euphrates, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land they now lived. The people chose to serve the Lord, a decision which Joshua recorded in the Book of the Law of God. He then erected a memorial stone \"under the oak that was by the sanctuary of the Lord\" in Shechem. The oak is associated with the Oak of Moreh where, during his travels in this area, Abram built an altar after the Lord appeared to him.Thus \"Joshua made a covenant with the people\", literally \"cut a covenant\", a phrase common to the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin languages. It derives from the custom of sacrifice, in which the victims were cut in pieces and offered to the deity invoked in ratification of the engagement.\nThe people then returned to their inheritance, i.e., their allocated lands.\nClosing items.\nThe Book of Joshua closes with three concluding items (referred to in the Jerusalem Bible as \"Two Additions\"):\nThe death of Joshua and his burial at Timnath-serah\nThe burial of the bones of Joseph at Shechem\nThe death of Eleazar and his burial in land belonging to Phinehas in the mountains of Ephraim.\nThere were no Levitical cities given to the descendants of Aaron in Ephraim, so theologians Carl Friedrich Keil and Franz Delitzsch supposed the land may have been at Geba in the territory of the Tribe of Benjamin: \"the situation, 'upon the mountains of Ephraim', is not at variance with this view, as these mountains extended, according to Judges 4:5, etc., far into the territory of Benjamin\".\nIn some manuscripts and editions of the Septuagint, there is an additional verse relating to the apostasy of the Israelites after Joshua's death.\nComposition.\nAuthorship and date.\nThe Book of Joshua is an anonymous work. The Babylonian Talmud, written in the 3rd to 5th centuries AD, attributed it to Joshua himself, but this idea was rejected as untenable by John Calvin (1509\u201364), and by the time of Thomas Hobbes (1588\u20131679) it was recognised that the book must have been written much later than the period it depicted. There is now general agreement that it was composed as part of a larger work, the Deuteronomistic history, stretching from the Book of Deuteronomy to the Books of Kings, composed first at the court of king Josiah in the late 7th century BC, and extensively revised in the 6th century BC.\nHistoricity.\nThe prevailing scholarly view is that Joshua is not a factual account of historical events. The apparent setting of Joshua in the 13th century BC corroborates with the Bronze Age Collapse, which was indeed a time of widespread city-destruction. However, with a few exceptions (Hazor, Lachish), the destroyed cities are not the ones the Bible associates with Joshua, and the ones it does associate with him show little or no sign of even being occupied at the time. The archaeological evidence shows that Jericho and Ai were not occupied in the Near Eastern Late Bronze Age, although recent excavations at Jericho have questioned this.\nAccording to \"Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible\", the story of the conquest represents the nationalist propaganda of the 8th-century BC kings of Judah and their claims to the territory of the Kingdom of Israel; incorporated into an early form of Joshua written late in the reign of king Josiah (reigned 640\u2013609\u00a0BC). The Book of Joshua was probably revised and completed after the fall of Jerusalem to the Neo-Babylonian Empire in 586\u00a0BC, and possibly after the return from the Babylonian exile in 538\u00a0BC.\nIn the 1930s Martin Noth made a sweeping criticism of the usefulness of the Book of Joshua for history. Noth was a student of Albrecht Alt, who emphasized form criticism (whose pioneer had been Hermann Gunkel in the 19th century) and the importance of etiology. Alt and Noth posited a peaceful movement of the Israelites into various areas of Canaan, in contradiction to the Biblical account. American archaeologist William F. Albright questioned the \"tenacity\" of etiologies, which were key to Noth's analysis of the campaigns in Joshua.\nThe site of Et-Tell (identified as Ai) was first excavated by Judith Marquet-Krause. Her investigations in the 1930s showed that the city, an early target for conquest in the putative Joshua account, had existed and been destroyed, but in the 22nd century BC. Some alternate sites for Ai, such as Khirbet el-Maqatir or Khirbet Nisya, have been proposed which would partially resolve the discrepancy in dates, but these sites have not been widely accepted. In 1951, Kathleen Kenyon showed that City IV at Tell es-Sultan (Jericho) was destroyed at the end of the Middle Bronze Age (c. 2100\u20131550 BC), not during the Late Bronze Age (c. 1550\u20131200 BC). Kenyon argued that the early Israelite campaign could not be historically corroborated, but rather explained as an etiology of the location and a representation of the Israelite settlement. Although this destruction is dated to 16th century by carbon dating, scholars propose that this destruction could be ascribed to either Ahmose I (1549\u20131524 BC), whose royal signet was found in the necropolis in a slightly later LB I tomb, or Tuthmose III (1479\u20131425 BC), whose scarab was recovered from a cemetery northwest of Jericho.\nMore recently, Lorenzo Nigro of the Italian-Palestinian Expedition to Tell es-Sultan has argued that there was a later settlement (City V) at the site during the 14th and 13th centuries BC. He states that the expedition detected Late Bronze Age II layers in several parts of the tell, although its upper layers were heavily cut by leveling operations during the Iron Age, which explains the low amount of 13th-century materials. Nigro says that the idea that the Biblical account should have a literal archaeological correspondence is erroneous, and \"any attempt to seriously identify something on the ground with biblical personages and their acts\" is hazardous.\nIn 1955, G. Ernest Wright discussed the correlation of archaeological data to the early Israelite campaigns, which he divided into three phases per the Book of Joshua. He pointed to two sets of archaeological findings that \"seem to suggest that the biblical account is in general correct regarding the nature of the late thirteenth and twelfth-eleventh centuries in the country\" (i.e., \"a period of tremendous violence\"). He gives particular weight to what were then recent digs at Hazor by Yigael Yadin.\nArchaeologist Amnon Ben-Tor of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, who replaced Yadin as the supervisor of excavations at Hazor in 1990, believed that recently unearthed evidence of violent destruction by burning verifies the Biblical account of the city's conquest by the Israelites. In 2012, a team led by Ben-Tor and Sharon Zuckerman discovered a scorched palace from the 13th century BC in whose storerooms they found 3,400-year-old ewers holding burned crops. Sharon Zuckerman did not agree with Ben-Tor's theory, and claimed that the burning was the result of the city's numerous factions opposing each other with excessive force.\nIn her commentary for the \"Westminster Bible Companion series,\" Carolyn Pressler suggested that readers of Joshua should give priority to its theological message (\"what passages teach about God\") and be aware of what these would have meant to audiences in the 7th and 6th centuries BC. Richard Nelson explained that the needs of the centralised monarchy favoured a single story of origins, combining old traditions of an exodus from Egypt, belief in a national god as \"divine warrior,\" and explanations for ruined cities, social stratification and ethnic groups, and contemporary tribes.\nLester L. Grabbe states that when he was studying for his doctorate (more than three decades before 2007), the \"substantial historicity\" of the Bible's stories of the patriarchs and the conquest of Canaan was widely accepted, but today it is hard to find a historian who still believes in it.\nAnn E. Killebrew writes that, while archaeological findings at Hazor and the Mount Ebal altar and a few literary elements suggest that the Book of Joshua may preserve some real memories of Israel's early history in Canaan, \"consensus exists that, whatever its sources (either oral and/or written), the conquest account as narrated is historically problematic and should be treated with caution.\"\nIn 2005, Pierre de Miroschedji published an article in the journal \"La Recherche\". He wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In general, no serious archaeologist today believes that the events narrated in the Book of Joshua have any real historical basis. Archaeological surveys, especially in the early 1990s, have revealed that the Israelite culture arose in the hills of the central part of the country, as a continuation of the Canaanite culture of the previous era.\nThe consensus of historians is that the ancient Israelites did not enter Canaan from outside and did not conquer it in a military campaign.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"there is little that we can salvage from Joshua's stories of the rapid, wholesale destruction of Canaanite cities and the annihilation of the local population. It simply did not happen; the archeological evidence is indisputable.\"\nThis is the judgment of one of the more conservative historians of ancient Israel. To be sure, there are far more conservative historians who try to defend the historicity of the entire biblical account beginning with Abraham, but their work rests on confessional presuppositions and is an exercise in apologetics rather than historiography. Most biblical scholars have come to terms with the fact that much (not all!) of the biblical narrative is only loosely related to history and cannot be verified.\u2014\u200a\nManuscripts.\nFragments of Joshua dating to the Hasmonean period were found among the Dead Sea Scrolls (4QJosha and 4QJoshb, found in Qumran Cave 4).\nThe Septuagint (Greek translation) is found in manuscripts such as Washington Manuscript I (5th century AD), and a reduced version of the Septuagint text is found in the illustrated Joshua Roll. The earliest complete copy of the book in Hebrew is in the Aleppo Codex (10th century AD).\nThemes.\nFaith and wrath.\nThe overarching theological theme of the Deuteronomistic history is faithfulness and God's mercy, and their opposites, faithlessness and God's wrath. In the Book of Judges, the Books of Samuel, and the Books of Kings, the Israelites become faithless and God ultimately shows his anger by sending his people into exile. But in Joshua Israel is obedient, Joshua is faithful, and God fulfills his promise and gives them the land as a result. Yahweh's war campaign in Canaan validates Israel's entitlement to the land and provides a paradigm of how Israel was to live there: twelve tribes, with a designated leader, united by covenant in warfare and in worship of Yahweh alone at a single sanctuary, all in obedience to the commands of Moses as found in the Book of Deuteronomy.\nGod and Israel.\nThe Book of Joshua takes forward Deuteronomy's theme of Israel as a single people worshipping Yahweh in the land God has given them. Yahweh, as the main character in the book, takes the initiative in conquering the land, and Yahweh's power wins the battles. For example, the walls of Jericho fall because Yahweh fights for Israel, not because the Israelites show superior fighting ability. The potential disunity of Israel is a constant theme, the greatest threat of disunity coming from the tribes east of the Jordan. Chapter 22:19 even hints that the land across the Jordan is unclean and that the tribes who live there have secondary status.\nLand.\nLand is the central topic of Joshua. The introduction to Deuteronomy recalled how Yahweh had given the land to the Israelites but then withdrew the gift when Israel showed fear and only Joshua and Caleb had trusted in God. The land is Yahweh's to give or to withhold, and the fact that he has promised it to Israel gives Israel an inalienable right to take it. For exilic and post-exilic readers, the land was both the sign of Yahweh's faithfulness and Israel's unfaithfulness, as well as the centre of their ethnic identity. In Deuteronomistic theology, \"rest\" meant Israel's unthreatened possession of the land, the achievement of which began with the conquests of Joshua.\nThe enemy.\nWilliam G. Dever writes that Joshua \"carries out a systematic campaign against the civilians of Canaan\u00a0\u2013 men, women and children\u00a0\u2013 that amounts to genocide\" although other scholars reject using \"genocide\" as a label to describe the conquest.\nThis practice was known as \"herem\", as described in Deuteronomy 20:17, which entailed no treaties with the enemy, no mercy, and no intermarriage. \"The extermination of the nations glorifies Yahweh as a warrior and promotes Israel's claim to the land,\" while their continued survival \"explores the themes of disobedience and penalty and looks forward to the story told in Judges and Kings.\" The divine call for massacre at Jericho and elsewhere can be explained in terms of cultural norms (Israel was not the only Iron Age state to practice \"herem\") and theology (e.g. to ensure Israel's purity, fulfill God's promise, judge the Canaanites for their \"sexual misconduct\"). The violent language within the story has also been taken by several scholars as being hyperbolic, drawing comparisons between the biblical account and extrabiblical military reports.\nPatrick D. Miller in his commentary on Deuteronomy, writes that \"there is no real way to make such reports palatable to the hearts and minds of contemporary readers and believers,\" and that the \"tension between the Israelites and its neighbors was fundamentally a religious conflict,\" writing further for the need to understand what the reports teach \"so that they make some sense to us in the whole.\" Miller writes further that the \"Deuteronomistic history in Joshua through Second Kings is a story of constant or recurring apostasy\" and that for the Israelites, maintaining their allegiance with Yahweh \"required, in their sight, removal of all temptation.\" Nissim Amzallag sees similarities between Joshua's conquest and the return of Judean exiles in Ezra-Nehemiah but compared to the former, the Judeans merely refrained from intermarrying the \"Canaanites\". These \"Canaanites\" were most likely non-exiled Judeans, who were contaminated with \"foreign influence\".\nObedience.\nObedience versus disobedience is a constant theme of the work. Obedience ties in the Jordan crossing, the defeat of Jericho and Ai, circumcision and Passover, and the public display and reading of the Law. Disobedience appears in the story of Achan (stoned for violating the \"herem\" command), the Gibeonites, and the altar built by the Transjordan tribes. Joshua's two final addresses challenge the Israel of the future (the readers of the story) to obey the most important command of all, to worship Yahweh and no other gods. Joshua thus illustrates the central Deuteronomistic message, that obedience leads to success and disobedience to ruin.\nMoses, Joshua and Josiah.\nThe Deuteronomistic history draws parallels in proper leadership between Moses, Joshua and Josiah. God's commission to Joshua in chapter 1 is framed as a royal installation. The people's pledge of loyalty to Joshua as the successor of Moses recalls royal practices. The covenant-renewal ceremony led by Joshua was the prerogative of the kings of Judah. God's command to Joshua to meditate on the \"book of the law\" day and night parallels the description of Josiah in 2 Kings 23:25 as a king uniquely concerned with the study of the law. The two figures had identical territorial goals; Josiah died in 609\u00a0BC while attempting to annex the former Israel to his own kingdom of Judah.\nSome of the parallels with Moses can be seen in the following, and not exhaustive, list:\nMoral and political interpretations.\nThe Book of Joshua deals with the conquest of the Land of Israel and its settlement, which are politically charged issues in Israeli society. In her article \"The Rise and Fall of the Book of Joshua in Public Education in the Light of Ideological Changes in Israeli Society,\" Israeli biblical scholar Leah Mazor analyzes the history of the book and reveals a complex system of references to it expressed in a wide range of responses, often extreme, moving from narrow-minded admiration, through embarrassment and thunderous silence to a bitter and poignant critique. The changes in the status of the Book of Joshua, she shows, are the manifestations of the ongoing dialogue that Israeli society has with its cultural heritage, with its history, with the Zionist idea, and with the need to redefine its identity.\nDavid Ben-Gurion saw in the war narrative of Joshua an ideal basis for a unifying national myth for the State of Israel, framed against a common enemy, the Arabs. He met with politicians and scholars such as Biblical scholar Shemaryahu Talmon to discuss Joshua's supposed conquests and later published a book of the meeting transcripts; in a lecture at Ben-Gurion's home, archaeologist Yigael Yadin argued for the historicity of the Israelite military campaign pointing to the conquests of Hazor, Bethel, and Lachish. Palestinian writer Nur Masalha claimed that Zionism had presented the 1948 Arab-Israeli War (which saw the creation of the State of Israel) as a \"miraculous\" clearing of the land based on Joshua, and the Bible as a mandate for the expulsion of the Palestinians.\nThe biblical narrative of conquest has been used as an apparatus of critique against Zionism. For example, Michael Prior criticizes the use of the campaign in Joshua to favor \"colonial enterprises\" (in general, not only Zionism), which have been interpreted as validating ethnic cleansing. He asserts that the Bible was used to make the mistreatment of Palestinians more morally palatable. A related moral condemnation can be seen in \"The political sacralization of imperial genocide: contextualizing Timothy Dwight's \"The Conquest of Canaan\"\" by Bill Templer. This kind of critique is not new; Jonathan Boyarin notes how Frederick W. Turner blamed Israel's monotheism for the very idea of genocide, which Boyarin found \"simplistic\" yet with precedents. In her tenure as Minister of Education, Israeli leftist politician Shulamit Aloni often complained about the centrality of the book of Joshua in the curricula, as opposed to the secondaryness of humane and universal principles found in the Books of the Prophets. Her attempt to change the Bible study program was unsuccessful.\nHarvard Bible professor and conservative Rabbi Shaye J. D. Cohen stated he is not happy with the genocide chapters being part of the Torah, and he would remove those from it, if it were his choice.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "4332", "revid": "48328727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4332", "title": "Book of Ezra", "text": "Book of the Bible\nThe Book of Ezra is a book of the Hebrew Bible which formerly included the Book of Nehemiah in a single book, commonly distinguished in scholarship as Ezra\u2013Nehemiah. The two became separated with the first printed rabbinic bibles of the early 16th century, following late medieval Latin Christian tradition. Composed in Hebrew and Aramaic, its subject is the Return to Zion following the close of the Babylonian captivity. Together with the Book of Nehemiah, it represents the final chapter in the historical narrative of the Hebrew Bible.\nThe Book of Ezra is divided into two parts: the first telling the story of the first return of exiles in the first year of Cyrus the Great (538\u00a0BC) and the completion and dedication of the new Temple in Jerusalem in the sixth year of Darius I (515\u00a0BC); the second telling of the subsequent mission of Ezra to Jerusalem and his struggle to purify the Jews from marriage with non-Jews.\nIn the book's recurring narrative pattern, the God of Israel three times inspires a king of Persia to commission a leader from among the Jews to carry out a mission: the first to rebuild the Temple, the second to purify the Jewish community, and the third to seal the holy city behind a wall. This third mission, that of Nehemiah, is not part of the Book of Ezra.\nThere is no historical consensus on Ezra's existence or mission due to a lack of extrabiblical evidence and conflicting scholarly interpretations, ranging from viewing him as a historical Aramean official to a literary figure, with debates hinging on the authenticity of the Artaxerxes rescript and its dating.\nSummary.\nThe Book of Ezra consists of ten chapters: chapters 1\u20136, covering the period from the decree of Cyrus the Great to the dedication of the Second Temple, are told in the third person. Chapters 7\u201310, dealing with the mission of Ezra, are told largely in the first person. The book contains several documents presented as historical inclusions, written in Aramaic while the surrounding text is in Hebrew (1:2\u20134, 4:8\u201316, 4:17\u201322, 5:7\u201317, 6:3\u20135, 6:6\u201312, 7:12\u201326) \nHistorical background.\nIn the early 6th century\u00a0BC, the Kingdom of Judah rebelled against the Neo-Babylonian Empire and was destroyed. As a result, the royal court, the priests, the prophets, and the scribes were taken into captivity in the city of Babylon. There, a profound intellectual revolution took place, the exiles blaming their fate on disobedience to their God and looking forward to a future when he would allow a purified people to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem. The same period saw the rapid rise of Persia, previously an unimportant kingdom in present-day southern Iran, to a position of great power, and in 539\u00a0BC Cyrus II, the Persian ruler, conquered Babylon.\nIt is difficult to describe the parties and politics of Judea in this period because of the lack of historical sources, but there seem to have been three important groups involved: the returnees from the exile who claimed the reconstruction with the support of Cyrus II; \"the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin\"; and a third group, \"people of the land\", who seem to be local opposition against the returnees building the Temple in Jerusalem.\nThe following table is a guide to major events in the region during the period covered by the Book of Ezra:\nTexts.\nEzra\u2013Nehemiah.\nThe single Hebrew book Ezra\u2013Nehemiah, with title \"Ezra\", was translated into Greek around the middle of the 2nd century BC. The Septuagint names Ezra\u2013Nehemiah and 1 Esdras Esdras B and A respectively. This usage is noted by the early Christian scholar Origen, who remarked that the Hebrew 'book of Ezra' might then be considered a 'double' book.\nJerome, writing in the early 5th century, noted that this duplication had since been adopted by Greek and Latin Christians. Jerome himself rejected the duplication in his Vulgate translation of the Bible into Latin from the Hebrew. Consequently, all early Vulgate manuscripts present Ezra-Nehemiah as a single book.\nFrom the 9th century onwards, Latin bibles are found that for the first time separate the Ezra and Nehemiah sections of Ezra-Nehemiah as two distinct books, then called the first and second books of Ezra. This becomes standard in the Paris Bibles of the 13th century. It was not until 1516/17, in the first printed Rabbinic Bible of Daniel Bomberg that the separation was introduced generally in Hebrew Bibles.\nFirst Esdras.\n1 Esdras, also known as \"Esdras \u03b1\", is an alternate Greek-language version of Ezra. This text has one additional section, the 'Tale of the Three Guardsmen' in the middle of Ezra 4. 1 Esdras (3 Esdras in the Vulgate) was considered apocryphal by Jerome.\nDate, structure and composition.\nDate.\nKoresh of Ezra 1:1 is called \"king of Persia\" (\u05de\u05dc\u05da \u05e4\u05e8\u05e1 \"Melekh P\u0101ras\"); the title was introduced by Cyrus the Great sometime after he defeated Astyages of Media (585\u2013550 BC).\nScholars are divided over the chronological sequence of the activities of Ezra and Nehemiah. Ezra 7:8 says that Ezra arrived in Jerusalem in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes, while Nehemiah 2:1\u20139 has Nehemiah arriving in Artaxerxes' twentieth year. If this was Artaxerxes I (465\u2013424 BC), then Ezra arrived in 458 and Nehemiah in 445\u00a0BC. Nehemiah 8\u20139, in which the two (possibly by editorial error) appear together, supports this scenario.\nStructure.\nThe contents of Ezra\u2013Nehemiah are structured in a theological rather than chronological order: \"The Temple must come first, then the purifying of the community, then the building of the outer walls of the city, and so finally all could reach a grand climax in the reading of the law.\"\nThe narrative follows a repeating pattern in which the God of Israel \"stirs up\" the king of Persia to commission a Jewish leader (Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah) to undertake a mission; the leader completes his mission in the face of opposition, and success is marked by a great assembly. The tasks of the three leaders are progressive: first the Temple is restored (Zerubabbel), then the community of Israel (Ezra), and finally the walls which will separate the purified community and Temple from the outside world (Nehemiah).\nThe pattern is completed with a final coda in which Nehemiah restores belief in Yahweh. This concern with a schematic pattern-making, rather than with history in the modern sense of a factual account of events in the order in which they occurred, explains the origin of the many problems which surround both Ezra and Nehemiah as historical sources.\nComposition.\nTwentieth-century views on the composition of Ezra revolved around whether the author was Ezra himself, and who may have also authored the Books of Chronicles, or was another author or authors who also wrote the Chronicles. More recently it has been increasingly recognised that Ezra, Nehemiah and Chronicles all have extremely complex histories stretching over many stages of editing, and most scholars now are cautious of assuming a unified composition with a single theology and point of view. As an indication of the many layers of editing which Ezra has undergone, one recent study finds that Ezra 1\u20136 and Ezra 9\u201310 were originally separate documents, that they were spliced together at a later stage by the authors of Ezra 7\u20138, and that all have undergone extensive later editing.\nTamara Cohn Eskenazi argues that the final composition of Ezra took place during the late Persian period (c. 370\u2013350 BCE), with some small additions from the Hellenistic period. She states that the language and ideology of the book seem to best fit within a Persian-period context.\nManuscripts.\nThe oldest surviving manuscript of Ezra is 4QEzra, also called 4Q117; it contains Ezra 4:2\u20136, 9\u201311; 5:17; 6:1\u20135. It dates to the Hasmonean period (140\u201337 BC). A 7th-century Egyptian ostracon contains a fragmentary text of the Septuagint (Greek translation): 1 Esdras 2:10, 9:21\u201324. A Vulgar Latin translation is found in the Codex Amiatinus (8th century). The Hebrew text in full is found in the Aleppo Codex (10th century) and Leningrad Codex (11th century).\nPersian documents.\nSeven purported Persian decrees of kings or letters to and from high officials are quoted in Ezra. Their authenticity has been contentious. While some scholars accept them in their current form, most accept only part of them as genuine, while still others reject them entirely. L.L. Grabbe surveyed six tests against which the documents can be measured (comparative known Persian material, linguistic details, contents, presence of Jewish theology, the Persian attitude to local religions, and Persian letter-writing formulas) and concluded that all the documents are late post-Persian works and probable forgeries, but that some features suggest a genuine Persian correspondence behind some of them. By contrast, Richard C. Steiner and H. G. M. Williamson argue that the linguistic and other evidence suggests that the documents are authentic.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCommentaries\nTranslations"}
{"id": "4333", "revid": "32791795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4333", "title": "Book of Daniel", "text": "Book of the Bible\nThe Book of Daniel is a 2nd-century\u00a0BC biblical apocalypse with a 6th-century\u00a0BC setting. It is ostensibly a narrative detailing the experiences and prophetic visions of Daniel, a Jewish exile in Babylon. The text features prophecy rooted in Jewish history as well as a portrayal of the end times that is cosmic in scope and political in its focus. The message of the text intended for the original audience was that just as the God of Israel saves Daniel from his enemies, so too he would save the Israelites in their present oppression.\nThe Hebrew Bible includes Daniel as one of the \"Ketuvim\" (\"Writings\"), while Christian biblical canons group the work with the major prophets. It divides into two parts: a set of six court tales in chapters 1\u20136, written mostly in Biblical Aramaic, and four apocalyptic visions in chapters 7\u201312, written mainly in Late Biblical Hebrew; the Septuagint contains three additional sections in Koine Greek: the Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children, Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon.\nThe book's themes have resonated throughout the ages, including with the community of the Dead Sea Scrolls and the authors of the canonical gospels and the Book of Revelation. From the 2nd century to the modern era, religious movements, including the Reformation and later millennialist movements, have been deeply influenced by it.\nStructure.\nDivisions.\nThe Book of Daniel is divided between the court tales of chapters 1\u20136 and the apocalyptic visions of 7\u201312, and between the Hebrew of chapters 1 and 8\u201312 and the Aramaic of chapters 2\u20137. The division is reinforced by the chiastic arrangement of the Aramaic chapters (see below), and by a chronological progression in chapters 1\u20136 from Babylonian to Median rule, and from Babylonian to Persian rule in chapters 7\u201312. Various suggestions have been made by scholars to explain the fact that the genre division does not coincide with the other two, but it appears that the language division and concentric structure of chapters 2\u20136 are artificial literary devices designed to bind the two halves of the book together. The following outline is provided by Collins in his commentary on Daniel:\nPART I: Tales (chapters 1:1\u20136:29)\nPART II: Visions (chapters 7:1\u201312:13)\nChiastic structure in the Aramaic section.\nThere is a recognised chiasm (a concentric literary structure in which the main point of a passage is placed in the centre and framed by parallel elements on either side in \"ABBA\" fashion) in the chapter arrangement of the Aramaic section. The following is taken from Paul Redditt's \"Introduction to the Prophets\":\nContent.\nIntroduction in Babylon (chapter 1).\nIn the third year of King Jehoiakim, God allows Jerusalem to fall into the power of Nebuchadnezzar II, king of Babylon. Young Israelites of noble and royal family, \"without physical defect, and handsome,\" versed in wisdom and competent to serve in the palace of the king, are taken to Babylon to be taught the literature and language of that nation. Among them are Daniel and his three companions, who refuse to touch the royal food and wine. Their overseer fears for his life in case the health of his charges deteriorates, but Daniel suggests a trial and the four emerge healthier than their counterparts from ten days of consuming nothing but vegetables and water. They are allowed to continue to refrain from eating the king's food, and to Daniel, God gives insight into visions and dreams. When their training is done Nebuchadnezzar finds them 'ten times better' than all the wise men in his service and therefore keeps them at his court, where Daniel continues until the first year of King Cyrus.\nNebuchadnezzar's dream of four kingdoms (chapter 2).\nIn the second year of his reign, Nebuchadnezzar has a dream. When he wakes up, he realizes that the dream has some important message, so he consults his wise men. Wary of their potential to fabricate an explanation, the king refuses to tell the wise men what he saw in his dream. Rather, he demands that his wise men tell him what the content of the dream was, and then interpret it. When the wise men protest that this is beyond the power of any man, he sentences all, including Daniel and his friends, to death. Daniel receives an explanatory vision from God: Nebuchadnezzar had seen an enormous statue with a head of gold, breast and arms of silver, belly and thighs of bronze, legs of iron, and feet of mixed iron and clay, then saw the statue destroyed by a rock that turned into a mountain filling the whole earth. Daniel explains the dream to the king: the statue symbolized four successive kingdoms, starting with Nebuchadnezzar, all of which would be crushed by God's kingdom, which would endure forever. Nebuchadnezzar acknowledges the supremacy of Daniel's god, raises Daniel over all his wise men, and places Daniel and his companions over the province of Babylon.\nThe fiery furnace (chapter 3).\nDaniel's companions Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego refuse to bow to King Nebuchadnezzar's golden statue and are thrown into a fiery furnace. Nebuchadnezzar is astonished to see a fourth figure in the furnace with the three, one \"with the appearance like a son of the gods.\" So the king calls the three to come out of the fire, blesses the God of Israel, and decrees that any who blaspheme against him shall be torn limb from limb.\nNebuchadnezzar's madness (chapter 4).\nNebuchadnezzar recounts a dream of a huge tree that is suddenly cut down at the command of a heavenly messenger. Daniel is summoned and interprets the dream. The tree is Nebuchadnezzar himself, who for seven years will lose his mind and live like a wild beast. All of this comes to pass until, at the end of the specified time, Nebuchadnezzar acknowledges that \"heaven rules\" and his kingdom and sanity are restored.\nBelshazzar's feast (chapter 5).\nBelshazzar and his nobles blasphemously drink from sacred Jewish temple vessels, offering praise to inanimate gods, until a mysterious hand suddenly appears and writes upon the wall. The horrified king summons Daniel, who upbraids him for his lack of humility before God and interprets the message: Belshazzar's kingdom will be given to the Medes and Persians. Belshazzar rewards Daniel and raises him to be third in the kingdom, and that very night Belshazzar is slain and Darius the Mede takes the kingdom.\nDaniel in the lions' den (chapter 6).\nDarius elevates Daniel to high office, exciting the jealousy of other officials. Knowing of Daniel's devotion to his God, his enemies trick the king into issuing an edict forbidding worship of any other god or man for a 30-day period. Daniel continues to pray three times a day to God towards Jerusalem; he is accused and King Darius, forced by his own decree, throws Daniel into the lions' den. But God shuts up the mouths of the lions, and the next morning Darius rejoices to find him unharmed. The king casts Daniel's accusers into the lions' pit together with their wives and children to be instantly devoured, while he himself acknowledges Daniel's God as he whose kingdom shall never be destroyed.\nVision of the beasts from the sea (chapter 7).\nIn the first year of Belshazzar Daniel has a dream of four monstrous beasts arising from the sea. The fourth, a beast with ten horns, devours the whole earth, treading it down and crushing it, and a further small horn appears and uproots three of the earlier horns. The Ancient of Days judges and destroys the beast, and \"one like a son of man\" is given everlasting kingship over the entire world. One of Daniel's attendants explains that the four beasts represent four kings, but that \"the holy ones of the Most High\" would receive the everlasting kingdom. The fourth beast would be a fourth kingdom with ten kings, and another king who would pull down three kings and make war on the \"holy ones\" for \"a time, two times and a half,\" after which the heavenly judgment will be made against him and the \"holy ones\" will receive the everlasting kingdom.\nVision of the ram and goat (chapter 8).\nIn the third year of Belshazzar Daniel has a vision of a ram and goat. The ram has two mighty horns, one longer than the other, and it charges west, north and south, overpowering all other beasts. A goat with a single horn appears from the west and destroys the ram. The goat becomes very powerful until the horn breaks off and is replaced by four lesser horns. A small horn that grows very large, it stops the daily temple sacrifices and desecrates the sanctuary for two thousand three hundred \"evenings and mornings\" (which could be either 1,150 or 2,300 days) until the temple is cleansed. The angel Gabriel informs him that the ram represents the Medes and Persians, the goat is Greece, and the \"little horn\" is a wicked king.\nVision of the Seventy Weeks (chapter 9).\nIn the first year of Darius the Mede, Daniel meditates on the word of Jeremiah that the desolation of Jerusalem would last seventy years; he confesses the sin of Israel and pleads for God to restore Israel and the \"desolated sanctuary\" of the Temple. The angel Gabriel explains that the seventy years stand for seventy \"weeks\" of years (490 years), during which the Temple will first be restored, then later defiled by a \"prince who is to come,\" \"until the decreed end is poured out.\"\nVision of the kings of north and south (chapters 10\u201312).\nDaniel 10: In the third year of Cyrus Daniel sees in his vision an angel (called \"a man\", but clearly a supernatural being) who explains that he is in the midst of a war with the \"prince of Persia\", assisted only by Michael, \"your prince.\" The \"prince of Greece\" will shortly come, but first he will reveal what will happen to Daniel's people.\nDaniel 11: A future king of Persia will make war on the king of Greece, a \"mighty king\" will arise and wield power until his empire is broken up and given to others, and finally the king of the south (identified in verse 8 as Egypt) will go to war with the \"king of the north.\" After many battles (described in great detail) a \"contemptible person\" will become king of the north; this king will invade the south two times, the first time with success, but on his second he will be stopped by \"ships of Kittim.\" He will turn back to his own country, and on the way his soldiers will desecrate the Temple, abolish the daily sacrifice, and set up the abomination of desolation. He will defeat and subjugate Libya and Egypt, but \"reports from the east and north will alarm him,\" and he will meet his end \"between the sea and the holy mountain.\"\nDaniel 12: At this time Michael will come. It will be a time of great distress, but all those whose names are written will be delivered. \"Multitudes who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake, some to everlasting life, others to shame and everlasting contempt; those who are wise will shine like the brightness of the heavens, and those who lead many to righteousness, like the stars for ever and ever.\" In the final verses the remaining time to the end is revealed: \"a time, times and half a time\" (three years and a half). Daniel fails to understand and asks again what will happen, and is told: \"From the time that the daily sacrifice is abolished and the abomination that causes desolation is set up, there will be 1,290 days. Blessed is the one who waits for and reaches the end of the 1,335 days.\"\nAdditions to Daniel (Greek text tradition).\nThe Greek text of Daniel is considerably longer than the Hebrew, due to three additional stories: they remain in Catholic and Orthodox Christian Bibles but were rejected by the Christian Protestant movement in the 16th century on the basis that they were absent from the Hebrew Bible.\nThe Book of Daniel is preserved in the 12-chapter Masoretic Text and in two longer Greek versions, the original Septuagint version, c.\u2009100\u00a0BC, and the later Theodotion version from c.\u20092nd century CE. Both Greek texts contain the three additions to Daniel. Theodotion is much closer to the Masoretic Text and became so popular that it replaced the original Septuagint version in all but two manuscripts of the Septuagint itself. The Greek additions were apparently never part of the Hebrew text. Several Old Greek texts of the Book of Daniel have been discovered, and the original form of the book is being reconstructed.\nHistorical background.\nThe visions of chapters 7\u201312 reflect the crisis which took place in Judea in 167\u2013164 BC when Antiochus IV Epiphanes, the Greek king of the Seleucid Empire, threatened to destroy traditional Jewish worship in Jerusalem. When Antiochus came to the throne in 175 BC the Jews were largely pro-Seleucid. The High Priestly family was split by rivalry, and one member, Jason, bribed Antiochus to be made High Priest and make Jerusalem a \"polis\", or Greek city. This meant, among other things, that city government would be in the hands of the citizens, which meant in turn that citizenship would be a valuable commodity, to be purchased from Jason. None of this threatened the Jewish religion, and the reforms were widely welcomed, especially among the Jerusalem aristocracy and the leading priests. Three years later, Jason was deposed when another priest, Menelaus, bribed Antiochus an even larger sum for the post of High Priest.\nAntiochus invaded Egypt twice, in 169 BC with success, but on the second incursion, in late 168 BC, he was forced to withdraw by the Romans. Jason, hearing a rumour that Antiochus was dead, attacked Menelaus to take back the High Priesthood. Antiochus drove Jason out of Jerusalem, plundered the Temple, and introduced measures to pacify his Egyptian border by imposing complete Hellenization: the Jewish Book of the Law was prohibited and on 15 December 167 BC an \"abomination of desolation\", probably a Greek altar, was introduced into the Temple. With the Jewish religion now clearly under threat a resistance movement sprang up, led by the Maccabee brothers, and over the next three years it won sufficient victories over Antiochus to take back and purify the Temple.\nThe crisis which the author of Daniel addresses is the defilement of the altar in Jerusalem in 167 BC (first introduced in chapter 8:11): the daily offering which used to take place twice a day, at morning and evening, stopped, and the phrase \"evenings and mornings\" recurs through the following chapters as a reminder of the missed sacrifices. But whereas the events leading up to the sacking of the Temple in 167 BC and the immediate aftermath are remarkably accurate, the predicted war between the Syrians and the Egyptians (11:40\u201343) never took place, and the prophecy that Antiochus would die in Palestine (11:44\u201345) was inaccurate (he died in Persia). The most probable conclusion is that the account must have been completed near the end of the reign of Antiochus but before his death in December 164 BC, or at least before news of it reached Jerusalem, and the consensus of modern scholarship is accordingly that the book dates to the period 167\u2013163 BC.\nComposition.\nDevelopment.\nIt is generally accepted that Daniel originated as a collection of Aramaic court tales, later expanded by Hebrew revelations. The court tales may have originally circulated independently, but the edited collection was probably composed in the third or early second-century BC. Chapter 1 was composed in Aramaic at this time as a brief introduction to provide historical context, introduce the characters of the tales, and explain how Daniel and his friends came to Babylon. The visions of chapters 7\u201312 were added, and chapter 1 was translated into Hebrew at the third stage when the final book was being drawn together. This final stage, marking the composition of the book of Daniel, took place between the desecration of the Temple by Antiochus IV Epiphanes in 167 and his death in 164 BC.\nAuthorship.\nDaniel is a product of \"Wisdom\" circles, but the type of wisdom is (i.e., the discovery of heavenly secrets from earthly signs) rather than the wisdom of learning\u2014the main source of wisdom in Daniel is allegedly God's revelation. It is one of a large number of Jewish apocalypses, all of them pseudonymous. The stories of the first half are legendary in origin, and the visions of the second the product of anonymous authors in the Maccabean period (2nd century BC). Chapters 1\u20136 are in the voice of an anonymous narrator, except for chapter 4 which is in the form of a letter from king Nebuchadnezzar; the second half (chapters 7\u201312) is presented by Daniel himself, introduced by the anonymous narrator in chapters 7 and 10. \nThe author/editor was probably an educated Jew, knowledgeable in Greek learning, and of high standing in his own community. It is possible that the name of Daniel was chosen as the hero of the book because of his reputation as a wise seer in Hebrew tradition. Ezekiel, who lived during the Babylonian exile, mentioned him in association with Noah and Job (Ezekiel 14:14) as a figure of legendary wisdom (28:3), and a hero named Daniel (more accurately Dan'el, but the spelling is close enough for the two to be regarded as identical) features in a late 2nd millennium myth from Ugarit. \"The legendary Daniel, known from long ago but still remembered as an exemplary character\u00a0... serves as the principal human 'hero' in the biblical book that now bears his name\"; Daniel is the wise and righteous intermediary who can interpret dreams and thus convey the will of God to humans, the recipient of visions from on high that are interpreted to him by heavenly intermediaries.\nDating.\nThe prophecies of Daniel are accurate down to the career of Antiochus IV Epiphanes, king of Syria and oppressor of the Jews, but not in its prediction of his death: the author seems to know about Antiochus' two campaigns in Egypt (169 and 167 BC), the desecration of the Temple (the \"abomination of desolation\"), and the fortification of the Akra (a fortress built inside Jerusalem), but he seems to know nothing about the reconstruction of the Temple or about the actual circumstances of Antiochus' death in late 164 BC. Chapters 10\u201312 must have been written between 167 and 164 BC. There is no evidence of a significant time lapse between those chapters and chapters 8 and 9, and chapter 7 may have been written just a few months earlier again.\nSome evidence of the book's date can be found in the fact that Daniel is not present in the Hebrew Bible's Nevi'im (wherein it might arguably be expected to fit), which was closed c.\u2009200\u00a0BC. Rather, Daniel forms a part of the Ketuvim ('Writings') also formed c.\u2009200\u00a0BC. Additionally, the Wisdom of Sirach, a work dating from c.\u2009180\u00a0BC, draws on almost every book of the Hebrew Bible except Daniel, leading scholars to suppose that its author was unaware of it, Daniel is, however, quoted in a section of the Sibylline Oracles commonly dated to the middle of the 2nd century BC, and was popular at Qumran at much the same time, suggesting that it was known from the middle of that century.\nManuscripts.\nThe Book of Daniel is preserved in the 12-chapter Masoretic Text and in two longer Greek versions, the original Septuagint version, c. 100\u00a0BC, and the later Theodotion version from c. 2nd century AD. Both Greek texts contain three additions to Daniel: The Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children; the story of Susannah and the Elders; and the story of Bel and the Dragon. Theodotion is much closer to the Masoretic Text and became so popular that it replaced the original Septuagint version in all but two manuscripts of the Septuagint itself. The Greek additions were apparently never part of the Hebrew text.\nEight copies of the Book of Daniel, all incomplete, have been found at Qumran, two in Cave 1, five in Cave 4, and one in Cave 6. Among them, they preserve text from eleven of Daniel's twelve chapters, and the twelfth is quoted in the Florilegium (a compilation scroll) 4Q174, showing that the book at Qumran did not lack this conclusion. All eight manuscripts were copied between 125\u00a0BC (4QDanc) and about 50 AD (4QDanb), showing that Daniel was being read at Qumran only about 40 years after its composition. All appear to preserve the 12-chapter Masoretic version rather than the longer Greek text. None reveal any major disagreements against the Masoretic, and the four scrolls that preserve the relevant sections (1QDana, 4QDana, 4QDanb, and 4QDand) all follow the bilingual nature of Daniel where the book opens in Hebrew, switches to Aramaic at 2:4b, then reverts to Hebrew at 8:1.\nA 2025 study published a series of radiocarbon tests which dated 4Q114, a manuscript preserving Daniel 8\u201311, to about 230\u2013160 BC. This estimated date range overlaps with the period in which the final part of Daniel was presumably composed.\nGenre, meaning, symbolism and chronology.\n\"(This section deals with modern scholarly reconstructions of the meaning of Daniel to its original authors and audience)\"\nGenre.\nThe Book of Daniel is an apocalypse, a literary genre in which a heavenly reality is revealed to a human recipient; such works are characterized by visions, symbolism, an other-worldly mediator, an emphasis on cosmic events, angels and demons, and pseudonymity (false authorship). The production of apocalypses occurred commonly from 300 BC to 100 AD, not only among Jews and Christians, but also among Greeks, Romans, Persians and Egyptians, and Daniel is a representative apocalyptic seer, the recipient of divine revelation: he has learned the wisdom of the Babylonian magicians and surpassed them because his God is the true source of knowledge; he is one of the \"maskilim\" (\u05de\u05e9\u05db\u05dc\u05d9\u05dd), the wise ones, who have the task of teaching righteousness and whose number may be considered to include the authors of the book itself. The book is also an eschatology, as the divine revelation concerns the end of the present age, a predicted moment in which God will intervene in history to usher in the final kingdom. It gives no real details of the end-time, but it seems that God's kingdom will be on this earth, that it will be governed by justice and righteousness, and that the tables will be turned on the Seleucids and those Jews who have cooperated with them.\nMeaning, symbolism, and chronology.\nThe message of the Book of Daniel is that, just as the God of Israel saved Daniel and his friends from their enemies, he would save all of Israel from their present oppression. The book is filled with monsters, angels, and numerology, drawn from a wide range of sources, both biblical and non-biblical, that would have had meaning in the context of 2nd-century Jewish culture and while Christian interpreters have always viewed these as predicting events in the New Testament\u2014\"the Son of God\", \"the Son of Man\", Christ and the Antichrist\u2014the book's intended audience is the Jews of the 2nd century BC. The following explains a few of these predictions as modern biblical scholars understand them.\nInfluence.\nThe concepts of immortality and resurrection, with rewards for the righteous and punishment for the wicked, have roots much deeper than Daniel, but the first clear statement is found in the final chapter of that book: \"Many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt.\" According to Daniel R. Schwartz, without the claim of the resurrection of Jesus, Christianity would have disappeared like the movements following other charismatic Jewish figures of the 1st century.\nDaniel was quoted and referenced by both Jews and Christians in the 1st century AD as predicting the imminent end-time. Moments of national and cultural crisis continually reawakened the apocalyptic spirit, through the Montanists of the 2nd/3rd centuries, persecuted for their millennialism, to the more extreme elements of the 16th-century Reformation such as the Zwickau prophets and the M\u00fcnster Rebellion. During the English Civil War, the Fifth Monarchy Men took their name and political program from Daniel 7, demanding that Oliver Cromwell allow them to form a \"government of saints\" in preparation for the coming of the Messiah; when Cromwell refused, they identified him instead as the Beast usurping the rightful place of King Jesus. For modern popularizers, the visions and revelations of Daniel remain a guide to the future, when the Antichrist will be destroyed by Jesus Christ at the Second Coming.\nDaniel belongs not only to the religious tradition but also to the wider Western intellectual and artistic heritage. It was easily the most popular of the prophetic books for the Anglo-Saxons, who nevertheless treated it not as prophecy but as a historical book, \"a repository of dramatic stories about confrontations between God and a series of emperor-figures who represent the highest reach of man\". Isaac Newton paid special attention to it, Francis Bacon borrowed a motto from it for his work \"Novum Organum\", Baruch Spinoza drew on it, its apocalyptic second half attracted the attention of Carl Jung, and it inspired musicians from medieval liturgical drama to Darius Milhaud and artists including Michelangelo, Rembrandt and Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
