{"id": "10328", "revid": "1315203979", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10328", "title": "Evliya \u00c7elebi", "text": "Turkish traveler and writer (1611\u20131682)\nDervish Mehmed Zill\u00ee (25 March 1611 \u2013 1682), known as Evliya \u00c7elebi (), was an Ottoman Turkish explorer who travelled through his home country during its cultural zenith as well as neighboring lands. He travelled for over 40 years, recording his commentary in a travelogue called the \"Seyahatn\u00e2me\" (\"Book of Travel\"). The name \u00c7elebi is an honorific meaning \"gentleman\" or \"man of God\".\nLife.\nEvliya \u00c7elebi was born in Istanbul in 1611 to a wealthy family from K\u00fctahya. Both his parents were attached to the Ottoman court, his father, Dervish Mehmed Zilli, as a jeweller, and his mother as an Abkhazian relation of the Grand Vizier of Mehmed IV Melek Ahmed Pasha. In his book, Evliya \u00c7elebi traces his paternal genealogy back to Ahmad Yasawi, the earliest known Turkic poet and an early Sufi mystic. Evliya \u00c7elebi received a court education from the Imperial \"ulama\" (scholars). He may have joined the Gulshani Sufi order, as he shows an intimate knowledge of their \"khanqah\" in Cairo, and a graffito exists in which he referred to himself as \"Evliya-y\u0131 G\u00fcl\u015fen\u00ee\" (\"Evliya of the G\u00fcl\u015fen\u00ee\").\nA devout Muslim opposed to fanaticism, Evliya could recite the Quran from memory and joked freely about Islam. Though employed as a clergyman and entertainer at the Imperial Court of Sultan Murad IV, Evliya refused employment that would keep him from travelling. \u00c7elebi had studied vocal and instrumental music as a pupil of a renowned Khalwati dervish by the name of 'Umar Gulshani, and his musical gifts earned him much favor at the Imperial Palace, impressing even the chief musician Amir Guna. He was also trained in the theory of music called . \nHis journal-writing began in Istanbul, with the taking of notes on buildings, markets, customs and culture, and in 1640 it was augmented with accounts of his travels beyond the confines of the city. The collected notes of his travels form a ten-volume work called the \"Seyah\u00e2tname\" (\"Travelogue\"). Departing from the Ottoman literary convention of the time, he wrote in a mixture of vernacular and high Turkish, with the effect that the Seyahatname has remained a popular and accessible reference work about life in the Ottoman Empire in the 17th century, including two chapters on musical instruments.\nEvliya \u00c7elebi died in 1684, it is unclear whether he was in Istanbul or Cairo at the time.\nTravels.\nEurope.\n\u00c7elebi claimed to have encountered Native Americans as a guest in Rotterdam during his visit of 1663. He wrote: \"[they] cursed those priests, saying, 'Our world used to be peaceful, but it has been filled by greedy people, who make war every year and shorten our lives.'\"\nWhile visiting Vienna in 1665\u201366, \u00c7elebi noted some similarities between words in German and Persian, an early observation of the relationship between what would later be known as two Indo-European languages.\n\u00c7elebi visited Crete and in book II describes the fall of Chania to the Sultan; in book VIII he recounts the Candia campaign.\nCroatia.\nDuring his travels in the Balkan regions of the Ottoman Empire \u00c7elebi visited various regions of the modern-day Croatia including northern Dalmatia, parts of Slavonia, Me\u0111imurje and Banija. He recorded variety of historiographic and ethnographic sources. They included descriptions of first-hand encounters, third-party narrator witnesses, and invented elements.\nCircassia.\n\u00c7elebi traveled to Circassia as well, in 1640. He commented on the women's beauty and talked about the absence of mosques and bazaars despite being a Muslim country. He talks about the hospitality of Circassians and mentions that he could not write the Circassian language using letters, and compared the language to a \"magpie shout\".\nBosnia.\nEvliya \u00c7elebi visited the town of Mostar, then in Ottoman Bosnia. He wrote that the name \"Mostar\" means \"bridge-keeper\", in reference to the town's celebrated bridge, 28 meters long and 20 meters high. \u00c7elebi wrote that it \"is like a rainbow arch soaring up to the skies, extending from one cliff to the other. ...I, a poor and miserable slave of Allah, have passed through 16 countries, but I have never seen such a high bridge. It is thrown from rock to rock as high as the sky.\"\nBulgaria (Dobruja).\nEvliya \u00c7elebi, who traveled around Anatolia and the Balkans in the 17th century, mentioned the northeast of Bulgaria as the Uz (O\u011fuz) region, and that a Turkish speaking Muslim society named \"\u00c7\u0131tak\" consisting of medium-sized, cheerful and strong people lived in Silistra, and also known as the \"Dobruca \u00c7itaklar\u0131\" in Dobruja. He also emphasizes that \"\u00c7\u0131taklar\" is made up of a mixture of Tatars, Vlachs, and Bulgarians.\nKosovo.\nIn 1660 \u00c7elebi went to Kosovo and referred to the central part of the region as \"Arnavud\" (\u0622\u0631\u0646\u0627\u0648\u0648\u062f) and noted that in Vushtrri its inhabitants were speakers of Albanian or Turkish and few spoke Bosnian. The highlands around the Tetovo, Peja and Prizren areas \u00c7elebi considered as being the \"mountains of Arnavudluk\". \u00c7elebi referred to the \"mountains of Peja\" as being in Arnavudluk (\u0622\u0631\u0646\u0627\u0648\u0648\u062f\u0644\u0642) and considered the Ibar river that converged in Mitrovica as forming Kosovo's border with Bosnia. He viewed the \"K\u0131lab\" or Llapi river as having its source in Arnavudluk (Albania) and by extension the Sitnica as being part of that river. \u00c7elebi also included the central mountains of Kosovo within Arnavudluk.\nAlbania.\n\u00c7elebi travelled extensively throughout Albania, visiting it on 3 occasions. He visited Tirana, Lezha, Shkodra and Bushat in 1662, Delvina, Gjirokastra, Tepelena, Skrapar, P\u00ebrmet, Berat, Kanina, Vlora, Bashtova, Durr\u00ebs, Kavaja, Peqin, Elbasan, and Pogradec in 1670.\nNorth Macedonia.\n\u00c7elebi visited the area of modern North Macedonia. He wrote that the mosque in Ohrid, now named the Ali Pasha Mosque, had two minarets. If true, the second did not survive to be photographed in the 19th century.\nParthenon.\nIn 1667 \u00c7elebi expressed his marvel at the Parthenon's sculptures and described the building as \"like some impregnable fortress not made by human agency.\" He composed a poetic supplication that the Parthenon, as \"a work less of human hands than of Heaven itself, should remain standing for all time.\"\nShirvan.\nOf oil merchants in Baku \u00c7elebi wrote: \"By Allah's decree oil bubbles up out of the ground, but in the manner of hot springs, pools of water are formed with oil congealed on the surface like cream. Merchants wade into these pools and collect the oil in ladles and fill goatskins with it, these oil merchants then sell them in different regions. Revenues from this oil trade are delivered annually directly to the Safavid Shah.\"\nCrimean Khanate.\nEvliya \u00c7elebi remarked on the impact of Cossack raids from Azak upon the territories of the Crimean Khanate, destroying trade routes and severely depopulating the regions. By the time of \u00c7elebi's arrival, many of the towns visited were affected by the Cossacks, and the only place in Crimea he reported as safe was the Ottoman fortress at Arabat.\n\u00c7elebi wrote of the slave trade in the Crimea:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A man who had not seen this market, had not seen anything in this world. A mother is severed from her son and daughter there, a son\u2014from his father and brother, and they are sold amongst lamentations, cries of help, weeping and sorrow.\n\u00c7elebi estimated that there were about 400,000 slaves in the Crimea but only 187,000 free Muslims.\nAsia.\nSyria and Palestine.\nIn contrast to many European and some Jewish travelogues of Syria and Palestine in the 17th century, \u00c7elebi wrote one of the few detailed travelogues from an Islamic point of view. \u00c7elebi visited Palestine twice, once in 1649 and once in 1670\u20131. An English translation of the first part, with some passages from the second, was published in 1935\u20131940 by the self-taught Palestinian scholar Stephan Hanna Stephan who worked for the Palestine Department of Antiquities. Significant are the many references to Palestine, or \"Land of Palestine\", and Evliya notes, \"All chronicles call this country Palestine.\"\nMecca.\nEvliya reported that the sheriffs of Mecca promoted trade in the region by encouraging fairs from the wealthy merchants. Evliya went on to explain that a large amount of buying and selling occurred in Mecca during the pilgrimage season.\nSeyahatn\u00e2me.\nHe wrote one of history's longest and most ambitious accounts of travel writing in any language, the \"Seyahatn\u00e2me\". Although many of the descriptions in the \"Seyahatn\u00e2me\" were written in an exaggerated manner or were plainly inventive fiction or third-source misinterpretation, his notes remain a useful guide to the culture and lifestyles of the 17th century Ottoman Empire. The first volume deals exclusively with Istanbul, the final volume with Egypt.\nCurrently there is no English translation of the entire \"Seyahatn\u00e2me\", although there are translations of various parts. The longest single English translation was published in 1834 by Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall, an Austrian orientalist: it may be found under the name \"Evliya Efendi.\" Von Hammer-Purgstall's work covers the first two volumes (Istanbul and Anatolia) but its language is antiquated. Other translations include Erich Prokosch's nearly complete translation into German of the tenth volume, the 2004 introductory work entitled \"The World of Evliya \u00c7elebi: An Ottoman Mentality\" written by Robert Dankoff, and Dankoff and Sooyong Kim's 2010 translation of select excerpts of the ten volumes, \"An Ottoman Traveller: Selections from the Book of Travels of Evliya \u00c7elebi\".\nEvliya is noted for having collected samples of the languages in each region he traveled in. There are some 30 Turkic dialects and languages cataloged in the \"Seyahatn\u00e2me\". \u00c7elebi notes the similarities between several words from the German and Persian, though he denies any common Indo-European heritage. The \"Seyahatn\u00e2me\" also contains the first transcriptions of many languages of the Caucasus and Tsakonian, and the only extant specimens of written Ubykh outside the linguistic literature. He also wrote in detail about Arabian horses and their different strains.\nIn the 10 volumes of his \"Seyahatn\u00e2me\", he describes the following journeys:\nTaxa named in his honor.\nIt is found in drainages in western Anatolia in Turkey.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10329", "revid": "15908147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10329", "title": "Eternal existence", "text": ""}
{"id": "10331", "revid": "29495465", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10331", "title": "Ancient Egyptian religion", "text": "Ancient Egyptian religion was a complex system of polytheistic beliefs and rituals that formed an integral part of ancient Egyptian culture. It centered on the Egyptians' interactions with many deities believed to be present and in control of the world. About 1,500 deities are known. Rituals such as prayer and offerings were provided to the gods to gain their favor. Formal religious practice centered on the pharaohs, the rulers of Egypt, believed to possess divine powers by virtue of their positions. They acted as intermediaries between their people and the gods, and were obligated to sustain the gods through rituals and offerings so that they could maintain Ma'at, the order of the cosmos, and repel Isfet, which was chaos. The state dedicated enormous resources to religious rituals and to the construction of temples.\nIndividuals could interact with the gods for their own purposes, appealing for help through prayer or compelling the gods to act through magic. These practices were distinct from, but closely linked with, the formal rituals and institutions. The popular religious tradition grew more prominent over the course of Egyptian history as the status of the pharaoh declined. Egyptian belief in the afterlife and the importance of funerary practices is evident in the great efforts made to ensure the survival of their souls after death \u2013 via the provision of tombs, grave goods and offerings to preserve the bodies and spirits of the deceased.\nThe religion had its roots in Egypt's prehistory and lasted for 3,500 years. The details of religious belief changed over time as the importance of particular gods rose and declined, and their intricate relationships shifted. At various times, certain gods became preeminent over the others, including the sun god Ra, the creator god Amun, and the mother goddess Isis. For a brief period, in the theology promulgated by the pharaoh Akhenaten, a single god, the Aten, replaced the traditional pantheon. Ancient Egyptian religion and mythology left behind many writings and monuments, along with significant influences on ancient and modern cultures. The religion declined following the Roman conquest of Egypt in 30 BC and Egyptians began converting to Christianity. Practices such as mummification halted, and the ancient Egyptian religion was considered to have fully died in the 530s. Following the Arab conquest of Egypt under Amr ibn al-As, Egyptians started to convert to Islam.\nHistory.\nThe beginnings of Egyptian religion extend into prehistory, though evidence for them comes only from the sparse and ambiguous archaeological record. Careful burials during the Predynastic period imply that the people of this time believed in some form of an afterlife. At the same time, animals were ritually buried, a practice which may reflect the development of zoomorphic deities like those found in the later religion. The evidence is less clear for gods in human form, and this type of deity may have emerged more slowly than those in animal shape. Each region of Egypt originally had its own patron deity, but it is likely that as these small communities conquered or absorbed each other, the god of the defeated area was either subsumed into the other god's mythology or entirely replaced by it. This resulted in a complex pantheon in which some deities remained only locally important while others developed more universal significance.\nPredynastic period.\nThe first known depictions of the Egyptian god of fertility Min, appear in the form of monumental statues discovered in an ancient temple at Koptos, dated to the late Naqada II to early Naqada III periods circa 3300 BC, and now displayed in the Ashmolean Museum following their discovery by Flinders Petrie in Koptos at the end of the 19th century. The estimated size of the three known statues ranges from 372\u00a0cm to 403\u00a0cm. The statues show a bearded man, naked but for a belt and a sash, holding his erect penis. An early form of the character for \"\"Min\" is inscribed on the side of two of these statues.\nOn the Koptos monumental statues of Min, generally dated to circa 3300 BC during the late Naqada II- early Naqada III periods, the Min symbol is inscribed, together with marine objects: the \"sword\" of a sawfish and two shells of the Pterocera species. These symbols seem to corroborate the traditional origin histories of the god, according to which he originated in the fabulous \"Land of Punt\", in the Eritrean region bordering on the Red Sea.\nArchaeological data has suggested that the Egyptian religious system had close, cultural affinities with Eastern African populations and arose from an African substratum rather than deriving from the Mesopotamian or Mediterranean regions.\nEarly Dynastic period.\nThe Early Dynastic Period began with the unification of Egypt around 3000\u00a0BC. This event transformed Egyptian religion, as some deities rose to national importance and the cult of the divine pharaoh became the central focus of religious activity. Horus was identified with the king, and his cult center in the Upper Egyptian city of Nekhen was among the most important religious sites of the period. Another important center was Abydos, where the early rulers built large funerary complexes.\nOld and Middle Kingdoms.\nDuring the Old Kingdom, the priesthoods of the major deities attempted to organize the complicated national pantheon into groups linked by their mythology and worshipped in a single cult center, such as the Ennead of Heliopolis, which linked important deities such as Atum, Ra, Osiris, and Set in a single creation myth. Meanwhile, pyramids, accompanied by large mortuary temple complexes, replaced mastabas as the tombs of pharaohs. In contrast with the great size of the pyramid complexes, temples to gods remained comparatively small, suggesting that official religion in this period emphasized the cult of the divine king more than the direct worship of deities. The funerary rituals and architecture of this time greatly influenced the more elaborate temples and rituals used in worshipping the gods in later periods.\nThe Ancient Egyptians regarded the sun as a powerful life force. The sun god Ra had been worshipped from the Early Dynastic period (3100\u20132686 BCE), but it was not until the Old Kingdom (2686\u20132181 BCE), when Ra became the dominant figure in the Egyptian pantheon, that the Sun Cult took power. Early in the Old Kingdom, Ra grew in influence, and his cult center at Heliopolis became the nation's most important religious site. By the Fifth Dynasty, Ra was the most prominent god in Egypt and had developed the close links with kingship and the afterlife that he retained for the rest of Egyptian history. Around the same time, Osiris became an important afterlife deity. The Pyramid Texts, first written at this time, reflect the prominence of the solar and Osirian concepts of the afterlife, although they also contain remnants of much older traditions. The texts are an extremely important source for understanding early Egyptian theology.\nSymbols such as the 'winged disc' took on new features. The solar disk with the wings of a hawk was originally the symbol of Horus and associated with his cult in the Delta town of Behdet. The sacred cobras were added on either side of the disc during the Old Kingdom. The winged disc had protective significance and was found on temple ceilings and ceremonial entrances.\nIn the 22nd century BC, the Old Kingdom collapsed into the disorder of the First Intermediate Period. Eventually, rulers from Thebes reunified the Egyptian nation in the Middle Kingdom (c.\u20092055\u20131650 BC). These Theban pharaohs initially promoted their patron god Montu to national importance, but during the Middle Kingdom, he was eclipsed by the rising popularity of Amun. In this new Egyptian state, personal piety grew more important and was expressed more freely in writing, a trend that continued in the New Kingdom.\nNew Kingdom.\nThe Middle Kingdom crumbled in the Second Intermediate Period (c.\u20091650\u20131550 BC), but the country was again reunited by Theban rulers, who became the first pharaohs of the New Kingdom. Under the new regime, Amun became the supreme state god. He was syncretized with Ra, the long-established patron of kingship and his temple at Karnak in Thebes became Egypt's most important religious center. Amun's elevation was partly due to the great importance of Thebes, but it was also due to the increasingly professional priesthood. Their sophisticated theological discussion produced detailed descriptions of Amun's universal power.\nIncreased contact with outside peoples in this period led to the adoption of many Near Eastern deities into the pantheon. At the same time, the subjugated Nubians absorbed Egyptian religious beliefs, and in particular, adopted Amun as their own.\nThe New Kingdom religious order was disrupted when Akhenaten acceded, and replaced Amun with the Aten as the state god. Eventually, he eliminated the official worship of most other gods and moved Egypt's capital to a new city at Amarna. This part of Egyptian history, the Amarna Period, is named after this. In doing so, Akhenaten claimed unprecedented status: only he could worship the Aten, and the populace directed their worship toward him. The Atenist system lacked well-developed mythology and afterlife beliefs, and the Aten seemed distant and impersonal, so the new order did not appeal to ordinary Egyptians. Thus, many probably continued to worship the traditional gods in private. Nevertheless, the withdrawal of state support for the other deities severely disrupted Egyptian society. Akhenaten's successors restored the traditional religious system, and eventually, they dismantled all Atenist monuments.\nBefore the Amarna Period, popular religion had trended toward more personal relationships between worshippers and their gods. Akhenaten's changes had reversed this trend, but once the traditional religion was restored, there was a backlash. The populace began to believe that the gods were much more directly involved in daily life. Amun, the supreme god, was increasingly seen as the final arbiter of human destiny, the true ruler of Egypt. The pharaoh was correspondingly more human and less divine. The importance of oracles as a means of decision-making grew, as did the wealth and influence of the oracles' interpreters, the priesthood. These trends undermined the traditional structure of society and contributed to the breakdown of the New Kingdom.\nLater periods.\nIn the 1st millennium BC, Egypt was significantly weaker than in earlier times, and in several periods foreigners seized the country and assumed the position of pharaoh. The importance of the pharaoh continued to decline, and the emphasis on popular piety continued to increase. Animal cults, a characteristically Egyptian form of worship, became increasingly popular in this period, possibly as a response to the uncertainty and foreign influence of the time. Isis grew more popular as a goddess of protection, magic, and personal salvation, and became the most important goddess in Egypt.\nIn the 4th century BC, Egypt became a Hellenistic kingdom under the Ptolemaic dynasty (305\u201330 BC), which assumed the pharaonic role, maintaining the traditional religion and building or rebuilding many temples. The kingdom's Greek ruling class identified the Egyptian deities with their own. From this cross-cultural syncretism emerged Serapis, a god who combined Osiris and Apis with characteristics of Greek deities, and who became very popular among the Greek population. Nevertheless, for the most part the two belief systems remained separate, and the Egyptian deities remained Egyptian.\nPtolemaic-era beliefs changed little after Egypt became a province of the Roman Empire in 30 BC, with the Ptolemaic kings replaced by distant emperors. The cult of Isis appealed even to Greeks and Romans outside Egypt, and in Hellenized form it spread across the empire. In Egypt itself, as the empire weakened, official temples fell into decay, and without their centralizing influence religious practice became fragmented and localized. Meanwhile, Christianity spread across Egypt, and in the third and fourth centuries AD, edicts by Christian emperors and the missionary activity of Christians eroded traditional beliefs.\nNevertheless, the traditional Egyptian religion persisted for a long time. The traditional worship in the temples of the city of Philae apparently survived at least until the 5th century, despite the active Christianization of Egypt. In fact, the fifth-century historian Priscus mentions a treaty between the Roman commander Maximinus and the Blemmyes and Nobades in 452, which among other things ensured access to the cult image of Isis.\nAccording to the 6th-century historian Procopius, the temples in Philae was closed down officially in AD 537 by the local commander Narses the Persarmenian in accordance with an order of Byzantine emperor Justinian I. This event is conventionally considered to mark the end of ancient Egyptian religion. However, its importance has recently come into question, following a major study by Jitse Dijkstra who argues that organized paganism at Philae ended in the fifth century, based on the fact that the last inscriptional evidence of an active pagan priesthood there dates to the 450s. Nevertheless, some adherence to traditional religion seems to have survived into the sixth century, based on a petition from Dioscorus of Aphrodito to the governor of the Thebaid dated to 567. The letter warns of an unnamed man (the text calls him \"eater of raw meat\") who, in addition to plundering houses and stealing tax revenue, is alleged to have restored paganism at \"the sanctuaries\", possibly referring to the temples at Philae.\nWhile it persisted among the populace for some time, Egyptian religion slowly faded away.\nLegacy.\nEgyptian religion produced the temples and tombs which are ancient Egypt's most enduring monuments, but it also influenced other cultures. In pharaonic times many of its symbols, such as the sphinx and winged solar disk, were adopted by other cultures across the Mediterranean and Near East, as were some of its deities, such as Bes. Some of these connections are difficult to trace. The Greek concept of Elysium may have derived from the Egyptian vision of the afterlife. In late antiquity, the Christian conception of Hell was most likely influenced by some of the imagery of the Duat. Egyptian beliefs also influenced or gave rise to several esoteric belief systems developed by Greeks and Romans, who considered Egypt as a source of mystic wisdom. Hermeticism, for instance, derived from the tradition of secret magical knowledge associated with Thoth.\nModern times.\nTraces of ancient beliefs remained in Egyptian folk traditions into modern times, but its influence on modern societies greatly increased with the French Campaign in Egypt and Syria in 1798 and their seeing the monuments and images. As a result of it, Westerners began to study Egyptian beliefs firsthand, and Egyptian religious motifs were adopted into Western art. Egyptian religion has since had a significant influence in popular culture. Due to continued interest in Egyptian beliefs, in the late 20th century, several new religious groups going under the blanket term of Kemetism have formed based on different reconstructions of ancient Egyptian religion. Kemetism is a neopagan religion and revival of the ancient Egyptian religion and related expressions of religion in classical and late antiquity, emerging during the 1970s. Kemetics do not consider themselves direct descendants of the ancient Egyptian religion but consistently speak of its recreation or restoration.\nBeliefs.\nThe beliefs and rituals now referred to as \"ancient Egyptian religion\" were integral within every aspect of Egyptian culture; thus the Egyptian language possessed no single term corresponding to the concept of religion. Ancient Egyptian religion consisted of a vast and varying set of beliefs and practices, linked by their common focus on the interaction between the world of humans and the world of the divine. The characteristics of the gods who populated the divine realm were inextricably linked to the Egyptians' understanding of the properties of the world in which they lived.\nDeities.\nThe Egyptians believed that the phenomena of nature were divine forces in and of themselves. These deified forces included the elements, animal characteristics, or abstract forces. The Egyptians believed in a pantheon of gods, which were involved in all aspects of nature and human society. Their religious practices were efforts to sustain and placate these phenomena and turn them to human advantage. This polytheistic system was very complex, as some deities were believed to exist in many different manifestations, and some had multiple mythological roles. Conversely, many natural forces, such as the sun, were associated with multiple deities. The diverse pantheon ranged from gods with vital roles in the universe to minor deities or \"demons\" with very limited or localized functions. It could include gods adopted from foreign cultures, and sometimes humans: deceased pharaohs were believed to be divine, and occasionally, distinguished commoners such as Imhotep also became deified.\nThe depictions of the gods in art were not meant as literal representations of how the gods might appear if they were visible, as the gods' true natures were believed to be mysterious. Instead, these depictions gave recognizable forms to the abstract deities by using symbolic imagery to indicate each god's role in nature. This iconography was not fixed, and many of the gods could be depicted in more than one form.\nMany gods were associated with particular regions in Egypt where their cults were most important. However, these associations changed over time, and they did not mean that the god associated with a place had originated there. For instance, the god Montu was original patron of the city of Thebes. Over the course of the Middle Kingdom, however, he was displaced in that role by Amun, who may have arisen elsewhere. The national popularity and importance of individual gods fluctuated in a similar way.\nDeities had complex interrelationships, which partly reflected the interaction of the forces they represented. The Egyptians often grouped gods together to reflect these relationships. One of the more common combinations was a family triad consisting of a father, mother, and child, who were worshipped together. Some groups had wide-ranging importance. One such group, the Ennead, assembled nine deities into a theological system that was involved in the mythological areas of creation, kingship, and the afterlife.\nThe relationships between deities could also be expressed in the process of syncretism, in which two or more different gods were linked to form a composite deity. This process was a recognition of the presence of one god \"in\" another when the second god took on a role belonging to the first. These links between deities were fluid, and did not represent the permanent merging of two gods into one; therefore, some gods could develop multiple syncretic connections. Sometimes, syncretism combined deities with very similar characteristics. At other times, it joined gods with very different natures, as when Amun, the god of hidden power, was linked with Ra, the god of the sun. The resulting god, Amun-Ra, thus united the power that lay behind all things with the greatest and most visible force in nature.\nMany deities could be given epithets that seem to indicate that they were greater than any other god, suggesting some kind of unity beyond the multitude of natural forces. This is particularly true of a few gods who, at various points, rose to supreme importance in Egyptian religion. These included the royal patron Horus, the sun-god Ra, and the mother-goddess Isis. During the New Kingdom (c.\u20091550\u2013c.\u20091070 BC), Amun held this position. The theology of the period described in particular detail Amun's presence in and rule over all things, so that he, more than any other deity, embodied the all-encompassing power of the divine.\nCosmology.\nThe Egyptian conception of the universe centered on \"Ma'at\", a word that encompasses several concepts in English, including \"truth\", \"justice\", and \"order\". It was the fixed, eternal order of the universe, both in the cosmos and in human society, and was often personified as a goddess. It had existed since the creation of the world, and without it the world would lose its cohesion. In Egyptian belief, \"Ma'at\" was constantly under threat from the forces of disorder, so all of society was required to maintain it. On the human level this meant that all members of society should cooperate and coexist; on the cosmic level it meant that all of the forces of nature\u2014the gods\u2014should continue to function in balance. This latter goal was central to Egyptian religion. The Egyptians sought to maintain \"Ma'at\" in the cosmos by sustaining the gods through offerings and by performing rituals which staved off disorder and perpetuated the cycles of nature.\nThe most important part of the Egyptian view of the cosmos was the conception of time, which was greatly concerned with the maintenance of \"Ma'at\". Throughout the linear passage of time, a cyclical pattern recurred, in which \"Ma'at\" was renewed by periodic events which echoed the original creation. Among these events were the annual Nile flood and the succession from one king to another, but the most important was the daily journey of the sun god Ra.\nWhen thinking of the shape of the cosmos, the Egyptians saw the earth as a flat expanse of land, personified by the god Geb, over which arched the sky goddess Nut. The two were separated by Shu, the god of air. Beneath the Earth lay a parallel underworld and undersky, and beyond the skies lay the infinite expanse of Nu, the chaos and primordial watery abyss that had existed before creation. The Egyptians also believed in a place called the Duat, a mysterious region associated with death and rebirth, that may have lain in the underworld or in the sky. Each day, Ra traveled over the earth across the underside of the sky, and at night he passed through the Duat to be reborn at dawn.\nIn Egyptian belief, this cosmos was inhabited by three types of sentient beings: one was the gods; another was the spirits of deceased humans, who existed in the divine realm and possessed many of the gods' abilities; living humans were the third category, and the most important among them was the pharaoh, who bridged the human and divine realms.\nKingship.\nEgyptologists have long debated the degree to which the pharaoh was considered a god. It seems most likely that the Egyptians viewed royal authority itself as a divine force. Therefore, although the Egyptians recognized that the pharaoh was human and subject to human weakness, they simultaneously viewed him as a god, because the divine power of kingship was incarnated in him. He therefore acted as intermediary between Egypt's people and the gods. He was key to upholding \"Ma'at\", both by maintaining justice and harmony in human society and by sustaining the gods with temples and offerings. For these reasons, he oversaw all state religious activity. However, the pharaoh's real-life influence and prestige could differ from his portrayal in official writings and depictions, and beginning in the late New Kingdom his religious importance declined drastically.\nThe king was also associated with many specific deities. He was identified directly with Horus, who represented kingship itself, and he was seen as the son of Ra, who ruled and regulated nature as the pharaoh ruled and regulated society. By the New Kingdom he was also associated with Amun, the supreme force in the cosmos. Upon his death, the king became fully deified. In this state, he was directly identified with Ra, and was also associated with Osiris, god of death and rebirth and the mythological father of Horus. Many mortuary temples were dedicated to the worship of deceased pharaohs as gods.\nAfterlife.\nThe elaborate beliefs about death and the afterlife reinforced the Egyptians theology in humans possessions a \"ka\", or life-force, which left the body at the point of death. In life, the \"ka\" received its sustenance from food and drink, so it was believed that, to endure after death, the \"ka\" must continue to receive offerings of food, whose spiritual essence it could still consume. Each person also had a \"ba\", the set of spiritual characteristics unique to each individual. Unlike the \"ka\", the \"ba\" remained attached to the body after death. Egyptian funeral rituals were intended to release the \"ba\" from the body so that it could move freely, and to rejoin it with the \"ka\" so that it could live on as an \"akh\". However, it was also important that the body of the deceased be preserved by mummification, as the Egyptians believed that the \"ba\" returned to its body each night to receive new life, before emerging in the morning as an \"akh\".\nIn early times the deceased pharaoh was believed to ascend to the sky and dwell among the stars. Over the course of the Old Kingdom (c.\u20092686\u20132181 BC), however, he came to be more closely associated with the daily rebirth of the sun god Ra and with the underworld ruler Osiris as those deities grew more important.\nIn the fully developed afterlife beliefs of the New Kingdom, the soul had to avoid a variety of supernatural dangers in the Duat, before undergoing a final judgement, known as the \"Weighing of the Heart\", carried out by Osiris and by the Assessors of Ma'at. In this judgement, the gods compared the actions of the deceased while alive (symbolized by the heart) to the feather of Ma'at, to determine whether he or she had behaved in accordance with Ma'at. If the deceased was judged worthy, his or her \"ka\" and \"ba\" were united into an \"akh\". Several beliefs coexisted about the \"akh\"'s destination. Often the dead were said to dwell in the realm of Osiris, a lush and pleasant land in the underworld. The solar vision of the afterlife, in which the deceased soul traveled with Ra on his daily journey, was still primarily associated with royalty, but could extend to other people as well. Over the course of the Middle and New Kingdoms, the notion that the \"akh\" could also travel in the world of the living, and to some degree magically affect events there, became increasingly prevalent.\nAtenism.\nDuring the New Kingdom the pharaoh Akhenaten abolished the official worship of other gods in favor of the sun-disk Aten. This is often seen as the first instance of true monotheism in history, although the details of Atenist theology are still unclear and the suggestion that it was monotheistic is disputed. The exclusion of all but one god from worship was a radical departure from Egyptian tradition and some see Akhenaten as a practitioner of monolatry or henotheism rather than monotheism, as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods; he simply refrained from worshipping any but the Aten. Under Akhenaten's successors Egypt reverted to its traditional religion, and Akhenaten himself came to be reviled as a heretic.\nWritings.\nWhile the Egyptians had no unified religious scripture, they produced many religious writings of various types. Together the disparate texts provide an extensive, but still incomplete, understanding of Egyptian religious practices and beliefs.\nMythology.\nEgyptian myths were stories intended to illustrate and explain the gods' actions and roles in nature. The details of the events they recounted could change to convey different symbolic perspectives on the mysterious divine events they described, so many myths exist in different and conflicting versions. Mythical narratives were rarely written in full, and more often texts only contain episodes from or allusions to a larger myth. Knowledge of Egyptian mythology, therefore, is derived mostly from hymns that detail the roles of specific deities, from ritual and magical texts which describe actions related to mythic events, and from funerary texts which mention the roles of many deities in the afterlife. Some information is also provided by allusions in secular texts. Finally, Greeks and Romans such as Plutarch recorded some of the extant myths late in Egyptian history.\nAmong the significant Egyptian myths were the creation myths. According to these stories, the world emerged as a dry space in the primordial ocean of chaos. Because the sun is essential to life on earth, the first rising of Ra marked the moment of this emergence. Different forms of the myth describe the process of creation in various ways: a transformation of the primordial god Atum into the elements that form the world, as the creative speech of the intellectual god Ptah, and as an act of the hidden power of Amun. Regardless of these variations, the act of creation represented the initial establishment of Ma'at and the pattern for the subsequent cycles of time.The most important of all Egyptian myths was the Osiris myth. It tells of the divine ruler Osiris, who was murdered by his jealous brother Set, a god often associated with chaos. Osiris' sister and wife Isis resurrected him so that he could conceive an heir, Horus. Osiris then entered the underworld and became the ruler of the dead. Once grown, Horus fought and defeated Set to become king himself. Set's association with chaos, and the identification of Osiris and Horus as the rightful rulers, provided a rationale for pharaonic succession and portrayed the pharaohs as the upholders of order. At the same time, Osiris' death and rebirth were related to the Egyptian agricultural cycle, in which crops grew in the wake of the Nile inundation, and provided a template for the resurrection of human souls after death.\nAnother important mythic motif was the journey of Ra through the Duat each night. In the course of this journey, Ra met with Osiris, who again acted as an agent of regeneration, so that his life was renewed. He also fought each night with Apep, a serpentine god representing chaos. The defeat of Apep and the meeting with Osiris ensured the rising of the sun the next morning, an event that represented rebirth and the victory of order over chaos.\nRitual and magical texts.\nThe procedures for religious rituals were frequently written on papyri, which were used as instructions for those performing the ritual. These ritual texts were kept mainly in the temple libraries. Temples themselves are also inscribed with such texts, often accompanied by illustrations. Unlike the ritual papyri, these inscriptions were not intended as instructions, but were meant to symbolically perpetuate the rituals even if, in reality, people ceased to perform them. Magical texts likewise describe rituals, although these rituals were part of the spells used for specific goals in everyday life. Despite their mundane purpose, many of these texts also originated in temple libraries and later became disseminated among the general populace.\nHymns and prayers.\nThe Egyptians produced numerous prayers and hymns, written in the form of poetry. Hymns and prayers follow a similar structure and are distinguished mainly by the purposes they serve. Hymns were written to praise particular deities. Like ritual texts, they were written on papyri and on temple walls, and they were probably recited as part of the rituals they accompany in temple inscriptions. Most are structured according to a set literary formula, designed to expound on the nature, aspects, and mythological functions of a given deity. They tend to speak more explicitly about fundamental theology than other Egyptian religious writings, and became particularly important in the New Kingdom, a period of particularly active theological discourse. Prayers follow the same general pattern as hymns, but address the relevant god in a more personal way, asking for blessings, help, or forgiveness for wrongdoing. Such prayers are rare before the New Kingdom, indicating that in earlier periods such direct personal interaction with a deity was not believed possible, or at least was less likely to be expressed in writing. They are known mainly from inscriptions on statues and stelae left in sacred sites as votive offerings.\nFunerary texts.\nAmong the most significant and extensively preserved Egyptian writings are funerary texts designed to ensure that deceased souls reached a pleasant afterlife. The earliest of these are the Pyramid Texts. They are a loose collection of hundreds of spells inscribed on the walls of royal pyramids during the Old Kingdom, intended to magically provide pharaohs with the means to join the company of the gods in the afterlife. The spells appear in differing arrangements and combinations, and few of them appear in all of the pyramids.\nAt the end of the Old Kingdom a new body of funerary spells, which included material from the Pyramid Texts, began appearing in tombs, inscribed primarily on coffins. This collection of writings is known as the Coffin Texts, and was not reserved for royalty, but appeared in the tombs of non-royal officials. In the New Kingdom, several new funerary texts emerged, of which the best-known is the Book of the Dead. Unlike the earlier books, it often contains extensive illustrations, or vignettes. The book was copied on papyrus and sold to commoners to be placed in their tombs.\nThe Coffin Texts included sections with detailed descriptions of the underworld and instructions on how to overcome its hazards. In the New Kingdom, this material gave rise to several \"books of the netherworld\", including the Book of Gates, the Book of Caverns, and the Amduat. Unlike the loose collections of spells, these netherworld books are structured depictions of Ra's passage through the Duat, and by analogy, the journey of the deceased person's soul through the realm of the dead. They were originally restricted to pharaonic tombs, but in the Third Intermediate Period they came to be used more widely.\nPractices.\nTemples.\nTemples existed from the beginning of Egyptian history, and at the height of the civilization they were present in most of its towns. They included both mortuary temples to serve the spirits of deceased pharaohs and temples dedicated to patron gods, although the distinction was blurred because divinity and kingship were so closely intertwined. The temples were not primarily intended as places for worship by the general populace, and the common people had a complex set of religious practices of their own. Instead, the state-run temples served as houses for the gods, in which physical images which served as their intermediaries were cared for and provided with offerings. This service was believed to be necessary to sustain the gods, so that they could in turn maintain the universe itself. Thus, temples were central to Egyptian society, and vast resources were devoted to their upkeep, including both donations from the monarchy and large estates of their own. Pharaohs often expanded them as part of their obligation to honor the gods, so that many temples grew to enormous size. However, not all gods had temples dedicated to them, as many gods who were important in official theology received only minimal worship, and many household gods were the focus of popular veneration rather than temple ritual.\nThe earliest Egyptian temples were small, impermanent structures, but through the Old and Middle Kingdoms their designs grew more elaborate, and they were increasingly built out of stone. In the New Kingdom, a basic temple layout emerged, which had evolved from common elements in Old and Middle Kingdom temples. With variations, this plan was used for most of the temples built from then on, and most of those that survive today adhere to it. In this standard plan, the temple was built along a central processional way that led through a series of courts and halls to the sanctuary, which held a statue of the temple's god. Access to this most sacred part of the temple was restricted to the pharaoh and the highest-ranking priests. The journey from the temple entrance to the sanctuary was seen as a journey from the human world to the divine realm, a point emphasized by the complex mythological symbolism present in temple architecture. Well beyond the temple building proper was the outermost wall. Between the two lay many subsidiary buildings, including workshops and storage areas to supply the temple's needs, and the library where the temple's sacred writings and mundane records were kept, and which also served as a center of learning on a multitude of subjects.\nTheoretically it was the duty of the pharaoh to carry out temple rituals, as he was Egypt's official representative to the gods. In reality, ritual duties were almost always carried out by priests. During the Old and Middle Kingdoms, there was no separate class of priests; instead, many government officials served in this capacity for several months out of the year before returning to their secular duties. Only in the New Kingdom did professional priesthood become widespread, although most lower-ranking priests were still part-time. All were still employed by the state, and the pharaoh had final say in their appointments. However, as the wealth of the temples grew, the influence of their priesthoods increased, until it rivaled that of the pharaoh. In the political fragmentation of the Third Intermediate Period (c.\u20091070\u2013664 BC), the high priests of Amun at Karnak even became the effective rulers of Upper Egypt. The temple staff also included many people other than priests, such as musicians and chanters in temple ceremonies. Outside the temple were artisans and other laborers who helped supply the temple's needs, as well as farmers who worked on temple estates. All were paid with portions of the temple's income. Large temples were therefore very important centers of economic activity, sometimes employing thousands of people.\nOfficial rituals and festivals.\nState religious practice included both temple rituals involved in the cult of a deity, and ceremonies related to divine kingship. Among the latter were coronation ceremonies and the Sed festival, a ritual renewal of the pharaoh's strength that took place periodically during his reign. There were numerous temple rituals, including rites that took place across the country and rites limited to single temples or to the temples of a single god. Some were performed daily, while others took place annually or on rare occasions. The most common temple ritual was the morning offering ceremony, performed daily in temples across Egypt. In it, a high-ranking priest, or occasionally the pharaoh, washed, anointed, and elaborately dressed the god's statue before presenting it with offerings. Afterward, when the god had consumed the spiritual essence of the offerings, the items themselves were taken to be distributed among the priests.\nThe less frequent temple rituals, or festivals, were still numerous, with dozens occurring every year. These festivals often entailed actions beyond simple offerings to the gods, such as reenactments of particular myths or the symbolic destruction of the forces of disorder. Most of these events were probably celebrated only by the priests and took place only inside the temple. However, the most important temple festivals, like the Opet Festival celebrated at Karnak, usually involved a procession carrying the god's image out of the sanctuary in a model barque to visit other significant sites, such as the temple of a related deity. Commoners gathered to watch the procession and sometimes received portions of the unusually large offerings given to the gods on these occasions.\nAnimal cults.\nAt many sacred sites, the Egyptians worshipped individual animals which they believed to be manifestations of particular deities. These animals were selected based on specific sacred markings which were believed to indicate their fitness for the role. Some of these cult animals retained their positions for the rest of their lives, as with the Apis bull worshipped in Memphis as a manifestation of Ptah. Other animals were selected for much shorter periods. These cults grew more popular in later times, and many temples began raising stocks of such animals from which to choose a new divine manifestation. A separate practice developed in the Twenty-sixth Dynasty, when people began mummifying any member of a particular animal species as an offering to the god whom the species represented. Millions of mummified cats, birds, and other creatures were buried at temples honoring Egyptian deities. Worshippers paid the priests of a particular deity to obtain and mummify an animal associated with that deity, and the mummy was placed in a cemetery near the god's cult center.\nOracles.\nThe Egyptians used oracles to ask the gods for knowledge or guidance. Egyptian oracles are known mainly from the New Kingdom and afterward, though they probably appeared much earlier. People of all classes, including the king, asked questions of oracles. The most common means of consulting an oracle was to pose a question to the divine image while it was being carried in a festival procession, and interpret an answer from the barque's movements. Other methods included interpreting the behavior of cult animals, drawing lots, or consulting statues through which a priest apparently spoke. The means of discerning the god's will gave great influence to the priests who spoke and interpreted the god's message.\nPopular religion.\nWhile the state cults were meant to preserve the stability of the Egyptian world, lay individuals had their own religious practices that related more directly to daily life. This popular religion left less evidence than the official cults, and because this evidence was mostly produced by the wealthiest portion of the Egyptian population, it is uncertain to what degree it reflects the practices of the populace as a whole.\nPopular religious practice included ceremonies marking important transitions in life. These included birth, because of the danger involved in the process, and naming, because the name was held to be a crucial part of a person's identity. The most important of these ceremonies were those surrounding death, because they ensured the soul's survival beyond it. Other religious practices sought to discern the gods' will or seek their knowledge. These included the interpretation of dreams, which could be seen as messages from the divine realm, and the consultation of oracles. People also sought to affect the gods' behavior to their own benefit through magical rituals.\nIndividual Egyptians also prayed to gods and gave them private offerings. Evidence of this type of personal piety is sparse before the New Kingdom. This is probably due to cultural restrictions on depiction of nonroyal religious activity, which relaxed during the Middle and New Kingdoms. Personal piety became still more prominent in the late New Kingdom, when it was believed that the gods intervened directly in individual lives, punishing wrongdoers and saving the pious from disaster. Official temples were important venues for private prayer and offering, even though their central activities were closed to laypeople. Egyptians frequently donated goods to be offered to the temple deity and objects inscribed with prayers to be placed in temple courts. Often they prayed in person before temple statues or in shrines set aside for their use. Yet in addition to temples, the populace also used separate local chapels, smaller but more accessible than the formal temples. These chapels were very numerous and probably staffed by members of the community. Households, too, often had their own small shrines for offering to gods or deceased relatives.\nThe deities invoked in these situations differed somewhat from those at the center of state cults. Many of the important popular deities, such as the fertility goddess Taweret and the household protector Bes, had no temples of their own. However, many other gods, including Amun and Osiris, were very important in both popular and official religion. Some individuals might be particularly devoted to a single god. Often they favored deities affiliated with their own region, or with their role in life. The god Ptah, for instance, was particularly important in his cult center of Memphis, but as the patron of craftsmen he received the nationwide veneration of many in that occupation.\nMagic.\nThe word \"magic\" is normally used to translate the Egyptian term \"heka\", which meant, as James P. Allen puts it, \"the ability to make things happen by indirect means\".\n\"Heka\" was believed to be a natural phenomenon, the force which was used to create the universe and which the gods employed to work their will. Humans could also use it, and magical practices were closely intertwined with religion. In fact, even the regular rituals performed in temples were counted as magical. Individuals also frequently employed magical techniques for personal purposes. Although these ends could be harmful to other people, no form of magic was considered inimical in itself. Instead, magic was seen primarily as a way for humans to prevent or overcome negative events.\nMagic was closely associated with the priesthood. Because temple libraries contained numerous magical texts, great magical knowledge was ascribed to the lector priests, who studied these texts. These priests often worked outside their temples, hiring out their magical services to laymen. Other professions also commonly employed magic as part of their work, including doctors, scorpion-charmers, and makers of magical amulets. It is also possible that the peasantry used simple magic for their own purposes, but because this magical knowledge would have been passed down orally, there is limited evidence of it.\nLanguage was closely linked with \"heka\", to such a degree that Thoth, the god of writing, was sometimes said to be the inventor of \"heka\". Therefore, magic frequently involved written or spoken incantations, although these were usually accompanied by ritual actions. Often these rituals invoked an appropriate deity to perform the desired action, using the power of \"heka\" to compel the deity to act. Sometimes this entailed casting the practitioner or subject of a ritual in the role of a character in mythology, thus inducing the god to act toward that person as it had in the myth.\nRituals also employed sympathetic magic, using objects believed to have a magically significant resemblance to the subject of the rite. The Egyptians also commonly used objects believed to be imbued with \"heka\" of their own, such as the magically protective amulets worn in great numbers by ordinary Egyptians.\nFunerary practices.\nBecause it was considered necessary for the survival of the soul, preservation of the body was a central part of Egyptian funerary practices. Originally the Egyptians buried their dead in the desert, where the arid conditions mummified the body naturally. In the Early Dynastic Period, however, they began using tombs for greater protection, and the body was insulated from the desiccating effect of the sand and was subject to natural decay. Thus, the Egyptians developed their elaborate embalming practices, in which the corpse was artificially desiccated and wrapped to be placed in its coffin. The quality of the process varied according to cost, however, and those who could not afford it were still buried in desert graves.\nOnce the mummification process was complete, the mummy was carried from the deceased person's house to the tomb in a funeral procession that included his or her relatives and friends, along with a variety of priests. Before the burial, these priests performed several rituals, including the opening of the mouth ceremony intended to restore the dead person's senses and give him or her the ability to receive offerings. Then the mummy was buried and the tomb sealed. Afterwards, relatives or hired priests gave food offerings to the deceased in a nearby mortuary chapel at regular intervals. Over time, families inevitably neglected offerings to long-dead relatives, so most mortuary cults only lasted one or two generations. However, while the cult lasted, the living sometimes wrote letters asking deceased relatives for help, in the belief that the dead could affect the world of the living as the gods did.\nThe first Egyptian tombs were mastabas, rectangular brick structures where kings and nobles were entombed. Each of them contained a subterranean burial chamber and a separate, above ground chapel for mortuary rituals. In the Old Kingdom, the mastaba developed into the pyramid, which symbolized the primeval mound of Egyptian myth. Pyramids were reserved for royalty, and were accompanied by large mortuary temples sitting at their base. Middle Kingdom pharaohs continued to build pyramids, but the popularity of mastabas waned. Increasingly, commoners with sufficient means were buried in rock-cut tombs with separate mortuary chapels nearby, an approach which was less vulnerable to tomb robbery. By the beginning of the New Kingdom even the pharaohs were buried in such tombs, and they continued to be used until the decline of the religion itself.\nTombs could contain a great variety of other items, including statues of the deceased to serve as substitutes for the body in case it was damaged. Because it was believed that the deceased would have to do work in the afterlife, just as in life, burials often included small models of humans to do work in place of the deceased. Human sacrifices found in early royal tombs were probably meant to serve the pharaoh in his afterlife.\nThe tombs of wealthier individuals could also contain furniture, clothing, and other everyday objects intended for use in the afterlife, along with amulets and other items intended to provide magical protection against the hazards of the spirit world. Further protection was provided by funerary texts included in the burial. The tomb walls also bore artwork, such as images of the deceased eating food that were believed to allow him or her to magically receive sustenance even after the mortuary offerings had ceased.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10332", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10332", "title": "Educational psychology", "text": "Branch of psychology concerned with the scientific study of human learning\nEducational psychology is the branch of psychology concerned with the scientific study of human learning. The study of learning processes, from both cognitive and behavioral perspectives, allows researchers to understand individual differences in intelligence, cognitive development, affect, motivation, self-regulation, and self-concept, as well as their role in learning. The field of educational psychology relies heavily on quantitative methods, including testing and measurement, to enhance educational activities related to instructional design, classroom management, and assessment, which serve to facilitate learning processes in various educational settings across the lifespan.\nEducational psychology can in part be understood through its relationship with other disciplines. It is informed primarily by psychology, bearing a relationship to that discipline analogous to the relationship between medicine and biology. It is also informed by neuroscience. Educational psychology in turn informs a wide range of specialties within educational studies, including instructional design, educational technology, curriculum development, organizational learning, special education, classroom management, and student motivation. Educational psychology both draws from and contributes to cognitive science and the learning theory. In universities, departments of educational psychology are usually housed within faculties of education, possibly accounting for the lack of representation of educational psychology content in introductory psychology textbooks.\nThe field of educational psychology involves the study of memory, conceptual processes, and individual differences (via cognitive psychology) in conceptualizing new strategies for learning processes in humans. Educational psychology has been built upon theories of operant conditioning, functionalism, structuralism, constructivism, humanistic psychology, Gestalt psychology, and information processing.\nEducational psychology has seen rapid growth and development as a profession in the last twenty years. School psychology began with the concept of intelligence testing leading to provisions for special education students, who could not follow the regular classroom curriculum in the early part of the 20th century. Another main focus of school psychology was to help close the gap for children of colour, as the fight against racial inequality and segregation was still very prominent, during the early to mid-1900s. However, \"school psychology\" itself has built a fairly new profession based upon the practices and theories of several psychologists among many different fields. Educational psychologists are working side by side with psychiatrists, social workers, teachers, speech and language therapists, and counselors in an attempt to understand the questions being raised when combining behavioral, cognitive, and social psychology in the classroom setting.\nHistory.\nAs a field of study, educational psychology is fairly new and was not considered a specific practice until the 20th century. Reflections on everyday teaching and learning allowed some individuals throughout history to elaborate on developmental differences in cognition, the nature of instruction, and the transfer of knowledge and learning. These topics are important to education and, as a result, they are important in understanding human cognition, learning, and social perception.\nAntiquity.\nSome of the ideas and issues pertaining to educational psychology date back to the time of Plato and Aristotle. Philosophers as well as sophists discussed the purpose of education, training of the body and the cultivation of psycho-motor skills, the formation of good character, the possibilities and limits of moral education. Some other educational topics they spoke about were the effects of music, poetry, and the other arts on the development of the individual, role of the teacher, and the relations between teacher and student. Plato saw knowledge acquisition as an innate ability, which evolves through experience and understanding of the world. This conception of human cognition has evolved into a continuing argument of nature vs. nurture in understanding conditioning and learning today. Aristotle, on the other hand, ascribed to the idea of knowledge by association or schema. His four laws of association included succession, contiguity, similarity, and contrast. His studies examined recall and facilitated learning processes.\nEarly Modern era.\nJohn Locke is considered one of the most influential philosophers in post-renaissance Europe, a time period that began around the mid-1600s. Locke is considered the \"Father of English Psychology\". One of Locke's most important works was written in 1690, named \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\". In this essay, he introduced the term \"tabula rasa\" meaning \"blank slate.\" Locke explained that learning was attained through experience only and that we are all born without knowledge.\nHe followed by contrasting Plato's theory of innate learning processes. Locke believed the mind was formed by experiences, not innate ideas. Locke introduced this idea as \"empiricism\", or the understanding that knowledge is only built on knowledge and experience.\nIn the late 1600s, John Locke advanced the hypothesis that people learn primarily from external forces. He believed that the mind was like a blank tablet (tabula rasa), and that successions of simple impressions give rise to complex ideas through association and reflection. Locke is credited with establishing \"empiricism\" as a criterion for testing the validity of knowledge, thus providing a conceptual framework for later development of experimental methodology in the natural and social sciences.\nIn the 18th century the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau espoused a set of theories which would become highly influential in the field of education, particularly through his philosophical novel \"Emile, or On Education\". Despite stating that the book should not be used as a practical guide to nurturing children, the pedagogical approach outlined in it was lauded by Enlightenment contemporaries including Immanuel Kant and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. Rousseau advocated a child-centered approach to education, and that the age of the child should be accounted for in choosing what and how to teach them. In particular he insisted on the primacy of experiential education, in order to develop the child's ability to reason autonomously. Rousseau's philosophy influenced educational reformers including Johann Bernhard Basedow, whose practice in his model school the Philanthropinum drew upon his ideas, as well as Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi. More generally Rousseau's thinking had significant direct and indirect influence on the development of pedagogy in Germany, Switzerland and the Netherlands. In addition, Jean Piaget's stage-based approach to child development has been observed to have parallels to Rousseau's theories.\nBefore 1890.\nPhilosophers of education such as Juan Vives, Johann Pestalozzi, Friedrich Fr\u00f6bel, and Johann Herbart had examined, classified and judged the methods of education centuries before the beginnings of psychology in the late 1800s.\nJuan Vives.\nJuan Vives (1493\u20131540) proposed induction as the method of study and believed in the direct observation and investigation of the study of nature. His studies focused on humanistic learning, which opposed scholasticism and was influenced by a variety of sources including philosophy, psychology, politics, religion, and history. He was one of the first prominent thinkers to emphasize that the location of a school is important to learning. He suggested that a school should be located away from disturbing noises; the air quality should be good and there should be plenty of food for the students and teachers. Vives emphasized the importance of understanding individual differences of the students and suggested practice as an important tool for learning.\nVives introduced his educational ideas in his writing, \"De anima et vita\" in 1538. In this publication, Vives explores moral philosophy as a setting for his educational ideals; with this, he explains that the different parts of the soul (similar to that of Aristotle's ideas) are each responsible for different operations, which function distinctively. The first book covers the different \"souls\": \"The Vegetative Soul\"; this is the soul of nutrition, growth, and reproduction, \"The Sensitive Soul\", which involves the five external senses; \"The Cogitative soul\", which includes internal senses and cognitive facilities. The second book involves functions of the rational soul: mind, will, and memory. Lastly, the third book explains the analysis of emotions.\nJohann Pestalozzi.\nJohann Pestalozzi (1746\u20131827), a Swiss educational reformer, emphasized the child rather than the content of the school. Pestalozzi fostered an educational reform backed by the idea that early education was crucial for children, and could be manageable for mothers. Eventually, this experience with early education would lead to a \"wholesome person characterized by morality.\" Pestalozzi has been acknowledged for opening institutions for education, writing books for mother's teaching home education, and elementary books for students, mostly focusing on the kindergarten level. In his later years, he published teaching manuals and methods of teaching.\nDuring the time of The Enlightenment, Pestalozzi's ideals introduced \"educationalization\". This created the bridge between social issues and education by introducing the idea of social issues to be solved through education. Horlacher describes the most prominent example of this during The Enlightenment to be \"improving agricultural production methods.\"\nJohann Herbart.\nJohann Herbart (1776\u20131841) is considered the father of educational psychology. He believed that learning was influenced by interest in the subject and the teacher. He thought that teachers should consider the students' existing mental sets\u2014what they already know\u2014when presenting new information or material. Herbart came up with what are now known as the formal steps. The 5 steps that teachers should use are:\n1890\u20131920.\nThere were three major figures in educational psychology in this period: William James, G. Stanley Hall, and John Dewey. These three men distinguished themselves in general psychology and educational psychology, which overlapped significantly at the end of the 19th century.\nWilliam James (1842\u20131910).\nThe period of 1890\u20131920 is considered the golden era of educational psychology when aspirations of the new discipline rested on the application of the scientific methods of observation and experimentation to educational problems. From 1840 to 1920 37 million people immigrated to the United States. This created an expansion of elementary schools and secondary schools. The increase in immigration also provided educational psychologists the opportunity to use intelligence testing to screen immigrants at Ellis Island. Darwinism influenced the beliefs of the prominent educational psychologists. Even in the earliest years of the discipline, educational psychologists recognized the limitations of this new approach. The pioneering American psychologist William James commented that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJames is the father of psychology in America, but he also made contributions to educational psychology. In his famous series of lectures \"Talks to Teachers on Psychology\", published in 1899, James defines education as \"the organization of acquired habits of conduct and tendencies to behavior\". He states that teachers should \"train the pupil to behavior\" so that he fits into the social and physical world. Teachers should also realize the importance of habit and instinct. They should present information that is clear and interesting and relate this new information and material to things the student already knows about. He also addresses important issues such as attention, memory, and association of ideas.\nAlfred Binet.\nAlfred Binet published \"Mental Fatigue\" in 1898, in which he attempted to apply the experimental method to educational psychology. In this experimental method he advocated for two types of experiments, experiments done in the lab and experiments done in the classroom. In 1904 he was appointed the Minister of Public Education. This is when he began to look for a way to distinguish children with developmental disabilities. Binet strongly supported special education programs because he believed that \"abnormality\" could be cured. The Binet-Simon test was the first intelligence test and was the first to distinguish between \"normal children\" and those with developmental disabilities. Binet believed that it was important to study individual differences between age groups and children of the same age. He also believed that it was important for teachers to take into account individual students' strengths and also the needs of the classroom as a whole when teaching and creating a good learning environment. He also believed that it was important to train teachers in observation so that they would be able to see individual differences among children and adjust the curriculum to the students. Binet also emphasized that practice of material was important. In 1916 Lewis Terman revised the Binet-Simon so that the average score was always 100. The test became known as the Stanford-Binet and was one of the most widely used tests of intelligence. Terman, unlike Binet, was interested in using intelligence test to identify gifted children who had high intelligence. In his longitudinal study of gifted children, who became known as the Termites, Terman found that gifted children become gifted adults.\nEdward Thorndike.\nEdward Thorndike (1874\u20131949) supported the scientific movement in education. He based teaching practices on empirical evidence and measurement. Thorndike developed the theory of instrumental conditioning or the law of effect. The law of effect states that associations are strengthened when it is followed by something pleasing and associations are weakened when followed by something not pleasing. He also found that learning is done a little at a time or in increments, learning is an automatic process and its principles apply to all mammals. Thorndike's research with Robert Woodworth on the theory of transfer found that learning one subject will only influence your ability to learn another subject if the subjects are similar. This discovery led to less emphasis on learning the classics because they found that studying the classics does not contribute to overall general intelligence. Thorndike was one of the first to say that individual differences in cognitive tasks were due to how many stimulus-response patterns a person had rather than general intellectual ability. He contributed word dictionaries that were scientifically based to determine the words and definitions used. The dictionaries were the first to take into consideration the users' maturity level. He also integrated pictures and easier pronunciation guide into each of the definitions. Thorndike contributed arithmetic books based on learning theory. He made all the problems more realistic and relevant to what was being studied, not just to improve the general intelligence. He developed tests that were standardized to measure performance in school-related subjects. His biggest contribution to testing was the CAVD intelligence test which used a multidimensional approach to intelligence and was the first to use a ratio scale. His later work was on programmed instruction, mastery learning, and computer-based learning:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJohn Dewey.\nJohn Dewey (1859\u20131952) had a major influence on the development of progressive education in the United States. He believed that the classroom should prepare children to be good citizens and facilitate creative intelligence. He pushed for the creation of practical classes that could be applied outside of a school setting. He also thought that education should be student-oriented, not subject-oriented. For Dewey, education was a social experience that helped bring together generations of people. He stated that students learn by doing. He believed in an active mind that was able to be educated through observation, problem-solving, and enquiry. In his 1910 book \"How We Think\", he emphasizes that material should be provided in a way that is stimulating and interesting to the student since it encourages original thought and problem-solving. He also stated that material should be relative to the student's own experience.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJean Piaget.\nJean Piaget (1896\u20131980) was one of the most powerful researchers in of developmental psychology during the 20th century. He developed the theory of cognitive development. The theory stated that intelligence developed in four different stages. The stages are the sensorimotor stage from birth to 2 years old, the preoperational state from 2 to 7 years old, the concrete operational stage from 7 to 10 years old, and the formal operational stage from 12 years old and up. He also believed that learning was constrained to the child's cognitive development. Piaget influenced educational psychology because he was the first to believe that cognitive development was important and something that should be paid attention to in education. Most of the research on Piagetian theory was carried out by American educational psychologists.\n1920\u2013present.\nThe number of people receiving a high school and college education increased dramatically from 1920 to 1960. Because very few jobs were available to teens coming out of eighth grade, there was an increase in high school attendance in the 1930s. The progressive movement in the United States took off at this time and led to the idea of progressive education. John Flanagan, an educational psychologist, developed tests for combat trainees and instructions in combat training. In 1954 the work of Kenneth Clark and his wife on the effects of segregation on black and white children was influential in the Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education. From the 1960s to present day, educational psychology has switched from a behaviorist perspective to a more cognitive-based perspective because of the influence and development of cognitive psychology at this time.\nJerome Bruner.\nJerome Bruner is notable for integrating Piaget's cognitive approaches into educational psychology. He advocated for discovery learning where teachers create a problem solving environment that allows the student to question, explore and experiment. In his book \"The Process of Education\" Bruner stated that the structure of the material and the cognitive abilities of the person are important in learning. He emphasized the importance of the subject matter. He also believed that how the subject was structured was important for the student's understanding of the subject and that it was the goal of the teacher to structure the subject in a way that was easy for the student to understand. In the early 1960s, Bruner went to Africa to teach math and science to school children, which influenced his view as schooling as a cultural institution. Bruner was also influential in the development of MACOS, , which was an educational program that combined anthropology and science. The program explored human evolution and social behavior. He also helped with the development of the head start program. He was interested in the influence of culture on education and looked at the impact of poverty on educational development.\nBenjamin Bloom.\nBenjamin Bloom (1903\u20131999) spent over 50 years at the University of Chicago, where he worked in the department of education. He believed that all students can learn. He developed the taxonomy of educational objectives. The objectives were divided into three domains: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor. The cognitive domain deals with how we think. It is divided into categories that are on a continuum from easiest to more complex. The categories are knowledge or recall, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. The affective domain deals with emotions and has 5 categories. The categories are receiving phenomenon, responding to that phenomenon, valuing, organization, and internalizing values. The psychomotor domain deals with the development of motor skills, movement, and coordination and has 7 categories that also go from simplest to most complex. The 7 categories of the psychomotor domain are perception, set, guided response, mechanism, complex overt response, adaptation, and origination. The taxonomy provided broad educational objectives that could be used to help expand the curriculum to match the ideas in the taxonomy. The taxonomy is considered to have a greater influence internationally than in the United States. Internationally, the taxonomy is used in every aspect of education from the training of the teachers to the development of testing material. Bloom believed in communicating clear learning goals and promoting an active student. He thought that teachers should provide feedback to the students on their strengths and weaknesses. Bloom also did research on college students and their problem-solving processes. He found that they differ in understanding the basis of the problem and the ideas in the problem. He also found that students differ in process of problem-solving in their approach and attitude toward the problem.\nNathaniel Gage.\nNathaniel Gage (1917\u20132008) is an important figure in educational psychology as his research focused on improving teaching and understanding the processes involved in teaching. He edited the book \"Handbook of Research on Teaching\" (1963), which helped develop early research in teaching and educational psychology. Gage founded the Stanford Center for Research and Development in Teaching, which contributed research on teaching as well as influencing the education of important educational psychologists.\nPerspectives.\nBehavioral.\nApplied behavior analysis, a research-based science utilizing behavioral principles of operant conditioning, is effective in a range of educational settings. For example, teachers can alter student behavior by systematically rewarding students who follow classroom rules with praise, stars, or tokens exchangeable for sundry items. Despite the demonstrated efficacy of awards in changing behavior, their use in education has been criticized by proponents of self-determination theory, who claim that praise and other rewards undermine intrinsic motivation. There is evidence that tangible rewards decrease intrinsic motivation in specific situations, such as when the student already has a high level of intrinsic motivation to perform the goal behavior. But the results showing detrimental effects are counterbalanced by evidence that, in other situations, such as when rewards are given for attaining a gradually increasing standard of performance, rewards enhance intrinsic motivation. Many effective therapies have been based on the principles of applied behavior analysis, including pivotal response therapy which is used to treat autism spectrum disorders.\nCognitive.\nAmong current educational psychologists, the cognitive perspective is more widely held than the behavioral perspective, perhaps because it admits causally related mental constructs such as traits, beliefs, memories, motivations, and emotions. Cognitive theories claim that memory structures determine how information is perceived, processed, stored, retrieved and forgotten. Among the memory structures theorized by cognitive psychologists are separate but linked visual and verbal systems described by Allan Paivio's dual coding theory. Educational psychologists have used dual coding theory and cognitive load theory to explain how people learn from multimedia presentations.\nThe spaced learning effect, a cognitive phenomenon strongly supported by psychological research, has broad applicability within education. For example, students have been found to perform better on a test of knowledge about a text passage when a second reading of the passage is delayed rather than immediate (see figure). Educational psychology research has confirmed the applicability to the education of other findings from cognitive psychology, such as the benefits of using mnemonics for immediate and delayed retention of information.\nProblem solving, according to prominent cognitive psychologists, is fundamental to learning. It resides as an important research topic in educational psychology. A student is thought to interpret a problem by assigning it to a schema retrieved from long-term memory. A problem students run into while reading is called \"activation.\" This is when the student's representations of the text are present during working memory. This causes the student to read through the material without absorbing the information and being able to retain it. When working memory is absent from the reader's representations of the working memory, they experience something called \"deactivation.\" When deactivation occurs, the student has an understanding of the material and is able to retain information. If deactivation occurs during the first reading, the reader does not need to undergo deactivation in the second reading. The reader will only need to reread to get a \"gist\" of the text to spark their memory. When the problem is assigned to the wrong schema, the student's attention is subsequently directed away from features of the problem that are inconsistent with the assigned schema. The critical step of finding a mapping between the problem and a pre-existing schema is often cited as supporting the centrality of analogical thinking to problem-solving.\nCognitive view of intelligence.\nEach person has an individual profile of characteristics, abilities, and challenges that result from predisposition, learning, and development. These manifest as individual differences in intelligence, creativity, cognitive style, motivation, and the capacity to process information, communicate, and relate to others. The most prevalent disabilities found among school age children are attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), learning disability, dyslexia, and speech disorder. Less common disabilities include intellectual disability, hearing impairment, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and blindness.\nAlthough theories of intelligence have been discussed by philosophers since Plato, intelligence testing is an invention of educational psychology and is coincident with the development of that discipline. Continuing debates about the nature of intelligence revolve on whether it can be characterized by a single factor known as general intelligence, multiple factors (e.g., Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences), or whether it can be measured at all. In practice, standardized instruments such as the Stanford-Binet IQ test and the WISC are widely used in economically developed countries to identify children in need of individualized educational treatment. Children classified as gifted are often provided with accelerated or enriched programs. Children with identified deficits may be provided with enhanced education in specific skills such as phonological awareness. In addition to basic abilities, the individual's personality traits are also important, with people higher in conscientiousness and hope attaining superior academic achievements, even after controlling for intelligence and past performance.\nDevelopmental.\nDevelopmental psychology, and especially the psychology of cognitive development, opens a special perspective for educational psychology. This is so because education and the psychology of cognitive development converge on a number of crucial assumptions. First, the psychology of cognitive development defines human cognitive competence at successive phases of development. Education aims to help students acquire knowledge and develop skills that are compatible with their understanding and problem-solving capabilities at different ages. Thus, knowing the students' level on a developmental sequence provides information on the kind and level of knowledge they can assimilate, which, in turn, can be used as a frame for organizing the subject matter to be taught at different school grades. This is the reason why Piaget's theory of cognitive development was so influential for education, especially mathematics and science education. In the same direction, the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development suggest that in addition to the concerns above, sequencing of concepts and skills in teaching must take account of the processing and working memory capacities that characterize successive age levels.\nSecond, the psychology of cognitive development involves understanding how cognitive change takes place and recognizing the factors and processes which enable cognitive competence to develop. Education also capitalizes on cognitive change, because the construction of knowledge presupposes effective teaching methods that would move the student from a lower to a higher level of understanding. Mechanisms such as reflection on actual or mental actions vis-\u00e0-vis alternative solutions to problems, tagging new concepts or solutions to symbols that help one recall and mentally manipulate them are just a few examples of how mechanisms of cognitive development may be used to facilitate learning.\nFinally, the psychology of cognitive development is concerned with individual differences in the organization of cognitive processes and abilities, in their rate of change, and in their mechanisms of change. The principles underlying intra- and inter-individual differences could be educationally useful, because knowing how students differ in regard to the various dimensions of cognitive development, such as processing and representational capacity, self-understanding and self-regulation, and the various domains of understanding, such as mathematical, scientific, or verbal abilities, would enable the teacher to cater for the needs of the different students so that no one is left behind.\nConstructivist.\nConstructivism is a category of learning theory in which emphasis is placed on the agency and prior \"knowing\" and experience of the learner, and often on the social and cultural determinants of the learning process. Educational psychologists distinguish individual (or psychological) constructivism, identified with Piaget's theory of cognitive development, from social constructivism. The social constructivist paradigm views the context in which the learning occurs as central to the learning itself. It regards learning as a process of enculturation. People learn by exposure to the culture of practitioners. They observe and practice the behavior of practitioners and 'pick up relevant jargon, imitate behavior, and gradually start to act in accordance with the norms of the practice'. So, a student learns to become a mathematician through exposure to mathematician using tools to solve mathematical problems. So in order to master a particular domain of knowledge it is not enough for students to learn the concepts of the domain. They should be exposed to the use of the concepts in authentic activities by the practitioners of the domain.\nA dominant influence on the social constructivist paradigm is Lev Vygotsky's work on sociocultural learning, describing how interactions with adults, more capable peers, and cognitive tools are internalized to form mental constructs. \"Zone of Proximal Development\" (ZPD) is a term Vygotsky used to characterize an individual's mental development. He believed that tasks individuals can do on their own do not give a complete understanding of their mental development. He originally defined the ZPD as \u201cthe distance between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more capable peers.\u201d He cited a famous example to make his case. Two children in school who originally can solve problems at an eight-year-old developmental level (that is, typical for children who were age 8) might be at different developmental levels. If each child received assistance from an adult, one was able to perform at a nine-year-old level and one was able to perform at a twelve-year-old level. He said \"This difference between twelve and eight, or between nine and eight, is what we call \"the zone of proximal development.\"\" He further said that the ZPD \"defines those functions that have not yet matured but are in the process of maturation, functions that will mature tomorrow but are currently in an embryonic state.\" The zone is bracketed by the learner's current ability and the ability they can achieve with the aid of an instructor of some capacity.\nVygotsky viewed the ZPD as a better way to explain the relation between children's learning and cognitive development. Prior to the ZPD, the relation between learning and development could be boiled down to the following three major positions: 1) Development always precedes learning (e.g., constructivism): children first need to meet a particular maturation level before learning can occur; 2) Learning and development cannot be separated, but instead occur simultaneously (e.g., behaviorism): essentially, learning is development; and 3) learning and development are separate, but interactive processes (e.g., gestaltism): one process always prepares the other process, and vice versa. Vygotsky rejected these three major theories because he believed that learning should always precede development in the ZPD. According to Vygotsky, through the assistance of a more knowledgeable other, a child can learn skills or aspects of a skill that go beyond the child's actual developmental or maturational level. The lower limit of ZPD is the level of skill reached by the child working independently (also referred to as the child's developmental level). The upper limit is the level of potential skill that the child can reach with the assistance of a more capable instructor. In this sense, the ZPD provides a prospective view of cognitive development, as opposed to a retrospective view that characterizes development in terms of a child's independent capabilities. The advancement through and attainment of the upper limit of the ZPD is limited by the instructional and scaffolding-related capabilities of the more knowledgeable other (MKO). The MKO is typically assumed to be an older, more experienced teacher or parent, but often can be a learner's peer or someone their junior. The MKO need not even be a person, it can be a machine or book, or other source of visual and/or audio input.\nElaborating on Vygotsky's theory, Jerome Bruner and other educational psychologists developed the important concept of instructional scaffolding, in which the social or information environment offers supports for learning that are gradually withdrawn as they become internalized.\nJean Piaget's Cognitive Development.\nJean Piaget was interested in how an organism adapts to its environment. Piaget hypothesized that infants are born with a schema operating at birth that he called \"reflexes\". Piaget identified four stages in cognitive development. The four stages are sensorimotor stage, pre-operational stage, concrete operational stage, and formal operational stage.\nConditioning and learning.\nTo understand the characteristics of learners in childhood, adolescence, adulthood, and old age, educational psychology develops and applies theories of human development. Often represented as stages through which people pass as they mature, developmental theories describe changes in mental abilities (cognition), social roles, moral reasoning, and beliefs about the nature of knowledge.\nFor example, educational psychologists have conducted research on the instructional applicability of Jean Piaget's theory of development, according to which children mature through four stages of cognitive capability. Piaget hypothesized that children are not capable of abstract logical thought until they are older than about 11 years, and therefore younger children need to be taught using concrete objects and examples. Researchers have found that transitions, such as from concrete to abstract logical thought, do not occur at the same time in all domains. A child may be able to think abstractly about mathematics but remain limited to concrete thought when reasoning about human relationships. Perhaps Piaget's most enduring contribution is his insight that people actively construct their understanding through a self-regulatory process.\nPiaget proposed a developmental theory of moral reasoning in which children progress from a na\u00efve understanding of morality based on behavior and outcomes to a more advanced understanding based on intentions. Piaget's views of moral development were elaborated by Lawrence Kohlberg into a stage theory of moral development. There is evidence that the moral reasoning described in stage theories is not sufficient to account for moral behavior. For example, other factors such as modeling (as described by the social cognitive theory of morality) are required to explain bullying.\nRudolf Steiner's model of child development interrelates physical, emotional, cognitive, and moral development in developmental stages similar to those later described by Piaget.\nDevelopmental theories are sometimes presented not as shifts between qualitatively different stages, but as gradual increments on separate dimensions. Development of epistemological beliefs (beliefs about knowledge) have been described in terms of gradual changes in people's belief in: certainty and permanence of knowledge, fixedness of ability, and credibility of authorities such as teachers and experts. People develop more sophisticated beliefs about knowledge as they gain in education and maturity.\nMotivation.\nMotivation is an internal state that activates, guides and sustains behavior. Motivation can have several impacting effects on how students learn and how they behave towards subject matter:\nEducational psychology research on motivation is concerned with the volition or will that students bring to a task, their level of interest and intrinsic motivation, the personally held goals that guide their behavior, and their belief about the causes of their success or failure. As intrinsic motivation deals with activities that act as their own rewards, extrinsic motivation deals with motivations that are brought on by consequences or punishments. A form of attribution theory developed by Bernard Weiner describes how students' beliefs about the causes of academic success or failure affect their emotions and motivations. For example, when students attribute failure to lack of ability, and ability is perceived as uncontrollable, they experience the emotions of shame and embarrassment and consequently decrease effort and show poorer performance. In contrast, when students attribute failure to lack of effort, and effort is perceived as controllable, they experience the emotion of guilt and consequently increase effort and show improved performance.\nThe self-determination theory (SDT) was developed by psychologists Edward Deci and Richard Ryan. SDT focuses on the importance of in driving human behavior and posits inherent growth and development tendencies. It emphasizes the degree to which an individual's behavior is self-motivated and self-determined. When applied to the realm of education, the self-determination theory is concerned primarily with promoting in students an interest in learning, a value of education, and a confidence in their own capacities and attributes.\nMotivational theories also explain how learners' goals affect the way they engage with academic tasks. Those who have \"mastery goals\" strive to increase their ability and knowledge. Those who have \"performance approach goals\" strive for high grades and seek opportunities to demonstrate their abilities. Those who have \"performance avoidance\" goals are driven by fear of failure and avoid situations where their abilities are exposed. Research has found that mastery goals are associated with many positive outcomes such as persistence in the face of failure, preference for challenging tasks, creativity, and intrinsic motivation. Performance avoidance goals are associated with negative outcomes such as poor concentration while studying, disorganized studying, less self-regulation, shallow information processing, and test anxiety. Performance approach goals are associated with positive outcomes, and some negative outcomes such as an unwillingness to seek help and shallow information processing.\nLocus of control is a salient factor in the successful academic performance of students. During the 1970s and '80s, Cassandra B. Whyte did significant educational research studying locus of control as related to the academic achievement of students pursuing higher education coursework. Much of her educational research and publications focused upon the theories of Julian B. Rotter in regard to the importance of internal control and successful academic performance. Whyte reported that individuals who perceive and believe that their hard work may lead to more successful academic outcomes, instead of depending on luck or fate, persist and achieve academically at a higher level. Therefore, it is important to provide education and counseling in this regard.\nTechnology.\nInstructional design, the systematic design of materials, activities, and interactive environments for learning, is broadly informed by educational psychology theories and research. For example, in defining learning goals or objectives, instructional designers often use a taxonomy of educational objectives created by Benjamin Bloom and colleagues. Bloom also researched mastery learning, an instructional strategy in which learners only advance to a new learning objective after they have mastered its prerequisite objectives. Bloom discovered that a combination of mastery learning with one-to-one tutoring is highly effective, producing learning outcomes far exceeding those normally achieved in classroom instruction. Gagn\u00e9, another psychologist, had earlier developed an influential method of task analysis in which a terminal learning goal is expanded into a hierarchy of learning objectives connected by prerequisite relationships.\nThe following list of technological resources incorporate computer-aided instruction and intelligence for educational psychologists and their students:\nTechnology is essential to the field of educational psychology, not only for the psychologist themselves as far as testing, organization, and resources, but also for students. Educational psychologists who reside in the K-12 setting focus most of their time on special education students. It has been found that students with disabilities learning through technology such as iPad applications and videos are more engaged and motivated to learn in the classroom setting. Liu et al. explain that learning-based technology allows for students to be more focused, and learning is more efficient with learning technologies. The authors explain that learning technology also allows for students with social-emotional disabilities to participate in distance learning.\nApplications.\nTeaching.\nResearch on classroom management and pedagogy is conducted to guide teaching practice and form a foundation for teacher education programs. The goals of classroom management are to create an environment conducive to learning and to develop students' self-management skills. More specifically, classroom management strives to create positive teacher-student and peer relationships, manage student groups to sustain on-task behavior, and use counseling and other psychological methods to aid students who present persistent psychosocial problems.\nIntroductory educational psychology is a commonly required area of study in most North American teacher education programs. When taught in that context, its content varies, but it typically emphasizes learning theories (especially cognitively oriented ones), issues about motivation, assessment of students' learning, and classroom management. A developing gives more detail about the educational psychology topics that are typically presented in preservice teacher education.\nCounseling.\nTraining.\nIn order to become an educational psychologist, students can complete an undergraduate degree of their choice. They then must go to graduate school to study education psychology, counseling psychology, or school counseling. Most students today are also receiving their doctoral degrees in order to hold the \"psychologist\" title. Educational psychologists work in a variety of settings. Some work in university settings where they carry out research on the cognitive and social processes of human development, learning and education. Educational psychologists may also work as consultants in designing and creating educational materials, classroom programs and online courses. Educational psychologists who work in K\u201312 school settings (closely related are school psychologists in the US and Canada) are trained at the master's and doctoral levels. In addition to conducting assessments, school psychologists provide services such as academic and behavioral intervention, counseling, teacher consultation, and crisis intervention. However, school psychologists are generally more individual-oriented towards students.\nMany high schools and colleges are increasingly offering educational psychology courses, with some colleges offering it as a general education requirement. Similarly, colleges offer students opportunities to obtain a Ph.D. in educational psychology.\nWithin the UK, students must hold a degree that is accredited by the British Psychological Society (either undergraduate or at the master's level) before applying for a three-year doctoral course that involves further education, placement, and a research thesis.\nIn recent years, many university training programs in the US have included curriculum that focuses on issues of race, gender, disability, trauma, and poverty, and how those issues affect learning and academic outcomes. A growing number of universities offer specialized certificates that allow professionals to work and study in these fields (i.e. autism specialists, trauma specialists).\nEmployment outlook.\nAnticipated to grow by 18\u201326%, employment for psychologists in the United States is expected to grow faster than most occupations in 2014. One in four psychologists is employed in educational settings. In the United States, the median salary for psychologists in primary and secondary schools is US$58,360 as of May 2004.\nIn recent decades, the participation of women as professional researchers in North American educational psychology has risen dramatically.\nMethods of research.\nAs opposed to some other fields of educational research, quantitative methods are the predominant mode of inquiry in educational psychology, but qualitative and mixed-methods studies are also common. Educational psychology, as much as any other field of psychology relies on a balance of observational, correlational, and experimental study designs. Given the complexities of modeling dependent data and psychological variables in school settings, educational psychologists have been at the forefront of the development of several common statistical tools, including psychometric methods, meta-analysis, regression discontinuity and latent variable modeling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10333", "revid": "34997143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10333", "title": "EFTPOS", "text": "Type of payment system\nElectronic funds transfer at point of sale (EFTPOS; ) is a type of payment transaction in which electronic funds transfers (EFT) are processed at a point of sale (POS) system or payment terminal usually via payment methods such as payment cards (debit cards, credit cards or gift cards). EFTPOS technology was developed during the 1980s. \nAs a payment network.\nIn Australia and New Zealand, EFTPOS is also the brand name for the interbank electronic payment system network used for facilitating eftpos types of payments. Other countries use different brand names for their EFTPOS systems, such as NETS in Singapore or Interlink in the United States. Since the early 2010s, country specific EFTPOS systems have been overtaken by global EMV based systems with contactless payments or QR code payment systems.\nThe payment cards used by EFTPOS systems are plastic cards complying with ISO/IEC 7810 ID-1 standard that have a bank card number conforming with the ISO/IEC 7812 numbering standard.\nHistory.\nEFTPOS technology originated in the United States in 1981 and was rolled out in 1982. Initially, a number of nationwide systems were set up, such as \"Interlink\", which were limited to participating correspondent banking relationships, not being linked to each other. Consumers and merchants were slow to accept it, and there was minimal marketing. As a result, growth and market penetration of EFTPOS was minimal in the US up to the turn of the century.\nIn a short time, other countries adopted the EFTPOS technology, these systems were limited to the national borders. Each country adopted various interbank co-operative models. In Australia, in 1984 Westpac was the first major Australian bank to implement an EFTPOS system, at BP petrol stations. In New Zealand that same year Bank of New Zealand was the first bank to introduced an EFTPOS system, initially at Shell petrol stations. The other major banks in Australia implemented EFTPOS systems during 1984, initially with petrol stations. The banks' existing debit and credit cards (but only allowed to access debit accounts) were used in the EFTPOS systems. In 1985, the State Bank of Victoria developed the capacity to host connect individual ATMS and helped create the ATM (Financial) Network. Banks started to link their EFTPOS systems to provide access for all customers across all EFTPOS devices. Cards issued by all banks could then be used at all EFTPOS terminals nationally, but debit cards issued in other countries could not. Prior to 1986, the Australian banks organised a widespread uniform credit card, called Bankcard, which had been in existence since 1974. There was a dispute between the banks whether Bankcard (or credit cards in general) should be permitted into the proposed EFTPOS system. At that time several banks were actively promoting MasterCard and Visa credit cards. Store cards and proprietary cards were shut out of the new system.\nSince 2002, the use of EFTPOS has grown significantly, and it has become the standard payment method, displacing the use of cash. Subsequently, networks facilitating the process of money transfer and payment settlement between the consumer and the merchant grew from a small number of nationwide systems to the majority of payment processing transactions. For EFTPOS, USA based systems allow the use of debit cards or credit cards.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, eftpos is the name of a proprietary domestic debit payment system launched in the 1980s, owned by eftpos Payments Australia Limited (ePAL) (now Australian Payments Network) that accepts bankcards or debit cards at POS \"point of sale\"\" terminals, ATMs and most recently, online via eCommerce. \nIn 2021, eftpos joined BPAY Group and NPP Australia under Australian Payments Plus (AP+) following ACCC authorisation of the amalgamation.\nNot all merchants provide EFTPOS facilities, but those who wish to accept EFTPOS payments must enter an agreement with one of the many (originally seven) merchant service providers, which rent an EFTPOS terminal to the merchant. ePal also sets the EFTPOS interchange fee. For credit cards to be accepted by a merchant a separate agreement must be entered into with each credit card company, each of which has its own flexible merchant fee rate. Eftpos machines for merchants are provided by larger banks and specialists such as Live eftpos.\nThe clearing arrangements for EFTPOS are managed by Australian Payments Clearing Association (APCA). The system for ATM and EFTPOS interchanges is called Issuers and Acquirers Community (formerly Consumer Electronic Clearing System; CECS) also called CS3. CECS required authorisations from the Australian Competition &amp; Consumer Commission (ACCC), which was obtained in 2001 and reaffirmed in 2009. ATM and EFTPOS clearances are the made under individual bilateral arrangements between the institutions involved.\nDebit cards.\nAustralian financial institutions provide their customers with a plastic card, which can be used as a debit card or as an ATM card, and sometimes as a credit card. The card merely provides the means by which a customer's linked bank or other accounts can be accessed using an EFTPOS terminal or ATM. These cards can also be used on some vending machines and other automatic payment mechanisms, such as ticket vending machines.\nEach Australian bank has given a different name to its debit cards, such as:\nSome banks offer alternative debit card facilities to their customers using the Visa or MasterCard clearance system. For example, St George Bank offers a Visa Debit Card, as does the National Australia Bank. The main difference with regular debit cards is that these cards can be used outside Australia where the respective credit card is accepted.\nThose merchants that enter the EFTPOS payment system must accept debit cards issued by any Australian bank, and some also accept various credit cards and other cards. Some merchants set minimum transaction amounts for EFTPOS transactions, which can be different for debit and credit card transactions. Some merchants impose a surcharge on the use of EFTPOS. These can vary between merchants and on the type of card being used, and generally are not imposed on debit card transactions, and widely not on MasterCard and Visa credit card transactions.\nA feature of a debit card is that an EFTPOS transaction will only be accepted if there is an available credit balance in the bank cheque or savings account linked to the card.\nAustralian debit cards normally cannot be used outside Australia. They can only be used outside Australia if they carry the MasterCard/Maestro/Cirrus or Visa/Plus or other similar logos, in which case the non-Australian transaction will be processed through those transaction systems. Similarly, non-Australian debit and credit cards can only be used at Australian EFTPOS terminals or ATMs if they have these logos or the MasterCard or Visa logos. Diners Club and/or American Express cards will be accepted only if the merchant has an agreement with those card companies, or increasingly if the merchant has modern alternative payment options available for those cards, such as through PayPal. The Discover Card is accepted in Australia as a Diners Club card.\nIn addition, credit card companies issue prepaid cards which act like generic gift cards, which are anonymous and not linked to any bank accounts. These cards are accepted by merchants who accept credit cards and are processed through the EFTPOS terminal in the same way as credit cards.\nCash out.\nA number of merchants permit customers using a debit card to withdraw cash as part of the EFTPOS transaction. In Australia, this facility (known as debit card cashback in many other countries) is known as \"cash out\". For the merchant, cash out is a way of reducing their net cash takings, saving on banking of cash. There is no additional cost to the merchant in providing cash out because banks charge a merchant a debit card transaction fee per EFTPOS transaction, and not on the transaction value. Cash out is a facility provided by the merchant, and not the bank, so the merchant can limit or vary how much cash can be withdrawn at a time, or suspend the facility at any time. When available, cash out is convenient for the customer, who can bypass having to visit a bank branch or ATM. Cash out is also cheaper for the customer, since only one bank transaction is involved. For people in some remote areas, cash out may be the only way they can withdraw cash from their personal accounts. However, most merchants who provide the facility set a relatively low limit on cash out, generally $50, and some also charge for the service. Some merchants in Australia only allow cash out with the purchase of goods; other merchants allow cash out whether or not customers buy any goods. Cash out is not available in association with credit card sales because on credit card transactions the merchant is charged a percentage commission based on the transaction value, and also because cash withdrawals are treated differently from purchase transactions by the credit card company. (However, though inconsistent with a merchant's agreement with each credit card company, the merchant may treat a cash withdrawal as part of an ordinary credit card sale.)\nCardholder verification.\nEFTPOS transactions involving a debit, credit or prepaid card are primarily authenticated via the entry of a personal identification number (PIN) at the point of sale. Historically, these transactions were authenticated by the merchant using the cardholder's signature, as signed on their receipt. However, merchants had become increasingly lax in enforcing this verification, resulting in an increase in fraud. Australian banks have since deployed chip and PIN technology using the global EMV card standard; as of 1 August 2014, Australian merchants no longer accept signatures on transactions by domestic customers at point of sale terminals.\nAs a further security measure, if a user enters an incorrect PIN three times, the card may be locked out of EFTPOS and require reactivation over the phone or at a bank branch. In the case of an ATM, the card will not be returned, and the cardholder will need to visit the branch to retrieve the card, or request a new card to be issued.\nAll debit cards now have a magnetic stripe on which is encoded the card's service codes, consisting of three-digit values. These codes are used to convey instructions to merchant terminals on how a card should be processed. The first digit indicates if a card can be used internationally or is valid for domestic use only. It is also used to signal if the card is chip-enabled. The second digit indicates if the transaction must be sent online for authorisation always or if transactions that are below floor limit can take place without authorisation. The third digit is used to indicate the preferred card verification method (e.g., PIN) and the environment where the card can be used (e.g., at point of sale only). Merchant terminals are required to recognise and act on service codes or send all transactions for online authorisation.\nContactless smart card.\nIn the late 2000s, MasterCard and Visa introduced contactless smart debit cards under the brand names MasterCard PayPass and Visa payWave. These payments are made using either electronic payment networks separate from the regular EFTPOS payment networks, or newer EFTPOS with tap sensors, and is an alternative to the previous swipe or chip systems. These networks are operated by MasterCard and Visa, and not by the banks as is the EFTPOS network, through EFTPOS Payments Australia Limited (ePAL).\nThese cards are based on EMV technology and contain a RFID chip and antenna loop embedded in the plastic of the card. To pay using this system, a customer passes the card within 4\u00a0cm of a reader at a merchant checkout. Using this method, for transactions under a specified limit, the customer does not need to authenticate their identity by PIN entry or signature, as on a regular EFTPOS machine. For transactions over the above limit, PIN verification is required.\nThe facility is only available for cards branded with the MasterCard PayPass or Visa payWave logos, indicating that they have the system-permitted embedded chip. ANZ launched an ATM solution based on Visa payWave in 2015, where the customer taps the card on a reader installed at the ATM and inserts their PIN to finalise cash withdrawals. Since 2018, these ATMs work with Apple Pay and Google Pay as well, where a customer taps their NFC-enabled phone instead of their card. Bank debit cards and other credit cards do not currently offer a contactless payment facility. ePAL is developing a contactless payment system for debit cards based on EMV technology as well as an extension of debit cards for use for on-line transactions, and a mobile payment system. Using contactless debit cards on tap-and-go terminals routes the transaction through the more expensive credit card system instead of the EFTPOS route, adding to the cost to the merchant, and ultimately the consumer.\nHistory.\nThe name and logo for EFTPOS in Australia were originally owned by Shiyombo Makasa and were trade marks from 1986 until 1991. The ownership was for convenience and all the banks used the name and logo (commonly called \"fat-E\") on their cards and advertising. By mid July 1986, all major banks and retailers have agreed to implement eftpos.\nIn 1991, dialup EFTPOS was conceived by Key Corp (John Wood) and deployment of dialup commenced in 1993. Until 1993, communications, connections and transactions between banks, ATM banks and EFTPOS devices where conducted via leased lines (a specific power assisted communication line that detects any attempt to tamper with it) but in 1993, mobile wireless EFTPOS was conceived by Dynamic Data Systems (H. Daniel Elbaum). In 1995, Dynamic Data Systems and the banking industry worked together to implement, certify and introduce protocols and standards for cellular networks, and by 1998, the use of mobile EFTPOS began to appear in Australia.\nIn 2006, Commonwealth Bank and MasterCard ran a six-month trial of the contactless smart card system PayPass in Sydney and Wollongong, \nsupplementing the traditional EFTPOS swipe or chip system. The system was rolled out across Australia in 2009; other systems being rolled out are Westpac Bank's MasterCard PayPass and Visa payWave branded cards.\nIn April 2009, a company, \u201cEFTPOS Payments Australia Ltd\u201d (ePal) was formed to manage and promote the EFTPOS system in Australia. ePal regulation commenced in January 2011. The initial members of EFTPOS Payments Australia Ltd were:\nThe current members of EFTPOS Payments Australia Ltd are:\nIn Australia, store cards have been excluded from participation in the EFTPOS and ATM systems. Consequently, several larger store accounts have entered into co-branding arrangements with credit card networks for the store-based accounts to be widely accepted. This was the case with Coles (previously, Coles-Myer) which co-branded with Mastercard, Myer which co-branded with Visa, and David Jones which co-branded with American Express. Woolworths organised its credit card called Everyday Rewards (now Woolworths Money) which initially was partnered with credit provider HSBC Bank, but changed on 26 October 2014 to Macquarie Bank.\nUsage.\nAs of June 2018, there were 961,247 EFTPOS terminals in Australia and 30,940 ATMs. Of the terminals, over 60,000 offered cash withdrawals. In 2010, 183 million transactions, worth A$12 billion, were made using Australian EFTPOS terminals per month.\nIn 2011, these figures increased to 750,000 terminals, with 325,000 individual businesses, processing over 2 billion transactions with combined value of approximately $131 billion for the year.\nNetwork.\nThe EFT network in Australia is made up of seven proprietary networks in which peers have interchange agreements, making an effective single network. A merchant who wishes to accept EFTPOS payments must enter an agreement with one of the seven merchant service providers, which rent the terminal to the merchant. All the merchant's EFTPOS transactions are processed through one of these gateways. Some of these peers are:\nOther organisations may have peering agreements with the one or more of the central peers.\nThe network uses the AS 2805 protocol, which is closely related to ISO 8583.\nNew Zealand.\nEFTPOS is highly popular in New Zealand. The system is operated by two providers, Worldline New Zealand (formerly Electronic Transaction Services Limited then Paymark Limited) which processes 75% of all electronic transactions in New Zealand, and EFTPOS New Zealand. Although the term eftpos is popularly used to describe the system, EFTPOS is a trademark of EFTPOS New Zealand, the smaller of the two providers. Both providers run an interconnected financial network that allows the processing of not only of debit cards at point of sale terminals but also credit cards and charge cards.\nHistory.\nIn New Zealand, a trial scheme of EFTPOS began in 1984, with a terminal in a Shell petrol station connected to a bank computer. The Bank of New Zealand introduced EFTPOS in 1985, with the first merchant terminals being installed through a pilot scheme at petrol stations.\nIn 1989 the system was officially launched and two providers owned by the major banks now run the system. The larger of the two providers, Worldline New Zealand (formerly Paymark limited Electronic Transaction Services Limited), is owned by French company Ingenico, following its sale in 2018 by ASB Bank, Westpac, Bank of New Zealand and ANZ Bank New Zealand (formerly ANZ National Bank). The second is operated by EFTPOS New Zealand, which is fully owned by VeriFone Systems, following its sale by ANZ New Zealand in December 2012.\n1995 was the first deployment of cellular EFTPOS in New Zealand, by Dynamic Data Systems.\nDuring July 2006 the five billionth EFTPOS payment was processed, and at the start of 2012 the 10 billionth transaction was processed.\nUsage.\nEFTPOS is highly popular in New Zealand, and being used for about 60% of all retail transactions. In 2009, there were 200 EFTPOS transactions per person.\nPaymark process over 900 million transactions (worth over NZ$48 billion) yearly. More than 75,000 merchants and over 110,000 EFTPOS terminals are connected to Paymark.\nSingapore.\nIn Singapore, NETS was founded in 1985 by a consortium of the country's local banks of DBS Bank, OCBC Bank and United Overseas Bank (UOB) to establish the debit network and drive the adoption of electronic payments in Singapore.\nHistory.\nNETS was officially launched on 18 January 1986, allowing millions of ATM card holders in Singapore to make transactions through the initial network of 195 terminals located in various retail outlets and by 1993, consumer spending through NETS reached S$1.14 billion. Since the late-2010s, NETS has also adopted QR code payments through NETS QR, which is also integrated with SGQR.\nMobile EFTPOS.\nIn 1996, mobile EFTPOS arrived, with hotels in Singapore installing systems in 1997 and the first example of a pizza delivery in Singapore accepting Visa card via cellular payment in 1998, which was a collaboration between Singnet, Visa, Citibank, and Dynamic Data Systems, beginning the rollout of mobile systems in Asia. By 2004, cellular based EFTPOS infrastructure had really taken off, and by 2010, cellular EFTPOS had become the standard for the global market.\nUsage.\nThe nationwide acceptance infrastructure is the largest in Singapore and includes 54,000 Unified Point-of-Sale (Unified POS) terminals and 94,000 QR acceptance points. In 2011, NETS\u2019 debit system was designated as national payment system by the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10334", "revid": "30585864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10334", "title": "Epistle to the Laodiceans", "text": "Possible writing of Paul the Apostle\nThe Epistle to the Laodiceans is a possible writing of Paul the Apostle, the original existence of which is inferred from an instruction in the Epistle to the Colossians that the congregation should send their letter to the believing community in Laodicea, and likewise obtain a copy of the letter \"from Laodicea\" (, \"ek Laodikeas\").\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And when this letter has been read among you, have it read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and see that you read also the letter from Laodicea.\nThis letter is generally regarded as being lost. However, some ancient sources, such as Hippolytus of Rome, and some modern scholars consider that the epistle \"from Laodicea\" was never a lost epistle, but rather Paul re-using one of his other letters (the most common candidate is the canonical Epistle to the Ephesians), just as he asks for the copying and forwarding of the Letter to Colossians to Laodicea. An additional complication is that many scholars do not believe that Colossians was itself written by Paul, in which case the indicated letter might itself not be Pauline even if it existed.\nAt least two ancient texts claimed to be the missing \"Epistle to the Laodiceans\" are known to have existed. These are generally considered, both in antiquity and by modern scholarship, to be attempts to supply a forged copy of a lost document. The sole version that survived is a Latin (\"Epistle to the Laodiceans\"), first witnessed in Codex Fuldensis. The Latin epistle is actually a short compilation of verses from other Pauline epistles, principally Philippians. It too is generally considered a \"clumsy forgery\" and an attempt to fill the \"gap\" suggested by Colossians 4:16. Despite this, it was part of medieval Bibles in the Western, Latin church for centuries, with it only becoming clearly non-canonical after it was rejected by both the Protestant reformers and the Catholic Council of Trent in the early modern era.\nMention in Colossians 4:16.\nPaul, the earliest known Christian author, wrote several letters (or epistles) in Greek to various churches. Paul apparently dictated all his epistles through a secretary (or amanuensis), but wrote the final few paragraphs of each letter by his own hand. Many survived and are included in the New Testament, but others are known to have been lost. The Epistle to the Colossians, which is traditionally attributed to Paul, includes a seeming reference to a presumably Pauline letter in the possession of the church at Laodicea. An interlinear gloss of Colossians 4:16 reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe last words can be interpreted as \"letter written to the Laodiceans\", but also \"letter written from Laodicea\". The New American Standard Bible (NASB) translates this verse in the latter manner, and a few translations in other languages also translate it likewise, such as the Dutch Statenvertaling: \"When this letter is read among you, have it also read in the church of the Laodiceans; and you, for your part read my letter (that is coming) from Laodicea.\" Those who read here \"letter written to the Laodiceans\" that, at the time that the Epistle to the Colossians was written, Paul also had written an epistle to the community of believers in Laodicea. It could also perhaps be interpreted as Paul recommending a letter produced by the Laodicean community, not himself.\nAnother possibility exists: that no such epistle to the Laodiceans was ever created, despite the verse in Colossians. Colossians is considered a deutero-Pauline work by many scholars (meaning a letter written in Paul's name by an associate or someone else), based on a number of differences in writing style and assumed situation from Paul's earlier letters. While this is explained by some as due to increasing use of a secretary (amanuensis) later in Paul's life, a more skeptical approach is to suggest that Colossians was not written by Paul at all. If Colossians was forged in Paul's name, then the reference to the other letter to the Laodiceans could merely be a verisimilitude\u2014a small detail to make the letter seem real. The letter would never have been sent to Colossae in this scenario, but rather used as an example of Paul's doctrine to win a theological dispute far from Colossae, and there would be nobody to recognize that the claimed letter to the Laodiceans was non-existent.\nIdentification with canonical epistles.\nEpistle to the Ephesians.\nSome scholars have suggested that it refers to the canonical Epistle to the Ephesians, contending that it was a circular letter (an \"encyclical\") to be read to many churches in the Laodicean area. Others dispute this view.\nEpistle to Philemon.\nOthers have suggested that it refers to the canonical Epistle to Philemon.\nWorks purporting to be the lost text.\nMarcionite Epistle to the Laodiceans.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...there is current also (an epistle) to the Laodiceans, another to the Alexandrians, forged in Paul's name for the sect of Marcion, and several others, which cannot be received in the catholic Church; for it will not do to mix gall with honey.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to the Muratorian fragment, Marcion's canon contained an epistle called the Epistle to the Laodiceans which is commonly thought to be a forgery written to conform to his own point of view. This is not at all clear, however, since none of the text survives. It is not known what this letter might have contained. Most scholars believe it was explicitly Marcionist in its outlook, hence its condemnation.\nOthers believe it to be the Epistle to the Ephesians; the proto-Orthodox author Tertullian accuses Marcion's group of using an edited version of Ephesians which was referred to as the Epistle to the Laodiceans.\nLatin Vulgate Epistle to the Laodiceans.\nA claimed Epistle to the Laodiceans from Paul exists in Latin. It is quite short at only 20 verses. It is mentioned by various writers from the fourth century onwards, notably by Pope Gregory the Great; the oldest known copy of this epistle is in the Fulda manuscript written for Victor of Capua in 546. Possibly due to Gregory's endorsement of it, many Western Latin Bibles contained this epistle for centuries afterward. Pre-modern Arabic and Slavonic translations were created from the Latin text. It also featured in early English Bibles: John Wycliffe included Paul's letter to the Laodiceans in his Bible translation from the Latin to English. Medieval German Bibles included it as well, until it was excluded from the Luther Bible in the 1500s. However, the epistle is essentially unknown in Eastern Christianity, where it was never used or published; the Second Council of Nicea of 787 rejected it. There is no evidence of a Greek text, the language Paul wrote in. The text was almost unanimously considered pseudepigraphal when the Christian Biblical canon was decided upon, and does not appear in any Greek copies of the Bible at all, nor is it known in Syriac or other versions. Jerome, who wrote the Latin Vulgate translation, wrote in the 4th century, \"it is rejected by everyone\".\nScholars are unanimous in concurring with Jerome and believing this epistle forged long after Paul's death. Additionally, the epistle is derided for having no theological content. It includes Pauline greetings and farewells, but does not appear to have any substantive content: it does not address any problem or advocate for any position. Rudolf Knopf and Gustav Kruger wrote that the epistle is \"nothing other than a worthless patching together of [canonical] Pauline passages and phrases, mainly from the Epistle to the Philippians.\" M. R. James wrote that \"It is not easy to imagine a more feebly constructed cento of Pauline phrases.\" Wilhelm Schneemelcher was \"amazed that it ever found a place in Bible manuscripts.\" However, it evidently gained a certain degree of respect, having appeared in over 100 surviving early Latin copies of the Bible. According to \"Biblia Sacra iuxta vulgatam versionem\", there are Latin Vulgate manuscripts containing this epistle dating between the 6th and 12th century, including Latin manuscripts F (Codex Fuldensis), M, Q, B, D (Ardmachanus), C, and Lambda.\nThe apocryphal epistle is generally considered a transparent attempt to supply this supposed lost sacred document. Some scholars, such as Wolfgang Speyer, suggest that it was created in response to the Marcionite epistle; it would be easier to reject the Marcionite version if the \"real\" Epistle to the Laodiceans could be provided to counter it.\nAn obvious question is if the Latin epistle and the Marcionite epistle are actually the same document: is it possible that the Muratorian fragment was referring to an early version of the Latin epistle? While the occasional scholar advocates for this (Adolf von Harnack for one), most scholars consider this unlikely, because the Latin epistle does not include any Marcionite theology or character.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10335", "revid": "300949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10335", "title": "Extermination camp", "text": "Nazi death camps established to systematically murder\nNazi Germany used six extermination camps (), also called death camps (), or killing centers (), in Central Europe, primarily in German-occupied Poland, during World War II to systematically murder over 2.7 million people\u2014mainly Jews\u2014in the Holocaust. The victims of death camps were primarily murdered by gassing, either in permanent installations constructed for this specific purpose, or by means of gas vans. The six extermination camps were Che\u0142mno, Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobibor, Treblinka, Majdanek and Auschwitz-Birkenau. Extermination through labour was also used at the Auschwitz and Majdanek death camps. Millions were also murdered in concentration camps, in the Aktion T4, or directly on site. Additionally, camps operated by Nazi allies have also been described as extermination or death camps, most notably the Jasenovac concentration camp in the Independent State of Croatia.\nThe National Socialists made no secret of the existence of concentration camps as early as 1933, as they served as a deterrent to resistance. The extermination camps, on the other hand, were kept strictly secret. To disguise the mass murder, even in internal correspondence, they only referred to it as \"special treatment,\" \"cleansing,\" \"resettlement,\" or \"evacuation.\" The SS referred to the extermination camps as concentration camps. Their internal organizational structures were also largely identical. The term \"extermination camp\" was only used later in historical scholarship and in court cases and serves to further categorize the camps.\nThe idea of mass extermination with the use of stationary facilities, to which the victims were taken by train, was the result of earlier Nazi experimentation with chemically manufactured poison gas during the secretive Aktion T4 euthanasia programme against hospital patients with mental and physical disabilities. The technology was adapted, expanded, and applied in wartime to unsuspecting victims of many ethnic and national groups; the Jews were the primary target, accounting for over 90 percent of extermination camp victims. The genocide of the Jews of Europe was Nazi Germany's \"Final Solution to the Jewish question\".\nBackground.\n Two of the four crematoria at Auschwitz II (Birkenau)\nAfter the invasion of Poland in September 1939, the secret Aktion T4 euthanasia programme\u00a0\u2013 the systematic murder of German, Austrian and Polish hospital patients with mental or physical disabilities authorized by Hitler\u00a0\u2013 was initiated by the \"SS\" in order to eliminate \"life unworthy of life\" (), a Nazi designation for people who they considered to have no right to life. In 1941, the experience gained in the secretive killing of these hospital patients led to the creation of extermination camps for the implementation of the Final Solution. By then, the Jews were already confined to new ghettos and interned in Nazi concentration camps along with other targeted groups, including Roma, and the Soviet POWs. The Nazi's so-called \"Final Solution of the Jewish Question\", based on the systematic murder of Europe's Jews by gassing, began during Operation Reinhard, after the June 1941 onset of the Nazi\u2013Soviet war. The adoption of the gassing technology by Nazi Germany was preceded by a wave of hands-on killings carried out by the SS , who followed the army during Operation Barbarossa on the Eastern Front.\nThe camps designed specifically for the mass gassings of Jews were established in the months following the Wannsee Conference chaired by Reinhard Heydrich in January 1942 in which the principle was made clear that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated. Responsibility for the logistics was to be handled by the programme administrator, Adolf Eichmann.\nOn 13 October 1941, the SS and Police Leader Odilo Globocnik stationed in Lublin received an oral order from Heinrich Himmler\u00a0\u2013 anticipating the fall of Moscow\u00a0\u2013 to start immediate construction work on the killing centre at Be\u0142\u017cec in the General Government territory of occupied Poland. Notably, the order preceded the Wannsee Conference by three months,&lt;ref name=\"M/MPwB\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; but the gassings at Che\u0142mno north of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a using gas vans began already in December, under Herbert Lange. The camp at Be\u0142\u017cec was operational by March 1942, with leadership brought in from Germany under the guise of \u00a0(OT). By mid-1942, two more death camps had been built on Polish lands for Operation Reinhard: Sobib\u00f3r (ready in May 1942) under the command of Franz Stangl, and Treblinka (operational by July 1942) under Irmfried Eberl from T4, the only doctor to have served in such a capacity. Auschwitz concentration camp was fitted with brand new gas chambers in March 1942. Majdanek had them built in September.\nDefinition.\nThe Nazis distinguished between extermination and concentration camps. The terms \"extermination camp\" () and \"death camp\" () were interchangeable in the Nazi system, each referring to camps whose primary function was genocide. Six camps meet this definition, though extermination of people happened at every sort of concentration camp or transit camp; the use of the term extermination camp with its exclusive purpose is carried over from Nazi terminology. The six camps were Che\u0142mno, Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka, Majdanek and Auschwitz (also called Auschwitz-Birkenau).\nDeath camps were designed specifically for the systematic killing of people delivered en masse by the Holocaust trains. Deportees were normally murdered within a few hours of arrival at Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka. The Reinhard extermination camps were under Globocnik's direct command; each of them was run by 20 to 35 men from the branch of the , augmented by about one hundred Trawnikis\u00a0\u2013 auxiliaries mostly from Soviet Ukraine, and up to one thousand slave labourers each. The Jewish men, women and children were delivered from the ghettos for \"special treatment\" in an atmosphere of terror by uniformed police battalions from both Orpo and Schupo.\nDeath camps differed from concentration camps located in Germany proper, such as Bergen-Belsen, Oranienburg, Ravensbr\u00fcck, and Sachsenhausen, which were prison camps set up prior to World War II for people defined as 'undesirable'. From March 1936, all Nazi concentration camps were managed by the (the Skull Units, SS-TV), who operated extermination camps from 1941 as well. An SS anatomist, Johann Kremer, after witnessing the gassing of victims at Birkenau, wrote in his diary on 2 September 1942: \"Dante's Inferno seems to me almost a comedy compared to this. They don't call Auschwitz the camp of annihilation for nothing!\" The distinction was evident during the Nuremberg trials, when Dieter Wisliceny (a deputy to Adolf Eichmann) was asked to name the camps, and he identified Auschwitz and Majdanek as such. Then, when asked, \"How do you classify the camps Mauthausen, Dachau, and Buchenwald?\", he replied, \"They were normal concentration camps, from the point of view of the department of Eichmann.\"\nMurders were not limited to these camps. Sites for the \"Holocaust by Bullets\" are marked on the map of The Holocaust in Occupied Poland by white skulls (without the black background), where people were lined up next to a ravine and shot by soldiers with rifles. Sites included Bronna G\u00f3ra, Ponary, Rumbula and others.\nIrrespective of round-ups for extermination camps, the Nazis abducted millions of foreigners for slave labour in other types of camps, which provided perfect cover for the extermination programme. Prisoners represented about a quarter of the total workforce of the Reich, with mortality rates exceeding 75 percent due to starvation, disease, exhaustion, executions, and physical brutality.\nHistory.\nIn the early years of World War II, the Jews were primarily sent to forced labour camps and ghettoised, but from 1942 onward they were deported to the extermination camps under the guise of \"resettlement\". For political and logistical reasons, the most infamous Nazi German killing factories were built in occupied Poland, where most of the intended victims lived; Poland had the greatest Jewish population in Nazi-controlled Europe. On top of that, the new death camps outside of Germany's prewar borders could be kept secret from the German civil populace.\nPure extermination camps.\nDuring the initial phase of the Final Solution, gas vans producing poisonous exhaust fumes were developed in the occupied Soviet Union (USSR) and at the Che\u0142mno extermination camp in occupied Poland, before being used elsewhere. The killing method was based on experience gained by the SS during the secretive programme of involuntary euthanasia. There were two types of death chambers operating during the Holocaust.\nUnlike at Auschwitz, where cyanide-based Zyklon B was used to exterminate trainloads of prisoners under the guise of \"relocation\", the camps at Treblinka, Be\u0142\u017cec, and Sobib\u00f3r, built during Operation Reinhard (October 1941\u00a0\u2013 November 1943), used lethal exhaust fumes produced by large internal combustion engines. The three killing centres of were constructed predominantly for the extermination of Poland's Jews trapped in the Nazi ghettos. At first, the victims' bodies were buried with the use of crawler excavators, but they were later exhumed and incinerated in open-air pyres to hide the evidence of genocide in what became known as .\nThe six camps considered to be purely for extermination were Che\u0142mno extermination camp, Be\u0142\u017cec extermination camp, Sobibor extermination camp, Treblinka extermination camp, Majdanek extermination camp and Auschwitz extermination camp (also called Auschwitz-Birkenau).\nWhereas the Auschwitz II (Auschwitz\u2013Birkenau) and Majdanek camps were parts of a labor camp complex, the Che\u0142mno and Operation Reinhard death camps (that is, Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka) were built exclusively for the rapid extermination of entire communities of people (primarily Jews) within hours of their arrival. All were constructed near branch lines that linked to the Polish railway system, with staff members transferring between locations. These camps had almost identical design: they were several hundred metres in length and width, and were equipped with only minimal staff housing and support installations not meant for the victims crammed into the railway transports.\nThe Nazis deceived the victims upon their arrival, telling them that they were at a temporary transit stop, and would soon continue to German (work camps) farther to the east. Selected able-bodied prisoners delivered to the death camps were not immediately killed, but instead were pressed into labor units called to help with the extermination process by removing corpses from the gas chambers and burning them.\nConcentration and extermination camps.\nAt the camps of Operation Reinhard, including Be\u0142\u017cec, Sobib\u00f3r, and Treblinka, trainloads of prisoners were murdered immediately after arrival in gas chambers designed exclusively for that purpose. The mass killing facilities were developed at about the same time inside the Auschwitz II-Birkenau subcamp of a forced labour complex, and at the Majdanek concentration camp. In most other camps prisoners were selected for slave labor first; they were kept alive on starvation rations and made available to work as required. Auschwitz, Majdanek, and Jasenovac were retrofitted with Zyklon B gas chambers and crematoria buildings as the time went on, remaining operational until war's end in 1945.\nExtermination procedure.\nHeinrich Himmler visited the outskirts of Minsk in 1941 to witness a mass shooting. He was told by the commanding officer there that the shootings were proving psychologically damaging to those being asked to pull the triggers. Thus, Himmler concluded that another method of mass killing was required. Auschwitz Commandant Rudolf H\u00f6ss claimed in his memoir that many were \"unable to endure wading through blood any longer\" and went mad or killed themselves, but he gives no specific numbers to support this claim.\nThe Nazis had first used gassing with carbon monoxide cylinders to murder 70,000 disabled people in Germany in what they called a 'euthanasia programme' to disguise that mass murder was taking place. Despite the lethal effects of carbon monoxide, this was seen as unsuitable for use in the East due to the cost of transporting the carbon monoxide in cylinders.\nEach extermination camp operated differently, yet each had designs for quick and efficient industrialized killing. While H\u00f6ss was away on an official journey in late August 1941 his deputy, Karl Fritzsch, tested out an idea. At Auschwitz clothes infested with lice were treated with crystallised prussic acid. The crystals were made to order by the IG Farben chemicals company for which the brand name was Zyklon B. Once released from their container, Zyklon B crystals in the air released a lethal cyanide gas. Fritzsch tried out the effect of Zyklon B on Soviet POWs, who were locked up in cells in the basement of the bunker for this experiment. H\u00f6ss on his return was briefed and impressed with the results and this became the camp strategy for extermination as it was also to be at Majdanek. Besides gassing, the camp guards continued killing prisoners via mass shooting, starvation, torture, etc.\nGassings.\nSS Kurt Gerstein of the Institute for Hygiene of the , told a Swedish diplomat during the war, about life in a death camp. He recounted that on 19 August 1942, he arrived at Be\u0142\u017cec extermination camp (which was equipped with carbon monoxide gas chambers) and was shown the unloading of 45 train cars filled with 6,700 Jews, many already dead. The rest were marched naked to the gas chambers, where:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Hackenholt was making great efforts to get the engine running. But it doesn't go. Captain Wirth comes up. I can see he is afraid, because I am present at a disaster. Yes, I see it all and I wait. My stopwatch showed it all, 50 minutes, 70 minutes, and the diesel [engine] did not start. The people wait inside the gas chambers. In vain. They can be heard weeping, \"like in the synagogue\", says Professor Pfannenstiel, his eyes glued to a window in the wooden door. Furious, Captain Wirth lashes the Ukrainian (Trawniki) assisting Hackenholt twelve, thirteen times, in the face. After 2 hours and 49 minutes\u00a0\u2013 the stopwatch recorded it all\u00a0\u2013 the diesel started. Up to that moment, the people shut up in those four crowded chambers were still alive, four times 750 persons, in four times 45 cubic meters. Another 25 minutes elapsed. Many were already dead, that could be seen through the small window, because an electric lamp inside lit up the chamber for a few moments. After 28 minutes, only a few were still alive. Finally, after 32 minutes, all were dead\u00a0... Dentists [then] hammered out gold teeth, bridges, and crowns. In the midst of them stood Captain Wirth. He was in his element, and, showing me a large can full of teeth, he said: \"See, for yourself, the weight of that gold! It's only from yesterday, and the day before. You can't imagine what we find every day\u00a0\u2013 dollars, diamonds, gold. You'll see for yourself!\"\u2014\u200a\nAuschwitz Camp Commandant Rudolf H\u00f6ss reported that the first time Zyklon B pellets were used on the Jews, many suspected they were to be killed\u00a0\u2013 despite having been deceived into believing they were to be deloused and then returned to the camp. As a result, the Nazis identified and isolated \"difficult individuals\" who might alert the prisoners, and removed them from the mass\u00a0\u2013 lest they incite revolt among the deceived majority of prisoners en route to the gas chambers. The \"difficult\" prisoners were led to a site out of view to be killed off discreetly.\nAccording to H\u00f6ss, enslaved prisoners, euphemistically called (Special Detachment), assisted in the process of extermination; they encouraged the Jews to undress and accompanied them into the gas chambers which were outfitted to appear as shower rooms (with nonworking water nozzles, and tile walls); and remained with the victims until just before the chamber door closed. To psychologically maintain the \"calming effect\" of the delousing deception, an SS man stood at the door until the end. The talked to the victims about life in the camp to pacify the suspicious ones, and hurried them inside; to that effect, they also assisted the aged and the very young in undressing. Many young mothers hid their infants beneath their piled clothes fearing that the delousing \"disinfectant\" might harm them. Camp Commandant H\u00f6ss reported that the \"men of the Special Detachment were particularly on the look-out for this\", and encouraged the women to take their children into the \"shower room\". Likewise, the comforted older children who might cry \"because of the strangeness of being undressed in this fashion\".\nYet, not every prisoner was deceived by such tactics; Commandant H\u00f6ss spoke of Jews \"who either guessed, or knew, what awaited them, nevertheless\u00a0... [they] found the courage to joke with the children, to encourage them, despite the mortal terror visible in their own eyes\". Some women would suddenly \"give the most terrible shrieks while undressing, or tear their hair, or scream like maniacs\"; these prisoners were taken away for execution by shooting. In such circumstances, others, meaning to save themselves at the gas chamber's threshold, betrayed the identities and \"revealed the addresses of those members of their race still in hiding\".\nOnce the door of the filled gas chamber was sealed, pellets of Zyklon B were dropped through special holes in the roof. Regulations required that the Camp Commandant supervise the preparations, the gassing (through a peephole), and the aftermath looting of the corpses. Commandant H\u00f6ss reported that the gassed victims \"showed no signs of convulsion\"; the Auschwitz camp physicians attributed that to the \"paralyzing effect on the lungs\" of the Zyklon B gas, which killed \"before\" the victim began suffering convulsions. The corpses were additionally found half-squatting, their skin discolored pink with red and green spots, with some foaming at the mouth or bleeding from their ears, exacerbated by the crowding in gas chambers.\nAs a matter of political training, some high-ranked Nazi Party leaders and SS officers were sent to Auschwitz\u2013Birkenau to witness the gassings. As the Auschwitz Camp Commandant Rudolf H\u00f6ss justified the extermination by explaining the need for \"the iron determination with which we must carry out Hitler's orders\".\nCorpse disposal.\nAfter the gassings, the removed the corpses from the gas chambers, then extracted any gold teeth. Initially, the victims were buried in mass graves, but were later cremated during in all camps of Operation Reinhard.\nThe was responsible for burning the corpses in the pits, stoking the fires, draining surplus body fat and turning over the \"mountain of burning corpses\u00a0... so that the draft might fan the flames\", wrote Commandant H\u00f6ss in his memoir while in the Polish custody. He was impressed by the diligence of prisoners from the so-called Special Detachment who carried out their duties despite their being well aware that they, too, would meet exactly the same fate in the end. At the Lazaret killing station they held the sick so they would never see the gun while being shot. They did it \"in such a matter-of-course manner that they might, themselves, have been the exterminators\", wrote H\u00f6ss. He further said that the men ate and smoked \"even when engaged in the grisly job of burning corpses which had been lying for some time in mass graves.\" They occasionally encountered the corpse of a relative, or saw them entering the gas chambers. According to H\u00f6ss, they were obviously shaken by this but \"it never led to any incident\". He mentioned the case of a who found the body of his wife, yet continued to drag corpses along \"as though nothing had happened\".\nAt Auschwitz, the corpses were incinerated in crematoria and the ashes either buried, scattered, or dumped in the river. At Sobib\u00f3r, Treblinka, Be\u0142\u017cec, and Che\u0142mno, the corpses were incinerated on pyres. The efficiency of industrialised murder at Auschwitz-Birkenau led to the construction of three buildings with crematoria designed by specialists from the firm J. A. Topf &amp; S\u00f6hne. They burned bodies 24 hours a day, and yet the death rate was at times so high that corpses also needed to be burned in open-air pits.&lt;ref name=\"B/G-199\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nVictims.\nThe estimated total number of people who were murdered in the six Nazi extermination camps is 2.7 million, according to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. All six camps are located in present-day Poland.\nDismantling and attempted concealment.\nThe Nazis attempted to either partially or completely dismantle the extermination camps in order to hide any evidence that people had been murdered there. This was an attempt to conceal not only the extermination process but also the buried remains. As a result of the secretive , the camps were dismantled by commandos of condemned prisoners, their records were destroyed, and the mass graves were dug up. Some extermination camps that remained uncleared of evidence were liberated by Soviet troops, who followed different standards of documentation and openness than the Western allies did.\nNonetheless Majdanek was captured nearly intact due to the rapid advance of the Soviet Red Army during Operation Bagration.\nCommemoration.\nIn the post-war period the government of the People's Republic of Poland created monuments at the extermination camp sites. These early monuments mentioned no ethnic, religious, or national particulars of the Nazi victims. The extermination camps sites have been accessible to everyone in recent decades. They are popular destinations for visitors from all over the world, especially the most infamous Nazi death camp, Auschwitz near the town of O\u015bwi\u0119cim. In the early 1990s, the Jewish Holocaust organisations debated with the Polish Catholic groups about \"What religious symbols of martyrdom are appropriate as memorials in a Nazi death camp such as Auschwitz?\" The Jews opposed the placement of Christian memorials such as the Auschwitz cross near Auschwitz I where mostly Poles were killed. The Jewish victims of the Holocaust were mostly killed at Auschwitz II Birkenau.\nThe March of the Living is organized in Poland annually since 1988. Marchers come from countries as diverse as Estonia, New Zealand, Panama, and Turkey.\nThe camps and Holocaust denial.\nHolocaust deniers or negationists are people and organizations who assert that the Holocaust did not occur, or that it did not occur in the historically recognized manner and extent. Holocaust deniers claim that the extermination camps were actually transit camps from which Jews were deported farther east. However, these theories are disproven by surviving German documents, which show that Jews were sent to the camps to be murdered.\nExtermination camp research is difficult because of extensive attempts by the SS and Nazi regime to conceal the existence of the extermination camps. The existence of the extermination camps is firmly established by testimonies of camp survivors and Final Solution perpetrators, material evidence (the remaining camps, etc.), Nazi photographs and films of the killings, and camp administration records.\nAwareness.\nIn 2017 a K\u00f6rber Foundation survey found that 40 percent of 14-year-olds in Germany did not know what Auschwitz was. A 2018 survey organized in the United States by the Claims Conference, United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, and others found that 66 percent of the American millennials who were surveyed (and 41 percent of all U.S. adults) did not know what Auschwitz was. In 2019, a survey of 1,100 Canadians found that 49 percent of them could not name any of the Nazi camps which were located in German-occupied Europe.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10336", "revid": "41670580", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10336", "title": "Enterprise", "text": "Enterprise (or the archaic spelling Enterprize) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEntertainment and media.\nNewspapers.\nAustralia\nUnited States\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10338", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10338", "title": "Excommunication", "text": "Censure used to deprive, suspend, or limit membership in a religious community\nExcommunication is an institutional act of religious censure used to deprive, suspend, or limit membership in a religious community or to restrict certain rights within it, in particular those of being in communion with other members of the congregation, and of receiving the sacraments.\nIt is practiced by all of the ancient churches (such as the Catholic Church, Oriental Orthodox churches and the Eastern Orthodox churches) as well as by other Christian denominations; however, it is also used more generally to refer to similar types of institutional religious exclusionary practices and shunning among other religious groups. The Amish have also been known to excommunicate members that were either seen or known for breaking rules, or questioning the church, a practice known as shunning. Jehovah's Witnesses use the term disfellowship to refer to their form of excommunication.\nThe word \"excommunication\" means putting a specific individual or group out of communion. In some denominations, excommunication includes spiritual condemnation of the member or group. Excommunication may involve banishment, shunning, and shaming, depending on the group, the offense that caused excommunication, or the rules or norms of the religious community. The grave act is often revoked in response to manifest repentance.\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nExcommunication among Bah\u00e1'\u00eds is rare and generally not used for transgressions of community standards, intellectual dissent, or conversion to other religions. Instead, it is the most severe punishment, reserved for suppressing organized dissent that threatens the unity of believers. \"Covenant-breaker\" is a term used by Bah\u00e1'\u00eds to refer to a person who has been excommunicated from the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed community for breaking the 'Covenant': actively promoting schism in the religion or otherwise opposing the legitimacy of the chain of succession of leadership.\nCurrently, the Universal House of Justice has the sole authority to declare a person a Covenant-breaker, and once identified, all Bah\u00e1'\u00eds are expected to shun them, even if they are family members. According to 'Abdu'l Baha Covenant-breaking is a contagious disease. The Bah\u00e1'\u00ed writings forbid association with Covenant-breakers and Bah\u00e1'\u00eds are urged to avoid their literature, thus providing an exception to the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed principle of \"independent investigation of truth\". Most Bah\u00e1'\u00eds are unaware of the small Bah\u00e1'\u00ed divisions that exist.\nChristianity.\nThe purpose of excommunication is to exclude from the church those members who have behaviors or teachings contrary to the beliefs of a Christian community (heresy). It aims to protect members of the church from abuses and allow the offender to recognize their error and repent.\nCatholic Church.\nWithin the Catholic Church, there are differences between the discipline of the majority Latin Church regarding excommunication and that of the Eastern Catholic Churches.\nLatin Church.\nExcommunication can be either (automatic, incurred at the moment of committing the offense for which canon law imposes that penalty) or (incurred only when imposed by a legitimate superior or declared as the sentence of an ecclesiastical court).\nThe Catholic Church teaches in the Council of Trent that \"excommunicated persons are not members of the Church, because they have been cut off by her sentence from the number of her children and belong not to her communion until they repent\".\nIn the papal bull (May 16, 1520), Pope Leo X condemned Luther's twenty-third proposition according to which \"excommunications are merely external punishments, nor do they deprive a man of the common spiritual prayers of the Church\". Pope Pius VI in (August 28, 1794) condemned the notion which maintained that the effect of excommunication is only exterior because of its own nature it excludes only from exterior communion with the Church, as if, said the pope, excommunication were not a spiritual penalty binding in heaven and affecting souls. The excommunicated person, being excluded from the society of the Church, still bears the indelible mark of Baptism and is subject to the jurisdiction of the Church. They are excluded from engaging in certain activities. These activities are listed in Canon 1331 \u00a71, and prohibit the individual from any ministerial participation in celebrating the sacrifice of the Eucharist or any other ceremonies of worship; celebrating or receiving the sacraments; or exercising any ecclesiastical offices, ministries, or functions.\nUnder current Catholic canon law, excommunicates remain bound by ecclesiastical obligations such as attending Mass, even though they are barred from receiving the Eucharist and from taking an active part in the liturgy (reading, bringing the offerings, etc.). \"Excommunicates lose rights, such as the right to the sacraments, but they are still bound to the obligations of the law; their rights are restored when they are reconciled through the remission of the penalty.\"\nThese are the only effects for those who have incurred a excommunication. For instance, a priest may not refuse Communion publicly to those who are under an automatic excommunication, as long as it has not been officially declared to have been incurred by them, even if the priest knows that they have incurred it\u2014although if the person's offence was a \"manifest grave sin\", then the priest is obliged to refuse their communion by canon 915. On the other hand, if the priest knows that excommunication has been imposed on someone or that an automatic excommunication has been declared (and is no longer merely an undeclared automatic excommunication), he is forbidden to administer Holy Communion to that person.\nIn the Catholic Church, excommunication is normally resolved by a declaration of repentance, profession of the Creed (if the offense involved heresy) and an Act of Faith, or renewal of obedience (if that was a relevant part of the offending act, i.e., an act of schism) by the excommunicated person and the lifting of the censure (absolution) by a priest or bishop empowered to do this. \"The absolution can be in the internal (private) forum only, or also in the external (public) forum, depending on whether scandal would be given if a person were privately absolved and yet publicly considered unrepentant.\"\nEastern Catholic Churches.\nIn the Eastern Catholic Churches, excommunication is imposed only by decree, never incurred automatically by excommunication. A distinction is made between minor and major excommunication. Those on whom minor excommunication has been imposed are excluded from receiving the Eucharist and can also be excluded from participating in the Divine Liturgy. They can even be excluded from entering a church when divine worship is being celebrated there. The decree of excommunication must indicate the precise effect of the excommunication and, if required, its duration.\nThose under major excommunication are in addition forbidden to receive not only the Eucharist but also the other sacraments, to administer sacraments or sacramentals, to exercise any ecclesiastical offices, ministries, or functions whatsoever, and any such exercise by them is null and void. They are to be removed from participation in the Divine Liturgy and any public celebrations of divine worship. They are forbidden to make use of any privileges granted to them and cannot be given any dignity, office, ministry, or function in the church, they cannot receive any pension or emoluments associated with these dignities etc., and they are deprived of the right to vote or to be elected.\nEastern Orthodox Church.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church, excommunication is the exclusion of a member from the Eucharist. It is not expulsion from the churches. This can happen for such reasons as not having confessed within that year; excommunication can also be imposed as part of a penitential period. It is generally done with the goal of restoring the member to full communion. Before an excommunication of significant duration is imposed, the bishop is usually consulted. The Eastern Orthodox do have a means of expulsion, by pronouncing anathema, but this is reserved only for acts of serious and unrepentant heresy. As an example of this, the Second Council of Constantinople in 553, in its eleventh capitula, declared: \"If anyone does not anathematize Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutyches and Origen, as well as their impious writings, as also all other heretics already condemned and anathematized by the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, and by the aforesaid four Holy Synods and [if anyone does not equally anathematize] all those who have held and hold or who in their impiety persist in holding to the end the same opinion as those heretics just mentioned: let him be anathema.\"\nLutheran churches.\nAlthough Lutheranism technically has an excommunication process, some denominations and congregations do not use it. In the Smalcald Articles Luther differentiates between the \"great\" and \"small\" excommunication. The \"small\" excommunication is simply barring an individual from the Lord's Supper and \"other fellowship in the church\". While the \"great\" excommunication excluded a person from both the church and political communities which he considered to be outside the authority of the church and only for civil leaders. A modern Lutheran practice is laid out in the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod's 1986 explanation to the Small Catechism, defined beginning at Questions No. 277\u2013284, in \"The Office of Keys\".\nMany Lutheran denominations operate under the premise that the entire congregation (as opposed to the pastor alone) must take appropriate steps for excommunication, and there are not always precise rules, to the point where individual congregations often set out rules for excommunicating laymen (as opposed to clergy). For example, churches may sometimes require that a vote must be taken at Sunday services; some congregations require that this vote be unanimous.\nIn the Church of Sweden and the Church of Denmark, excommunicated individuals are turned out from their parish in front of their congregation. They are not forbidden, however, to attend church and participate in other acts of devotion, although they are to sit in a place appointed by the priest (which was at a distance from others).\nThe Lutheran process, though rarely used, has created unusual situations in recent years due to its somewhat democratic excommunication process. One example was an effort to get serial killer Dennis Rader excommunicated from his denomination (the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America) by individuals who tried to \"lobby\" Rader's fellow church members into voting for his excommunication.\nAnglican Communion.\nChurch of England.\nThe Church of England does not have any specific canons regarding how or why a member can be excommunicated, although it has a canon according to which ecclesiastical burial may be refused to someone \"declared excommunicate for some grievous and notorious crime and no man to testify to his repentance\".\nThe punishment of imprisonment for being excommunicated from the Church of England was removed from English law in 1963.\nHistorian Christopher Hill found that, in pre-revolutionary England, excommunication was common but fell into disrepute because it was applied unevenly and could be avoided on payment of fines.\nEpiscopal Church of the United States of America.\nThe ECUSA is in the Anglican Communion, and shares many canons with the Church of England which would determine its policy on excommunication.\nReformed churches.\nIn the Reformed Churches, excommunication has generally been seen as the culmination of church discipline, which is one of the three marks of the Church. The Westminster Confession of Faith sees it as the third step after \"admonition\" and \"suspension from the sacrament of the Lord's Supper for a season.\" Yet, John Calvin argues in his \"Institutes of the Christian Religion\" that church censures do not \"consign those who are excommunicated to perpetual ruin and damnation\", but are designed to induce repentance, reconciliation and restoration to communion. Calvin notes, \"though ecclesiastical discipline does not allow us to be on familiar and intimate terms with excommunicated persons, still we ought to strive by all possible means to bring them to a better mind, and recover them to the fellowship and unity of the Church.\"\nAt least one modern Reformed theologian argues that excommunication is not the final step in the disciplinary process. Jay E. Adams argues that in excommunication, the offender is still seen as a brother, but in the final step they become \"as the heathen and tax collector\" (Matthew 18:17). Adams writes, \"Nowhere in the Bible is excommunication (removal from the fellowship of the Lord's Table, according to Adams) equated with what happens in step 5; rather, step 5 is called 'removing from the midst, handing over to Satan,' and the like.\"\nFormer Princeton president and theologian, Jonathan Edwards, addresses the notion of excommunication as \"removal from the fellowship of the Lord's Table\" in his treatise entitled \"The Nature and End of Excommunication\". Edwards argues:\n\"Particularly, we are forbidden such a degree of associating ourselves with (excommunicants), as there is in making them our guests at our tables, or in being their guests at their tables; as is manifest in the text, where we are commanded to have no company with them, no not to eat [...] That this respects not eating with them at the Lord's supper, but a common eating, is evident by the words, that the eating here forbidden, is one of the lowest degrees of keeping company, which are forbidden. Keep no company with such a one, saith the apostle, no not to eat \u2013 as much as to say, no not in so low a degree as to eat with him. But eating with him at the Lord's supper, is the very highest degree of visible Christian communion. Who can suppose that the apostle meant this: Take heed and have no company with a man, no not so much as in the highest degree of communion that you can have? Besides, the apostle mentions this eating as a way of keeping company which, however, they might hold with the heathen. He tells them, not to keep company with fornicators. Then he informs them, he means not with fornicators of this world, that is, the heathens; but, saith he, 'if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, etc. with such a one keep no company, no not to eat.' This makes it most apparent, that the apostle doth not mean eating at the Lord's table; for so, they might not keep company with the heathens, any more than with an excommunicated person\".\nMethodism.\nIn the Methodist Episcopal Church, individuals were able to be excommunicated following \"trial before a jury of his peers, and after having had the privilege of an appeal to a higher court\". Nevertheless, an excommunication could be lifted after sufficient penance.\nJohn Wesley, the founder of the Methodist Churches, excommunicated sixty-four members from the Newcastle Methodist society alone for the following reasons:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Allegheny Wesleyan Methodist Connection, in its 2014 \"Discipline\", includes \"homosexuality, lesbianism, bi-sexuality, bestiality, incest, fornication, adultery, and any attempt to alter one's gender by surgery\", as well as remarriage after divorce among its excommunicable offences.\nThe Evangelical Wesleyan Church, in its 2015 \"Discipline\", states that \"Any member of our church who is accused of neglect of the means of grace or other duties required by the Word of God, the indulgence of sinful tempers, words or actions, the sowing of dissension, or any other violation of the order and discipline of the church, may, after proper labor and admonition, be censured, placed on probation, or expelled by the official board of the circuit of which he is a member. If he request a trial, however, within thirty dates of the final action of the official board, it shall be granted.\"\nAnabaptist tradition.\nAmish.\nAmish communities practice variations of excommunication known as \"shunning\". This practice may include isolation from community events or the cessation of all communication.\nMennonites.\nMennonite communities use the \"ban\", separation and correction on baptized members that fall into sin. Separated members must be avoided or \"shunned\" until they repent and reform. Shunning must be done in the spirit of moderation and Christian charity; the aim is not to destroy but to reform the person.\nHutterites.\nHutterite communities use a form of excommunication called \"the ban\" on baptized members that fall into sin repeatedly.\nBaptists.\nFor Baptists, excommunication is used as a last resort by denominations and churches for members who do not want to repent of beliefs or behavior at odds with the confession of faith of the community. The vote of community members, however, can restore a person who has been excluded.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) practices excommunication as a penalty for those who commit serious sins, \"i.e.\", actions that significantly impair the name or moral influence of the church or pose a threat to other people. In 2020, the church ceased using the term \"excommunication\" and instead refers to \"withdrawal of membership\". According to the church leadership \"General Handbook\", the purposes of withdrawing membership or imposing membership restrictions are, (1) to help protect others; (2) to help a person access the redeeming power of Jesus Christ through repentance; and (3) to protect the integrity of the Church. The origins of LDS disciplinary procedures and excommunications are traced to a revelation Joseph Smith dictated on 9 February 1831, later canonized as Doctrine and Covenants, section 42 and codified in the \"General Handbook\".\nThe LDS Church also practices the lesser sanctions of private counsel and caution and informal and formal membership restrictions. (Informal membership restrictions was formerly known as \"probation\"; formal membership restrictions was formerly known as \"disfellowshipment\".)\nFormal membership restrictions are used for serious sins that do not rise to the level of membership withdrawal. Formal membership restriction denies some privileges but does not include a loss of church membership. Once formal membership restrictions are in place, persons may not take the sacrament or enter church temples, nor may they offer public prayers or sermons. Such persons may continue to attend most church functions and are allowed to wear temple garments, pay tithes and offerings, and participate in church classes if their conduct is orderly. Formal membership restrictions typically lasts for one year, after which one may be reinstated as a member in good standing.\nIn the more grievous or recalcitrant cases, withdrawal of membership becomes a disciplinary option. Such an action is generally reserved for what are seen as the most serious sins, including committing serious crimes such as murder, child abuse, and incest; committing adultery; involvement in or teaching of polygamy; involvement in homosexual conduct; apostasy; participation in an abortion; teaching false doctrine; or openly criticizing church leaders. The \"General Handbook\" states that formally joining another church constitutes apostasy and is worthy of membership withdrawal; however, merely attending another church does not constitute apostasy.\nA withdrawal of membership can occur only after a formal church membership council. Formerly called a \"disciplinary council\" or a \"church court\", the councils were renamed to avoid focusing on guilt and instead to emphasize the availability of repentance.\nThe decision to withdraw the membership of a Melchizedek priesthood holder is generally the province of the leadership of a stake. In such a disciplinary council, the stake presidency and, sometimes in more difficult cases, the stake high council attend. It is possible to appeal a decision of a stake membership council to the church's First Presidency.\nFor females and for male members not initiated into the Melchizedek priesthood, a ward membership council is held. In such cases, a bishop determines whether withdrawal of membership or a lesser sanction is warranted. He does this in consultation with his two counselors, with the bishop making the final determination after prayer. The decision of a ward membership council can be appealed to the stake president.\nThe following list of variables serves as a general set of guidelines for when membership withdrawal or lesser action may be warranted, beginning with those more likely to result in severe sanction:\nNotices of withdrawal of membership may be made public, especially in cases of apostasy, where members could be misled. However, the specific reasons for individual withdrawal of membership are typically kept confidential and are seldom made public by church leadership.\nThose who have their membership withdrawn lose the right to partake of the sacrament. Such persons are permitted to attend church meetings but participation is limited: they cannot offer public prayers, preach sermons, and cannot enter temples. Such individuals are also prohibited from wearing or purchasing temple garments and from paying tithes. A person whose membership has been withdrawn may be re-baptized after a waiting period of at least one year and sincere repentance, as judged by a series of interviews with church leaders.\nSome critics have charged that LDS Church leaders have used the threat of membership withdrawal to silence or punish church members and researchers who disagree with established policy and doctrine, who study or discuss controversial subjects, or who may be involved in disputes with local, stake leaders or general authorities; see, e.g., Brian Evenson, a former BYU professor and writer whose fiction came under criticism from BYU officials and LDS Leadership. Another notable case of excommunication from the LDS Church was the \"September Six\", a group of intellectuals and professors, five of whom were excommunicated and the sixth disfellowshipped. However, church policy dictates that local leaders are responsible for membership withdrawal, without influence from church headquarters. The church thus argues that this policy is evidence against any systematic persecution of scholars or dissenters. Data shows per-capita excommunication rates among the LDS Church have varied dramatically over the years, from a low of about 1 in 6,400 members in the early 1900s to one in 640 by the 1970s, an increase which has been speculatively attributed to \"informal guidance from above\" in enforcing the growing list of possible transgressions added to \"General Handbook\" editions over time.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses practice a form of excommunication, using the term \"disfellowshipping\", in cases where a member is believed to have unrepentantly committed one or more of several documented \"serious sins\".\nWhen a member confesses to, or is accused of, a \"serious sin\", a \"judicial committee\" of at least three elders is formed. This committee investigates the case and determines the magnitude of the sin committed. If the person is deemed guilty of a disfellowshipping offense, the committee then decides, on the basis of the person's attitude and \"works befitting repentance\".\nDisfellowshipping is a severing of friendly relationships between all Jehovah's Witnesses and the disfellowshipped person. Interaction with extended family is typically restricted to a minimum, such as presence at the reading of wills and providing essential care for the elderly. Within a household, typical family contact may continue, but without spiritual fellowship such as family Bible study and religious discussions. Parents of disfellowshipped minors living in the family home may continue to attempt to convince the child about the group's teachings. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that this form of discipline encourages the disfellowshipped individual to conform to biblical standards and prevents the person from influencing other members of the congregation.\nAlong with breaches of the Witnesses' moral code, openly disagreeing with the teachings of Jehovah's Witnesses is considered grounds for shunning. These persons are labeled as \"apostates\" and are described in Watch Tower Society literature as \"mentally diseased\". Descriptions of \"apostates\" appearing in the Witnesses literature have been the subject of investigation in the UK to determine if they violate religious hatred laws. Sociologist Andrew Holden claims many Witnesses who would otherwise defect because of disillusionment with the organization and its teachings, remain affiliated out of fear of being shunned and losing contact with friends and family members. Shunning employs what is known \"as relational aggression\" in psychological literature. When used by church members and member-spouse parents against excommunicant parents it contains elements of what psychologists call \"parental alienation\". Extreme shunning may cause trauma to the shunned (and to their dependents) similar to what is studied in the psychology of torture.\nDisassociation is a form of shunning where a member expresses verbally or in writing that they do not wish to be associated with Jehovah's Witnesses, rather than for having committed any specific 'sin'. Elders may also decide that an individual has disassociated, without any formal statement by the individual, by actions such as accepting a blood transfusion, or for joining another religious or military organization. Individuals who are deemed by the elders to have disassociated are given no right of appeal.\nEach year, congregation elders are instructed to consider meeting with disfellowshipped individuals to determine changed circumstances and encourage them to pursue reinstatement. Reinstatement is not automatic after a certain time period, nor is there a minimum duration; disfellowshipped persons may talk to elders at any time but must apply in writing to be considered for reinstatement into the congregation. Elders consider each case individually, and are instructed to ensure \"that sufficient time has passed for the disfellowshipped person to prove that his profession of repentance is genuine\". A judicial committee meets with the individual to determine their repentance, and if this is established, the person is reinstated into the congregation and may participate with the congregation in their formal ministry (such as house-to-house preaching).\nA Witness who has been formally reproved or reinstated cannot be appointed to any \"special privilege of service\" for at least one year. Serious sins involving child sex abuse permanently disqualify the sinner from appointment to any congregational \"privilege of service\", regardless of whether the sinner was convicted of any secular crime.\nChristadelphians.\nSimilarly to many groups having their origins in the 1830s Restoration Movement, Christadelphians call their form of excommunication \"disfellowshipping\", though they do not practice \"shunning\". Disfellowshipping can occur for moral reasons, changing beliefs, or (in some ecclesias) for not attending communion (referred to as \"the emblems\" or \"the breaking of bread\").\nIn such cases, the person involved is usually required to discuss the issues. If they do not conform, the church ('meeting' or 'ecclesia') is recommended by the management committee (\"Arranging Brethren\") to vote on disfellowshipping the person. These procedures were formulated 1863 onwards by early Christadelphians, and then in 1883 codified by Robert Roberts in \"A Guide to the Formation and Conduct of Christadelphian Ecclesias\" (colloquially \"The Ecclesial Guide\"). However Christadelphians justify and apply their practice not only from this document but also from passages such as the exclusion in 1Co.5 and recovery in 2Co.2.\nChristadelphians typically avoid the term \"excommunication\" which many associate with the Catholic Church; and may feel the word carries implications they do not agree with, such as undue condemnation and punishment, as well as failing to recognise the remedial intention of the measure.\nIn the case of adultery and divorce, the passage of time usually means a member can be restored if he or she wants to be. In the case of ongoing behaviour, cohabitation, homosexual activity, then the terms of the suspension have not been met.\nThe mechanics of \"refellowship\" follow the reverse of the original process; the individual makes an application to the \"ecclesia\", and the \"Arranging Brethren\" give a recommendation to the members who vote. If the \"Arranging Brethren\" judge that a vote may divide the ecclesia, or personally upset some members, they may seek to find a third party ecclesia which is willing to \"refellowship\" the member instead. According to the Ecclesial Guide a third party ecclesia may also take the initiative to \"refellowship\" another meeting's member. However this cannot be done unilaterally, as this would constitute heteronomy over the autonomy of the original ecclesia's members.\nSociety of Friends (Quakers).\nAmong many of the Society of Friends (Quakers) groups one is \"read out of meeting\" for behaviour inconsistent with the sense of the meeting. In Britain a meeting may record a minute of disunity. However it is the responsibility of each meeting, quarterly meeting, and yearly meeting, to act with respect to their own members. For example, during the Vietnam War many Friends were concerned about Friend Richard Nixon's position on war which seemed at odds with their beliefs; however, it was the responsibility of Nixon's own meeting, the East Whittier Meeting of Whittier, California, to act if indeed that meeting felt the leading. They did not.\nIn 17th- and 18th-Century North America, before the founding of abolitionist societies, Friends who too forcefully tried to convince their coreligionists of the evils of slavery were read out of meeting. Benjamin Lay was read out of the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting for this. During the American Revolution over 400 Friends were read out of meeting for their military participation or support.\nIglesia ni Cristo.\n practices expulsion of members it deems to have gravely sinned or gone against the teachings and doctrines of the church. The Sanggunian, the church's council, has jurisdiction to expel members from the church. People expelled by the church are referred to as \"dismissed\" (). Offenses that may be grounds for expulsion include marrying a non-member, having a romantic relationship with a non-member, becoming pregnant out of wedlock (unless the couple marries before the child is born) and most especially disagreeing with the church administration. An expelled member can be re-admitted by pledging obedience to the church administration and its rules, values and teachings.\nUnitarian Universalism.\nUnitarian Universalism, being a liberal religious group and a congregational denomination, has a wide diversity of opinions and sentiments. Nonetheless, Unitarian Universalists have had to deal with disruptive individuals. Congregations which had no policies on disruptive individuals have sometimes found themselves having to create such policies, up to (and including) expulsion.\nBy the late 1990s, several churches were using the West Shore UU Church's policy as a model. If someone is threatening, disruptive, or distracting from the appeal of the church to its membership, a church using this model has three recommended levels of response to the offending individual. While the first level involves dialogue between a committee or clergy member and the offender, the second and third levels involve expulsion, either from the church itself or a church activity.\nBuddhism.\nThere is no direct equivalent to excommunication in Buddhism. However, in the Theravadan monastic community monks can be expelled from monasteries for heresy or other acts. In addition, monks have four vows, called the four defeats, which are abstaining from sexual intercourse, stealing, murder, and lying about spiritual gains (e.g., having special power or ability to perform miracles). If any one is broken, the monk is automatically a layman again and can never become a monk in his or her current life.\nMost Japanese Buddhist sects hold ecclesiastical authority over their followers and have their own rules for expelling members of the sangha, lay or bishopric. The lay Japanese Buddhist organization S\u014dka Gakkai was expelled from the Nichiren Shoshu sect in 1991.\nHinduism.\nHinduism is too diverse to be seen as a homogenous and monolithic religion. It is often described an unorganised and syncretist religion with a conspicuous absence of any listed doctrines. There are multiple religious institutions (equivalent to Christian ecclesia) within Hinduism that teach slight variations of Dharma and Karma, hence Hinduism has no concept of excommunication and hence no Hindu may be ousted from the Hindu religion, though a person may easily lose caste status through gramanya for a very wide variety of infringements of caste prohibitions. This may or may not be recoverable. However, some of the modern organised sects within Hinduism may practice something equivalent to excommunication today, by ousting a person from their own sect.\nIn medieval and early-modern times (and sometimes even now) in South Asia, excommunication from one's \"caste\" (\"j\u0101ti\" or \"varna\") used to be practiced (by the caste-councils) and was often with serious consequences, such as abasement of the person's caste status and even throwing him into the sphere of the untouchables or bhangi. In the 19th century, a Hindu faced excommunication for going abroad, since it was presumed he/she would be forced to break caste restrictions and, as a result, become polluted.\nAfter excommunication, it would depend upon the caste-council whether they would accept any form of repentance (ritual or otherwise) or not. Such current examples of excommunication in Hinduism are often more political or social rather than religious, for example the excommunication of lower castes for refusing to work as scavengers in Tamil Nadu.\nAnother example of caste-related violence and discrimination occurred in the case of the Gupti Ismailis from the Hindu Kachhiya caste. Interestingly, Hindu members of this caste began prayers with the inclusion of the mantra \u201cOM, by the command, in the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful\u201d (\"om farm\u0101nj\u012b bi\u2019smi\u2019l-l\u0101h al-ra\u1e25m\u0101n al-ra\u1e25\u012bm\"), but never found it objectionable or Islamic. However, in the early 1930s, after some conflict with caste members due to their profession of allegiance to the Ismaili Imam, this group, known as the Guptis, were excommunicated from the caste completely as they appeared to be breaking caste solidarity. This was also significant for the Gupti community as, for the first time, they could be identified as a distinct group based on their religious persuasion. Some of the more daring Guptis also abandoned their former practice of pious circumspection (\"taqiyya\") as Hindus, claiming that since they had been excommunicated, the caste no longer had any jurisdiction over their actions.\nAn earlier example of excommunication in Hinduism is that of Shastri Yagnapurushdas, who voluntarily left and was later expelled from the Vadtal Gadi of the Swaminarayan Sampraday by the then Vadtal acharya in 1906. He went on to form his own institution, \"Bochasanwasi Swaminarayan Sanstha\" or \"BSS\" (now BAPS) claiming Gunatitanand Swami was the rightful spiritual successor to Swaminarayan.\nSikhism.\n\"Patit\" is a Sikh term which is sometimes translated into English as apostate. It refers to a person who initiated into Sikh religion, but violated the religious rules of Sikhi. The Sikh Rehat Maryada (Code of Conduct), Section Six states the transgressions which cause a person to become a \"patit\":\nThese four kurahit causes of apostasy were first listed by Guru Gobind Singh in his 52 hukams (commandments).\nIslam.\nSince there has been no universally and univocally recognized religious authority among the many Islamic denominations that have emerged throughout history, papal excommunication has no exact equivalent in Islam, at least insofar as the attitudes of any conflicting religious authorities with regard to an individual or another sect are judged to be coordinate, not subordinate to one another. Nonetheless, condemning heterodoxy and punishing heretics through shunning and ostracism is comparable with the practice in non-Catholic Christian faiths.\nIslamic theologians commonly employ two terms when describing measurements to be taken against schismatics and heresy: \u0647\u064e\u062c\u0652\u0631 (\"hajr\", \"abandoning\") and \u062a\u064e\u0643\u0652\u0641\u0650\u064a\u0631 (\"takf\u012br\", \"making or declaring to be a nonbeliever\"). The former (\u0647\u064e\u062c\u0652\u0631, \"hajr\") signifies the act of abandoning somewhere (such as migration, as in the Islamic prophet's journey out of Mecca, which is called al-Hijra (\"the (e)migration\")) or someone (used in the Qur'an in the case of disciplining a dissonant or disobedient wife or avoiding a harmful person). The latter (\u062a\u064e\u0643\u0652\u0641\u0650\u064a\u0631, \"takf\u012br\") means a definitive declaration that denounces a person as a k\u0101fir (\"infidel\"). However, because such a charge would entail serious consequences for the accused, who would then be deemed to be a \u0645\u064f\u0631\u0652\u062a\u064e\u062f\u0651 (\"murtadd\", \"a backslider; an apostate), less extreme denunciations, such as an accusation of \u0628\u0650\u062f\u0652\u0639\u064e\u0629 (\"bid\u02bdah\", \"[deviant] innovation; heresy\") followed by shunning and excommunication have historically preponderated over apostasy trials.\n\"Takf\u012br\" has often been practiced through the courts. More recently, cases have taken place where individuals have been considered nonbelievers. These decisions followed lawsuits against individuals, mainly in response to their writings that some have viewed as anti-Islamic. The most famous cases are of Salman Rushdie, Nasr Abu Zayd, Nawal El-Saadawi, and of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. The repercussions of such cases have included divorce, since under traditional interpretations of Islamic law, Muslim women are not permitted to marry non-Muslim men.\nJudaism.\n\"Herem\" is the highest ecclesiastical censure in Judaism. It is the total exclusion of a person from the Jewish community. Except for cases in the Charedi community, \"cherem\" stopped existing after The Enlightenment, when local Jewish communities lost their political autonomy, and Jews were integrated into the gentile nations in which they lived. A \"siruv\" order, equivalent to a contempt of court, issued by a Rabbinical court may also limit religious participation.\nRabbinical conferences of movements do expel members from time to time, but sometimes choose the lesser penalty of censuring the offending rabbi. Between 2010 and 2015, the Reform Jewish Central Conference of American Rabbis expelled six rabbis, the Orthodox Jewish Rabbinical Council of America expelled three, and the Conservative Jewish Rabbinical Assembly expelled one, suspended three, and caused one to resign without eligibility for reinstatement. While the CCAR and RCA were relatively shy about their reasons for expelling rabbis, the RA was more open about its reasons for kicking rabbis out. Reasons for expulsion from the three conferences include sexual misconduct, failure to comply with ethics investigations, setting up conversion groups without the conference's approval, stealing money from congregations, other financial misconduct, and getting arrested.\nJudaism, like Unitarian Universalism, tends towards congregationalism, and so decisions to exclude from a community of worship often depend on the congregation. Congregational bylaws sometimes enable the board of a synagogue to ask individuals to leave or not to enter.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10339", "revid": "37273639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10339", "title": "Electrochemical cell", "text": "Electro-chemical device\nAn electrochemical cell is a device that either generates electrical energy from chemical reactions in a so-called galvanic or voltaic cell, or induces chemical reactions (electrolysis) by applying external electrical energy in an electrolytic cell.\nBoth galvanic and electrolytic cells can be thought of as having two half-cells: consisting of separate oxidation and reduction reactions.\nWhen one or more electrochemical cells are connected in parallel or series they make a battery. Primary battery consists of single-use galvanic cells. Rechargeable batteries are built from secondary cells that use reversible reactions and can operate as galvanic cells (while providing energy) or electrolytic cells (while charging).\nTypes of electrochemical cells.\nGalvanic cell.\nA galvanic cell (voltaic cell), named after Luigi Galvani (Alessandro Volta), is an electrochemical cell that generates electrical energy from spontaneous redox reactions.\nA wire connects two different metals (e.g. zinc and copper). Each metal is in a separate solution; often the aqueous sulphate or nitrate forms of the metal, however more generally metal salts and water which conduct current. A salt bridge or porous membrane connects the two solutions, keeping electric neutrality and the avoidance of charge accumulation. The metal's differences in oxidation/reduction potential drive the reaction until equilibrium.\nKey features:\nHalf cells.\nGalvanic cells consists of two half-cells. Each half-cell consists of an electrode and an electrolyte (both half-cells may use the same or different electrolytes).\nThe chemical reactions in the cell involve the electrolyte, electrodes, and/or an external substance (fuel cells may use hydrogen gas as a reactant). In a full electrochemical cell, species from one half-cell lose electrons (oxidation) to their electrode while species from the other half-cell gain electrons (reduction) from their electrode.\nA \"salt bridge\" (e.g., filter paper soaked in KNO3, NaCl, or some other electrolyte) is used to ionically connect two half-cells with different electrolytes, but it prevents the solutions from mixing and unwanted side reactions. An alternative to a salt bridge is to allow direct contact (and mixing) between the two half-cells, for example in simple electrolysis of water.\nAs electrons flow from one half-cell to the other through an external circuit, a difference in charge is established. If no ionic contact were provided, this charge difference would quickly prevent the further flow of electrons. A salt bridge allows the flow of negative or positive ions to maintain a steady-state charge distribution between the oxidation and reduction vessels, while keeping the contents otherwise separate. Other devices for achieving separation of solutions are porous pots and gelled solutions. A porous pot is used in the Bunsen cell.\nEquilibrium reaction.\nEach half-cell has a characteristic voltage (depending on the metal and its characteristic reduction potential). Each reaction is undergoing an equilibrium reaction between different oxidation states of the ions: when equilibrium is reached, the cell cannot provide further voltage. In the half-cell performing oxidation, the closer the equilibrium lies to the ion/atom with the more positive oxidation state the more potential this reaction will provide. Likewise, in the reduction reaction, the closer the equilibrium lies to the ion/atom with the more \"negative\" oxidation state the higher the potential.\nCell potential.\nThe cell potential can be predicted through the use of electrode potentials (the voltages of each half-cell). These half-cell potentials are defined relative to the assignment of 0 volts to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). (See table of standard electrode potentials). The difference in voltage between electrode potentials gives a prediction for the potential measured. When calculating the difference in voltage, one must first rewrite the half-cell reaction equations to obtain a balanced oxidation-reduction equation.\nCell potentials have a possible range of roughly zero to 6 volts. Cells using water-based electrolytes are usually limited to cell potentials less than about 2.5 volts due to high reactivity of the powerful oxidizing and reducing agents with water which is needed to produce a higher voltage. Higher cell potentials are possible with cells using other solvents instead of water. For instance, lithium cells with a voltage of 3 volts are commonly available.\nThe cell potential depends on the concentration of the reactants, as well as their type. As the cell is discharged, the concentration of the reactants decreases and the cell potential also decreases.\nElectrolytic cell.\nAn electrolytic cell is an electrochemical cell in which applied electrical energy drives a non-spontaneous redox reaction.\nThey are often used to decompose chemical compounds, in a process called electrolysis. (The Greek word \"lysis\" (\u03bb\u03cd\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2) means \"loosing\" or \"setting free\".)\nImportant examples of electrolysis are the decomposition of water into hydrogen and oxygen, and of bauxite into aluminium and other chemicals. Electroplating (e.g. of Copper, Silver, Nickel or Chromium) is done using an electrolytic cell. Electrolysis is a technique that uses a direct electric current (DC).\nThe components of an electrolytic cell are:\nWhen driven by an external voltage (potential difference) applied to the electrodes, the ions in the electrolyte are attracted to the electrode with the opposite potential, where charge-transferring (also called faradaic or redox) reactions can take place. Only with a sufficient external voltage can an electrolytic cell decompose a normally stable, or inert chemical compound in the solution. Thus the electrical energy provided produces a chemical reaction which would not occur spontaneously otherwise. Key features:\nPrimary cell.\nA primary cell produces current by irreversible chemical reactions (ex. small disposable batteries) and is not rechargeable.\nThey are used for their portability, low cost, and short lifetime.\nPrimary cells are made in a range of standard sizes to power small household appliances such as flashlights and portable radios.\nAs chemical reactions proceed in a primary cell, the battery uses up the chemicals that generate the power; when they are gone, the battery stops producing electricity.\nPrimary batteries make up about 90% of the $50 billion battery market, but secondary batteries have been gaining market share. About 15 billion primary batteries are thrown away worldwide every year, virtually all ending up in landfills. Due to the toxic heavy metals and strong acids or alkalis they contain, batteries are hazardous waste. Most municipalities classify them as such and require separate disposal. The energy needed to manufacture a battery is about 50 times greater than the energy it contains. Due to their high pollutant content compared to their small energy content, the primary battery is considered a wasteful, environmentally unfriendly technology. Mainly due to the increasing sales of wireless devices and cordless tools, which cannot be economically powered by primary batteries and come with integral rechargeable batteries, the secondary battery industry has high growth and has slowly been replacing the primary battery in high end products.\nSecondary cell.\nA secondary cell produces current by reversible chemical reactions (ex. lead-acid battery car battery) and is rechargeable.\nLead-acid batteries are used in an automobile to start an engine and to operate the car's electrical accessories when the engine is not running. The alternator, once the car is running, recharges the battery.\nIt can perform as a galvanic cell and an electrolytic cell. It is a convenient way to store electricity: when current flows one way, the levels of one or more chemicals build up (charging); while it is discharging, they reduce and the resulting electromotive force can do work.\nThey are used for their high voltage, low costs, reliability, and long lifetime.\nFuel cell.\nA fuel cell is an electrochemical cell that reacts hydrogen fuel with oxygen or another oxidizing agent, to convert chemical energy to electricity.\nFuel cells are different from batteries in requiring a continuous source of fuel and oxygen (usually from air) to sustain the chemical reaction, whereas in a battery the chemical energy comes from chemicals already present in the battery.\nFuel cells can produce electricity continuously for as long as fuel and oxygen are supplied.\nThey are used for primary and backup power for commercial, industrial and residential buildings and in remote or inaccessible areas. They are also used to power fuel cell vehicles, including forklifts, automobiles, buses, boats, motorcycles and submarines.\nFuel cells are classified by the type of electrolyte they use and by the difference in startup time, which ranges from 1 second for proton-exchange membrane fuel cells (PEM fuel cells, or PEMFC) to 10 minutes for solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC).\nThere are many types of fuel cells, but they all consist of:\nA related technology are flow batteries, in which the fuel can be regenerated by recharging. Individual fuel cells produce relatively small electrical potentials, about 0.7 volts, so cells are \"stacked\", or placed in series, to create sufficient voltage to meet an application's requirements. In addition to electricity, fuel cells produce water, heat and, depending on the fuel source, very small amounts of nitrogen dioxide and other emissions. The energy efficiency of a fuel cell is generally between 40 and 60%; however, if waste heat is captured in a cogeneration scheme, efficiencies up to 85% can be obtained.\nIn 2022, the global fuel cell market was estimated to be $6.3 billion, and is expected to increase by 19.9% by 2030. Many countries are attempting to enter the market by setting renewable energy GW goals.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10340", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10340", "title": "Ecdysis", "text": "Shedding of the exoskeleton in arthropods and other invertebrates\nEcdysis is the moulting of the cuticle in many invertebrates of the clade Ecdysozoa. Since the cuticle of these animals typically forms a largely inelastic exoskeleton, it is shed during growth and a new, larger covering is formed. The remnants of the old, empty exoskeleton are called exuviae.\nAfter moulting, an arthropod is described as \"teneral\", a \"callow\"; it is \"fresh\", pale and soft-bodied. Within one or two hours, the cuticle hardens and darkens following a tanning process analogous to the production of leather. During this short phase the animal expands, since growth is otherwise constrained by the rigidity of the exoskeleton. Growth of the limbs and other parts normally covered by the hard exoskeleton is achieved by transfer of body fluids from soft parts before the new skin hardens. A spider with a small abdomen may be undernourished but more probably has recently undergone ecdysis. Some arthropods, especially large insects with tracheal respiration, expand their new exoskeleton by swallowing or otherwise taking in air. The maturation of the structure and colouration of the new exoskeleton might take days or weeks in a long-lived insect; this can make it difficult to identify an individual if it has recently undergone ecdysis.\nEcdysis allows damaged tissue and missing limbs to be regenerated or substantially re-formed. Complete regeneration may require a series of moults, the stump becoming a little larger with each moult until the limb is a normal, or near normal, size.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"ecdysis\" comes from Ancient Greek () 'to take off, strip off'.\nProcess.\nIn preparation for ecdysis, the arthropod becomes inactive for a period of time, undergoing apolysis or separation of the old exoskeleton from the underlying epidermal cells. For most organisms, the resting period is a stage of preparation during which the secretion of fluid from the moulting glands of the epidermal layer and the loosening of the underpart of the cuticle occurs.\nOnce the old cuticle has separated from the epidermis, a digesting fluid is secreted into the space between them. However, this fluid remains inactive until the upper part of the new cuticle has been formed. Then, by crawling movements, the organism pushes forward in the old integumentary shell, which splits down the back allowing the animal to emerge. Often, this initial crack is caused by a combination of movement and increase in pressure of hemolymph within the body, forcing an expansion across its exoskeleton, leading to an eventual crack that allows for certain organisms such as spiders to extricate themselves.\nWhile the old cuticle is being digested, the new layer is secreted. All cuticular structures are shed at ecdysis, including the inner parts of the exoskeleton, which includes terminal linings of the alimentary tract and of the tracheae if they are present.\nInsects.\nEach stage of development between moults for insects in the taxon Endopterygota is called an instar, and the amount of time between moults is called a stadium. Each stage between moults of insects in the Exopterygota is called a nymph: there may be up to 15 nymphal stages. Endopterygota tend to have only four or five instars. Endopterygotes have more alternatives to moulting, such as expansion of the cuticle and collapse of air sacs to allow growth of internal organs.\nThe process of moulting in insects begins with the separation of the cuticle from the underlying epidermal cells (apolysis) and ends with the shedding of the old cuticle (ecdysis). In many species it is initiated by an increase in the hormone ecdysone. This hormone causes:\nAfter apolysis the insect is known as a pharate. Moulting fluid is then secreted into the exuvial space between the old cuticle and the epidermis, this contains inactive enzymes which are activated only after the new epicuticle is secreted. This prevents the new procuticle from getting digested as it is laid down. The lower regions of the old cuticle, the endocuticle and mesocuticle, are then digested by the enzymes and subsequently absorbed. The exocuticle and epicuticle resist digestion and are hence shed at ecdysis.\nSpiders.\nSpiders generally change their skin for the first time while still inside the egg sac, and the spiderling that emerges broadly resembles the adult. The number of moults varies, both between species and sexes, but generally will be between five times and nine times before the spider reaches maturity. Not surprisingly, since males are generally smaller than females, the males of many species mature faster and do not undergo ecdysis as many times as the females before maturing.\nMembers of the Mygalomorphae are very long-lived, sometimes 20 years or more; they moult annually even after they mature.\nSpiders stop feeding at some time before moulting, usually for several days. The physiological processes of releasing the old exoskeleton from the tissues beneath typically cause various colour changes, such as darkening. If the old exoskeleton is not too thick it may be possible to see new structures, such as setae, from the outside. However, contact between the nerves and the old exoskeleton is maintained until a very late stage in the process.\nThe new, teneral exoskeleton has to accommodate a larger frame than the previous instar, while the spider has had to fit into the previous exoskeleton until it has been shed. This means the spider does not fill out the new exoskeleton completely, so it commonly appears somewhat wrinkled.\nMost species of spiders hang from silk during the entire process, either dangling from a drop line, or fastening their claws into webbed fibres attached to a suitable base. The discarded, dried exoskeleton typically remains hanging where it was abandoned once the spider has left.\nTo open the old exoskeleton, the spider generally contracts its abdomen (opisthosoma) to supply enough fluid to pump into the prosoma with sufficient pressure to crack it open along its lines of weakness. The carapace lifts off from the front, like a helmet, as its surrounding skin ruptures, but it remains attached at the back. Now the spider works its limbs free and typically winds up dangling by a new thread of silk attached to its own exuviae, which in turn hang from the original silk attachment.\nAt this point the spider is a callow; it is teneral and vulnerable. As it dangles, its exoskeleton hardens and takes shape. The process may take minutes in small spiders, or some hours in the larger Mygalomorphs. Some spiders, such as some \"Synema\" species, members of the Thomisidae (crab spiders), mate while the female is still callow, during which time she is unable to eat the male.\nEurypterids.\nEurypterids are a group of chelicerates that became extinct in the Late Permian. They underwent ecdysis similarly to extant chelicerates, and most fossils are thought to be of exuviae, rather than cadavers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10342", "revid": "101540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10342", "title": "Eider Duck", "text": ""}
{"id": "10343", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10343", "title": "Ebor, New South Wales", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEbor is a village on Waterfall Way on the Northern Tablelands in New South Wales, Australia. It is situated about east of Armidale and about a third of the way between Armidale and the coast. Dorrigo to the east is away with the Coffs Coast away along Waterfall Way. In the 2021 census, Ebor's zone had a population of 149.\nHistory.\nThe village is situated in the traditional lands of the Gumbaynggirr peoples.\nEbor shares its name with a nearby set of waterfalls, Ebor Falls, which is a local tourist attraction. Gumbaynggirr people traditionally called the falls \"Martiam\" (meaning 'the great falls').\nThe village's wooden Catholic church burned down in October 1946.\nAt the 2021 census, Ebor had a population of 149 people.\nBorderlands.\nAlthough \"The Heart of Waterfall Way\", Ebor is on the eastern edge of Armidale Regional Council, and close to the border of Clarence Valley Council and Bellingen Shire Council. Until the amalgamation of Guyra and Armidale councils, one side of Ebor was under Armidale council, and the other under Guyra shire. Likewise, Ebor is close to three state electoral districts (Northern Tablelands, Oxley and Clarence) and three federal electoral boundaries (New England, Cowper and Page).\nFacilities.\nAmenities in the area include a cafe, a combined post office, fuel station and general store, a pub/motel with camp ground, and a NSW DEC primary school. The local sports ground is home of the Ebor Campdraft.\nThere are also Rural Fire Service and National Parks and Wildlife Service depots in the area, but no police or ambulance services based in Ebor. The nearest hospital and 24h emergency department is in Dorrigo.\nFeatures.\nDue to its central position on Waterfall Way, Ebor offers easy access for residents and tourists to Guy Fawkes River National Park, Cathedral Rock National Park, Cunnawarra National Park, New England National Park, part of Oxley Wild Rivers National Park, Nymboi-Binderay National Park and Mount Hyland Nature Reserve.\nThe natural environment of the surrounding district includes several areas which have been cleared for pastoralism and forestry. Nonetheless, the national parks around Ebor have been described as a bush walking \"Mecca\". The main tourist attraction is the twin Ebor Falls.\nIn 1930 Sydney Smith Jr. wrote that: \"During a recent visit to Ebor I was much impressed with the possibilities of this part of the State as a tourist resort... Around Ebor and Guy Fawkes can be seen some of the most magnificent scenery in this State if not Australia. ...The two falls are scenes of beauty, and in winter time are sometimes frozen, making a beautiful spectacle as they hang in huge icicles. The water from the Ebor eventually finds an outlet in the Clarence River. ...The view, ...as regards expansiveness, ruggedness, and beauty, must compare more than favourably with views of a similar nature in any part of the Commonwealth. It reminded me of the Valley of a Thousand Hills, outside Durban, in South Africa\".\nIn 1976, local historian Eric Fahey also wrote: \"I believe the future of Dorrigo will depend largely on tourism. The area has a lot to offer, both in peerless scenery and because of the native fauna which can be seen in large numbers in their natural state.\"\nWagyu beef specialists Stone Axe have a large holding, \"Glen Alvie\", on the northern boundary of the village. Stone Axe also acquired \"Alfreda\" in the nearby locality of Wongwibinda.\nBlack truffles (tuber melanosporum) are grown at the Guy Fawkes Truffle Company outside of Ebor on the Guyra Rd.\nTrout are another local product. The Dutton Trout Hatchery on Point Lookout Road was established in 1950 and is one of the largest hatcheries in the state. Visitors can see the various stages of trout development prior to their release in the mountain streams. The release of trout into local streams is believed to have led to decline of the endangered Tusked frog.\nThere are two short walks close to the village. One takes walkers through the recreation reserve. This walk follows the Guy Fawkes River upstream for about half of the walk. Some bird life can be seen. The second walk is accessed by crossing the Guy Fawkes River bridge, and following the pedestrian path that winds downstream under the bridge. This path follows the Guy Fawkes River north and meets the national park's Upper and Lower Falls paths. Wallabies, kangaroos, bird life and fire-flies can be seen depending on the season. Platypus have also been sighted in August in the pool above the falls.\nThe Bicentennial National Trail (BNT) passes through Ebor, which sits on the boundary of sections 7 and 8 of the BNT.\nThe Ebor Falls area is sometimes used for rock climbing, and is described as \"holding a rather special place in the History of New England climbing\".\nSpeeding and traffic.\nEbor has a noted problem with speeding vehicles. Both passenger cars and heavy vehicles regularly exceed the posted speed limit of 50\u00a0km/h. Traffic noise is also a problem. Waterfall Way has an entry on the Dangerous Roads website.\nPost office.\nEbor's Post Office opened on 2 March 1868, closed in 1869 and reopened in 1910. It is currently located at the Ebor petrol station/store having moved from Fusspots Cafe.\nCultural heritage.\nEbor has a number of cultural heritage sites, including several Aboriginal meeting places, and massacre sites.\n\"Gwenda Gardens\" is an abandoned homestead on the Guyra-Ebor Road.\nOther sites include:\nClimate.\nThe village of Ebor is at high altitude by Australian standards. It has cold winters with frequent overnight frost and occasional light snow falls. The average rain fall is about .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10344", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10344", "title": "Ancient history of Afghanistan", "text": "The ancient history of Afghanistan, also referred to as the pre-Islamic period of Afghanistan, dates back to the prehistoric era and the Helmand civilization around 3300\u20132350 B.C. Archaeological exploration began in Afghanistan in earnest after World War II and proceeded until the late 1970s during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War. Archaeologists and historians suggest that humans were living in Afghanistan at least 50,000 years ago, and that farming communities of the region were among the earliest in the world. Urbanized culture has existed in the land from between 3000 and 2000 BC. Artifacts typical of the Paleolithic, Mesolithic, Neolithic, Bronze, and Iron ages have been found inside Afghanistan.\nAfter the Indus Valley Civilisation stretched up to northeast Afghanistan, it was inhabited by the Iranic tribes and controlled by the Medes until about 500 BC when Darius the Great (Darius I) marched with his Persian army to make it part of the Achaemenid Empire. In 330 BC, Alexander the Great of Macedonia invaded the land after defeating Darius III of Persia in the Battle of Gaugamela. Much of Afghanistan became part of the Seleucid Empire followed by the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. Seleucus I Nicator was defeated by Chandragupta Maurya and gave his daughter in a peace treaty. The land was inhabited by various tribes and ruled by many different kingdoms for the next two millennia. Before the arrival of Islam in the 7th century, there were a number of religions practiced in modern-day Afghanistan. Zoroastrianism and Ancient Iranian religions were practiced in western Afganistan (Khorasan and Herat). Hinduism and Buddhism was primarily practiced in regions of Eastern (Kabul) and South-Eastern Afganistan (Kandahar). The Kafiristan (present-day Nuristan) region, in the Hindu Kush mountain range, was not converted until the 19th century. They still follow the ancient Vedic religion (related to modern day Hinduism).\nPrehistoric era.\nPaleolithic.\nLouis Dupree, the University of Pennsylvania, the Smithsonian Institution and others suggest that humans were living in Afghanistan at least 50,000 years ago and that farming communities of the region were among the earliest in the world. Evidence of early human settlements at cave sites such as Darra-e Kur suggest that hunter-gatherer societies existed in the region by at least 30,000 B.C.\nThe earliest evidence of Neolithic farming dates to the 7th millennia B.C. where excavations at Said Qala Tepe in southern Kandahar have revealed the remains of domesticated sheep, goats, and cattle alongside plant material from domesticated wheat and barley. By the 5th millennia B.C., the Neolithic agricultural transition spread throughout southern and northern Afghanistan, as evidenced by the archaeological findings at permanent settlements such as Mundigak and the Aq Kupruk cave complex.\nThese findings place Afghanistan within the broader arc of the Neolithic agricultural transition radiating outward from the Fertile Crescent, and suggest an eastward flow of cultural and technological exchange from sites such as Tepe Sialk in Iran and Mehrgarh in Baluchistan, Pakistan, while Afghanistan\u2019s own highland communities adapted farming practices to local ecological conditions.\nBronze Age.\nAfghanistan seems in prehistory, as well as in ancient and modern times, to have been connected by culture and trade with the neighbouring regions. Urban civilization may have begun as early as 3000 to 2000 BC. Archaeological finds indicate the possible beginnings of the Bronze Age, which would ultimately spread throughout the ancient world from Afghanistan. It is also believed that the region had early trade contacts with Mesopotamia.\nBactria.\nPartially located within the present borders of modern-day Afghanistan, Bactria (2300-1700 BCE) was an ancient Bronze Age Iranian civilization located in the area south of the Oxus River (modern Amu Darya) and north of the Hindu Kush. The modern archaeological designation for this ancient civilization is Bactria\u2013Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC), and is also known as the Oxus civilization. Located at the confluence of several important trade routes, this mostly nomadic population accumulated vast amounts of wealth and developed its first proto-urban civilization during the 2nd millennia BCE.\nBMAC communities engaged in long-distance trade with the Indus Valley and Mesopotamia, exchanging goods like lapis lazuli and turquoise. The decline of the BMAC around 1700 BCE coincides with the arrival of Indo-Iranian groups in Central Asia, marking a cultural shift toward the Iron Age. While some scholars suggest the BMAC population may have been early Indo-Iranians, this remains uncertain.\nIndus Valley Civilization.\nThe Indus Valley Civilisation (IVC) was a Bronze Age civilization (3300\u20131300 BCE). Evidence of an Indus Valley site from the Mature Harappan period (2600-1900 BCE) has been found on the Oxus River at Shortugai in northern Afghanistan. Apart from Shortughai is Mundigak, another notable site. There are several smaller IVC colonies to be found in Afghanistan.\nAryan expansion into Mesopotamia and the Medean rule (1500 BC\u2013551 BC).\nBetween 2000\u20131200 BC, a branch of Indo-European-speaking tribes known as the Aryans began migrating into the region. This is part of a dispute in regards to the Indo-Aryan migration. They split into Iranic peoples, Nuristani, and Indo-Aryan groups at an early stage, possibly between 1500 and 1000 BC in what is today Afghanistan or much earlier as eastern remnants of the Indo-Aryans drifted much further west as with the Mitanni. The Iranians dominated the modern day plateau, while the Indo-Aryans ultimately headed towards the Indian subcontinent. The Avesta is believed to have been composed possibly as early as 1800 BC and written in ancient Ariana (Aryana), the earliest name of Afghanistan which indicates an early link with today's Iranian tribes to the west, or adjacent regions in Central Asia or northeastern Iran in the 6th century BC. Due to the similarity between early Avestan and Sanskrit (and other related early Indo-European languages such as Latin and Ancient Greek), it is believed that the split between the old Persians and Indo-Aryan tribes had taken place at least by 1000 BC. There are striking similarities between Avestan and Sanskrit, which may support the notion that the split was contemporary with the Indo-Aryans living in Afghanistan at a very early stage. Also, the Avesta itself divides into Old and New sections and neither mention the Medes who are known to have ruled Afghanistan starting around 700 BC. This suggests an early time-frame for the Avesta that has yet to be exactly determined as most academics believe it was written over the course of centuries if not millennia. Much of the archaeological data comes from the Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC and Indus Valley civilization) that probably played a key role in early Aryanic civilization in Afghanistan.\nThe Indo-Aryan inhabitants of the region- mainly in the southern and eastern parts of the country were adherents of Hinduism. Notable among these were the Gandharis\nThe Pashayi and Nuristanis are present day examples of these Indo-Iranian people.\nThe Medes, a Western Iranian people, arrived from what is today Kurdistan sometime around the 700s BC and came to dominate most of ancient Afghanistan. They were an early tribe that forged the first empire on the present Iranian plateau and sister-nations with the Persians whom they initially dominated in the province of Fars to the south. Median control of parts of far off Afghanistan would last until Cyrus the Great, prince of the Persians, assassinated and ultimately replaced his Median emperor father-in-law from rule.\nAchaemenid invasion and Zoroastrianism (550 BC\u2013331 BC).\nThe city of Bactra (which later became Balkh), is believed to have been the home of Zarathustra, who founded the Zoroastrian religion. The Avesta refers to eastern Bactria as being the home of the Zoroastrian faith. Regardless of the debate as to where Zoroaster was from, Zoroastrianism spread to become one of the world's most influential religions and became the main faith of the old Aryan people for centuries. It also remained the official religion of Persia until the defeat of the Sassanian ruler Yazdegerd III\u2014over a thousand years after its founding\u2014by Muslim Arabs. In what is today southern Iran, the Persians emerged to challenge Median supremacy on the Iranian plateau. By 550 BC, the Persians had replaced Median rule with their own dominion and even began to expand past previous Median imperial borders. Both Gandhara and Kamboja Mahajanapadas of the Buddhist texts soon fell a prey to the Achaemenian Dynasty during the reign of Achaemenid, Cyrus the Great (558\u2013530 BC), or in the first year of Darius I, marking the region or of the easternmost provinces of the empire, located partly in nowadays Afghanistan. According to Pliny's evidence, Cyrus the Great (Cyrus II) had destroyed Kapisa in Capiscene which was a Kamboja city. The former region of Gandhara and Kamboja (upper Indus) had constituted seventh satrapy of the Achaemenid Empire and annually contributed 170 talents of gold dust as a tribute to the Achaemenids.\nBactria had a special position in old Afghanistan, being the capital of a vice-kingdom. By the 4th century BC, Persian control of outlying areas and the internal cohesion of the empire had become somewhat tenuous. Although distant provinces like Bactriana had often been restless under Achaemenid rule, Bactrian troops nevertheless fought in the decisive Battle of Gaugamela in 330 BC against the advancing armies of Alexander the Great. The Achaemenids were decisively defeated by Alexander and retreated from his advancing army of Greco-Macedonians and their allies. Darius III, the last Achaemenid ruler, tried to flee to Bactria but was assassinated by a subordinate lord, the Bactrian-born Bessus, who proclaimed himself the new ruler of Persia as Artaxerxes (V). Bessus was unable to mount a successful resistance to the growing military might of Alexander's army so he fled to his native Bactria, where he attempted to rally local tribes to his side but was instead turned over to Alexander who proceeded to have him tortured and executed for having committed regicide.\nAlexander the Great to Greco-Bactrian rule (330 BC \u2013 c. 150 BC).\nMoving thousands of kilometers eastward from recently subdued Persia, the Macedonian leader Alexander the Great, encountered fierce resistance from the local tribes of Aria, Drangiana, Arachosia (South and Eastern Afghanistan, North-West Pakistan) and Bactria (North and Central Afghanistan). One of the fiercest battles that he faced was in Herat. One of his top commanding officers was killed by the rebels and he had to go there himself. He couldn't defeat them in time and he ended up burning down the forest to finish the rebellion.\nUpon Alexander's death in 323 BC, his empire, which had never been politically consolidated, broke apart as his companions began to divide it amongst themselves. Alexander's cavalry commander, Seleucus, took nominal control of the eastern lands and founded the Seleucid dynasty. Under the Seleucids, as under Alexander, Greek colonists and soldiers colonized Bactria, roughly corresponding to modern Afghanistan's borders. However, the majority of Macedonian soldiers of Alexander the Great wanted to leave the east and return home to Greece. Later, Seleucus sought to guard his eastern frontier and moved Ionian Greeks (also known as Yavanas to many local groups) to Bactria in the 3rd century BC.\nGreece had one of the most advanced civilizations at that period. Wherever they went, they left and gained something from cultures and ultimately, they had a civilization that was compromised from other top civilizations of the time. Greek men were marrying with other women and this helped the process of mixing the cultures a lot.\nMaurya Empire.\nWhile the Diadochi were warring amongst themselves, the Mauryan Empire was developing in the northern part of the Indian subcontinent. The founder of the empire, Chandragupta Maurya, confronted a Macedonian invasion force led by Seleucus I in 305 BC and following a brief conflict, an agreement was reached as Seleucus ceded Gandhara and Arachosia (centered around ancient Kandahar) and areas south of Bagram (corresponding to the extreme south-east of modern Afghanistan) to the Mauryans. During the 120 years of the Mauryans in southern Afghanistan, Buddhism was introduced and eventually become a major religion alongside Zoroastrianism and local pagan beliefs. The ancient Grand Trunk Road was built linking what is now Kabul to various cities in the Punjab and the Gangetic Plain. Commerce, art, and architecture (seen especially in the construction of stupas) developed during this period. It reached its high point under Emperor Ashoka whose edicts, roads, and rest stops were found throughout the subcontinent. Although the vast majority of them throughout the subcontinent were written in Prakrit, Afghanistan is notable for the inclusion of 2 Greek and Aramaic ones alongside the court language of the Mauryans.\nInscriptions made by the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka, a fragment of Edict 13 in Greek, as well as a full Edict, written in both Greek and Aramaic has been discovered in Old Kandahar. It is said to be written in excellent Classical Greek, using sophisticated philosophical terms. In this Edict, Ashoka uses the word Eusebeia (\"Piety\") as the Greek translation for the ubiquitous \"Dharma\" of his other Edicts written in Prakrit:\n\"Ten years (of reign) having been completed, King Piodasses (Ashoka) made known (the doctrine of) Piety (\"\u03b5\u1f50\u03c3\u03ad\u03b2\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1\", Eusebeia) to men; and from this moment he has made men more pious, and everything thrives throughout the whole world. And the king abstains from (killing) living beings, and other men and those who (are) huntsmen and fishermen of the king have desisted from hunting. And if some (were) intemperate, they have ceased from their intemperance as was in their power; and obedient to their father and mother and to the elders, in opposition to the past also in the future, by so acting on every occasion, they will live better and more happily.\" (Trans. by G.P. Carratelli)\nThe last ruler in the region was probably Subhagasena (Sophagasenus of Polybius), who, in all probability, belonged to the Ashvaka (q.v.) background.\nGreco-Bactrians.\nIn the middle of the 3rd century BC, an independent, Hellenistic state was declared in Bactria and eventually the control of the Seleucids and Mauryans was overthrown in western and southern Afghanistan. Graeco-Bactrian rule spread until it included a large territory which stretched from Turkmenistan in the west to the Punjab in India in the east by about 170 BC. Graeco-Bactrian rule was eventually defeated by a combination of internecine disputes that plagued Greek and Hellenized rulers to the west, continual conflict with Indian kingdoms, as well as the pressure of two groups of nomadic invaders from Central Asia\u2014the Parthians and Sakas.\nKushan Empire (150 BC\u2013300 AD).\nIn the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC, the Parthians, a nomadic Iranian peoples, arrived in Western Asia. While they made large inroads into the modern-day territory of Afghanistan, about 100 years later another Indo-European group from the north\u2014the Kushans (a subgroup of the tribe called the Yuezhi by the Chinese)\u2014entered the region of Afghanistan and established an empire lasting almost four centuries, which would dominate most of the Afghanistan region.\nThe Kushan Empire spread from the Kabul River valley to defeat other Central Asian tribes that had previously conquered parts of the northern central Iranian Plateau once ruled by the Parthians. By the middle of the 1st century BC, the Kushans' base of control became Afghanistan and their empire spanned from the north of the Pamir mountains to the Ganges river valley in India. During rule of Kanishka, they had 2 seasonal capital cities which were Kabul in Spring and Summer then moving to Peshawar for Fall and Winter. Early in the 2nd century under Kanishka, the most powerful of the Kushan rulers, the empire reached its greatest geographic and cultural breadth to become a center of literature and art. Kanishka extended Kushan control to the mouth of the Indus River on the Arabian Sea, into Kashmir, and into what is today the Chinese-controlled area north of Tibet. Kanishka was a patron of religion and the arts. It was during his reign that Buddhism, which was promoted in northern India earlier by the Mauryan emperor Ashoka (c. 260 BC\u2013232 BC), reached its zenith in Central Asia. Though the Kushanas supported local Buddhists and Hindus as well as the worship of various local deities.\nSasanian &amp; Hephthalite invasions (300\u2013650).\nIn the 3rd century, Kushan control fragmented into semi-independent kingdoms that became easy targets for conquest by the rising Iranian dynasty, the Sasanians (c. 224\u2013561) which annexed Afghanistan by 300 AD. In these far off easternmost territories, they established vassal kings as rulers, known as the Kushanshahs. Sasanian control was tenuous at times as numerous challenges from Central Asian tribes led to instability and constant warfare in the region.\nThe disunited Kushan and Sasanian kingdoms were in a poor position to meet the threat several waves of Xionite/Huna invaders from the north from the 4th century onwards. In particular, the Hephthalites (or \"Ebodalo\"; Bactrian script \u03b7\u03b2\u03bf\u03b4\u03b1\u03bb\u03bf) swept out of Central Asia during the 5th century into Bactria and Iran, overwhelming the last of the Kushan kingdoms. Historians believe that Hephthalite control continued for a century and was marked by constant warfare with the Sassanians to the west who exerted nominal control over the region.\nBy the middle of the 6th century, the Hephthalites were defeated in the territories north of the Amu Darya (the Oxus River of antiquity) by another group of Central Asian nomads, the G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, and by the resurgent Sassanians in the lands south of the Amu Darya. It was the ruler of western G\u00f6kt\u00fcrks, Sijin (a.k.a. Sinjibu, Silzibul and Yandu Muchu Khan) who led the forces against the Hepthalites who were defeated at the Battle of Chach (Tashkent) and at the Battle of Bukhara.\nKabul Shahi.\nThe Shahi dynasties ruled portions of the Kabul Valley (in eastern Afghanistan) and the old province of Gandhara (northern Pakistan and Kashmir) from the decline of the Kushan Empire in the 3rd century to the early 9th century. They are split into two eras the Buddhist Turk Shahis and the later Hindu Shahis with the change-over occurring around 870, and ruled up until the Islamic conquest of Afghanistan.\nWhen Xuanzang visited the region early in the 7th century, the Kabul region was ruled by a Kshatriya king, who is identified as the \"Shahi Khingal\", and whose name has been found in an inscription found in Gardez. The Turkic Shahi regency was overthrown and replaced by a Mohyal Shahi dynasty of Brahmins who began the first phase of the Hindu Shahi dynasty.\nThese Hindu kings of Kabul and Gandhara may have had links to some ruling families in neighboring Kashmir and other areas to the east. The Shahis were rulers of predominantly Buddhist, Zoroastrian, Hindu and Muslim populations and were thus patrons of numerous faiths, and various artifacts and coins from their rule have been found that display their multicultural domain. In 964 AD, the last Mohyal Shahi was succeeded by the Janjua overlord, Jayapala, of the Panduvanshi dynasty. The last Shahi emperors Jayapala, Anandapala and Tirlochanpala fought the Muslim Ghaznavids of Ghazna and were gradually defeated. Their remaining army were eventually exiled into northern India.\nArchaeological remnants.\nMost of the Zoroastrian, Greek, Hellenistic, Buddhist, Hindu and other indigenous cultures were replaced by the coming of Islam and little influence remains in Afghanistan today. Along ancient trade routes, however, stone monuments of the once flourishing Buddhist culture did exist as reminders of the past. The two massive sandstone Buddhas of Bamyan, 35 and 53 meters high, overlooked the ancient route through Bamyan to Balkh and dated from the 3rd and 5th centuries. They survived until 2001, when they were destroyed by the Taliban. In this and other key places in Afghanistan, archaeologists have located frescoes, stucco decorations, statuary, and rare objects from as far away as China, Phoenicia, and Rome, which were crafted as early as the 2nd century and bear witness to the influence of these ancient civilizations upon Afghanistan.\nOne of the early Buddhist schools, the Mah\u0101s\u0101\u1e43ghika-Lokottarav\u0101da, were known to be prominent in the area of Bamiyan. The Chinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang visited a Lokottarav\u0101da monastery in the 7th century CE, at Bamiyan, Afghanistan, and this monastery site has since been rediscovered by archaeologists. Birchbark and palm leaf manuscripts of texts in this monastery's collection, including Mah\u0101y\u0101na s\u016btras, have been discovered at the site, and these are now located in the Sch\u00f8yen Collection. Some manuscripts are in the G\u0101ndh\u0101r\u012b language and Kharo\u1e63\u1e6dh\u012b script, while others are in Sanskrit and written in forms of the Gupta script. Manuscripts and fragments that have survived from this monastery's collection include well-known Buddhist texts such as the \"Mah\u0101parinirv\u0101\u1e47a S\u016btra\" (from the \"\u0100gamas\"), the \"Diamond S\u016btra\" (\"Vajracchedik\u0101 Praj\u00f1\u0101p\u0101ramit\u0101\"), the \"Medicine Buddha S\u016btra\", and the \"\u015ar\u012bm\u0101l\u0101dev\u012b Si\u1e43han\u0101da S\u016btra\".\nIn 2010, reports stated that about 42 Buddhist relics have been discovered in the Logar Province of Afghanistan, which is south of Kabul. Some of these items date back to the 2nd century according to Archaeologists. The items included two Buddhist temples (Stupas), Buddha statues, frescos, silver and gold coins and precious beads.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is a temple, stupas, beautiful rooms, big and small statues, two with the length of seven and nine meters, colorful frescos ornamented with gold and some coins... Some of the relics date back to the fifth century (AD)... We have come across signs that there are items maybe going back to the era before Christ or prehistory... We need foreign assistance to preserve these and their expertise to help us with further excavations.\u2014\u200a\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10345", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10345", "title": "Easter Uprising", "text": ""}
{"id": "10346", "revid": "27326546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10346", "title": "Gravitational redshift", "text": "Physical effect in general relativity\nIn physics and general relativity, gravitational redshift (known as Einstein shift in older literature) is the phenomenon that electromagnetic waves or photons travelling out of a gravitational well lose energy. This loss of energy corresponds to a decrease in the wave frequency and increase in the wavelength, known more generally as a \"redshift\". The opposite effect, in which photons gain energy when travelling into a gravitational well, is known as a gravitational blueshift (a type of \"blueshift\"). The effect was first described by Einstein in 1907, eight years before his publication of the full theory of relativity. Observing the gravitational redshift in the Solar System is one of the classical tests of general relativity.\nGravitational redshift can be interpreted as a consequence of the equivalence principle (that gravitational effects are locally equivalent to inertial effects and the redshift is caused by the Doppler effect) or as a consequence of the mass\u2013energy equivalence and conservation of energy ('falling' photons gain energy), though there are numerous subtleties that complicate a rigorous derivation. A gravitational redshift can also equivalently be interpreted as gravitational time dilation at the source of the radiation: if two oscillators (attached to transmitters producing electromagnetic radiation) are operating at different gravitational potentials, the oscillator at the higher gravitational potential (farther from the attracting body) will tick faster; that is, when observed from the same location, it will have a higher measured frequency than the oscillator at the lower gravitational potential (closer to the attracting body).\nMagnitudes.\nTo first approximation, gravitational redshift is proportional to the difference in gravitational potential divided by the speed of light squared, formula_1, thus resulting in a very small effect. Light escaping from the surface of the Sun was predicted by Einstein in 1911 to be redshifted by roughly 2 ppm or 2 \u00d7 10\u22126. Navigational signals from GPS satellites orbiting at altitude are perceived blueshifted by approximately 0.5 ppb or 5 \u00d7 10\u221210, corresponding to a (negligible) increase of less than 1\u00a0Hz in the frequency of a 1.5\u00a0GHz GPS radio signal (however, the accompanying gravitational time dilation affecting the atomic clock in the satellite \"is\" crucially important for accurate navigation). On the surface of the Earth the gravitational potential is proportional to height, formula_2, and the corresponding redshift is roughly 10\u221216 (0.1 parts per quadrillion) per meter of change in elevation and/or altitude.\nIn astronomy, the magnitude of a gravitational redshift is often expressed as the velocity that would create an equivalent shift through the relativistic Doppler effect. In such units, the 2 ppm sunlight redshift corresponds to a 633\u00a0m/s receding velocity, roughly of the same magnitude as convective motions in the Sun, thus complicating the measurement. The GPS satellite gravitational blueshift velocity equivalent is less than 0.2\u00a0m/s, which is negligible compared to the actual Doppler shift resulting from its orbital velocity. In astronomical objects with strong gravitational fields the redshift can be much greater; for example, light from the surface of a white dwarf is gravitationally redshifted on average by around (50\u00a0km/s)/\"c\" (around 170\u00a0ppm).\nPrediction by the equivalence principle and general relativity.\nUniform gravitational field or acceleration.\nEinstein's theory of general relativity incorporates the equivalence principle, which can be stated in various different ways. One such statement is that gravitational effects are locally undetectable for a free-falling observer. Therefore, in a laboratory experiment at the surface of the Earth, all gravitational effects should be equivalent to the effects that would have been observed if the laboratory had been accelerating through outer space at \"g\". One consequence is a gravitational Doppler effect. If a light pulse is emitted at the floor of the laboratory, then a free-falling observer says that by the time it reaches the ceiling, the ceiling has accelerated away from it, and therefore when observed by a detector fixed to the ceiling, it will be observed to have been Doppler shifted toward the red end of the spectrum. This shift, which the free-falling observer considers to be a kinematical Doppler shift, is thought of by the laboratory observer as a gravitational redshift. Such an effect was verified in the 1959 Pound\u2013Rebka experiment. In a case such as this, where the gravitational field is uniform, the change in wavelength is given by\n formula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the change in height. Since this prediction arises directly from the equivalence principle, it does not require any of the mathematical apparatus of general relativity, and its verification does not specifically support general relativity over any other theory that incorporates the equivalence principle.\nOn Earth's surface (or in a spaceship accelerating at 1\u00a0\"g\"), the gravitational redshift is approximately , the equivalent of a Doppler shift for every 1\u00a0m of altitude.\nSpherically symmetric gravitational field.\nWhen the field is not uniform, the simplest and most useful case to consider is that of a spherically symmetric field. By Birkhoff's theorem, such a field is described in general relativity by the Schwarzschild metric, formula_5, where formula_6 is the clock time of an observer at distance \"R\" from the center, formula_7 is the time measured by an observer at infinity, formula_8 is the Schwarzschild radius formula_9, \"...\" represents terms that vanish if the observer is at rest, formula_10 is the Newtonian constant of gravitation, formula_11 the mass of the gravitating body, and formula_12 the speed of light. The result is that frequencies and wavelengths are shifted according to the ratio\n formula_13\nwhere\nThis can be related to the redshift parameter conventionally defined as formula_17.\nIn the case where neither the emitter nor the observer is at infinity, the transitivity of Doppler shifts allows us to generalize the result to formula_18. The redshift formula for the frequency formula_19 is formula_20. When formula_21 is small, these results are consistent with the equation given above based on the equivalence principle.\nThe redshift ratio may also be expressed in terms of a (Newtonian) escape velocity formula_22 at formula_23, resulting in the corresponding Lorentz factor:\n formula_24.\nFor an object compact enough to have an event horizon, the redshift is not defined for photons emitted inside the Schwarzschild radius, both because signals cannot escape from inside the horizon and because an object such as the emitter cannot be stationary inside the horizon, as was assumed above. Therefore, this formula only applies when formula_16 is larger than formula_8. When the photon is emitted at a distance equal to the Schwarzschild radius, the redshift will be \"infinitely\" large, and it will not escape to \"any\" finite distance from the Schwarzschild sphere. When the photon is emitted at an infinitely large distance, there is no redshift.\nNewtonian limit.\nIn the Newtonian limit, i.e. when formula_16 is sufficiently large compared to the Schwarzschild radius formula_8, the redshift can be approximated as\n formula_29\nwhere formula_30 is the gravitational acceleration at formula_16. For Earth's surface with respect to infinity, \"z\" is approximately (the equivalent of a 0.2\u00a0m/s radial Doppler shift); for the Moon it is approximately (about 1\u00a0cm/s). The value for the surface of the Sun is about , corresponding to 0.64\u00a0km/s. (For non-relativistic velocities, the radial Doppler equivalent velocity can be approximated by multiplying \"z\" with the speed of light.)\nThe z-value can be expressed succinctly in terms of the escape velocity at formula_16, since the gravitational potential is equal to half the square of the escape velocity, thus:\n formula_33\nwhere formula_22 is the escape velocity at formula_16.\nIt can also be related to the circular orbit velocity formula_36 at formula_16, which equals formula_38, thus\n formula_39.\nFor example, the gravitational blueshift of distant starlight due to the Sun's gravity, which the Earth is orbiting at about 30\u00a0km/s, would be approximately 1 \u00d7 10\u22128 or the equivalent of a 3\u00a0m/s radial Doppler shift.\nFor an object in a (circular) orbit, the gravitational redshift is of comparable magnitude as the transverse Doppler effect, formula_40 where \"\u03b2\" = \"v\"/\"c\", while both are much smaller than the radial Doppler effect, for which formula_41.\nPrediction of the Newtonian limit using the properties of photons.\nThe formula for the gravitational red shift in the Newtonian limit can also be derived using the properties of a photon:\nIn a gravitational field formula_42 a particle of mass formula_43 and velocity formula_44 changes it's energy formula_45 according to:\n formula_46.\nFor a massless photon described by its energy formula_47 and momentum formula_48 this equation becomes after dividing by the Planck constant formula_49:\n formula_50\nInserting the gravitational field of a spherical body of mass formula_11 within the distance formula_52\n formula_53\nand the wave vector of a photon leaving the gravitational field in radial direction\n formula_54\nthe energy equation becomes\n formula_55\nUsing formula_56 an ordinary differential equation which is only dependent on the radial distance formula_57 is obtained:\n formula_58\nFor a photon starting at the surface of a spherical body with a Radius formula_59 with a frequency formula_60 the analytical solution is:\n formula_61\nIn a large distance from the body formula_62 an observer measures the frequency :\n formula_63\nTherefore, the red shift is:\n formula_64\nIn the linear approximation \n formula_65\nthe Newtonian limit for the gravitational red shift of General Relativity is obtained.\nHistory.\nThe gravitational weakening of light from high-gravity stars was predicted by John Michell in 1783 and Pierre-Simon Laplace in 1796, using Isaac Newton's concept of light corpuscles (see: emission theory) and who predicted that some stars would have a gravity so strong that light would not be able to escape. The effect of gravity on light was then explored by Johann Georg von Soldner (1801), who calculated the amount of deflection of a light ray by the Sun, arriving at the Newtonian answer which is half the value predicted by general relativity. All of this early work assumed that light could slow down and fall, which is inconsistent with the modern understanding of light waves.\nEinstein's 1917 paper on general relativity proposed three tests: the timing of the perihelion of Mercury, the bending of light around the Sun, and the shift in frequency of light emerging from a different gravitational potential, now called the gravitational redshift. Of these, the redshift proved difficult for physicist to understand and to measure convincingly. A confusing mix of complex and subtle issues plague even famous textbook descriptions of the phenomenon.\nOnce it became accepted that light was an electromagnetic wave, it was clear that the frequency of light should not change from place to place, since waves from a source with a fixed frequency keep the same frequency everywhere. One way around this conclusion would be if time itself were altered\u00a0\u2013 if clocks at different points had different rates. This was precisely Einstein's conclusion in 1911. He considered an accelerating box, and noted that according to the special theory of relativity, the clock rate at the \"bottom\" of the box (the side away from the direction of acceleration) was slower than the clock rate at the \"top\" (the side toward the direction of acceleration). Indeed, in a frame moving (in formula_66 direction) with velocity formula_67 relative to the rest frame, the clocks at a nearby position formula_68 are ahead by formula_69 (to the first order); so an acceleration formula_30 (that changes speed by formula_71 per time formula_7) makes clocks at the position formula_68 to be ahead by formula_74, that is, tick at a rate \n formula_75\nThe equivalence principle implies that this change in clock rate is the same whether the acceleration formula_30 is that of an accelerated frame without gravitational effects, or caused by a gravitational field in a stationary frame. Since acceleration due to gravitational potential formula_77 is formula_78, we get\n formula_79\nso \u2013 in weak fields \u2013 the change formula_80 in the clock rate is equal to formula_81.\nThe changing rates of clocks allowed Einstein to conclude that light waves change frequency as they move, and the frequency/energy relationship for photons allowed him to see that this was best interpreted as the effect of the gravitational field on the mass\u2013energy of the photon. To calculate the changes in frequency in a nearly static gravitational field, only the time component of the metric tensor is important, and the lowest order approximation is accurate enough for ordinary stars and planets, which are much bigger than their Schwarzschild radius.\nAstronomical observations.\nA number of experimenters initially claimed to have identified the effect using astronomical measurements, and the effect was considered to have been finally identified in the spectral lines of the star Sirius B by W.S. Adams in 1925. However, measurements by Adams have been criticized as being too low and these observations are now considered to be measurements of spectra that are unusable because of scattered light from the primary, Sirius A. The first accurate measurement of the gravitational redshift of a white dwarf was done by Popper in 1954, measuring a 21\u00a0km/s gravitational redshift of 40 Eridani B. The redshift of Sirius B was finally measured by Greenstein \"et al.\" in 1971, obtaining the value for the gravitational redshift of 89\u00b116\u00a0km/s, with more accurate measurements by the Hubble Space Telescope, showing 80.4\u00b14.8\u00a0km/s.\nJames W. Brault, a graduate student of Robert Dicke at Princeton University, measured the gravitational redshift of the sun using optical methods in 1962. In 2020, a team of scientists published the most accurate measurement of the solar gravitational redshift so far, made by analyzing Fe spectral lines in sunlight reflected by the Moon; their measurement of a mean global 638 \u00b1 6\u00a0m/s lineshift is in agreement with the theoretical value of 633.1\u00a0m/s. Measuring the solar redshift is complicated by the Doppler shift caused by the motion of the Sun's surface, which is of similar magnitude as the gravitational effect.\nIn 2011, the group of Radek Wojtak of the Niels Bohr Institute at the University of Copenhagen collected data from 8000 galaxy clusters and found that the light coming from the cluster centers tended to be red-shifted compared to the cluster edges, confirming the energy loss due to gravity.\nIn 2018, the star S2 made its closest approach to Sgr A*, the 4-million solar mass supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way, reaching 7650\u00a0km/s or about 2.5% of the speed of light while passing the black hole at a distance of just 120 AU, or 1400 Schwarzschild radii. Independent analyses by the GRAVITY collaboration (led by Reinhard Genzel) and the KECK/UCLA Galactic Center Group (led by Andrea Ghez) revealed a combined transverse Doppler and gravitational redshift up to 200\u00a0km/s/c, in agreement with general relativity predictions.\nIn 2021, Mediavilla (IAC, Spain) &amp; Jim\u00e9nez-Vicente (UGR, Spain) were able to use measurements of the gravitational redshift in quasars up to cosmological redshift of \"z\" \u2248 3 to confirm the predictions of Einstein's equivalence principle and the lack of cosmological evolution within 13%.\nIn 2024, Padilla et al. have estimated the gravitational redshifts of supermassive black holes (SMBH) in eight thousand quasars and one hundred Seyfert type 1 galaxies from the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of their emission lines, finding log \"z\" \u2248 \u22124, compatible with SMBHs of ~ 1 billion solar masses and broadline regions of ~ 1 parsec radius. This same gravitational redshift was directly measured by these authors in the SAMI sample of LINER galaxies, using the redshift differences between lines emitted in central and outer regions.\nTerrestrial tests.\nBetween 1925 and 1955, very few attempts were made to measure the gravitational redshift.\nThe effect is now considered to have been definitively verified by the experiments of Pound, Rebka and Snider between 1959 and 1965. The Pound\u2013Rebka experiment of 1959 measured the gravitational redshift in spectral lines using a terrestrial 57Fe gamma source over a vertical height of 22.5 metres. This paper was the first determination of the gravitational redshift which used measurements of the change in wavelength of gamma-ray photons generated with the M\u00f6ssbauer effect, which generates radiation with a very narrow line width. The accuracy of the gamma-ray measurements was typically 1%.\nAn improved experiment was done by Pound and Snider in 1965, with an accuracy better than the 1% level.\nA very accurate gravitational redshift experiment was performed in 1976, where a hydrogen maser clock on a rocket was launched to a height of , and its rate compared with an identical clock on the ground. It tested the gravitational redshift to 0.007%.\nLater tests can be done with the Global Positioning System (GPS), which must account for the gravitational redshift in its timing system, and physicists have analyzed timing data from the GPS to confirm other tests. When the first satellite was launched, it showed the predicted shift of 38 microseconds per day. This rate of the discrepancy is sufficient to substantially impair the function of GPS within hours if not accounted for. An excellent account of the role played by general relativity in the design of GPS can be found in Ashby 2003.\nIn 2010, an experiment placed two aluminum-ion quantum clocks close to each other, but with the second elevated 33\u00a0cm compared to the first, making the gravitational red shift effect visible in everyday lab scales.\nIn 2020, a group at the University of Tokyo measured the gravitational redshift of two strontium-87 optical lattice clocks. The measurement took place at Tokyo Skytree where the clocks were separated by approximately 450\u00a0m and connected by telecom fibers. The gravitational redshift can be expressed as\n formula_82,\nwhere formula_83 is the gravitational redshift, formula_84 is the optical clock transition frequency, formula_85 is the difference in gravitational potential, and formula_86 denotes the violation from general relativity. By Ramsey spectroscopy of the strontium-87 optical clock transition (429\u00a0THz, 698\u00a0nm) the group determined the gravitational redshift between the two optical clocks to be 21.18\u00a0Hz, corresponding to a \"z\"-value of approximately 5 \u00d7 10\u221214. Their measured value of formula_86, formula_88, is an agreement with recent measurements made with hydrogen masers in elliptical orbits.\nIn October 2021, a group at JILA led by physicist Jun Ye reported a measurement of gravitational redshift in the submillimeter scale. The measurement is done on the 87Sr clock transition between the top and the bottom of a millimeter-tall ultracold cloud of 100,000 strontium atoms in an optical lattice.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10348", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10348", "title": "Educational choice", "text": ""}
{"id": "10350", "revid": "36595496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10350", "title": "Easter Rising", "text": "1916 armed insurrection in Ireland\nThe Easter Rising (), also known as the Easter Rebellion, was an armed insurrection in Ireland during Easter Week in April 1916. The Rising was launched by Irish republicans against British rule in Ireland with the aim of establishing an independent Irish Republic while the United Kingdom was fighting the First World War. It was the most significant uprising in Ireland since the rebellion of 1798 and the first armed conflict of the Irish revolutionary period. Sixteen of the Rising's leaders were executed starting in May 1916. The nature of the executions, and subsequent political developments, ultimately contributed to an increase in popular support for Irish independence.\nOrganised by a seven-man Military Council of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, the Rising began on Easter Monday, 24 April 1916 and lasted for six days. Members of the Irish Volunteers, led by schoolmaster and Irish language activist Patrick Pearse, joined by the smaller Irish Citizen Army of James Connolly and 200 women of Cumann na mBan seized strategically important buildings in Dublin and proclaimed the Irish Republic. The British Army brought in thousands of reinforcements as well as artillery and a gunboat. There was street fighting on the routes into the city centre, where the rebels slowed the British advance and inflicted many casualties. Elsewhere in Dublin, the fighting mainly consisted of sniping and long-range gun battles. The main rebel positions were gradually surrounded and bombarded with artillery. There were isolated actions in other parts of Ireland; Volunteer leader Eoin MacNeill had issued a countermand in a bid to halt the Rising, which greatly reduced the extent of the rebel actions.\nWith much greater numbers and heavier weapons, the British Army suppressed the Rising. Pearse agreed to an unconditional surrender on Saturday 29 April, although sporadic fighting continued briefly. After the surrender, the country remained under martial law. About 3,500 people were taken prisoner by the British and 1,800 of them were sent to internment camps or prisons in Britain. Most of the leaders of the Rising were executed following courts martial. The Rising brought physical force republicanism back to the forefront of Irish politics, which for nearly fifty years had been dominated by constitutional nationalism. Opposition to the British reaction to the Rising contributed to changes in public opinion and the move toward independence, as shown in the 1918 general election, in which Sinn F\u00e9in won 73 of the 105 Irish seats. Sinn F\u00e9in convened the First D\u00e1il and declared independence.\nOf the 485 people killed, 260 were civilians, 143 were British military and police personnel, and 82 were Irish rebels, including 16 rebels executed for their roles in the Rising. More than 2,600 people were wounded. Many of the civilians were killed or wounded by British artillery fire or were mistaken for rebels. Others were caught in the crossfire during firefights between the British and the rebels. The shelling and resulting fires left parts of central Dublin in ruins.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBackground.\nThe Acts of Union 1800 united the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Ireland as the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, abolishing the Irish Parliament and giving Ireland representation in the British Parliament. From early on, many Irish nationalists opposed the union and the continued lack of adequate political representation, along with the British government's handling of Ireland and Irish people, particularly the Great Famine. The union was closely preceded by and formed partly in response to an Irish uprising \u2013 whose centenary would prove an influence on the Easter Rising. Three more rebellions ensued: one in 1803, another in 1848 and one in 1867. All were failures.\nOpposition took other forms: constitutional (the Repeal Association; the Home Rule League) and social (disestablishment of the Church of Ireland; the Land League). The Irish Home Rule movement sought to achieve self-government for Ireland, within the United Kingdom. In 1886, the Irish Parliamentary Party under Charles Stewart Parnell succeeded in having the First Home Rule Bill introduced in the British parliament, but it was defeated. The Second Home Rule Bill of 1893 was passed by the House of Commons but rejected by the House of Lords.\nAfter the death of Parnell, younger and more radical nationalists became disillusioned with parliamentary politics and turned toward more extreme forms of separatism. The Gaelic Athletic Association, the Gaelic League, and the cultural revival under W. B. Yeats and Augusta, Lady Gregory, together with the new political thinking of Arthur Griffith expressed in his newspaper \"Sinn F\u00e9in\" and organisations such as the National Council and the Sinn F\u00e9in League, led many Irish people to identify with the idea of an independent Gaelic Ireland.\nThe Third Home Rule Bill was introduced by British Liberal Prime Minister H. H. Asquith in 1912. Irish Unionists, who were overwhelmingly Protestants, opposed it, as they did not want to be ruled by a Catholic-dominated Irish government. Led by Sir Edward Carson and James Craig, they formed the Ulster Volunteers (UVF) in January 1913. The UVF's opposition included arming themselves, in the event that they had to resist by force.\nSeeking to defend Home Rule, the Irish Volunteers was formed in November 1913. Although sporting broadly open membership and without avowed support for separatism, the executive branch of the Irish Volunteers \u2013 excluding leadership \u2013 was dominated by the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) who rose to prominence via the organisation, having restarted recruitment in 1909. These members feared that Home Rule's enactment would result in a broad, seemingly perpetual, contentment with the British Empire. Another militant group, the Irish Citizen Army, was formed by trade unionists as a result of the Dublin Lock-out of that year. The issue of Home Rule appeared to some, as the basis of an \"imminent civil war\".\nOn the outbreak of the First World War, the Third Home Rule Bill was enacted, but its implementation was postponed for the war's duration. It was widely believed at the time that the war would not last more than a few months. The Irish Volunteers split: the great majority of its 160,000 members \u2013 thereafter known as the National Volunteers \u2013 followed John Redmond and supported the British war effort, some 35,000 to 40,000 of them enlisting in the British Army, while the smaller faction of 2,000 to 3,000 \u2013 who retained the name \u2013 opposed any involvement in the war. The official policy thus became \"the abolition of the system of governing Ireland through Dublin Castle and the British military power and the establishment of a National Government in its place\"; the Volunteers believed that \"England's difficulty\" was \"Ireland's opportunity\".\nPlanning the Rising.\nThe Supreme Council of the IRB met on 5 September 1914, just over a month after the British government had declared war on Germany. At this meeting, they elected to stage an uprising before the war ended and to secure help from Germany. Responsibility for the planning of the rising was given to Tom Clarke and Se\u00e1n Mac Diarmada. Patrick Pearse, Michael Joseph O'Rahilly, Joseph Plunkett and Bulmer Hobson would assume general control of the Volunteers by March 1915.\nIn May 1915, Clarke and Mac Diarmada established a Military Council within the IRB, consisting of Pearse, Plunkett and \u00c9amonn Ceannt \u2013 and soon themselves \u2013 to devise plans for a rising. The Military Council functioned independently and in opposition to those who considered a possible uprising inopportune. Volunteer Chief-of-Staff Eoin MacNeill supported a rising only if the British government attempted to suppress the Volunteers or introduce conscription in Ireland, and if such a rising had some chance of success. Hobson and IRB President Denis McCullough held similar views as did much of the executive branches of both organisations.\nThe Military Council kept its plans secret, so as to prevent the British authorities from learning of the plans, and to thwart those within the organisation who might try to stop the rising. The secrecy of the plans was such that the Military Council largely superseded the IRB's Supreme Council with even McCullough being unaware of some of the plans, whereas the likes of MacNeill were only informed as the Rising rapidly approached. Although most Volunteers were oblivious to any plans their training increased in the preceding year. The public nature of their training heightened tensions with authorities, which, come the next year, manifested in rumours of the Rising. Public displays likewise existed in the espousal of anti-recruitment. The number of Volunteers also increased: between December 1914 and February 1916 the rank and file rose from 9,700 to 12,215. Although the likes of the civil servants were discouraged from joining the Volunteers, the organisation was permitted by law.\nShortly after the outbreak of World War I, Roger Casement and John Devoy went to Germany and began negotiations with the German government and military. Casement \u2013 later accompanied by Plunkett \u2013 persuaded the Germans to announce their support for Irish independence in November 1914. Casement envisioned the recruitment of Irish prisoners of war, to be known as the Irish Brigade, aided by a German expeditionary force who would secure the line of the River Shannon, before advancing on the capital. Neither intention came to fruition, but the German military did agree to ship arms and ammunition to the Volunteers, gunrunning having become difficult and dangerous on account of the war.\nIn late 1915 and early 1916 Devoy had trusted couriers deliver approximately $100,000 from the American-based Irish Republican organization Clan na Gael to the IRB. In January 1916 the Supreme Council of the IRB decided that the rising would begin on Easter Sunday, 23 April 1916. On 5 February 1916 Devoy received a coded message from the Supreme Council of the IRB informing him of their decision to start a rebellion at Easter 1916: \"We have decided to begin action on Easter Sunday. We must have your arms and munitions in Limerick between Good Friday and Easter Sunday. We expect German help immediately after beginning action. We might have to begin earlier.\"\nHead of the Irish Citizen Army, James Connolly, was unaware of the IRB's plans, and threatened to start a rebellion on his own if other parties failed to act. The IRB leaders met with Connolly in Dolphin's Barn in January 1916 and convinced him to join forces with them. They agreed that they would launch a rising together at Easter and made Connolly the sixth member of the Military Council. Thomas MacDonagh would later become the seventh and final member.\nThe death of the old Fenian leader Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa in New York City in August 1915 was an opportunity to mount a spectacular demonstration. His body was sent to Ireland for burial in Glasnevin Cemetery, with the Volunteers in charge of arrangements. Huge crowds lined the route and gathered at the graveside. Pearse (wearing the uniform of the Irish Volunteers) made a dramatic funeral oration, a rallying call to republicans, which ended with the words \"Ireland unfree shall never be at peace\".\nBuild-up to Easter Week.\nIn early April, Pearse issued orders to the Irish Volunteers for three days of \"parades and manoeuvres\" beginning on Easter Sunday. He had the authority to do this, as the Volunteers' Director of Organisation. The idea was that IRB members within the organisation would know these were orders to begin the rising, while men such as MacNeill and the British authorities would take it at face value.\nOn 9 April, the German Navy dispatched the SS \"Libau\" for County Kerry, disguised as the Norwegian ship \"Aud\". It was loaded with 20,000 rifles, one million rounds of ammunition, and explosives. Casement also left for Ireland aboard the German submarine \"U-19\". He was disappointed with the level of support offered by the Germans and he intended to stop or at least postpone the rising. During this time, the Volunteers amassed ammunition from various sources, including the adolescent Michael McCabe.\nOn Wednesday 19 April, Alderman Tom Kelly, a Sinn F\u00e9in member of Dublin Corporation, read out at a meeting of the corporation a document purportedly leaked from Dublin Castle, detailing plans by the British authorities to shortly arrest leaders of the Irish Volunteers, Sinn F\u00e9in and the Gaelic League, and occupy their premises. Although the British authorities said the \"Castle Document\" was fake, MacNeill ordered the Volunteers to prepare to resist. Unbeknownst to MacNeill, the document had been forged by the Military Council to persuade moderates of the need for their planned uprising. It was an edited version of a real document outlining British plans in the event of conscription. That same day, the Military Council informed senior Volunteer officers that the rising would begin on Easter Sunday. However, it chose not to inform the rank-and-file, or moderates such as MacNeill, until the last minute.\nThe following day, MacNeill got wind that a rising was about to be launched and threatened to do everything he could to prevent it, short of informing the British. He and Hobson confronted Pearse, but refrained from decisive action as to avoiding instigating a rebellion of any kind; Hobson would be detained by Volunteers until the Rising occurred.\nThe \"SS Libau\" (disguised as the \"Aud\") and the \"U-19\" reached the coast of Kerry on Good Friday, 21 April. This was earlier than the Volunteers expected and so none were there to meet the vessels. The Royal Navy had known about the arms shipment and intercepted the \"SS Libau\", prompting the captain to scuttle the ship. Furthermore, Casement was captured shortly after he landed at Banna Strand.\nWhen MacNeill learned that the arms shipment had been lost, he reverted to his original position. With the support of other leaders of like mind, notably Bulmer Hobson and The O'Rahilly, he issued a countermand to all Volunteers, cancelling all actions for Sunday. This countermanding order was relayed to Volunteer officers and printed in the Sunday morning newspapers. The order resulted in a delay to the rising by a day, and some confusion over strategy for those who took part.\nBritish Naval Intelligence had been aware of the arms shipment, Casement's return, and the Easter date for the rising through radio messages between Germany and its embassy in the United States that were intercepted by the Royal Navy and deciphered in Room 40 of the Admiralty. It is unclear how extensive Room 40's decryptions preceding the Rising were. On the eve of the Rising, John Dillon wrote to Redmond of Dublin being \"full of most extraordinary rumours. And I have no doubt in my mind that the Clan men \u2013 are planning some devilish business \u2013 what it is I cannot make out. It may not come off \u2013 But you must not be surprised if something very unpleasant and mischievous happens this week\".\nThe information was passed to the Under-Secretary for Ireland, Sir Matthew Nathan, on 17 April, but without revealing its source; Nathan was doubtful about its accuracy. When news reached Dublin of the capture of the \"SS Libau\" and the arrest of Casement, Nathan conferred with the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Wimborne. Nathan proposed to raid Liberty Hall, headquarters of the Citizen Army, and Volunteer properties at Father Matthew Park and at Kimmage, but Wimborne insisted on wholesale arrests of the leaders. It was decided to postpone action until after Easter Monday, and in the meantime, Nathan telegraphed the Chief Secretary, Augustine Birrell, in London seeking his approval. By the time Birrell cabled his reply authorising the action, at noon on Monday 24 April 1916, the Rising had already begun.\nOn the morning of Easter Sunday, 23 April, the Military Council met at Liberty Hall to discuss what to do in light of MacNeill's countermanding order. They decided that the Rising would go ahead the following day, Easter Monday, and that the Irish Volunteers and Irish Citizen Army would go into action as the 'Army of the Irish Republic'. They elected Pearse as president of the Irish Republic, and also as Commander-in-Chief of the army; Connolly became Commandant of the Dublin Brigade. That weekend was largely spent preparing rations and manufacturing ammunition and bombs. Messengers were then sent to all units informing them of the new orders.\nThe Rising in Dublin.\nEaster Monday.\nOn the morning of Monday 24 April, about 1,200 members of the Irish Volunteers and Irish Citizen Army mustered at several locations in central Dublin. Among them were members of the all-female Cumann na mBan. Some wore Irish Volunteer and Citizen Army uniforms, while others wore civilian clothes with a yellow Irish Volunteer armband, military hats, and bandoliers. They were armed mostly with rifles (especially 1871 Mausers), but also with shotguns, revolvers, a few Mauser C96 semi-automatic pistols, and grenades. The number of Volunteers who mobilised was much smaller than expected. This was due to MacNeill's countermanding order, and the fact that the new orders had been sent so soon beforehand. However, several hundred Volunteers joined the Rising after it began.\nShortly before midday, the rebels began to seize important sites in central Dublin. The rebels' plan was to hold Dublin city centre. This was a large, oval-shaped area bounded by two canals: the Grand to the south and the Royal to the north, with the River Liffey running through the middle. On the southern and western edges of this district were five British Army barracks. Most of the rebels' positions had been chosen to defend against counter-attacks from these barracks. The rebels took the positions with ease. Civilians were evacuated and policemen were ejected or taken prisoner. Windows and doors were barricaded, food and supplies were secured, and first aid posts were set up. Barricades were erected on the streets to hinder British Army movement.\nA joint force of about 400 Volunteers and the Citizen Army gathered at Liberty Hall under the command of Commandant James Connolly. This was the headquarters battalion, and it also included Commander-in-Chief Patrick Pearse, as well as Tom Clarke, Se\u00e1n Mac Diarmada and Joseph Plunkett. They marched to the General Post Office (GPO) on O'Connell Street, Dublin's main thoroughfare, occupied the building and hoisted two republican flags. Pearse stood outside and read the Proclamation of the Irish Republic. Copies of the Proclamation were also pasted on walls and handed out to bystanders by Volunteers and newsboys. The GPO would be the rebels' headquarters for most of the Rising. Volunteers from the GPO also occupied other buildings on the street, including buildings overlooking O'Connell Bridge. They took over a wireless telegraph station and sent out a radio broadcast in Morse code, announcing that an Irish Republic had been declared. This was the first radio broadcast in Ireland.\nElsewhere, some of the headquarters battalion under Michael Mallin occupied St Stephen's Green, where they dug trenches and barricaded the surrounding roads. The 1st battalion, under Edward 'Ned' Daly, occupied the Four Courts and surrounding buildings, while a company under Se\u00e1n Heuston occupied the Mendicity Institution, across the River Liffey from the Four Courts. The 2nd battalion, under Thomas MacDonagh, occupied Jacob's biscuit factory. The 3rd battalion, under \u00c9amon de Valera, occupied Boland's Mill and surrounding buildings (uniquely, without the presence of Cumann na mBan women whom de Valera expressly excluded). The 4th battalion, under \u00c9amonn Ceannt, occupied the South Dublin Union and the distillery on Marrowbone Lane. From each of these garrisons, small units of rebels established outposts in the surrounding area.\nThe rebels also attempted to cut transport and communication links. As well as erecting roadblocks, they took control of various bridges and cut telephone and telegraph wires. Westland Row and Harcourt Street railway stations were occupied, though the latter only briefly. The railway line was cut at Fairview and the line was damaged by bombs at Amiens Street, Broadstone, Kingsbridge and Lansdowne Road.\nAround midday, a small team of Volunteers and Fianna \u00c9ireann members swiftly captured the Magazine Fort in the Phoenix Park and disarmed the guards. The goal was to seize weapons and blow up the ammunition store to signal that the Rising had begun. They seized weapons and planted explosives, but the blast was not loud enough to be heard across the city. The 23-year-old son of the fort's commander was fatally shot when he ran to raise the alarm.\nA contingent under Se\u00e1n Connolly occupied Dublin City Hall and adjacent buildings. They attempted to seize neighbouring Dublin Castle, the heart of British rule in Ireland. As they approached the gate a lone and unarmed police sentry, James O'Brien, attempted to stop them and was shot dead by Connolly. According to some accounts, he was the first casualty of the Rising. The rebels overpowered the soldiers in the guardroom but failed to press further. The British Army's chief intelligence officer, Major Ivon Price, fired on the rebels while the Under-Secretary for Ireland, Sir Matthew Nathan, helped shut the castle gates. Unbeknownst to the rebels, the Castle was lightly guarded and could have been taken with ease. The rebels instead laid siege to the Castle from City Hall. Fierce fighting erupted there after British reinforcements arrived. The rebels on the roof exchanged fire with soldiers on the street. Se\u00e1n Connolly was shot dead by a sniper, becoming the first rebel casualty. By the following morning, British forces had re-captured City Hall and taken the rebels prisoner.\nThe rebels did not attempt to take some other key locations, notably Trinity College, in the heart of the city centre and defended by only a handful of armed unionist students. Failure to capture the telephone exchange in Crown Alley left communications in the hands of the Government with GPO staff quickly repairing telephone wires that had been cut by the rebels. The failure to occupy strategic locations was attributed to lack of manpower. In at least two incidents, at Jacob's and Stephen's Green, the Volunteers and Citizen Army shot dead civilians trying to attack them or dismantle their barricades. Elsewhere, they hit civilians with their rifle butts to drive them off.\nThe British military were caught totally unprepared by the Rising and their response of the first day was generally un-coordinated. Two squadrons of British cavalry were sent to investigate what was happening. They took fire and casualties from rebel forces at the GPO and at the Four Courts. As one troop passed Nelson's Pillar, the rebels opened fire from the GPO, killing three cavalrymen and two horses and fatally wounding a fourth man. The cavalrymen retreated and were withdrawn to barracks. On Mount Street, a group of Volunteer Training Corps men stumbled upon the rebel position and four were killed before they reached Beggars Bush Barracks. Although ransacked, the barracks were never seized.\nThe only substantial combat of the first day of the Rising took place at the South Dublin Union where a piquet from the Royal Irish Regiment encountered an outpost of \u00c9amonn Ceannt's force at the northwestern corner of the South Dublin Union. The British troops, after taking some casualties, managed to regroup and launch several assaults on the position before they forced their way inside and the small rebel force in the tin huts at the eastern end of the Union surrendered. However, the Union complex as a whole remained in rebel hands. A nurse in uniform, Margaret Keogh, was shot dead by British soldiers at the Union. She is believed to have been the first civilian killed in the Rising.\nThree unarmed Dublin Metropolitan Police were shot dead on the first day of the Rising and their Commissioner pulled them off the streets. Partly as a result of the police withdrawal, a wave of looting broke out in the city centre, especially in the area of O'Connell Street (still officially called \"Sackville Street\" at the time).\nTuesday and Wednesday.\nLord Wimborne, the Lord Lieutenant, declared martial law on Tuesday evening and handed over civil power to Brigadier-General William Lowe. British forces initially put their efforts into securing the approaches to Dublin Castle and isolating the rebel headquarters, which they believed was in Liberty Hall. The British commander, Lowe, worked slowly, unsure of the size of the force he was up against, and with only 1,269 troops in the city when he arrived from the Curragh Camp in the early hours of Tuesday 25 April. City Hall was taken from the rebel unit that had attacked Dublin Castle on Tuesday morning.\nIn the early hours of Tuesday, 120 British soldiers, with machine guns, occupied two buildings overlooking St Stephen's Green: the Shelbourne Hotel and United Services Club. At dawn they opened fire on the Citizen Army occupying the green. The rebels returned fire but were forced to retreat to the Royal College of Surgeons building. They remained there for the rest of the week, exchanging fire with British forces.\nFighting erupted along the northern edge of the city centre on Tuesday afternoon. In the northeast, British troops left Amiens Street railway station in an armoured train, to secure and repair a section of damaged tracks. They were attacked by rebels who had taken up position at Annesley Bridge. After a two-hour battle, the British were forced to retreat and several soldiers were captured. At Phibsborough, in the northwest, rebels had occupied buildings and erected barricades at junctions on the North Circular Road. The British summoned 18-pounder field artillery from Athlone and shelled the rebel positions, destroying the barricades. After a fierce firefight, the rebels withdrew.\nThat afternoon Pearse walked out into O'Connell Street with a small escort and stood in front of Nelson's Pillar. As a large crowd gathered, he read out a ',' calling on them to support the Rising.\nThe rebels had failed to take either of Dublin's two main railway stations or either of its ports, at Dublin Port and Kingstown. As a result, during the following week, the British were able to bring in thousands of reinforcements from Britain and from their garrisons at the Curragh and Belfast. By the end of the week, British strength stood at over 16,000 men. Their firepower was provided by field artillery which they positioned on the Northside of the city at Phibsborough and at Trinity College, and by the patrol vessel \"Helga\", which sailed up the Liffey, having been summoned from the port at Kingstown. On Wednesday, 26 April, the guns at Trinity College and \"Helga\" shelled Liberty Hall, and the Trinity College guns then began firing at rebel positions, first at Boland's Mill and then in O'Connell Street. Some rebel commanders, particularly James Connolly, did not believe that the British would shell the 'second city' of the British Empire.\nThe principal rebel positions at the GPO, the Four Courts, Jacob's Factory and Boland's Mill saw little action. The British surrounded and bombarded them rather than assault them directly. One Volunteer in the GPO recalled, \"we did practically no shooting as there was no target\". Entertainment ensued within the factory, \"everybody merry &amp; cheerful\", bar the \"occasional sniping\", noted one Volunteer. However, where the rebels dominated the routes by which the British tried to funnel reinforcements into the city, there was fierce fighting.\nAt 5:25 PM a dozen Volunteers, including Eamon Martin, Garry Holohan, Robert Beggs, Sean Cody, Dinny O'Callaghan, Charles Shelley, and Peadar Breslin, attempted to occupy Broadstone railway station on Church Street. The attack was unsuccessful and Martin was injured.\nOn Wednesday morning, hundreds of British troops encircled the Mendicity Institution, which was occupied by 26 Volunteers under Se\u00e1n Heuston. British troops advanced on the building, supported by snipers and machine-gun fire, but the Volunteers put up stiff resistance. Eventually, the troops got close enough to hurl grenades into the building, some of which the rebels threw back. Exhausted and almost out of ammunition, Heuston's men became the first rebel position to surrender. Heuston had been ordered to hold his position for a few hours, to delay the British, but had held on for three days.\nReinforcements were sent to Dublin from Britain and disembarked at Kingstown on the morning of Wednesday 26 April. Heavy fighting occurred at the rebel-held positions around the Grand Canal as these troops advanced towards Dublin. More than 1,000 Sherwood Foresters were repeatedly caught in a crossfire trying to cross the canal at Mount Street Bridge. Seventeen Volunteers were able to severely disrupt the British advance, killing or wounding 240 men. Despite there being alternative routes across the canal nearby, General Lowe ordered repeated frontal assaults on the Mount Street position. The British eventually took the position, which had not been reinforced by the nearby rebel garrison at Boland's Mills, on Thursday, but the fighting there inflicted up to two-thirds of their casualties for the entire week for a cost of just four dead Volunteers. It had taken nearly nine hours for the British to advance .\nOn Wednesday Linenhall Barracks on Constitution Hill was burnt down under the orders of Commandant Edward Daly to prevent its reoccupation by the British.\nThursday to Saturday.\nThe rebel position at the South Dublin Union (site of the present-day St. James's Hospital) and Marrowbone Lane, further west along the canal, also inflicted heavy losses on British troops. The South Dublin Union was a large complex of buildings and there was vicious fighting around and inside the buildings. Cathal Brugha, a rebel officer, distinguished himself in this action and was badly wounded. By the end of the week, the British had taken some of the buildings in the Union, but others remained in rebel hands. British troops also took casualties in unsuccessful frontal assaults on the Marrowbone Lane Distillery.\nThe third major scene of fighting during the week was in the area of North King Street, north of the Four Courts. The rebels had established strong outposts in the area, occupying numerous small buildings and barricading the streets. From Thursday to Saturday, the British made repeated attempts to capture the area, in what was some of the fiercest fighting of the Rising. As the troops moved in, the rebels continually opened fire from windows and behind chimneys and barricades. At one point, a platoon led by Major Sheppard made a bayonet charge on one of the barricades but was cut down by rebel fire. The British employed machine guns and attempted to avoid direct fire by using makeshift armoured trucks, and by mouse-holing through the inside walls of terraced houses to get near the rebel positions. By the time of the rebel headquarters' surrender on Saturday, the South Staffordshire Regiment under Colonel Taylor had advanced only down the street at a cost of 11 dead and 28 wounded. The enraged troops broke into the houses along the street and shot or bayoneted fifteen unarmed male civilians whom they accused of being rebel fighters.\nElsewhere, at Portobello Barracks, an officer named Bowen Colthurst summarily executed six civilians, including the pacifist nationalist activist, Francis Sheehy-Skeffington. These instances of British troops killing Irish civilians would later be highly controversial in Ireland.\nSurrender.\nThe headquarters garrison at the GPO was forced to evacuate after days of shelling when a fire caused by the shells spread to the GPO. Connolly had been incapacitated by a bullet wound to the ankle and had passed command on to Pearse. The O'Rahilly was killed in a sortie from the GPO. They tunnelled through the walls of the neighbouring buildings in order to evacuate the Post Office without coming under fire and took up a new position in 16 Moore Street. The young Se\u00e1n McLoughlin was given military command and planned a breakout, but Pearse realised this plan would lead to further loss of civilian life.\nOn the eve of the surrender, there had been about 35 Cumann na mBan women remaining in the GPO. In the final group that left with Pearse and Connolly, there were three: Connolly's aide de camp, Winifred Carney, who had entered with the original ICA contingent, and the dispatchers and nurses Elizabeth O'Farrell, and Julia Grenan.\nOn Saturday 29 April, from this new headquarters, Pearse issued an order for all companies to surrender. Pearse surrendered unconditionally to Brigadier-General Lowe. The surrender document read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In order to prevent the further slaughter of Dublin citizens, and in the hope of saving the lives of our followers now surrounded and hopelessly outnumbered, the members of the Provisional Government present at headquarters have agreed to an unconditional surrender, and the commandants of the various districts in the City and County will order their commands to lay down arms.\nThe other posts surrendered only after Pearse's surrender order, carried by O'Farrell, reached them. Sporadic fighting, therefore, continued until Sunday, when word of the surrender was got to the other rebel garrisons. Command of British forces had passed from Lowe to General John Maxwell, who arrived in Dublin just in time to take the surrender. Maxwell was made temporary military governor of Ireland.\nThe Rising outside Dublin.\nThe Rising was planned to occur across the nation, but MacNeill's countermanding order coupled with the failure to secure German arms hindered this objective significantly. Charles Townshend contended that serious intentions for a national Rising were meagre, being diminished by a focus upon Dublin \u2013 although this is an increasingly contentious notion.\nIn the south, around 1,200 Volunteers commanded by Tom\u00e1s Mac Curtain mustered on the Sunday in Cork, but they dispersed on Wednesday after receiving nine contradictory orders by dispatch from the Volunteer leadership in Dublin. At their Sheares Street headquarters, some of the Volunteers engaged in a standoff with British forces. Much to the anger of many Volunteers, MacCurtain, under pressure from Catholic clergy, agreed to surrender his men's arms to the British. The only violence in County Cork occurred when the RIC attempted to raid the home of the Kent family. The Kent brothers, who were Volunteers, engaged in a three-hour firefight with the RIC. An RIC officer and one of the brothers were killed, while another brother was later executed. Virtually all rebel family homes were raided, either during or after the Rising.\nIn the north, Volunteer companies were mobilised in County Tyrone at Coalisland (including 132 men from Belfast led by IRB President Denis McCullough) and Carrickmore, under the leadership of Patrick McCartan. They also mobilised at Creeslough, County Donegal under Daniel Kelly and James McNulty. However, in part because of the confusion caused by the countermanding order, the Volunteers in these locations dispersed without fighting. McCartan claimed that the decision by the leadership of the rebellion not to share plans led to poor communication and uncertainty. McCartan wrote that Tyrone Volunteers could have &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"...captured Omagh and burned the barracks...we could have had all the men of Tyrone and Derry...in five districts on Sunday, cleared the police barracks on Sunday night...destroyed wires and railways and got into position on Monday night...We could have marched out of Tyrone probably 1,000 strong, but at worst 500, and all well-armed. Is it any wonder I feel like cursing the Dublin men?\" \nAshbourne.\nIn north County Dublin, about 60 Volunteers mobilised near Swords. They belonged to the 5th Battalion of the Dublin Brigade (also known as the Fingal Battalion), and were led by Thomas Ashe and his second in command, Richard Mulcahy. Unlike the rebels elsewhere, the Fingal Battalion successfully employed guerrilla tactics. They set up camp and Ashe split the battalion into four sections: three would undertake operations while the fourth was kept in reserve, guarding camp and foraging for food. The Volunteers moved against the RIC barracks in Swords, Donabate and Garristown, forcing the RIC to surrender and seizing all the weapons. They also damaged railway lines and cut telegraph wires. The railway line at Blanchardstown was bombed to prevent a troop train from reaching Dublin. This derailed a cattle train, which had been sent ahead of the troop train.\nThe only large-scale engagement of the Rising, outside Dublin city, was at Ashbourne, County Meath. On Friday, about 35 Fingal Volunteers surrounded the Ashbourne RIC barracks and called on it to surrender, but the RIC responded with a volley of gunfire. A firefight followed, and the RIC surrendered after the Volunteers attacked the building with a homemade grenade. Before the surrender could be taken, up to sixty RIC men arrived in a convoy, sparking a five-hour gun battle, in which eight RIC men were killed and 18 wounded. Two Volunteers were also killed and five wounded, and a civilian was fatally shot. The RIC surrendered and were disarmed. Ashe let them go after warning them not to fight against the Irish Republic again. Ashe's men camped at Kilsalaghan near Dublin until they received orders to surrender on Saturday. The Fingal Battalion's tactics during the Rising foreshadowed those of the IRA during the War of Independence that followed.\nVolunteer contingents also mobilised nearby in counties Meath and Louth but proved unable to link up with the North Dublin unit until after it had surrendered. In County Louth, Volunteers shot dead an RIC man near the village of Castlebellingham on 24 April, in an incident in which 15 RIC men were also taken prisoner.\nEnniscorthy.\nIn County Wexford, 100\u2013200 Volunteers\u2014led by Robert Brennan, S\u00e9amus Doyle and Se\u00e1n Etchingham\u2014took over the town of Enniscorthy on Thursday 27 April until Sunday. Volunteer officer Paul Galligan had cycled 200\u00a0km from rebel headquarters in Dublin with orders to mobilise. They blocked all roads into the town and made a brief attack on the RIC barracks, but chose to blockade it rather than attempt to capture it. They flew the tricolour over the Athenaeum building, which they had made their headquarters, and paraded uniformed in the streets. They also occupied Vinegar Hill, where the United Irishmen had made a last stand in the 1798 rebellion. The public largely supported the rebels and many local men offered to join them.\nBy Saturday, up to 1,000 rebels had been mobilised, and a detachment was sent to occupy the nearby village of Ferns. In Wexford, the British assembled a column of 1,000 soldiers (including the Connaught Rangers), two field guns and a 4.7 inch naval gun on a makeshift armoured train. On Sunday, the British sent messengers to Enniscorthy, informing the rebels of Pearse's surrender order. However, the Volunteer officers were sceptical. Two of them were escorted by the British to Arbour Hill Prison, where Pearse confirmed the surrender order.\nGalway.\nIn County Galway, 600\u2013700 Volunteers mobilised on Tuesday under Liam Mellows. His plan was to \"bottle up the British garrison and divert the British from concentrating on Dublin\". However, his men were poorly armed, with only 25 rifles, 60 revolvers, 300 shotguns and some homemade grenades \u2013 many of them only had pikes. Most of the action took place in a rural area to the east of Galway city. They made unsuccessful attacks on the RIC barracks at Clarinbridge and Oranmore, captured several officers, and bombed a bridge and railway line, before taking up position near Athenry. There was also a skirmish between rebels and an RIC mobile patrol at Carnmore crossroads. A constable, Patrick Whelan, was shot dead after he had called to the rebels: \"Surrender, boys, I know ye all\".\nOn Wednesday, arrived in Galway Bay and shelled the countryside on the northeastern edge of Galway. The rebels retreated southeast to Moyode, an abandoned country house and estate. From here they set up lookout posts and sent out scouting parties. On Friday, landed 200 Royal Marines and began shelling the countryside near the rebel position. The rebels retreated further south to Limepark, another abandoned country house. Deeming the situation to be hopeless, they dispersed on Saturday morning. Many went home and were arrested following the Rising, while others, including Mellows, went \"on the run\". By the time British reinforcements arrived in the west, the Rising there had already disintegrated.\nLimerick and Clare.\nIn County Limerick, 300 Irish Volunteers assembled at Glenquin Castle near Killeedy, but they did not take any military action.\nIn County Clare, Micheal Brennan marched with 100 Volunteers (from Meelick, Oatfield, and Cratloe) to the River Shannon on Easter Monday to await orders from the Rising leaders in Dublin, and weapons from the expected Casement shipment. However, neither arrived and no actions were taken.\nCasualties.\nThe Easter Rising resulted in at least 485 deaths, according to the Glasnevin Trust.\nOf those killed:\nMore than 2,600 were wounded; including at least 2,200 civilians and rebels, at least 370 British soldiers and 29 policemen. All 16 police fatalities and 22 of the British soldiers killed were Irishmen. About 40 of those killed were children (under 17 years old), four of whom were members of the rebel forces.\nThe number of casualties each day steadily rose, with 55 killed on Monday and 78 killed on Saturday. The British Army suffered their biggest losses in the Battle of Mount Street Bridge on Wednesday when at least 30 soldiers were killed. The rebels also suffered their biggest losses on that day. The RIC suffered most of their casualties in the Battle of Ashbourne on Friday.\nThe majority of the casualties, both killed and wounded, were civilians. Most of the civilian casualties and most of the casualties overall were caused by the British Army. This was due to the British using artillery, incendiary shells and heavy machine guns in built-up areas, as well as their \"inability to discern rebels from civilians\". One Royal Irish Regiment officer recalled, \"they regarded, not unreasonably, every one they saw as an enemy, and fired at anything that moved\". Many other civilians were killed when caught in the crossfire. Both sides, British and rebel, also shot civilians deliberately on occasion; for not obeying orders (such as to stop at checkpoints), for assaulting or attempting to hinder them, and for looting. There were also instances of British troops killing unarmed civilians out of revenge or frustration: notably in the North King Street Massacre, where fifteen were killed, and at Portobello Barracks, where six were shot. Furthermore, there were incidents of friendly fire. On 29 April, the Royal Dublin Fusiliers under Company Quartermaster Sergeant Robert Flood shot dead two British officers and two Irish civilian employees of the Guinness Brewery after he decided they were rebels. Flood was court-martialled for murder but acquitted.\nAccording to the historian Fearghal McGarry, the rebels attempted to avoid needless bloodshed. Desmond Ryan stated that Volunteers were told \"no firing was to take place except under orders or to repel attack\". Aside from the engagement at Ashbourne, policemen and unarmed soldiers were not systematically targeted, and a large group of policemen was allowed to stand at Nelson's Pillar throughout Monday. McGarry writes that the Irish Citizen Army \"were more ruthless than Volunteers when it came to shooting policemen\" and attributes this to the \"acrimonious legacy\" of the Dublin Lock-out.\nThe vast majority of the Irish casualties were buried in Glasnevin Cemetery in the aftermath of the fighting. British families came to Dublin Castle in May 1916 to reclaim the bodies of British soldiers, and funerals were arranged. Soldiers whose bodies were not claimed were given military funerals in Grangegorman Military Cemetery.\nAftermath.\nArrests and executions.\nIn the immediate aftermath, the Rising was commonly described as the \"Sinn F\u00e9in Rebellion\", reflecting a popular belief that Sinn F\u00e9in, a separatist organisation that was neither militant nor republican, was behind it. Thus General Maxwell signalled his intention \"to arrest all dangerous Sinn Feiners\", including \"those who have taken an active part in the movement although not in the present rebellion\".\nA total of 3,430 men and 79 women were arrested, including 425 people for looting \u2013 roughly, 1,500 of these arrests accounted for the rebels. Detainees were overwhelmingly young, Catholic and religious. 1,424 men and 73 women were released after a few weeks of imprisonment; those interned without trial in England and Wales (see below) were released on Christmas Eve, 1916; the remaining majority of convicts were held until June 1917.\nA series of courts martial began on 2 May, in which 187 people were tried. Controversially, Maxwell decided that the courts martial would be held in secret and without a defence, which Crown law officers later ruled to have been illegal. Some of those who conducted the trials had commanded British troops involved in suppressing the Rising, a conflict of interest that the Military Manual prohibited. Only one of those tried by courts martial was a woman, Constance Markievicz, who was also the only woman to be kept in solitary confinement. Ninety were sentenced to death. Fifteen of those (including all seven signatories of the Proclamation) had their sentences confirmed by Maxwell and fourteen were executed by firing squad at Kilmainham Gaol between 3 and 12 May.\nMaxwell stated that only the \"ringleaders\" and those proven to have committed \"cold-blooded murder\" would be executed. However, some of those executed were not leaders and did not kill anyone, such as Willie Pearse and John MacBride; Thomas Kent did not come out at all\u2014he was executed for the killing of a police officer during the raid on his house the week after the Rising. The most prominent leader to escape execution was \u00c9amon de Valera, Commandant of the 3rd Battalion, who did so partly because of his American birth. Hobson went into hiding, re-emerging after the June amnesty, largely to scorn.\nMost of the executions took place over a ten-day period:\nThe arrests greatly affected hundreds of families and communities; anti-English sentiment developed among the public, as separatists declared the arrests as indicative of a draconian approach. The public, at large, feared that the response was \"an assault on the entirety of the Irish national cause\". This radical transformation was recognised in the moment and had become a point of concern among British authorities; after Connolly's execution, the remaining death sentences were commuted to penal servitude. Growing support for republicanism can be found as early as June 1916; imprisonment largely failed to deter militants \u2013 interned rebels would proceed to fight at higher rates than those who weren't \u2013 who thereafter quickly reorganised the movement.\nFrongoch prison camp.\nUnder Regulation 14B of the Defence of the Realm Act 1914 1,836 men were interned at internment camps and prisons in England and Wales. As urban areas were becoming the nexus for republicanism, Internees were largely from such areas. Many Internees had not taken part in the Rising; many thereafter became sympathetic to the nationalist cause.\nInternees occupied themselves with the likes of lectures, craftwork, music and sports. These activities \u2013 which included games of Gaelic football, crafting of Gaelic symbols, and lessons in Irish \u2013 regularly had a nationalist character and the cause itself developed a sense of cohesion within the camps. The military studies included discussion of the Rising. Internment lasted until December of that year with releases having started in July. Martial law had ceased by the end of November.\nCasement was tried in London for high treason and hanged at Pentonville Prison on 3 August.\nBritish atrocities.\nOn Tuesday 25 April, Dubliner Francis Sheehy Skeffington, a pacifist nationalist activist, was arrested and then taken as hostage and human shield by Captain John Bowen-Colthurst; that night Bowen-Colthurst shot dead a teenage boy. Skeffington was executed the next day \u2013 alongside two journalists. Two hours later, Bowen-Colthurst captured the Labour Party councillor and IRB lieutenant, Richard O'Carroll and had him shot in the street. Major Sir Francis Vane raised concerns over Bowen-Colthurst's actions and saw to him being court martialled. Bowen-Colthurst was found guilty but insane and was sentenced to an insane asylum. Owing to political pressure, an inquiry soon transpired, revealing the murders and their cover-up. The killing of Skeffington and others provoked outrage among citizens.\nThe other incident was the \"North King Street Massacre\". On the night of 28\u201329 April, British soldiers of the South Staffordshire Regiment, under Colonel Henry Taylor, had burst into houses on North King Street and killed fifteen male civilians whom they accused of being rebels. The soldiers shot or bayoneted the victims, and then secretly buried some of them in cellars or backyards after robbing them. The area saw some of the fiercest fighting of the Rising and the British had taken heavy casualties for little gain. Maxwell attempted to excuse the killings and argued that the rebels were ultimately responsible. He claimed that \"the rebels wore no uniform\" and that the people of North King Street were rebel sympathisers. Maxwell concluded that such incidents \"are absolutely unavoidable in such a business as this\" and that \"under the circumstance the troops [...] behaved with the greatest restraint\". A private brief, prepared for the Prime Minister, said the soldiers \"had orders not to take any prisoners\" but took it to mean they were to shoot any suspected rebel. The City Coroner's inquest found that soldiers had killed \"unarmed and unoffending\" residents. The military court of inquiry ruled that no specific soldiers could be held responsible, and no action was taken.\nInquiry.\nA Royal Commission was set up to enquire into the causes of the Rising. It began hearings on 18 May under the chairmanship of Lord Hardinge of Penshurst. The Commission heard evidence from Sir Matthew Nathan, Augustine Birrell, Lord Wimborne, Sir Neville Chamberlain (Inspector-General of the Royal Irish Constabulary), General Lovick Friend, Major Ivor Price of Military Intelligence and others. The report, published on 26 June, was critical of the Dublin administration, saying that \"Ireland for several years had been administered on the principle that it was safer and more expedient to leave the law in abeyance if collision with any faction of the Irish people could thereby be avoided.\" Birrell and Nathan had resigned immediately after the Rising. Wimborne resisted the pressure to resign, but was recalled to London by Asquith. He was re-appointed in July 1916. Chamberlain also resigned.\nReaction of the Dublin public.\nAt first, many Dubliners were bewildered by the outbreak of the Rising. James Stephens, who was in Dublin during the week, thought, \"None of these people were prepared for Insurrection. The thing had been sprung on them so suddenly they were unable to take sides.\" Eyewitnesses compared the ruin of Dublin with the destruction of towns in Europe in the war: the physical damage, which included over ninety fires, was largely confined to Sackville Street. In the immediate aftermath, the Irish government was in disarray.\nThere was great hostility towards the Volunteers in some parts of the city which escalated to physical violence in some instances. Historian Keith Jeffery noted that most of the opposition came from the dependents of British Army personnel. The death and destruction, which resulted in disrupted trade, considerable looting and unemployment, contributed to the antagonism of the Volunteers, who were denounced as \"murderers\" and \"starvers of the people\" \u2013 the monetary consequences of the Rising were estimated to be at \u00a32,500,000. International aid was supplied to residents \u2013 nationalists aided the dependents of Volunteers. The British Government compensated the consequences to the sum of \u00a32,500,000.\nSupport for the rebels did exist among Dubliners, expressed through both crowds cheering at prisoners and reverent silence. With martial law seeing this expression prosecuted, many would-be supporters elected to remain silent although \"a strong undercurrent of disloyalty\" was still felt. Drawing upon this support, and amidst the deluge of nationalist ephemera, the significantly popular \"Catholic Bulletin\" eulogised Volunteers killed in action and implored readers to donate; entertainment was offered as an extension of those intentions, targeting local sectors to great success. The \"Bulletin\"'s Catholic character allowed it to evade the widespread censorship of press and seizure of republican propaganda; it therefore exposed many unaware readers to such propaganda.\nRise of Sinn F\u00e9in.\nA meeting called by George Noble Plunkett on 19 April 1917 led to the formation of a broad political movement under the banner of Sinn F\u00e9in which was formalised at the Sinn F\u00e9in Ard Fheis of 25 October 1917. The Conscription Crisis of 1918 further intensified public support for Sinn F\u00e9in before the general election to the British Parliament on 14 December 1918, which resulted in a landslide victory for Sinn F\u00e9in, winning 73 seats out of 105, whose Members of Parliament (MPs) gathered in Dublin on 21 January 1919 to form D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann and adopt the Declaration of Independence.\nDuring that election, they drew directly upon the Rising and their popularity was significantly accreditable to that association, one that accrued political prestige until the end of the century. Many participants of the Rising would soon assume electoral positions. Sinn F\u00e9in served as an alternative to the Irish Parliamentary Party whose support for British establishments alienated voters.\nSinn F\u00e9in would become closely aligned with the Irish Republican Army, who sought to continue the IRB's ideals and waged armed conflict against British forces.\nLegacy.\n1916 \u2013 containing both the Rising and the Battle of the Somme, events paramount to the collective memory of Irish Republicans and Ulster Unionists, respectively \u2013 had a profound effect on Ireland and is remembered accordingly. The Rising was among the events that ended colonial rule in Ireland, succeeded by the Irish War of Independence. The legacy of the Rising possess many dimensions although the declaration of the Republic and the ensuing executions remain focal points.\nAnnual parades in celebration of the Rising occurred for many years, however, ceased after The Troubles in Northern Ireland began, being seen as supportive of republican paramilitary violence \u2013 the Rising is a common feature of republican murals in Northern Ireland. These commemorations celebrated the Rising as the origin of the Irish state, a stance reiterated through extensive analysis. Unionists contend that the Rising was an illegal attack on the British State that should not be celebrated. Revivalism of the parades has inspired significant public debate, although the centenary of the Rising, which featured the likes of ceremonies and memorials, was largely successful and praised for its sensitivity.\nThe leaders of the Rising were \"instantly apotheosized\" and remembrance was situated within a larger republican tradition of claimed martyrdom \u2013 the Catholic Church would contend this narrative as the foundational myth of the Irish Free State, assuming a place within the remembrance as an association between republicanism and Catholicism grew. The \"Pearsean combination of Catholicism, Gaelicism, and spiritual nationalism\" would become dominant within republicanism, the ideas gaining a quasi-religiosity, whilst helping unify later strands thereof. Within the Free State, the Rising was sanctified by officials, positioned as a \"highly disciplined military operation\". Historians largely agree that the Rising succeeded by offering a symbolic display of sacrifice, while the military action was a considerable failure. As Monk Gibbon remarked, the \"shots from khaki-uniformed firing parties did more to create the Republic of Ireland than any shot fired by a Volunteer in the course of Easter week\".\nLiterature surrounding the Rising was significant: MacDonagh, Plunkett, and Pearse were themselves poets, whose ideals were granted a spiritual dimension in their work; Arnold Bax, Francis Ledwidge, George William Russell and W. B. Yeats responded through verse that ranged from endorsement to elegies. Although James Joyce was ambivalent to the insurgence, metaphors of and imagery consistent with the Rising appear in his later work. Hugh Leonard, Denis Johnston, Tom Murphy, Roddy Doyle and Sorley MacLean are among writers would later invoke the Rising. Now extensively dramatised, its theatricality was identified in the moment and has been stressed in its remembrance. Literary and political evocation position the Rising as a \"watershed moment\" central to Irish history.\nBlack, Basque, Breton, Catalan and Indian nationalists have drawn upon the Rising and its consequences. For the latter, Jawaharlal Nehru noted, the symbolic display was the appeal, that of the transcendent, \"invincible spirit of a nation\"; such was broadly appealing in America, where diasporic, occasionally socialist, nationalism occurred. Vladimir Lenin was effusive, ascribing its anti-imperialism a singular significance within geopolitics \u2013 his only misgiving was its estrangement from the broader wave of revolution occurring.\nDuring the Troubles, significant revisionism of the Rising occurred. Revisionists contended that it was not a \"heroic drama\" as thought but rather informed the violence transpiring, by having legitimised a \"cult of 'blood sacrifice'\". With the advent of a Provisional IRA ceasefire and the beginning of what became known as the Peace Process during the 1990s, the government's view of the Rising grew more positive and in 1996 an 80th anniversary commemoration at the Garden of Remembrance in Dublin was attended by the Taoiseach and leader of Fine Gael, John Bruton.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10353", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10353", "title": "Eschrichtiidae", "text": "Family of mammals\nEschrichtiidae or the gray whales is a family of baleen whale (Parvorder Mysticeti) with a single extant species, the gray whale (\"Eschrichtius robustus\"), as well as four described fossil genera: \"Archaeschrichtius\" (Miocene), \"Glaucabalaena\" and \"Eschrichtioides\" (Pliocene) from Italy, and \"Gricetoides\" from the Pliocene of North Carolina. Some phylogenetic studies have found this family to be invalid, with its members nesting inside of the clade Balaenopteridae. The names of the extant genus and the family honours Danish zoologist Daniel Eschricht.\nTaxonomy.\nIn his morphological analysis, found that eschrichtiids and Cetotheriidae (\"Cetotherium\", \"Mixocetus\" and \"Metopocetus\") form a monophyletic sister group of Balaenopteridae.\nA specimen from the Late Pliocene of Northern Italy, named \"\"Cetotherium\" gastaldii\" by and renamed \"\"Balaenoptera\" gastaldii\" by , was identified as a basal eschrichtiid by who recombined it to \"Eschrichtioides gastaldii\".\n found that the gray whale is phylogenetically distinct from rorquals and that previous morphological studies were correct in the conclusion that the evolution of gulp feeding was a single event in the rorqual lineage. In contrast, multiple later studies found the gray whale to fall within the family Balaenopteridae, being more derived than the minke whales but basal to all other members in the family, and reclassified it in Balaenopteridae; the American Society of Mammalogists has followed this classification.\nEvolution.\nFossils of Eschrichtiidae have been found in all major oceanic basins in the Northern Hemisphere, and the family is believed \u03c4\u03bf date back to the Late Miocene. Today, gray whales are only present in the northern Pacific, but a population was also present in the northern Atlantic before being driven to extinction by European whalers three centuries ago.\nFossil eschrichtiids from before the Holocene are rare compared to other fossil mysticetes. The only Pleistocene fossil from the Pacific referred to \"E. eschrichtius\" is a partial skeleton and an associated skull from California, estimated to be about 200 thousand years old. However, a late Pliocene fossil from Hokkaido, Japan, referred to \"Eschrichtius\" sp. is estimated to be https:// 3.9 and a similar unnamed fossil has been reported from California.\nIn their description of \"Archaeschrichtius ruggieroi\" from the late Miocene of Italy, argued that eschrichtiids most likely originated in the Mediterranean Basin about https://\u00a0million years ago and remained there, either permanently or intermittently, at least until the Early Pliocene (5\u20133 Mya), (but see Messinian salinity crisis.)\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10354", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10354", "title": "Edmund I", "text": "King of the English from 939 to 946\nEdmund I or Eadmund I (920/921 \u2013 26 May 946) was King of the English from 27 October 939 until his death in 946. He was the elder son of King Edward the Elder and his third wife, Queen Eadgifu, and a grandson of King Alfred the Great. After Edward died in 924, he was succeeded by his eldest son, Edmund's half-brother \u00c6thelstan. Edmund was crowned after \u00c6thelstan died childless in 939. He had two sons, Eadwig and Edgar, by his first wife \u00c6lfgifu, and none by his second wife \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d. His sons were young children when he was killed in a brawl with an outlaw at Pucklechurch in Gloucestershire, and he was succeeded by his younger brother Eadred, who died in 955 and was followed by Edmund's sons in succession.\n\u00c6thelstan had succeeded as the king of England south of the Humber and he became the first king of all England when he conquered Viking-ruled York in 927, but after his death Anlaf Guthfrithson was accepted as King of York and extended Viking rule to the Five Boroughs of north-east Mercia. Edmund was initially forced to accept the reverse, the first major setback for the West Saxon dynasty since Alfred's reign, but he was able to recover his position following Anlaf's death in 941. In 942, Edmund took back control of the Five Boroughs and in 944 he regained control over the whole of England when he expelled the Viking kings of York. Eadred had to deal with further revolts when he became king, and York was not finally conquered until 954. \u00c6thelstan had achieved a dominant position over other British kings and Edmund maintained this, perhaps apart from Scotland. The north Welsh king Idwal Foel may have allied with the Vikings as he was killed by the English in 942. The British kingdom of Strathclyde may also have sided with the Vikings as Edmund ravaged it in 945 and then ceded it to Malcolm I of Scotland. Edmund also continued his brother's friendly relations with Continental rulers, several of whom were married to his half-sisters.\nEdmund inherited his brother's interests and leading advisers, such as Oda, whom he appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 941, \u00c6thelstan Half-King, ealdorman of East Anglia, and \u00c6lfheah the Bald, Bishop of Winchester. Government at the local level was mainly carried on by ealdormen, and Edmund made substantial changes in personnel during his reign, with a move from \u00c6thelstan's main reliance on West Saxons to a greater prominence of men with Mercian connections. Unlike the close relatives of previous kings, his mother and brother attested many of Edmund's charters, suggesting a high degree of family cooperation. Edmund was also an active legislator, and three of his codes survive. Provisions include ones which attempt to regulate feuds and emphasise the sanctity of the royal person.\nThe major religious movement of the tenth century, the English Benedictine Reform, reached its peak under Edgar, but Edmund's reign was important in its early stages. He appointed Dunstan abbot of Glastonbury, where he was joined by \u00c6thelwold. They were to be two of the leaders of the reform and they made the abbey the first important centre for disseminating it. Unlike the circle of his son Edgar, Edmund did not take the view that Benedictine monasticism was the only worthwhile religious life, and he also patronised unreformed (non-Benedictine) establishments.\nBackground.\nIn the ninth century the four Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of Wessex, Mercia, Northumbria and East Anglia came under increasing attack from Vikings, culminating in invasion by the Great Heathen Army in 865. By 878, the Vikings had overrun East Anglia, Northumbria, and Mercia, and nearly conquered Wessex, but in that year the West Saxons fought back under Alfred the Great and achieved a decisive victory at the Battle of Edington. In the 880s and 890s, the Anglo-Saxons ruled Wessex and western Mercia, but the rest of England was under Viking kings. Alfred constructed a network of fortresses, and these helped him to frustrate renewed Viking attacks in the 890s with the assistance of his son-in-law, \u00c6thelred, Lord of the Mercians, and his elder son Edward, who became king when Alfred died in 899. In 909, Edward sent a force of West Saxons and Mercians to attack the Northumbrian Danes, and the following year the Danes retaliated with a raid on Mercia. While they were marching back to Northumbria, they were caught by an Anglo-Saxon army and decisively defeated at the Battle of Tettenhall, ending the threat from the Northumbrian Vikings for a generation. In the 910s, Edward and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, his sister and \u00c6thelred's widow, extended Alfred's network of fortresses and conquered Viking-ruled eastern Mercia and East Anglia. When Edward died in 924, he controlled all England south of the Humber.\nEdward was succeeded by his eldest son \u00c6thelstan, who seized control of Northumbria in 927, thus becoming the first king of all England. He then styled himself in charters as king of the English, and soon afterwards Welsh kings and the kings of Scotland and Strathclyde acknowledged his overlordship. After this, he adopted more grandiose titles such as (king of the whole of Britain). In 934 he invaded Scotland and in 937 an alliance of armies of Scotland, Strathclyde and the Vikings invaded England. \u00c6thelstan secured a decisive victory at the Battle of Brunanburh, cementing his dominant position in Britain.\nBenedictine monasticism had flourished in England in the seventh and eighth centuries, but it severely declined in the late eighth and ninth centuries. By the time Alfred came to the throne in 871, monasteries and knowledge of Latin were at a low ebb, but there was a gradual revival from Alfred's time onwards. This accelerated during \u00c6thelstan's reign, and two leaders of the later tenth-century English Benedictine Reform, Dunstan and \u00c6thelwold, reached maturity in \u00c6thelstan's cosmopolitan, intellectual court of the 930s.\nFamily and early life.\nEdmund's father, Edward the Elder, had three wives, eight or nine daughters, several of whom married Continental royalty, and five sons. \u00c6thelstan was the only known son of Edward's first wife, Ecgwynn. His second wife, \u00c6lffl\u00e6d, had two sons: \u00c6lfweard, who may have been acknowledged in Wessex as king when his father died in 924 but who died less than a month later, and Edwin, who drowned in 933. In about 919, Edward married Eadgifu, the daughter of Sigehelm, ealdorman of Kent. Edmund, who was born in 920 or 921, was Eadgifu's elder son. Her younger son Eadred succeeded him as king. Edmund had one or two full sisters. Eadburh was a nun at Winchester who was later venerated as a saint. The twelfth-century historian William of Malmesbury gives Edmund a second full sister who married Louis, prince of Aquitaine; she was called Eadgifu, the same name as her mother. William's account is accepted by the historians Ann Williams and Sean Miller, but \u00c6thelstan's biographer Sarah Foot argues that she did not exist, and that William confused her with \u00c6lfgifu, a daughter of \u00c6lffl\u00e6d.\nEdmund was a young child when his half-brother \u00c6thelstan became king in 924. He grew up at \u00c6thelstan's court, probably with two important Continental exiles, his nephew Louis, future King of the West Franks, and Alain, future Duke of Brittany. According to William of Malmesbury, \u00c6thelstan showed great affection towards Edmund and Eadred: \"mere infants at his father's death, he brought them up lovingly in childhood, and when they grew up gave them a share in his kingdom\". Edmund may have been a member of the expedition to Scotland in 934 as, according to the (History of Saint Cuthbert), \u00c6thelstan instructed that in the event of his death Edmund was to take his body to Cuthbert's shrine at Chester-le-Street. Edmund fought at the Battle of Brunanburh in 937, and in a poem commemorating the victory in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" (\"ASC\"), Edmund (prince of the royal house) is given such a prominent role \u2013 and praised for his heroism alongside \u00c6thelstan \u2013 that the historian Simon Walker has suggested that the poem was written during Edmund's reign. At a royal assembly shortly before \u00c6thelstan's death in 939, Edmund and Eadred attested a grant to their full sister, Eadburh, both as (king's brother). Their attestations may have been because of the family connection, but they also may have been intended to display the throneworthiness of the king's half-brothers when it was known that he did not have long to live. This is the only charter of \u00c6thelstan attested by Edmund, the authenticity of which has not been questioned. \u00c6thelstan died childless on 27 October 939 and Edmund's succession to the throne was undisputed. He was the first king to succeed to the throne of all England, and was probably crowned at Kingston-upon-Thames, perhaps on Advent Sunday, 1 December 939.\nReign.\nThe loss and recovery of the north.\nBrunanburh saved England from destruction as a united kingdom, and it helped to ensure that Edmund would succeed smoothly to the throne, but it did not preserve him from challenges to his rule once he became king. The chronology of the Viking challenge is disputed, but according to the most widely accepted version, \u00c6thelstan's death encouraged the York Vikings to accept the kingship of Anlaf Guthfrithson, the King of Dublin who had led the Viking forces defeated at Brunanburh. According to \"ASC D\": \"Here the Northumbrians belied their pledges and chose Anlaf from Ireland as their king.\" Anlaf was in York by the end of 939 and the following year he invaded north-east Mercia, aiming to recover the southern territories of the York kingdom which had been conquered by Edward and \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d. He marched on Northampton, where he was repulsed, and then stormed the ancient Mercian royal centre of Tamworth, with considerable loss of life on both sides. On his way back north he was caught at Leicester by an army under Edmund, but battle was averted by the mediation of Archbishop Wulfstan of York, on behalf of the Vikings, and probably the Archbishop of Canterbury acting for the English. They arranged a treaty at Leicester which surrendered the Five Boroughs of Lincoln, Leicester, Nottingham, Stamford and Derby, to Guthfrithson. This was the first serious setback for the English since Edward the Elder began to roll back Viking conquests in the early tenth century, and it was described by the historian Frank Stenton as \"an ignominious surrender\". Guthfrithson had coins struck at York with the lower Viking weight than the English standard.\nGuthfrithson died in 941, allowing Edmund to reverse his losses. In 942, he recovered the Five Boroughs, and his victory was considered so significant that it was commemorated by a poem in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLike other tenth century poems in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", this one shows a concern with English nationalism and the West Saxon royal dynasty, and in this case displays the Christian English and Danes as united under Edmund in their victorious opposition to Norse (Norwegian) pagans. Stenton commented that the poem brings out the highly significant fact that the Danes of eastern Mercia, after fifteen years of \u00c6thelstan's government, had come to regard themselves as the rightful subjects of the English king. Above all, it emphasises the antagonism between Danes and Norsemen, which is often ignored by modern writers, but underlies the whole history of England in this period. It is the first political poem in the English language, and its author understood political realities.\nHowever, Williams is sceptical, arguing that the poem is not contemporary, and that it is doubtful whether contemporaries saw their situation in those terms. In the same year, Edmund granted large estates in northern Mercia to a leading nobleman, Wulfsige the Black, continuing the policy of his father of granting land in the Danelaw to supporters in order to give them an interest in resisting the Vikings.\nGuthfrithson was succeeded as king of York by his cousin, Anlaf Sihtricson, who was baptised in 943 with Edmund as his godfather, suggesting that he accepted West Saxon overlordship. Sihtricson issued his own coinage, but he clearly had rivals in York as coins were also issued there in two other names: Ragnall, a brother of Anlaf Guthfrithson who also accepted baptism under Edmund's sponsorship, and an otherwise unknown Sihtric. The coins of all three men were issued with the same design, which may suggest joint authority. In 944, Edmund expelled the Viking rulers of York and seized control of the city with the assistance of Archbishop Wulfstan, who had previously supported the Vikings, and an ealdorman in Mercia, probably \u00c6thelmund, who had been appointed by Edmund in 940.\nWhen Edmund died, his successor Eadred faced further revolts in Northumbria, which were not finally defeated until 954. In Miller's view, Edmund's reign \"shows clearly that although \u00c6thelstan had conquered Northumbria, it was still not really part of a united England, nor would it be until the end of Eadred's reign\". The Northumbrians' repeated revolts show that they retained separatist ambitions, which they only abandoned under pressure from successive southern kings. Unlike \u00c6thelstan, Edmund and Eadred rarely claimed jurisdiction over the whole of Britain, although each did sometimes describe himself as 'king of the English' even at times when he did not control Northumbria. In charters, Edmund sometimes even called himself by the lesser title of \"king of the Anglo-Saxons\" in 940 and 942, and only claimed to be king of all Britain once he had gained full control over Northumbria in 945. He never described himself as on his coinage.\nRelations with other British kingdoms.\nEdmund inherited overlordship over the kings of Wales from \u00c6thelstan, but Idwal Foel, king of Gwynedd in north Wales, apparently took advantage of Edmund's early weakness to withhold fealty and may have supported Anlaf Guthfrithson, as according to the , he was killed by the English in 942. Between 942 and 950 his kingdom was conquered by Hywel Dda, the king of Deheubarth in south Wales, who is described by the historian of Wales Thomas Charles-Edwards as \"the firmest ally of the English \"emperors of Britain\" among all the kings of his day\". Attestations of Welsh kings to English charters appear to have been rare compared with those in \u00c6thelstan's reign, but in the historian David Dumville's view there is no reason to doubt that Edmund retained his overlordship over the Welsh kings. In a charter of 944 disposing of land in Devon, Edmund is styled \"King of the English and ruler of this British province\", suggesting that the former British kingdom of Dumnonia was still not regarded as fully integrated into England, although the historian Simon Keynes \"suspects some 'local' interference\" in the wording of Edmund's title.\nBy 945, both Scotland and Strathclyde had kings who had assumed the throne since Brunanburh, and it is likely that whereas Scotland allied with England, Strathclyde held to its alliance with the Vikings. In that year Edmund ravaged Strathclyde. According to the thirteenth century chronicler Roger of Wendover, the invasion was supported by Hywel Dda, and Edmund had two sons of the king of Strathclyde blinded, perhaps to deprive their father of throneworthy heirs. Edmund then gave the kingdom to Malcolm I of Scotland in return for a pledge to defend it on land and on sea, a decision variously interpreted by historians. Dumville and Charles-Edwards regard it as granting Strathclyde to the Scottish king in return for an acknowledgement of Edmund's overlordship, whereas Williams thinks it probably means that he agreed to Malcolm's overlordship of the area in return for an alliance against the Dublin Vikings, and Stenton and Miller see it as recognition by Edmund that Northumbria was the northern limit of Anglo-Saxon England.\nAccording to the hagiography of a Gaelic monk called Cathr\u00f3e, he travelled through England on his journey from Scotland to the Continent; Edmund summoned him to court and Oda, Archbishop of Canterbury, then ceremonially conducted him to his ship at Lympne. Travelling clerics played an important part in the circulation of manuscripts and ideas in this period, and Cathr\u00f3e is unlikely to have been the only Celtic cleric at Edmund's court.\nRelations with Continental Europe.\nEdmund inherited strong Continental contacts from \u00c6thelstan's cosmopolitan court, and these were enhanced by their sisters' marriages to foreign kings and princes. Edmund carried on his brother's Continental policies and maintained his alliances, especially with his nephew King Louis IV of West Francia and Otto I, King of East Francia and future Holy Roman Emperor. Louis was both nephew and brother-in-law of Otto, while Otto and Edmund were brothers-in-law. There were almost certainly extensive diplomatic contacts between Edmund and Continental rulers which have not been recorded, but it is known that Otto sent delegations to Edmund's court. In the early 940s, some Norman lords sought the help of the Danish prince Harald against Louis, and in 945 Harald captured Louis and handed him to Hugh the Great, Duke of the Franks, who kept him prisoner. Edmund and Otto both protested and demanded his immediate release, but this only took place in exchange for the surrender of the town of Laon to Hugh.\nEdmund's name is in the confraternity book of Pf\u00e4fers Abbey in Switzerland, perhaps at the request of Archbishop Oda when staying there on his way to or from Rome to collect his pallium. As with the diplomatic delegations, this probably represents rare surviving evidence of extensive contacts between English and Continental churchmen which continued from \u00c6thelstan's reign.\nAdministration.\nEdmund inherited his brother's interests and leading advisers, such as \u00c6thelstan Half-King, ealdorman of East Anglia, \u00c6lfheah the Bald, bishop of Winchester, and Oda, bishop of Ramsbury, who was appointed as Archbishop of Canterbury by Edmund in 941. \u00c6thelstan Half-King first witnessed a charter as an ealdorman in 932, and within three years of Edmund's accession he had been joined by two of his brothers as ealdormen; their territories covered more than half of England and his wife fostered the future King Edgar. The historian Cyril Hart compares the brothers' power during Edmund's reign to that of the Godwins a century later. Edmund's mother, Eadgifu, who had been in eclipse during her step-son's reign, was also very influential.\nFor the first half of 940, there were no changes in the attestations of ealdormen compared with the end of \u00c6thelstan's reign, but later in the year the number of ealdormen was doubled from four to eight, with three of the new ealdormen covering Mercian districts. There was an increased reliance on the family of \u00c6thelstan Half-King, which was enriched by grants in 942. The appointments may have been part of Edmund's measures to deal with Anlaf's incursion.\nEadgifu and Eadred attested many of Edmund's charters, showing a high degree of family cooperation; initially Eadgifu attested first, but from sometime in late 943 or early 944 Eadred took precedence, perhaps reflecting his growing authority. Eadgifu attested around one third, always as (king's mother), including all grants to religious institutions and individuals. Eadred attested over half of his brother's charters. Eadgifu's and Eadred's prominence in charter attestations is unparalleled by any other West Saxon king's mother and male relative.\nCharters.\nThe period from around 925 to 975 was the golden age of Anglo-Saxon royal charters, when they were at their peak as instruments of royal government, and the scribes who drew up most of Edmund's charters constituted a royal secretariat which he inherited from his brother. From 928 until 935, charters were produced by the very learned scribe designated by scholars as \u00c6thelstan A in a highly elaborate style. Keynes comments: \"It is only by dwelling on the glories and complexities of the diplomas drafted and written by \u00c6thelstan A that one can appreciate the elegant simplicity of the diplomas that followed.\" A scribe known as Edmund C wrote an inscription in a gospel book (BL Cotton Tiberius A. ii folio 15v) during \u00c6thelstan's reign and wrote charters for Edmund and Eadred between 944 and 949.\nMost of Edmund's charters belong to the diplomatic \"mainstream\", including those of Edmund C, but four are part of a group, dating mainly to Eadred's reign, called the 'alliterative charters'. They were drafted by a very learned scholar, almost certainly someone in the circle of Cenwald, Bishop of Worcester, or perhaps the bishop himself. These charters are characterised both by a high proportion of words starting with the same letter and by the use of unusual words. Ben Snook describes the charters as \"impressive literary works\", and like much of the writing of the period their style displays the influence of Aldhelm, a leading scholar and early eighth century bishop of Sherborne.\nCoinage.\nThe only coin in common use in the tenth century was the penny. The main coin designs in Edmund's reign were H (Horizontal) types, with a cross or other decoration on the obverse surrounded by a circular inscription including the king's name, and the moneyer's name horizontally on the reverse. There were also substantial numbers of BC (Bust Crowned) types in East Anglia and the Danish shires; these had a portrait of the king, often crudely drawn, on the obverse. For a period in \u00c6thelstan's reign many coins showed the mint town, but this had become rare by the time of Edmund's accession, except in Norwich, where it continued during the 940s for BC types.\nAfter the reign of Edward the Elder there was a slight decline in the weight of coins under \u00c6thelstan, and the deterioration increased after around 940, continuing until Edgar's reform of the coinage in around 973. However, based on a very small sample, there is no evidence of a decline in the silver content under Edmund. His reign saw an increase in regional diversity of the coinage which lasted for twenty years until a return to relative unity of design early in Edgar's reign.\nLegislation.\nThree law codes of Edmund survive, carrying on \u00c6thelstan's tradition of legal reform. They are called I Edmund, II Edmund and III Edmund. The order in which they were issued is clear, but not the dates of issue. I Edmund is concerned with ecclesiastical matters, while the other codes deal with public order.\nI Edmund was promulgated at a council in London convened by Edmund and attended by archbishops Oda and Wulfstan. The code is very similar to \"Constitutions\" previously promulgated by Oda. Uncelibate clerics were threatened with the loss of property and forbidden burial in consecrated ground, and there were also provisions regarding church dues and the restoration of church property. A clause forbidding a murderer from coming into the neighbourhood of the king, unless he had done penance for his crime, reflected an increasing emphasis on the sanctity of kingship. Edmund was one of the few Anglo-Saxon kings to promulgate laws concerned with sorcery and idolatry, and the code condemns false witness and the use of magical drugs. The association between perjury and the use of drugs in magic was traditional, probably because they both involved the breaking of a religious oath.\nIn II Edmund, the king and his counsellors are stated to be \"greatly distressed by the manifold illegal deeds of violence which are in our midst\", and aimed to promote \"peace and concord\". The main focus is on regulating and controlling blood feuds. The authorities () are required to put a stop to vendettas following murders: the killer should instead pay (compensation) to the relatives of the victim. If no wergeld is paid, the killer has to bear the feud, but attacks on him are forbidden in churches and royal manor houses. If the killer's kin abandon him and refuse to contribute to a wergeld and to protect him, then it is the king's will that they are to be exempt from the feud: any of the victim's kin taking vengeance on them shall incur the hostility of the king and his friends and shall lose all their possessions. In the view of the historian Dorothy Whitelock the need for legislation to control the feud was partly due to the influx of Danish settlers who believed that it was more manly to pursue a vendetta than to settle a dispute by accepting compensation. Several Scandinavian loan words are first recorded in this code, such as , the crime of attacking a homestead; the penalty is loss of all the offender's property, while the king decides whether he also loses his life. Scandinavian loan words are not found in Edmund's other codes, and this one may have been particularly aimed at his Danish subjects. In contrast to Edmund's concern about the level of violence, he congratulated his people on their success in suppressing thefts. The code encourages greater local initiative in upholding the law, while emphasising Edmund's royal dignity and authority.\nThe relationship between Anglo-Saxon kings and their leading men was personal; kings were lords and protectors in return for pledges of loyalty and obedience, and this is spelled out in terms based on Carolingian legislation for the first time in III Edmund, issued at Colyton in Devon. This requires that \"all shall swear in the name of the Lord, before whom that holy thing is holy, that they will be faithful to King Edmund, even as it behooves a man to be faithful to his lord, without any dispute or dissension, openly or in secret, favouring what he favours and discountenancing what he discountenances.\" The threat of divine retribution was important in a society which had limited coercive power to punish law breaking and disloyalty. The military historian Richard Abels argues that \"all\" () shall swear does not mean literally all, but should be understood to mean those men qualified to take oaths administered by royal reeves at shire courts, that is the middling and great landholders, and that Edmund's oath united his diverse peoples by binding them all to him personally. The emphasis on lordship is further seen in provisions setting out the duties of lords to take responsibility for their followers and stand surety for them.\nIII Edmund was also concerned to prevent theft, especially cattle rustling. The local community is required to cooperate in catching thieves, dead or alive, and to assist in tracking down stolen cattle, while trading had to be witnessed by a high reeve, priest, treasurer or port reeve. According to a provision described by the legal historian Patrick Wormald as gruesome: \"we have declared with regard to slaves that, if a number of them commit theft, their leader shall be captured and slain, or hanged, and each of the others shall be scourged three times and have his scalp removed and his little finger mutilated as a token of his guilt\". The code has the first reference to the hundred as an administrative unit of local government in a provision requiring anyone who refuses to assist in the apprehension of a thief to pay 120 shillings to the king and 30 shillings to the hundred.\nWilliams comments \"In both the second code and the Colyton legislation, the functions of the four pillars of medieval society, kingship, lordship, family and neighbourhood, are clearly evident.\" Wormald describes the codes as \"an object-lesson in the variety of Anglo-Saxon legal texts\", but he sees what they have in common as more important, especially a heightened rhetorical tone which extends to treating murder as an affront to the royal person. The historian Alaric Trousdale sees \"explicit funding of local administrative institutions and the greater empowerment of local officials in the application of the law\" as original contributions of Edmund's legislation. Edmund is listed in laws of his grandson \u00c6thelred the Unready as one of the wise law-givers of the past.\nReligion.\nThe major religious movement of the tenth century, the English Benedictine Reform, reached its peak under Edgar, but Edmund's reign was important in the early stages, which were led by Oda and \u00c6lfheah, both of whom were monks. Oda had strong connections with Continental centres of reform, especially Fleury Abbey. He had been a leading counsellor of \u00c6thelstan and had helped to negotiate the return of Louis to France as king of the Franks in 936. Dunstan was to be a key figure in the reform and Archbishop of Canterbury, and according to his first biographer he was a leading figure at Edmund's court until his enemies persuaded Edmund to expel him, only for the king to have a change of heart after a narrow escape from death and give him a royal estate at Glastonbury, including its abbey. Williams rejects the story because there is no evidence that he was influential in this period; his brother attested charters, but he did not. Edmund may have given Dunstan the abbey to keep him at a distance because he was too much of a disruptive influence at court. He was joined by \u00c6thelwold, another future reform leader, and they spent much of the next decade studying Benedictine texts at Glastonbury, which became the first centre for disseminating monastic reform.\nEdmund visited the shrine of St Cuthbert in Chester-le-Street church, probably on his way to Scotland in 945. He prayed at the shrine and commended himself and his army to the saint. His men gave 60 pounds to the shrine, and Edmund placed two gold bracelets on the saint's body and wrapped two costly (lengths of Greek cloth) around it. One of the was probably an excellent Byzantine silk found in Cuthbert's tomb known as the \"Nature Goddess silk\". He also \"granted peace and law better than any it ever had to the whole territory of St Cuthbert\". Edmund's show of respect and support for the shrine reflected both the political power of the community of St Cuthbert in the north and southern reverence for him. According to William of Malmesbury, Edmund brought the relics of important Northumbrian saints such as Aidan south to Glastonbury Abbey.\nAnother sign of the religious revival was the number of aristocratic women who adopted a religious life. Several received grants from Edmund, including a nun called \u00c6lfgyth, who was a patron of Wilton Abbey, and Wynfl\u00e6d, the mother of Edmund's first wife. \u00c6thelstan had granted two estates to religious women, Edmund made seven such grants and Eadred four. After this the practice ceased abruptly, apart from one further donation. The significance of the donations is uncertain, but the most likely explanation is that in the mid-tenth century some religious aristocratic women were granted the estates so that they could choose how to pursue their vocation, whether by establishing a nunnery or living a religious life in their own homes.\nIn the reign of Edmund's son Edgar, \u00c6thelwold and his circle insisted that Benedictine monasticism was the only worthwhile form of religious life, but this was not the view of earlier kings such as Edmund. He was concerned to support religion, but was not committed to a particular ideology of religious development. In his grants, he continued \u00c6thelstan's policies. When G\u00e9rard of Brogne reformed the Abbey of Saint Bertin by imposing the Benedictine rule in 944, monks who rejected the changes fled to England and Edmund gave them a church owned by the crown at Bath. He may have had personal motives for his assistance, as the monks had given burial to his half-brother, Edwin, who had drowned at sea in 933, but the incident shows that Edmund did not see only one monastic rule as valid. He may also have granted privileges to the unreformed (non-Benedictine) Bury St Edmunds Abbey, but the charter's authenticity is disputed.\nLearning.\nLatin learning revived in \u00c6thelstan's reign, influenced by Continental models and by the hermeneutic style of the leading seventh century scholar and Bishop of Sherborne, Aldhelm. The revival continued in Edmund's reign, and Welsh book production became increasingly influential. Welsh manuscripts were studied and copied, and they influenced the early use of Carolingian minuscule script in England, although Continental sources are also important. Edmund's reign also saw the development of a new style of the native square minuscule script, which was used in mid-century royal diplomas. Oda's school at Canterbury was praised by post-Conquest chroniclers, especially for the presence there of Frithegod, a brilliant Continental scholar and the most skilful poet in mid-tenth century England. The \"Vatican\" recension of the was produced in England in Edmund's reign, probably in 944.\nMarriages and children.\nEdmund probably married his first wife \u00c6lfgifu around the time of his accession to the throne, as their second son was born in 943. Their sons Eadwig and Edgar both became kings of England. \u00c6lfgifu's father is not known, but her mother is identified by a charter of Edgar which confirms a grant by his grandmother Wynfl\u00e6d of land to Shaftesbury Abbey. \u00c6lfgifu was also a benefactor of Shaftesbury Abbey; when she died in 944 she was buried there and venerated as a saint. Edmund had no known children by his second wife, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, who died after 991. Her father \u00c6lfgar became ealdorman of Essex in 946. Edmund presented him with a sword lavishly decorated with gold and silver, which \u00c6lfgar later presented to King Eadred. \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d's second husband was \u00c6thelstan Rota, a south-east Mercian ealdorman, and her will survives.\nDeath and succession.\nOn 26 May 946, Edmund was killed in a brawl at Pucklechurch in Gloucestershire. According to the post-Conquest chronicler, John of Worcester:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While the glorious Edmund, king of the English, was at the royal township called Pucklechurch in English, in seeking to rescue his steward from Leofa, a most wicked thief, lest he be killed, was himself killed by the same man on the feast of St Augustine, teacher of the English, on Tuesday, 26 May, in the fourth indiction, having completed five years and seven months of his reign. He was borne to Glastonbury, and buried by the abbot, St Dunstan.\nThe historians Clare Downham and Kevin Halloran dismiss John of Worcester's account and suggest that the king was the victim of a political assassination, but this view has not been accepted by other historians.\nLike his son Edgar thirty years later, Edmund was buried at Glastonbury Abbey. The location may have reflected its spiritual prestige and royal endorsement of the monastic reform movement, but as his death was unexpected it is more likely that Dunstan was successful in claiming the body. His sons were still young children, so he was succeeded as king by his brother Eadred, who was in turn succeeded by Edmund's elder son Eadwig in 955.\nAssessment.\nHistorians' views of Edmund's character and record differ widely. The historian Barbara Yorke comments that when substantial powers were delegated there was a danger that subjects would become over-powerful: the kings following \u00c6thelstan came to the throne young and had short reigns, and the families of \u00c6thelstan 'Half-King' and \u00c6lfhere, Ealdorman of Mercia, developed unassailable positions. In the view of Cyril Hart: \"For the whole of his brief reign, the young king Edmund remained strongly under the influence of his mother Eadgifu and the \"Half King\", who between them must have decided much of the national policy.\" In contrast, Williams describes Edmund as \"an energetic and forceful ruler\" and Stenton commented that \"he proved himself to be both warlike and politically effective\", while in Dumville's view, but for his early death \"he might yet have been remembered as one of the more remarkable of Anglo-Saxon kings\".\nThe historian Ryan Lavelle comments that \"a case can be made, as Alaric Trousdale has recently done [in his PhD thesis on Edmund's reign], for assigning Edmund a central role to the achievements of the tenth century English state\". Trousdale comments that the period between the reigns of \u00c6thelstan and Edgar has been comparatively neglected by historians: the reigns of Edmund, Eadred and Eadwig \"are often lumped together as a sort of interim period between the much more interesting reigns of \u00c6thelstan and Edgar\". He argues that \"King Edmund's legislation shows an ambition towards tighter control of the localities through increased cooperation between all levels of government, and that king and archbishop were working closely together in restructuring the English administrative framework\". Trousdale sees a transition which \"was marked in part by a small yet significant shift away from a reliance on traditional West Saxon administrative structures and the power blocs that had enjoyed influence under King \u00c6thelstan, towards increased cooperation with interests and families from Mercia and East Anglia\". He also sees Edmund as moving away from \u00c6thelstan's centralisation of power to a more collegial relationship with local secular and ecclesiastical authorities. Trousdale's picture contrasts with that of other historians such as Sarah Foot, who emphasises the achievements of \u00c6thelstan, and George Molyneaux in his study of the formation of the late Anglo-Saxon state in the reign of Edgar.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10356", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10356", "title": "Endothermic process", "text": "Thermodynamic process that absorbs energy from its surroundings\nAn endothermic process is a chemical or physical process that absorbs heat from its surroundings. In terms of thermodynamics, it is a thermodynamic process with an increase in the enthalpy H (or internal energy U) of the system. In an endothermic process, the heat that a system absorbs is thermal energy transfer into the system. Thus, an endothermic reaction generally leads to an increase in the temperature of the system and a decrease in that of the surroundings.\nThe term was coined by 19th-century French chemist Marcellin Berthelot. The term \"endothermic\" comes from the Greek \u1f14\u03bd\u03b4\u03bf\u03bd (\"endon\") meaning 'within' and \u03b8\u03b5\u03c1\u03bc- (\"therm\") meaning 'hot' or 'warm'.\nAn endothermic process may be a chemical process, such as dissolving ammonium nitrate () in water (), or a physical process, such as the melting of ice cubes.\nThe opposite of an endothermic process is an exothermic process, one that releases or \"gives out\" energy, usually in the form of heat and sometimes as electrical energy. Thus, \"endo\" in endothermic refers to energy or heat going in, and \"exo\" in exothermic refers to energy or heat going out. In each term (endothermic and exothermic) the prefix refers to where heat (or electrical energy) goes as the process occurs.\nIn chemistry.\nDue to bonds breaking and forming during various processes (changes in state, chemical reactions), there is usually a change in energy. If the energy of the forming bonds is greater than the energy of the breaking bonds, then energy is released. This is known as an exothermic reaction. However, if more energy is needed to break the bonds than the energy being released, energy is taken up. Therefore, it is an endothermic reaction.\nDetails.\nWhether a process can occur spontaneously depends not only on the enthalpy change but also on the entropy change (\u2206\"S\") and absolute temperature T. If a process is a spontaneous process at a certain temperature, the products have a lower Gibbs free energy \"G\" = \"H\" \u2013 \"TS\" than the reactants (an exergonic process), even if the enthalpy of the products is higher. Thus, an endothermic process usually requires a favorable entropy increase (\u2206\"S\" &gt; 0) in the system that overcomes the unfavorable increase in enthalpy so that still \u2206\"G\" &lt; 0. While endothermic phase transitions into more disordered states of higher entropy, e.g. melting and vaporization, are common, spontaneous chemical processes at moderate temperatures are rarely endothermic. The enthalpy increase\u2206\"H\" \u226b 0 in a hypothetical strongly endothermic process usually results in \u2206\"G\" = \u2206\"H\" \u2013 \"T\"\u2206\"S\" &gt; 0, which means that the process will not occur (unless driven by electrical or photon energy). An example of an endothermic and exergonic process is\n&lt;chem&gt;C6H12O6 + 6 H2O -&gt; 12 H2 + 6 CO2&lt;/chem&gt;\nformula_1.\nDistinction between endothermic and endotherm.\nThe terms \"endothermic\" and \"endotherm\" are both derived from Greek ' \"within\" and ' \"heat\", but depending on context, they can have very different meanings.\nIn physics, thermodynamics applies to processes involving a system and its surroundings, and the term \"endothermic\" is used to describe a reaction where energy is taken \"(with)in\" by the system (vs. an \"exothermic\" reaction, which releases energy \"outwards\").\nIn biology, thermoregulation is the ability of an organism to maintain its body temperature, and the term \"endotherm\" refers to an organism that can do so from \"within\" by using the heat released by its internal bodily functions (vs. an \"ectotherm\", which relies on external, environmental heat sources) to maintain an adequate temperature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10357", "revid": "6231105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10357", "title": "Earle Page", "text": "Prime Minister of Australia in 1939\nSir Earle Christmas Grafton Page (8 August 1880\u00a0\u2013 20 December 1961) was an Australian politician and surgeon who served as the 11th Prime Minister of Australia from 7 to 26 April 1939, in a caretaker capacity following the death of Joseph Lyons. He was the leader of the Country Party from 1921 to 1939, and was the most influential figure in its later years.\nPage was born in Grafton, New South Wales. He entered the University of Sydney at the age of 15, and completed a degree in medicine at the age of 21. After completing his medical residency at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney, he moved back to Grafton and opened a private hospital. He soon became involved in local politics, and in 1915 purchased a part-share in \"The Daily Examiner\", a local newspaper. He also briefly was a military surgeon during World War I. Page gained prominence as an advocate of various development schemes for the Northern Rivers region, especially those involving hydroelectricity. He also helped found a movement for New England statehood.\nAt the 1919 Australian federal election, Page was elected to the Parliament of Australia representing the Division of Cowper. He joined the new Country Party the following year as its inaugural whip, and then replaced William McWilliams as party leader in 1921. Page opposed the economic policies of Prime Minister Billy Hughes, and when the Country Party gained the balance of power at the 1922 election, he demanded Hughes' resignation as the price for a coalition with the Nationalist Party. He was subsequently made Treasurer of Australia under the new prime minister, Stanley Bruce, serving in that role from 1923 to 1929. He had a significant degree of influence on domestic policy, with Bruce concentrating on international issues.\nPage returned to cabinet after the 1934 election, when the Country Party entered a new coalition with Joseph Lyons' United Australia Party (UAP). He was appointed Minister for Commerce, and concentrated on agricultural issues. When Lyons died in office in April 1939, Page was commissioned as his successor in a caretaker capacity while the UAP elected a new leader, Robert Menzies. Page subsequently denounced Menzies and refused to serve in his cabinet, withdrawing the Country Party from the coalition, but this proved unpopular and he resigned the party leadership after a few months. The coalition was eventually reconstituted, and Page served again as Minister for Commerce under Menzies and Arthur Fadden until the government's defeat in October 1941.\nPage's last major role was as Minister for Health (1949\u20131956) in the post-war Menzies Government. He retired from cabinet at the age of 76, and died a short time after losing his seat at the 1961 election. Page served in parliament for almost 42 years, the third longest-serving Australian parliamentarian of all time; only Menzies lasted longer as the leader of a major Australian political party. He secured his party's independence by refusing overtures to merge with the Nationalists and the UAP, and the policies that he favoured \u2013 decentralisation, agrarianism, and government support of primary industry \u2013 have remained the basis of its platform up to the present day. The coalitions that he established and maintained with Bruce and Lyons have served as a model for all subsequent coalition governments.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family background.\nEarle Christmas Grafton Page was born in Grafton, New South Wales, on 8 August 1880. His first middle name, which he disliked, was given to him to carry on the surname of a childless relative, while his second middle name was in honour of his birthplace. Page was the fifth of eleven children born to Charles Page and Mary Johanna Haddon (Annie) Cox. His older brother Rodger was chaplain to the royal family of Tonga and his younger brother Harold was the deputy administrator of the Territory of New Guinea and a Japanese prisoner of war. Page's parents had both lived in Grafton since they were children. His mother was born in Tasmania to an English father and a Scottish mother. His father, born in London, was a successful businessman and a member of the Grafton City Council, serving a single term as mayor in 1908. The family business was a hardware manufacturing firm, which had its origins in a coachbuilding firm established in 1858 by Page's maternal grandfather, Edwin Cox. His other grandfather, James Page, arrived in Grafton in 1855, serving as the town's first schoolmaster and first town clerk.\nEducation.\nPage began his schooling at Grafton Public School, where he excelled academically. His family could not afford to send him to boarding school, as a result of financial difficulties caused by the banking crisis of 1893. Page consequently had to rely on scholarships to advance his education. He won a bursary to attend Sydney Boys High School in 1895, where he passed the university entrance exams, and the following year \u2013 aged 15 \u2013 began studying a liberal arts course at the University of Sydney. He was equal top in mathematics in his first year, and was also awarded the lucrative Struth Exhibition for \"general proficiency in the arts\", which allowed him to switch to medicine and covered his first four years of medical school. His role model was Grafton Smith, who had followed a similar path from Grafton Public School to university. At Sydney Medical School, Page's lecturers included William Haswell (biology), James Hill (biology), Charles Martin (physiology), Anderson Stuart (physiology), and James Wilson (anatomy). He graduated at the top of his class in 1901, with the degrees of Bachelor of Medicine (M.B.) and Master of Surgery (Ch.M.).\nMedical career.\nPage's first professional posting came before he had even been registered as a medical practitioner. Due to a shortage of doctors, he was acting superintendent of the Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children for one month. In 1902, he took up a position as a resident at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, serving in a variety of roles including as house surgeon under Robert Scot Skirving. During that time he contracted a near-fatal infection from a postmortem examination. He also met his future wife, nurse Ethel Blunt.&lt;ref name=\"ethel http:// , National Archives of Australia. Retrieved 29 January 2017.&lt;/ref&gt; Page returned to his home town in 1903, taking over a practice in South Grafton. He and two partners subsequently established a new private hospital, Clarence House Hospital, which opened in 1904 and served both Grafton and the surrounding region.\nPage was a keen adopter of new technologies. In 1904, he bought what he claimed was \"the first Rover car in Australia\", which was powered by kerosene. He upgraded to an Itala in 1908, and had the chassis enlarged so it could be used as an ambulance. He also had an x-ray machine installed in his hospital, one of the first in Australia outside a major city. Page developed a reputation for surgical innovation, taking a number of patients from Sydney and even some from interstate. One operation that brought him particular fame was the removal of a patient's diseased lung, a procedure that had only been invented a few years previously. Page became an inaugural Fellow of the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons (FRACS) in 1927, and in 1942 was made an honorary Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England (FRCS).\nIn February 1916, Page enlisted in the Australian Army Medical Corps. He was chief medical officer aboard the troopship HMAT \"Ballarat\", and was then stationed at an army hospital in Cairo for several months. He was transferred to a hospital in England in July 1916, and concluded his service as a surgical specialist at a casualty clearing station in France. Page returned to Australia in March 1917 and was discharged from the military in July 1917. Although his active involvement in medicine declined as his political career progressed, he was frequently called upon to treat his fellow MPs or parliamentary staff. This was particularly true after the federal government moved to Canberra, as the new capital had only a handful of qualified surgeons. In 1928, for instance, he performed an emergency appendectomy on Parker Moloney.\nEarly political involvement.\nPage's medical career brought him considerable wealth, and he began investing in land. He bought several large farming properties in South East Queensland, including in Nerang, Kandanga, and the Numinbah Valley; Pages Pinnacle in the Numinbah State Forest is named after him. His entry into public life came about as a result of his passion for hydroelectricity, which he first observed in New Zealand while attending a medical convention in 1910. He believed that it could be applied to the Northern Rivers region, which was still mostly unelectrified outside of the major towns. Page was elected to the South Grafton Municipal Council in 1913, believing his position as an alderman would be useful in his lobbying efforts. However, his overtures to the state government were rebuffed. In 1915, Page was one of the founders of the Northern New South Wales Separation League, which advocated the creation of a new state in the New England region. He toured a number of towns to raise awareness of the new movement, but interest waned as a result of the ongoing war. Later that year, he was part of a syndicate that bought \"The Daily Examiner\", the local newspaper in Grafton.\nPage visited a number of hydroelectric sites in North America in 1917, on his way back from military service in France. He was elected mayor of South Grafton in 1918, serving until 1920, and also became the inaugural president of the North Coast Development League. He developed more concrete plans for a hydroelectric project on the Clarence River, and put forward various other development schemes relating to roads, railways, and ports, all of which served to raise his profile in the local district. Page was elected to the Australian House of Representatives at the 1919 federal election, defeating the sitting Nationalist MP, John Thomson in the Division of Cowper. He stood as an independent with the endorsement of the Farmers' and Settlers' Association, and after the election joined the new Country Party, along with 10 other MPs from rural seats. Page continued to advocate for hydroelectricity throughout his political career, and many such projects were built in New South Wales. However, the specific scheme he favoured for the Clarence River was never put in place, only the smaller Nymboida Power Station. Decentralisation also remained a pet project, with Page frequently arguing for New South Wales and Queensland to be divided into smaller states to aid regional development. The movement for New England statehood waned in the 1920s, but re-emerged in the 1950s; a legally binding referendum on the subject was finally held in 1967, after Page's death, but was narrowly defeated in controversial circumstances.\nBruce\u2013Page government.\nGovernment formation.\nPage was elected leader of the Country Party in 1921, replacing William McWilliams. At the 1922 federal election the party campaigned on a platform which included the establishment of a national sinking fund, national insurance scheme covering \"sickness, unemployment, poverty and age\", and conversion of the Commonwealth Bank into a full central bank. The party emerged from the election with the balance of power in the House; the Nationalist government of Billy Hughes lost its majority and could not govern without Country Party support. It soon became apparent that the price for that support would be a full coalition with the Nationalists. However, the Country Party had been formed partly due to discontent with Hughes' rural policy, and Page's animosity toward Hughes was such that he would not even consider supporting him. Indeed, he would not even begin talks with the Nationalists as long as Hughes remained leader. Bowing to the inevitable, Hughes resigned.\nPage then began negotiations with Hughes' successor as leader of the Nationalists, Stanley Bruce. His terms were stiff; he wanted his Country Party to have five seats in an 11-man cabinet, including the post of Treasurer and the second rank in the ministry for himself. These demands were unprecedented for a prospective junior coalition partner in a Westminster system, and especially so for such a new party. Nonetheless, Bruce agreed rather than force another election. For all intents and purposes, Page was the first Deputy Prime Minister of Australia (a title that did not officially exist until 1968). Since then, the leader of the Country/National Party has been the second-ranking member in nearly every non-Labor government. Page was acting prime minister on several occasions, and in January 1924 chaired the first meeting of Federal Cabinet ever held in Canberra, at Yarralumla. Parliament did not move to Canberra until 1927.\nTreasurer.\nAs Treasurer, Page formed a close working relationship with Bruce. Due to favourable economic conditions the government was able to abolish land tax, cut income tax, and establishment the national sinking fund that Page had campaigned on. The government also established an investment fund for the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research and sponsored the first national housing program. The final years of Page's treasurership were marked by the beginnings of an economic downturn. The budget went into deficit in 1927 and his 1929 budget speech referred to a \"temporary financial depression\". He was a strong believer in orthodox finance and conservative policies, as well as a \"high protectionist\" supporting tariff barriers to protect Australian rural industries.\nPage introduced a series of reforms to the Commonwealth Bank to enhance its central banking functions. In 1924, he announced that the government would place the Commonwealth Bank under an independent board, comprising a governor, the Treasury secretary, and representatives of industry. The same bill placed banknotes under the direct control of the bank, whereas previously it had been under a nominally independent Note Issue Board. Later reforms saw the establishment of a Rural Credits Department within the bank, the profits of which were partly hypothecated to agricultural research. In March 1925, cabinet decided to return Australia to the gold standard, which it had left during World War I. It delayed its announcement until the United Kingdom had decided it would do the same, which \"disguised what was arguably Australia\u2019s first explicit macroeconomic policy decision\".\nIn 1924, Bruce and Page established the Loan Council to coordinate public-sector borrowings between the state and federal governments. It was given constitutional force with an amendment passed in 1928. The government abolished the previous system of per-capita grants to states that had been implemented in 1911 and began introducing tied grants, initially for road building. It also established a royal commission into the proposed National Insurance scheme, chaired by Senator John Millen. Page was one of the chief supporters of the \"National Insurance Bill 1928\", which would have provided \"sickness, old age, disability and maternity benefits\", as well as payments to orphans and a limited form of child endowment. It was to be paid for by compulsory contributions from workers and co-contributions from employers. The government took the policy to the 1928 Australian federal election but failed to pass the bill by the time of its defeat in 1929.\nAs Treasurer, Page continued his professional medical practice. On 22 October 1924, he had to tell his best friend, Thomas Shorten Cole (1870\u20131957), the news that his wife Mary Ann Crane had just died on the operating table from complications of intestinal or stomach cancer, reputed by their daughter Dorothy May Cole to be \"the worst day of his life\". Due to a shortage of surgeons in Canberra, in 1928 Page performed an appendectomy on fellow MP Parker Moloney.\nOut of office, 1929\u20131934.\nIn his memoirs, Page recalled that the defeat of the government at the 1929 election came as a relief, following the intense stress of the government's final term. He and the Country Party sat on the crossbench, with John Latham replacing Bruce as Nationalist leader and leader of the opposition. Page regarded time out of office as a period which \"sharpened our wits and enabled us to prepare public opinion for the policies we hoped to implement when the next opportunity came\".\nIn 1931, a group of dissident Labor MPs led by former Scullin government minister Joseph Lyons merged with the Nationalists to form the United Australia Party (UAP), with Lyons replacing Latham as opposition leader. Page and Lyons produced a joint policy statement in October 1931 and Page expected that the Country Party would form a new coalition government. However, at the 1931 election the UAP won majority government in its own right. Lyons offered the Country Party three cabinet positions, on the basis that he would choose the ministers and portfolios. Page rejected this and also insisted that the trade and customs portfolio be assigned to the Country Party. Negotiations eventually collapsed and Lyons formed a UAP-only ministry.\nPage's oldest son Earle Jr. was killed by a lightning strike in January 1933; shortly after his wife Ethel suffered a stroke. Page considered retiring from politics but was persuaded to instead take a leave of absence, with his deputy Thomas Paterson serving as acting leader of the Country Party for nine months.\nLyons government, 1934\u20131939.\nThe UAP lost its majority at the 1934 election, after which Lyons governed in minority for two months. He eventually negotiated a new coalition agreement with Page, which provided four ministerial positions and assurances around tariff policies. Page was appointed Minister for Commerce, a significant portfolio covering agriculture and trade policy, and again became the \"de facto\" deputy prime minister.\nOne of Page's first initiatives in the commerce portfolio was the creation of the Australian Agricultural Council (AAC) in December 1934, which aimed to coordinate state and federal agricultural policy on a similar basis to the Loan Council. In his 1934 election policy he had envisioned the AAC as a \"board of directors for Australian agriculture\" that would \"eliminate needless waste of public and private capital\". The council \"quickly became central to agricultural policy\", covering a wide variety of topics including debt relief for farmers, agricultural marketing (reforms to which were rejected in a 1937 referendum), soil erosion, pest control, and problems in the wheat and dairy industries. Page found some of his attempts to guide policy were stymied by state agricultural ministers, with the AAC remaining a voluntary body reliant on passage of state legislation.\nPage was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG) in the New Year's Day Honours of 1938. While nine Australian prime ministers were knighted (and Bruce was elevated to the peerage), Page is the only one who was knighted before becoming prime minister.\nPrime Minister and aftermath.\nWhen Lyons died suddenly in 1939, the Governor-General of Australia Lord Gowrie appointed Page as caretaker prime minister pending the UAP choosing a new leader. He held the office for three weeks until the UAP elected former deputy leader Robert Menzies as its new leader, and hence prime minister. Page had been close to Lyons, but disliked Menzies, whom he charged publicly with having been disloyal to Lyons. Page contacted Stanley Bruce (now in London as Australian High Commissioner to the UK) and offered to resign his seat if Bruce would return to Australia to seek re-election to the parliament in a by-election for Page's old seat, and then seek election as UAP leader. Bruce said that he would only re-enter the parliament as an independent.\nWhen Menzies was elected UAP leader, Page refused to serve under him, and made an extraordinary personal attack on him in the House, accusing him not only of ministerial incompetence but of physical cowardice (for failing to enlist during World War I). His party soon rebelled, though, and Page was deposed as Country Party leader in favour of Archie Cameron.\nWorld War II.\nIn March 1940, Archie Cameron led the Country Party back into coalition with the UAP. However, he resigned as party leader on 16 October, following the 1940 federal election. Page attempted to regain the party's leadership, but was deadlocked with John McEwen over multiple ballots. As a compromise, the party elected Arthur Fadden as acting leader; he was confirmed in the position a few months later. Page replaced Cameron as Minister for Commerce in the reconstituted ministry.\nFadden replaced Menzies as prime minister in August 1941. A few weeks later, cabinet decided to send Page to London as resident minister, with the intention that he would be granted access to the British War Cabinet. While he was en route to England, the Fadden government lost a confidence motion and was replaced by an ALP minority government. The new prime minister John Curtin nonetheless allowed Page to take up the position, declining his offer to return to Australia. The attack on Pearl Harbor in December changed the dynamic of Anglo-Australian relations, as the War in the Pacific became the primary concern of the Australian government. Page assisted in the creation of the Pacific War Council early the following year. He later recalled Winston Churchill's frustration in war cabinet meetings with Curtin's decision to withdraw troops from the Middle East and North Africa and return them to Australia. He credited himself with helping negate the tensions between the two men, but in February 1942 mistakenly advised Churchill that the Australian government was amenable to diverting the 7th Division to Burma rather than return it directly to Australia. He was heavily rebuked by Curtin and external affairs minister Herbert Evatt for his error.\nPage wrote to Curtin in April 1942 that since January he had been through \"the worst period of acute mental distress of my whole life\". His tenure was not regarded as a success, and he was said to have suffered from a lack of experience in diplomacy. Field Marshal Alan Brooke, the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, recalled that in war cabinet meetings he had \"the mentality of a greengrocer\". Page left London in June 1942 following a severe bout of pneumonia. He had been made a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) before his departure. He returned to Australia in August, travelling via the United States, and quickly turned his attention to planning for post-war reconstruction.\nPage spent the remaining years of the Curtin and Chifley governments on the opposition backbench. He served on the Advisory War Council and was a delegate to the constitutional convention in Canberra in late 1942, which included members of all major political parties. However, he was frustrated by the government's failure to offer him any formal role in developing post-war policy, which he believed was due to him given his past work. Page's brother Harold and nephew Robert were killed by the Japanese during the war.\nReturn to the ministry.\nPage was reappointed Minister for Health after the Coalition won the 1949 federal election, at the age of 69. He was the chief architect of the \"National Health Act 1953\", which established a national public health scheme based on government subsidies of voluntary private insurance and free medical services for pensioners. He played a key role in securing the support of the medical profession, which had strongly opposed the Chifley government's attempt to introduce universal health care. Unlike in previous governments, Page had little influence beyond his own policy area and was frustrated by the lack of interest in his ideas for national development. In 1951 when Senator Gordon Brown of the ALP suffered a stroke while speaking in the Senate, Page, a trained surgeon rushed in from the House to treat him before medical professionals could take Brown to hospital for treatment.\nUpon the death of Billy Hughes in October 1952, Page became the Father of the House of Representatives and Father of the Parliament. In 1954, he became the first chancellor of the University of New England, which had become fully autonomous from the University of Sydney. He retired from cabinet at the age of 76, moving to the backbench in January 1956 after the December 1955 election.\nUpon Arthur Fadden's retirement in 1958, Page became the only former prime minister returned at that year's election.\nLater life and death.\nPage sought a 17th term in parliament at the 1961 election, having joined Billy Hughes two years earlier as only the second person to serve over 40 years in federal parliament. Two weeks before the election, he experienced stomach pains while visiting the home of Ian Robinson near Coraki. His health then dramatically declined and he was admitted to the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney. He was diagnosed with bowel cancer and underwent immediate surgery. He had been gravely ill even before being admitted to hospital and was too sick to campaign nearly as actively as he had campaigned in the previous four decades. He fought the election anyway, though he scarcely appeared on the hustings.\nPage died in hospital on 20 December 1961, aged 81. He was granted a state funeral at St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney. At his request, his ashes were scattered over the Clarence River near his home. On the same date Page died, the election result in Cowper was declared and recorded his defeat by Labor challenger Frank McGuren, as part of a nationwide swing against the Coalition. The seat had been reported as a Labor gain on election night 11 days earlier; Page died without knowing he had been defeated.\nPage had represented Cowper for just four days short of 42 years, making him the longest-serving Australian federal parliamentarian who represented the same seat throughout his career. Only Billy Hughes and Philip Ruddock have served in Parliament longer than Page. He was the last former prime minister to lose his seat until Tony Abbott lost his seat of Warringah in 2019, though John Howard would lose his seat of Bennelong as a sitting prime minister in 2007.\nPage's defeat/death saw the Australian Federal Parliament having no former prime ministers among its members for the first time since the period between Sir Joseph Cook's resignation from Parliament in 1921 to become Australian High Commissioner to the United Kingdom and Page forcing Billy Hughes' resignation as prime minister in 1923.\nPersonal life.\nPage married Ethel Blunt on 18 September 1906. They had met at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital while he was undertaking his medical residency; she was a senior nurse there. Page soon began courting her, and convinced her to become the matron of his new hospital in Grafton. She gave up nursing after their marriage, but was active in politics and community organisations. The couple had five children: Mary (b. 1909), Earle Jr. (b. 1910), Donald (b. 1912), Iven (b. 1914), and Douglas (b. 1916). Their grandchildren include Don Page, who was active in New South Wales state politics, and Geoff Page, a poet.\nPage was predeceased by his first wife and his oldest son. Earle Jr., a qualified veterinarian, was killed by a lightning strike in January 1933, aged 22. Ethel died in May 1958, aged 82, after a long illness. On 20 July 1959 at St Paul's Cathedral, London, Page married for a second time, wedding his long-serving secretary Jean Thomas (32 years his junior). Stanley Bruce was his best man. The second Lady Page lived for almost 50 years after her husband's death, dying on 20 June 2011; her ashes were interred at Northern Suburbs Crematorium.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\u00a0"}
{"id": "10358", "revid": "49661755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10358", "title": "Ephrem the Syrian", "text": "Syriac saint, theologian and writer (c. 306 \u2013 373)\nEphrem the Syrian (; c.\u2009306 \u2013 373), also known as Ephraem the Deacon, Ephrem of Edessa or Aprem of Nisibis, (Syriac: \u0721\u072a\u071d \u0710\u0726\u072a\u071d\u0721 \u0723\u0718\u072a\u071d\u071d\u0710 \u2014 \"M\u00e2r Aphr\u00eam S\u00fbry\u00e2y\u00e2)\" was a prominent Syriac-Aramean Christian theologian and writer who is revered as one of the most notable hymnographers of Eastern Christianity. He was born in Nisibis, served as a deacon and later lived in Edessa.\nEphrem is venerated as a saint by all traditional Churches. He is especially revered in Syriac Christianity, both in East Syriac tradition and West Syriac tradition, and also counted as a Holy and Venerable Father (i.e., a sainted monk) in the Eastern Orthodox Church, especially in the Slovak tradition. He was declared a Doctor of the Church in the Catholic Church in 1920. Ephrem is also credited as the founder of the School of Nisibis, which in later centuries was the center of learning for the Church of the East.\nEphrem wrote a wide variety of hymns, poems, and sermons in verse, as well as prose exegesis. These were works of practical theology for the edification of the Church in troubled times. His performance practice of all-women choirs singing his madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea (teaching hymns) was particularly notable, and from it emerged the Syriac Christian tradition of \"deaconess\" choir members. Ephrem's works were so popular that, for centuries after his death, Christian authors wrote hundreds of pseudepigraphal works in his name. He has been called the most significant of all the fathers of the Syriac-speaking church tradition, the next most famous after him being Jacob of Serugh and Narsai.\nLife.\nEphrem was born around the year 306 in the city of Nisibis (modern Nusaybin, Turkey), in the Roman province of Mesopotamia, that was recently acquired by the Roman Empire. Internal evidence from Ephrem's hymnody suggests that both his parents were part of the growing Christian community in the city, although later hagiographers wrote that his father was a pagan priest. In those days, religious culture in the region of Nisibis included local polytheism, Judaism and several varieties of the Early Christianity. Most of the population spoke the Aramaic language, while Greek and Latin were languages of administration. The city had a complex ethnic composition, consisting of \"Arameans, Arabs, Greeks, Jews, Parthians, Romans, and Iranians.\" Ephrem, being a speaker of Syriac, an Eastern Aramaic dialect, and the community to which he and the Christians of Nisibis belonged, were most likely part of the Aramean population.\nJacob, the second bishop of Nisibis, was appointed in 308, and Ephrem grew up under his leadership of the community. Jacob of Nisibis is recorded as a signatory at the First Council of Nicea in 325. Ephrem was baptized as a youth and almost certainly became a son of the covenant, an unusual form of syriac proto-monasticism. Jacob appointed Ephrem as a teacher (Syriac \"malp\u0304\u0101n\u00e2\", a title that still carries great respect for Syriac Christians). He was ordained as a deacon either at his baptism or later. He began to compose hymns and write biblical commentaries as part of his educational office. In his hymns, he sometimes refers to himself as a \"herdsman\" (, \"'all\u0101n\u00e2\"), to his bishop as the \"shepherd\" (, \"r\u0101'y\u00e2\"), and to his community as a 'fold' (, \"dayr\u00e2\"). Ephrem is popularly credited as the founder of the School of Nisibis, which, in later centuries, was the centre of learning of the Church of the East.\nIn 337, Emperor Constantine I, who had legalised and promoted the practice of Christianity in the Roman Empire, died. Seizing on this opportunity, Shapur II of Persia began a series of attacks into Roman North Mesopotamia. Nisibis was besieged in 338, 346 and 350. During the first siege, Ephrem credits Bishop Jacob as defending the city with his prayers. In the third siege, of 350, Shapur rerouted the River Mygdonius to undermine the walls of Nisibis. The Nisibenes quickly repaired the walls while the Persian elephant cavalry became bogged down in the wet ground. Ephrem celebrated what he saw as the miraculous salvation of the city in a hymn that portrayed Nisibis as being like Noah's Ark, floating to safety on the flood.\nOne important physical link to Ephrem's lifetime is the baptistery of Nisibis. The inscription tells that it was constructed under Bishop Vologeses in 359. In that year, Shapur attacked again. The cities around Nisibis were destroyed one by one, and their citizens killed or deported. Constantius II was unable to respond; the campaign of Julian in 363 ended with his death in battle. His army elected Jovian as the new emperor, and to rescue his army, he was forced to surrender Nisibis to Persia (also in 363) and to permit the expulsion of the entire Christian population. Ephrem declined being ordained a bishop by feigning madness, because he regarded himself unworthy for it.\nEphrem, with the others, went first to Amida (Diyarbak\u0131r), eventually settling in Edessa (Urhay, in Aramaic) in 363. Ephrem, in his late fifties, applied himself to ministry in his new church and seems to have continued his work as a teacher, perhaps in the School of Edessa. Edessa had been an important center of the Aramaic-speaking world, and the birthplace of a specific Middle Aramaic dialect that came to be known as the Syriac language. The city was rich with rivaling philosophies and religions. Ephrem comments that orthodox Nicene Christians were simply called \"Palutians\" in Edessa, after a former bishop. Arians, Marcionites, Manichees, Bardaisanites and various gnostic sects proclaimed themselves as the true church. In this confusion, Ephrem wrote a great number of hymns defending Nicene orthodoxy. A later Syriac writer, Jacob of Serugh, wrote that Ephrem rehearsed all-female choirs to sing his hymns set to Syriac folk tunes in the forum of Edessa. In 370 he visited Basil the Great at Caesarea, and then journeyed to the monks of Egypt. As he preached a panegyric on St. Basil, who died in 379, his own death must be placed at a later date. After a ten-year residency in Edessa, in his sixties, Ephrem succumbed to the plague as he ministered to its victims. He died in 373.\nWritings and authorship.\nEphrem wrote exclusively in his native Aramaic language, using the local Edessan (\"Urhoyo\") dialect, which later came to be known as Classical Syriac. In his works, Ephrem repeatedly refers endonymically to his language as Aramaic, his homeland as \"the land of Aram,\" and his people as the Arameans. He is therefore known as \"the authentic voice of Aramaic Christianity.\"\nIn the early stages of modern scholarly studies, it was believed that some examples of the long-standing Greek practice of labeling Aramaic as \"Syriac,\" found in the \"Cave of Treasures\", could be attributed to Ephrem, but later scholarly analyses have shown that the work in question was written much later (c. 600) by an unknown author, thus showing that Ephrem's original works still belonged to a tradition unaffected by exonymic (foreign) labeling. \nOne of the early admirers of Ephrem's works, theologian Jacob of Serugh (d. 521), who already belonged to the generation that accepted the custom of a double naming of their language, not only as Aramaic (\"\u014cr\u014dm\u014dy\u014d\" / \u0710\u0733\u072a\u0733\u0721\u0733\u071d\u0733\u0710) but also as \"Syriac\" (\"Sury\u014dy\u014d\" / \u0723\u073d\u0718\u072a\u071d\u0733\u071d\u0733\u0710), wrote a homily (\"memr\u014d\") dedicated to Ephrem, praising him as the \"crown\" or \"wreath\" \"of the\" \"Arameans\" (), and the same praise was repeated in early liturgical texts. \nOnly later, under the Greek influence already prevalent in the works of the mid-fifth-century author Theodoret of Cyrus, did it become customary to associate Ephrem with a Syriac identity and to label him only as \"the Syrian\" (). Theodoret described him as a poet who \"daily waters the ethnos of Syrians with streams of grace,\" and Sozomen similarly claimed that Ephrem, \"who wrote in the language of the Syrians, surpassed the Greeks in wisdom.\" In turn, over a century later, Jacob of Serugh explicitly vaunted Ephrem as the poet of a Syrian people, and he seems to have framed this Syrian people as descended from Aram. Such portrayals show how Ephrem, who in his own writings identified with Aram and the Arameans, was gradually reframed in both Syriac and Greek traditions as not only an Aramean (\"\u014cr\u014dm\u014dy\u014d)\" but also as a representative of the Syrians (\"Sury\u014dy\u0113).\"\nSome of these problems persisted into recent times, even in scholarly literature, as a consequence of several methodological issues within the field of source editing. During the process of critical editing and translation of sources within Syriac studies, some scholars have practiced various forms of arbitrary (and often unexplained) interventions, including the occasional disregard for the importance of original terms used as endonymic (native) designations for Arameans and their language. Such disregard was manifested primarily in translations and commentaries, by the replacement of authentic terms with polysemic Syrian/Syriac labels. In the previously mentioned \"memr\u0101\" dedicated to Ephrem, one of the terms for the \"Aramean people\" was published correctly in the original script of the source, but at the same time it was translated into English as \"Syriac nation,\" and then enlisted among quotations related to \"Syrian/Syriac\" identity, without any mention of the Aramean-related terms in the source. Even when noticed and corrected by some scholars, such replacements of terms continue to create problems for others.\nSeveral translations of his writings exist in Classical Armenian, Coptic, Old Georgian, Koine Greek, and other languages. Some of his works are extant only in translation (particularly in Armenian).\nManuscripts.\nAccording to the Catalogues of Syriac Manuscripts in the British Library published by Forshall &amp; Rosen (1839) and Wright (1870\u201372), there are \"ninety or so manuscripts which contain works by or attributed to Ephraem.\"\nHymns.\nOver four hundred hymns attributed to Ephrem still exist. Granted that some have been lost, Ephrem's productivity is not in doubt. The church historian Sozomen credits Ephrem with having written three million verses. Ephrem combines in his writing a threefold heritage: he draws on the models and methods of early Rabbinic Judaism, he engages skillfully with Greek science and philosophy, and he delights in the Mesopotamian/Persian tradition of mystery symbolism.\nThe most important of his works are his lyric, teaching hymns (\u0721\u0715\u0716\u0308\u072b\u0710, \"madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea\"). These hymns are full of rich, poetic imagery drawn from biblical sources, folk tradition, and other religions and philosophies. The \"madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea\" are written in stanzas of syllabic verse and employ over fifty different metrical schemes. The form is defined by an antiphon, or congregational refrain (\u0725\u0718\u0722\u071d\u072c\u0710, \"'\u00fbn\u00ee\u1e6f\u00e2\"), between each independent strophe (or verse), and the refrain's melody mimics that of the opening half of the strophe. Each \"madr\u0101\u0161\u00e2\" had its \"q\u0101l\u00e2\" (\u0729\u0720\u0710), a traditional tune identified by its opening line. All of these \"q\u0101l\u00ea\" are now lost. It seems that Bardaisan and Mani composed \"madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea\", and Ephrem felt that the medium was a suitable tool to use against their claims.\nThe \"madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea\" are gathered into various hymn cycles. In the CSCO critical edition of Beck et al. (1955\u20131975), these have been given standardised names and abbreviations. By the year 2000, English translations had been published for the following:\nSome of these titles do not do justice to the entirety of the collection (for instance, only the first half of the \"Carmina Nisibena\" is about Nisibis). Bates (2000) remarked: \"[Various] collections of Ephrem's hymns [...] appear to be randomly assembled by later editors and named for the subject of the first hymn in the collection only\".\nParticularly influential were his \"Hymns Against Heresies\". Ephrem used these to warn his flock of the heresies that threatened to divide the early church. He lamented that the faithful were \"tossed to and fro and carried around with every wind of doctrine, by the cunning of men, by their craftiness and deceitful wiles\" (Eph 4:14). He devised hymns laden with doctrinal details to inoculate right-thinking Christians against heresies such as docetism. The \"Hymns Against Heresies\" employ colourful metaphors to describe the Incarnation of Christ as fully human and divine. Ephrem asserts that Christ's unity of humanity and divinity represents peace, perfection and salvation; in contrast, docetism and other heresies sought to divide or reduce Christ's nature and, in doing so, rend and devalue Christ's followers with their false teachings.\nAuthenticity of hymns \"On Epiphany\".\nThe most complete, critical text of writings attributed to Ephrem was compiled between 1955 and 1979 by Dom Edmund Beck, OSB, as part of the \"Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium\" (CSCO). Beck's 1959 critical edition of the madrashe (hymns) and m\u00eamr\u00ea (homilies) attributed to Ephrem led to much scholarly debate on the authenticity of the madrashe known as \"On Epiphany\", as Ephrem was certainly not familiar with Epiphany as a feast celebrating Jesus' baptism on 6 January. Unlike in Europe, where the Nativity of Jesus was celebrated on 25 December, but the baptism of Jesus would evolve into a separate feast called \"Epiphany\" on 6 January, there was only one Christian feast celebrated in winter in the time and place where Ephrem lived, namely the Nativity on 6 January, when baptism was also performed. A 1956 paper written by Beck himself therefore warned researchers not to base their reconstructions of Ephrem's baptismal theology on the contents of these madrashe, given the fact that many of the hymns presuppose that Epiphany and Nativity were two separate feasts celebrated two weeks apart, thereby challenging Ephrem's authorship. While the oldest surviving manuscripts of Ephrem's hymns date to the 6th century and contain hymns on the Nativity that Beck thought were certainly authentic, the contested hymns \"On Epiphany\" are missing from them. They do not appear in manuscripts until much later, in the 9th century, suggesting that they were interpolated. Scholars have largely accepted Beck's arguments that the collection as a whole was established after the 4th century, and that some hymns in them were not written by Ephrem, or at least not in the form that they have been preserved in, but that other hymns should nevertheless be considered authentic.\nPerformance practices and gender.\nThe relationship between Ephrem's compositions and femininity is shown again in documentation suggesting that the madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea were sung by all-women choirs with an accompanying lyre. These women's choirs were composed of members of the Daughters of the Covenant, an important institution in historical Syriac Christianity, but they weren't always labeled as such. Ephrem, like many Syriac liturgical poets, believed that women's voices were important to hear in the church as they were modeled after Mary, mother of Jesus, whose acceptance of God's call led to salvation for all through the birth of Jesus. One variety of the madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea, the \"soghyatha\", was sung in a conversational style between male and female choirs. The women's choir would sing the role of biblical women, and the men's choir would sing the male role. Through the role of singing Ephrem's madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea, women's choirs were granted a role in worship.\nFurther writings.\nEphrem also wrote verse homilies (, \"m\u00eamr\u00ea\"). These sermons in poetry are far fewer in number than the madr\u0101\u0161\u00ea. The m\u00eamr\u00ea were written in heptasyllabic couplets (pairs of lines of seven syllables each).\nThe third category of Ephrem's writings is his prose work. He wrote a biblical commentary on the Diatessaron (the single gospel harmony of the early Syriac church), the Syriac original of which was found in 1957. His \"Commentary on Genesis and Exodus\" is an exegesis of Genesis and Exodus. Some fragments exist in Armenian of his commentaries on the Acts of the Apostles and Pauline Epistles.\nHe also wrote refutations against Bardaisan, Mani, Marcion and others.\nSymbols and metaphors.\nEphrem's writings contain a rich variety of symbols and metaphors. Christopher Buck gives a summary of analysis of a selection of six key scenarios (the way, robe of glory, sons and daughters of the Covenant, wedding feast, harrowing of hell, Noah's Ark/Mariner) and six root metaphors (physician, medicine of life, mirror, pearl, Tree of life, paradise).\nSelected works.\nBoasting an extensive corpus, Ephrem's poems, hymns, prayers and prose has been incorporated deeply into every facet of the Syriac tradition, from the Liturgy of the Hours (Shehimo) to Divine Liturgy. The following is a bedtime prayer, found in the Compline of the Shehimo for some weekdays.\nPseudepigraphy and misattributions.\nEphrem's meditations on the symbols of Christian faith and his stand against heresy made him a popular source of inspiration throughout the church. There is a huge corpus of Ephrem pseudepigraphy and legendary hagiography in many languages. Some of these compositions are in verse, often mimicking Ephrem's heptasyllabic couplets. Syriac churches still use many of Ephrem's hymns as part of the annual cycle of worship. However, most of these liturgical hymns are edited and conflated versions of the originals. Another one of the works attributed to Ephrem was the \"Cave of Treasures\", written in Syriac, but by a much later, unknown author, who lived at the end of the 6th and the beginning of the 7th century.\nGreek Ephrem.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It is a mark of Ephraem's enormous reputation that such an extensive corpus of works in Greek was gathered under his name. Where no Syriac original has survived, the question of authenticity arises. (...) The Greek works may not be so much translations as adaptations in the spirit of Ephraem using his favourite images. A widely held judgment is that the corpus is 'sporadically authentic'.\"\n\u2013 T.S. Pattie (1990)\nThere is a very large number of works by \"Ephrem\" extant in Greek. In the literature this material is often referred to as \"Greek Ephrem\", or \"Ephraem Graecus\" (\"Ephrem the Greek\", as opposed to the real Ephrem the Syrian), as if it was by a single author. This is not the case, but the term is used for convenience. Some texts are in fact Greek translations of genuine works by Ephrem, but most are not. Ephrem is attributed with writing hagiographies such as \"The Life of Saint Mary the Harlot\" (extant in Greek and Latin), though this credit is called into question. The best known of these writings is the \"Prayer of Saint Ephrem\", which is recited at every service during Great Lent and other fasting periods in Eastern Christianity.\nThere has been very little critical examination of any of these works. They were edited uncritically by Assemani, and there is also a modern Greek edition by Phrantzolas. Amongst scholars, there is a broad consensus that the Greek corpus attributed to Ephrem is only 'sporadically authentic'.\nLatin Ephrem and other languages.\nThere are also works by \"Ephrem\" in Latin, Slavonic and Arabic. \"Ephrem Latinus\" is the term given to Latin translations of \"Ephrem Graecus\". None is by Ephrem the Syrian. \"Pseudo-Ephrem Latinus\" is the name given to Latin works under the name of Ephrem which are imitations of the style of Ephrem Latinus. One example is the \"Apocalypse of Pseudo-Ephraem\", extant in one Latin and one Syriac version. Also attributed to Ephrem are the \"Parenesis\" or \"precepts\", found in the 10th-century Rila fragments and the early 13th-century \"Kyiv Caves Patericon\", translated into Old Church Slavonic.\nVeneration as a saint.\nSoon after Ephrem's death, legendary accounts of his life began to circulate. One of the earlier \"modifications\" is the statement that Ephrem's father was a pagan priest of Abnil or Abizal. However, internal evidence from his authentic writings suggest that he was raised by Christian parents.\nEphrem is venerated as an example of monastic discipline in Eastern Christianity. In the Eastern Orthodox scheme of hagiography, Ephrem is counted as a Venerable Father (i.e., a sainted monk). His feast day is celebrated on 28 January and on the Saturday of the Venerable Fathers (Cheesefare Saturday), which is the Saturday before the beginning of Great Lent.\nOn 5 October 1920, Pope Benedict XV proclaimed Ephrem a Doctor of the Church (\"Doctor of the Syrians\").\nThe most popular title for Ephrem is \"Harp of the Spirit\" (Syriac: , \"Ken\u0101r\u00e2 d-R\u00fb\u1e25\u00e2\"). He is also referred to as the Deacon of Edessa, the Sun of the Syrians and a Pillar of the Church.\nHis Roman Catholic feast day of 9 June conforms to his date of death. For 48 years (1920\u20131969), it was on 18 June, and this date is still observed in the Extraordinary Form.\nEphrem is honored with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on June 10.\nEphrem is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 9 June.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10359", "revid": "50226174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10359", "title": "Amiga Enhanced Chip Set", "text": "Amiga chipset\nThe Enhanced Chip Set (ECS) is the second generation of the Amiga computer's chipset, offering minor improvements over the original chipset (OCS) design. ECS was introduced in 1990 with the launch of the Amiga 3000. Another version was developed around 1994 but was unreleased due to Commodore International filing for bankruptcy. Amigas produced from 1990 onwards featured a mix of OCS and ECS chips, such as later versions of the Amiga 500 and the Commodore CDTV. Other ECS models were the Amiga 500+ in 1991 and lastly the Amiga 600 in 1992.\nFeatures.\nThe enhanced chip set had two new chips, the 8375 HR Agnus and 8373 HR Denise. The ECS Denise chip offers \"Productivity\" VGA output (640\u00d7480 non-interlaced) and \"SuperHiRes\" (1280\u00d7200 or 1280\u00d7256) display modes (also available in interlaced mode), which are however limited to only 4 bits on-screen colors. The \"Productivity\" output required a multi-sync monitor. It also allowed for a greyscale resolution of 1008 x 800 pixels with the A2024 monitor.\nSome Amigas, such as the Amiga 500 and the Amiga 2000 came with the ECS version of the Agnus chip but the original chipset version (OCS) of the Denise chip. It is possible to upgrade one or both of them to obtain partial or full ECS functionality by replacing OCS chips with ECS versions. Not all OCS chipset computers were upgradable, some such as the Amiga 2000-A and the Amiga 1000 had different Agnus sockets.\nECS was followed by the third generation AGA chipset with the launch of the Amiga 4000 and Amiga 1200 in 1992.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10361", "revid": "1319233492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10361", "title": "European Space Operations Centre", "text": "Main mission control centre for the European Space Agency\nThe European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) serves as the main mission control centre for the European Space Agency (ESA) and is located in Darmstadt, Germany. ESOC's primary function is the operation of uncrewed spacecraft on behalf of ESA and the launch and early orbit phases (LEOP) of ESA and third-party missions. The Centre is also responsible for a range of operations-related activities within ESA and in cooperation with ESA's industry and international partners, including ground systems engineering, software development, flight dynamics and navigation, development of mission control tools and techniques and space debris studies.\nESOC's current major activities comprise operating planetary and solar missions, such as Mars Express and the Trace Gas Orbiter, astronomy &amp; fundamental physics missions, such as Gaia and XMM Newton, and Earth observation missions such as CryoSat2 and Swarm.\nESOC is responsible for developing, operating and maintaining ESA's ESTRACK network of ground stations. Teams at the Centre are also involved in research and development related to advanced mission control concepts and Space Situational Awareness, and standardisation activities related to frequency management; mission operations; tracking, telemetry and telecommanding; and space debris.\nMissions.\nESOC's current missions comprise the following:\nPlanetary and solar missions\nAstronomy and fundamental physics missions\nEarth observation missions\nIn addition, the ground segment and mission control teams for several missions are in preparation and training, including:\nESTRACK.\nESOC hosts the control centre for the Agency's European Tracking ESTRACK station network. The core network comprises seven stations in seven countries: Kourou (French Guiana), Cebreros (Spain), Redu (Belgium), Santa Maria (Portugal), Kiruna (Sweden), Malarg\u00fce (Argentina) and New Norcia (Australia). Operators are on duty at ESOC 24 hours/day, year round, to conduct tracking passes, uploading telecommands and downloading telemetry and data.\nActivities.\nIn addition to 'pure' mission operations, a number of other activities take place at the Centre, most of which are directly related to ESA's broader space operations activities.\nHistory.\nThe European Space Operations Centre was formally inaugurated in Darmstadt, Germany, on 8 September 1967 by the then-Minister of Research of the Federal Republic of Germany, Gerhard Stoltenberg. Its role was to provide satellite control for the European Space Research Organisation (ESRO), which is today known as its successor organisation, the European Space Agency (ESA).\nThe 90-person ESOC facility was, as it is today, located on the west side of Darmstadt; it employed the staff and resources previously allocated to the European Space Data Centre (ESDAC), which had been established in 1963 to conduct orbit calculations. These were augmented by mission control staff transferred from ESTEC to operate satellites and manage the ESTRACK tracking station network.\nWithin just eight months, ESOC, as part of ESRO, was already operating its first mission, ESRO-2B, a scientific research satellite and the first of many operated from ESOC for ESRO, and later ESA.\nBy July 2012, ESOC had operated over 56 missions spanning science, Earth observation, orbiting observatories, meteorology and space physics.\nIn 2024 ESA announced a new satellite control center at ESOC. Designed to support multiple launch operations at once and with power redundancy that will provide 99% uptime, the control center will be designed with the future in mind.\nLocation and expansion.\nESOC is located on the west side of the city of Darmstadt, some from the main train station, at Robert-Bosch-Stra\u00dfe 5. In 2011, ESA announced the first phase of the ESOC II modernisation and expansion project valued at \u20ac60 million. The new construction is located across Robert-Bosch-Stra\u00dfe, opposite the current centre.\nEmployees.\nAt ESOC, ESA employs approximately 800, comprising some 250 permanent staff and about 550 contractors. Staff from ESOC are routinely dispatched to work at other ESA establishments, ESTRACK stations, the ATV Control Centre (Toulouse), the Columbus Control Centre (Oberpfaffenhofen) and at partner facilities in several countries.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10363", "revid": "47674541", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10363", "title": "European Space Agency", "text": "European organisation dedicated to space exploration\nThe European Space Agency (ESA), pronounced 'ee-sah', is a 23-member international organisation devoted to space exploration. It has its headquarters in Paris and a staff of around 2,547 people globally as of 2023. ESA was founded in 1975 in the context of European integration. Its 2025 annual budget was \u20ac7.7\u00a0billion.\nThe ESA human spaceflight programme includes participation in the International Space Station (ISS) and collaboration with NASA on the Artemis programme, especially manufacturing of the Orion spacecraft's European Service Module (ESM). ESA launches and operates uncrewed missions to the Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, the Sun, and various comets and asteroids. Other activities include space telescopes, Earth observation satellites, asteroid impact avoidance, telecommunication and navigation satellites, designing launch vehicles (\"e.g.\" Ariane 6 is operated through Arianespace with ESA sharing in the costs), and maintaining Europe's Spaceport (the Guiana Space Centre at Kourou, French Guiana), as well as space safety and commercialisation.\nMission.\nThe treaty establishing the European Space Agency reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The purpose of the Agency shall be to provide for and to promote, for exclusively peaceful purposes, cooperation among European States in space research and technology and their space applications, with a view to their being used for scientific purposes and for operational space applications systems.\"\nESA is responsible for setting a unified space and related industrial policy, recommending space objectives to the member states, and integrating national programs like satellite development, into the European program as much as possible.\nJean-Jacques Dordain\u2014ESA's Director General (2003\u20132015)\u2014outlined the European Space Agency's mission in a 2003 interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Today space activities have pursued the benefit of citizens, and citizens are asking for a better quality of life on Earth. They want greater security and economic wealth, but they also want to pursue their dreams, to increase their knowledge, and they want younger people to be attracted to the pursuit of science and technology.&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nI think that space can do all of this: it can produce a higher quality of life, better security, more economic wealth, and also fulfill our citizens' dreams and thirst for knowledge, and attract the young generation. This is the reason space exploration is an integral part of overall space activities. It has always been so, and it will be even more important in the future.\"At the ministerial council of 2025, ESA member states widened the agency's mandate to include defense. The resolution reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"ESA's intergovernmental framework provides the credentials and tools for developing space technologies and systems [...] for security and defence and to implement corresponding activities.\"\nHistory.\nAfter World War II, many European scientists left Western Europe to work with the United States. Although the 1950s boom made it possible for Western European countries to invest in research and specifically in space-related activities, Western European scientists realised solely national projects would not be able to compete with the two superpowers. In 1958, only months after the Sputnik shock, Edoardo Amaldi (Italy) and Pierre Auger (France), two prominent members of the Western European scientific community, met to discuss the foundation of a common Western European space agency. The meeting was attended by scientific representatives from eight countries.\nThe Western European nations decided to have two agencies: one concerned with developing a launch system, ELDO (European Launcher Development Organisation), of which Renzo Carrobio di Carrobio became the first Secretary General from 1964 to 1971, and the other the precursor of the European Space Agency, ESRO (European Space Research Organisation), led by Pierre Auger. The latter was established on 20 March 1964 by an agreement signed on 14 June 1962. From 1968 to 1972, ESRO launched seven research satellites, but ELDO was not able to deliver a launch vehicle. Both agencies struggled with the underfunding and diverging interests of their participants.\nFoundation.\nThe ESA in its current form was founded with the ESA Convention in 1975, when ESRO was merged with ELDO. ESA had ten founding member states: Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. These signed the ESA Convention in 1975 and deposited the instruments of ratification by 1980, when the convention came into force. During this interval the agency functioned in a \"de facto\" fashion.\nFirst science missions.\nESA launched its first major scientific mission in 1975, \"Cos-B\", a satellite monitoring gamma-ray emissions in the universe, which was first worked on by ESRO. ESA collaborated with NASA on the International Ultraviolet Explorer (IUE), the world's first high-orbit telescope, which was launched in 1978 and operated successfully for 18 years. A number of successful Earth-orbit projects followed, and in 1986 ESA began \"Giotto\", its first deep-space mission, to study the comets Halley and Grigg\u2013Skjellerup. \"Hipparcos\", a star-mapping mission, was launched in 1989 and in the 1990s SOHO, \"Ulysses\", and the Hubble Space Telescope were all jointly carried out with NASA. Later scientific missions in cooperation with NASA include the \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" space probe, to which the ESA contributed by building the Titan landing module \"Huygens\".\nFirst launch vehicles.\nAs the successor of ELDO, the ESA has also constructed rockets for scientific and commercial payloads. Ariane 1, launched in 1979, carried mostly commercial payloads into orbit from 1984 onward. The next two versions of the Ariane rocket family were intermediate stages in the development of a more advanced launch system, the Ariane 4, which operated between 1988 and 2003 and established the ESA as the world leader in commercial space launches in the 1990s. Although the succeeding Ariane 5 experienced a failure on its first flight in 1996, it has since firmly established itself within the heavily competitive commercial space launch market with 112 successful launches until 2023. In 1998, ESA started developing the small-lift launch vehicle Vega.\nFirst astronauts.\nAstronauts from the future ESA member states have been joining Soviet space missions since 1978. The first ESA astronaut to fly to space was Ulf Merbold who joined the STS-9 mission of the American Space Shuttle in 1983, that carried the first European-built Spacelab laboratory module. The experience gained during the Spacelab programme was later instrumental in developing the International Space Station (ISS). Since then, ESA astronauts have been joining Space Shuttle flights, as well as Russian Soyuz flights to the Mir space station. During the 1980s and 1990s, ESA was considering developing its own crewed spacecraft Hermes and a small space station Columbus MTFF. These plans were later abandoned and instead, ESA joined the International Space Station (ISS) programme with Columbus being repurposed as one of the station's laboratory modules and ESA astronauts flying to the station on American and Russian spacecraft.\nESA in the 2000s.\nThe beginning of the new millennium saw the ESA become, along with agencies like NASA and JAXA, one of the major participants in space research. Although ESA had relied on co-operation with NASA in previous decades, changed circumstances, such as tough legal restrictions on information sharing under ITAR, led to decisions to rely more on itself and on cooperation with Roscosmos.\nThe agency continued its contribution to the International Space Station (ISS) programme with European astronauts joining assembly flights as well as long-term missions to the station. In 2008, ESA added its laboratory module Columbus to ISS and started launching the ATV cargo spacecraft. During the 2000s, ESA was considering cooperation with Russia on the proposed Kliper and CSTS crewed vehicles, but neither of these was developed.\nNotable deep space missions during the 2000s included the agency's first Moon, Mars, and Venus orbiters: \"SMART-1\", \"Mars Express\", and \"Venus Express\". ESA's \"Huygens\" probe, launched together with the NASA's \"Cassini\" mission in 1997, reached its destination in 2005 when it successfully landed on Titan, marking the farthest landing from Earth a spacecraft has ever made. The comet orbiter \"Rosetta\" launched in 2004 and performed multiple deep space flybys and observations during the decade, but wouldn't reach its destination until 2014.\nESA has launched multiple major astronomy missions in the 2000s: the gamma ray observatory \"INTEGRAL\", the infrared observatory \"Herschel\", the cosmic microwave background mapper \"Planck\", and \"Corot\", a milestone in the search for exoplanets. Notable Earth observation missions launched during the decade included \"Envisat,\" \"Double Star,\" \"GOCE,\" \"SMOS\", and the experimental PROBA series. ESA also contributed to the meteorological constellations Meteosat and MetOp and tested technologies for the future Galileo satellite navigation system with two GIOVE satellites.\nDuring the 2000s, ESA pursued the Aurora programme which planned to launch a series of increasingly ambitious missions culminating in a crewed landing on Mars. The programme was eventually abandoned with only the ExoMars series of astrobiology space probes to Mars remaining active. ExoMars, as well as the plans for human spaceflight to LEO, the Moon, and Mars, were later incorporated into the new Terrae Novae programme established in 2016.\nESA in the 2010s.\nIn 2010, ESA added the Cupola observation module to ISS and European astronauts continued joining long-term missions to the station. The ATV cargo spacecraft continued resupplying ISS until its last flight in 2015. In 2012, ESA committed to providing the ATV-derived European Service Module for NASA's crewed lunar spacecraft Orion.\nIn 2014, ESA's \"Rosetta\" probe arrived at its destinatination, the Jupiter-family comet 67P/Churyumov\u2013Gerasimenko. It became the first spacecraft ever to orbit a comet and its lander \"Philae\" performed the first ever landing on a comet. In 2016, ESA launched its second Mars orbiter mission, the ExoMars \"Trace Gas Orbiter\" (TGO), as the first ExoMars mission within the newly established Terrae Novae programme. When the spacecraft arrived at Mars later the same year, it released the \"Schiaparelli\" lander, which failed on landing. TGO, however, entered the Martian orbit and after 11 months of aerobraking began its scientific observations, focused mostly on the atmosphere of Mars. In 2018, ESA and JAXA launched the joint mission \"BepiColombo\", which is expected to arrive at Mercury in 2026.\nNotable astronomy missions launched in 2010s were the astrometry telescope \"Gaia\", which produced the largest and most precise 3D catalogue of astronomical objects ever made, and the exoplanets-characterizing telescope \"CHEOPS\". ESA also launched \"LISA Pathfinder\", a technology demonstrator for the future gravitational wave observatory LISA. In 2010, ESA launched the cryosphere-monitoring satellite \"CryoSat-2\", a replacement for \"CryoSat-1\" which had been destroyed in 2005 due to a failure of its Russian launch vehicle. Another major Earth observation satellite mission of the decade was the magnetic field-observing Swarm, launched in 2013.\nThe 2010s saw the first launches of two major European satellite constellations, to which ESA contributed alongside other European institutions, the satellite navigation system Galileo and the Earth observation programme Copernicus with its Sentinel satellites. The first operational pair of Galileo satellites was launched in 2011. The radar satellite Sentinel-1A, first dedicated mission of the Copernicus programme, was launched in 2014, followed by the optical imaging satellite Sentinel-2A in 2015, the oceanography satellite Sentinel-3A in 2016, and the air pollution-monitoring Sentinel-5p in 2017.\nThe small-lift launch vehicle Vega, developed by the Italian company Avio, had its first flight in 2012 and then flew 22 times until 2024 when it was replaced by the more powerful Vega-C. In 2016, ESA started supporting the Spanish company PLD Space with FLPP funding for the development of their commercial reusable launch vehicle Miura 5.\nESA in the 2020s.\nAfter the Russian invason of Ukraine in 2022, the cooperation between ESA and Roscosmos was mostly severed. This led to a delay in the ExoMars programme and ending of Soyuz launches from the Guiana Space Centre. Furthermore, the Second presidency of Donald Trump brought uncertainty into many joint ESA-NASA programmes including major science missions and human spaceflight. The ministerial council held in November 2025 reacted to the changed international situation by including security and defense in ESA's mandate, funding development of new European launch vehicles, as well as confirming many priorities of the long term, autonomy-focused \"Strategy 2040\" proposed earlier in 2025 and approving a record budget of \u20ac22.1 billion.\nIn early 2020s, ESA has added two major components to the ISS. The Bartolomeo platform was connected to the Columbus module in 2020 to increase its capacity for external payloads. The European Robotic Arm was launched in 2021 together with the Nauka module. ESA continued contributing European astronauts to regular ISS expeditions, and also started paying private companies for short-term astronaut flights to the station. ESA also started supporting European companies in developing uncrewed space capsules for resupplying the ISS and future space stations via the LCRS initiative, as well as the Indian ISRO in developing their crewed Gaganyaan spacecraft. The ESA-built European Service Module of the Orion spacecraft flew on its first uncrewed test flight around the Moon in 2022.\nThe \"BepiColombo\" mission, launched in 2018, has completed all its nine gravity assist maneuvers at Earth, Venus, and Mercury, in preparation for the planned 2026 insertion into Mercury orbit. The heliophysics mission \"Solar Orbiter\", launched in 2020, continues to perform periodic Venus flybys which gradually increase its orbital inclination, allowing it to observe the Sun from outside the Solar system plane. The \"Juice\" mission, launched in 2023, has so far completed two gravity assist maneuvers at Earth and Venus on its way to enter an orbit around Jupiter in 2031. Two European orbiters, \"Mars Express\" and TGO, continued their operations around Mars, providing scientific insights into the planet's surface and atmosphere. In 2025, \"Mars Express\" received a software update, which could allow it to stay operational until 2030s.\nThe \"Hera\" mission, launched in 2024 as the first space mission of the optional Space Safety Programme, flew by Mars in 2025 on its way to perform a post-impact survey of the asteroid Dimorphos which had been impacted by NASA's Double Asteroid Redirection Test mission. The Space Safety Programme was established in 2019 by substantially expanding the former Space Situational Awareness (SSA) programme. Since then, it has prepared an extensive series of space missions and ground-based projects focused on mitigating the dangers of near-Earth asteroids, space weather, and space debris.\nIn the 2020s, ESA's optional Terrae Novae programme started developing two major space infrastructure projects for long term, sustainable robotic exploration of the Moon and Mars. The Argonaut landers will deliver heavy payloads to the lunar surface. The LightShip interplanetary space tugs equipped with solar electric propulsion will deliver other spacecraft to Mars and then serve as communication, navigation, and weather satellites within the MARCONI constellation in high Mars orbit. Additionally, the optional Advanced Research in Telecommunication Systems (ARTES) programme started developing the Moonlight Initiative intended to place a constellation of communication and navigation satellites around the Moon.\nThe long-awaited NASA-ESA-CSA space telescope \"JWST\" finally launched in 2021 and started operating in its halo orbit around the Sun\u2013Earth L2 point in 2022. The first half of 2023 saw the launch the \"Euclid\" space telescope designed to better understand dark energy and dark matter by accurately measuring the accelerating expansion of the universe. The experimental \"PROBA-3\" mission, launched in 2024, successfully demonstrated high-precision formation flying for coronagraphy observation of the Sun.\nThe successor to the Vega launch vehicle, Vega C, launched successfully for the first time on 13 July 2022, delivering the \"LARES 2\" satellite and six CubeSats to Earth orbit. The successor to the Ariane 5 launch vehicle, Ariane 6, had its maiden flight on 9 July 2024, followed by the first commercial launch on 6 March 2025. In the 2020s, ESA started supporting aspiring European commercial launch providers with substantial development funding and launch contracts through the Boost! programme, the Flight Ticket Initiative, and the European Launcher Challenge (ELC).\nFacilities.\nThe agency's facilities date back to ESRO and are deliberately distributed among various countries and areas. The most important are the following centres:\nProgrammes.\nMandatory programmes.\nEvery member state must contribute to the mandatory programmes. The contributions to the mandatory programmes are calculated based on the stats' Gross National Product. Decisions about these programmes are taken unanimously. \nOptional programmes.\nDepending on their individual choices, the member states can contribute to optional programmes.\nMember states, funding, and budget.\nMembership and contribution to the ESA.\nMember states participate to varying degrees with both mandatory space programs and those that are optional. As of 2008[ [update]], the mandatory programmes made up 25% of total expenditures while optional space programmes were the other 75%. The ESA has traditionally implemented a policy of \"georeturn\", where funds that ESA member states provide to the ESA \"are returned in the form of contracts to companies in those countries.\"\nBy 2015, the ESA was an intergovernmental organisation of 22 member states. The 2008 ESA budget amounted to \u20ac3.0\u00a0billion whilst the 2009 budget amounted to \u20ac3.6\u00a0billion. The total budget amounted to about \u20ac3.7\u00a0billion in 2010, \u20ac3.99\u00a0billion in 2011, \u20ac4.02\u00a0billion in 2012, \u20ac4.28\u00a0billion in 2013, \u20ac4.10\u00a0billion in 2014, \u20ac4.43\u00a0billion in 2015, \u20ac5.25\u00a0billion in 2016, \u20ac5.75\u00a0billion in 2017, \u20ac5.60\u00a0billion in 2018, \u20ac5.72\u00a0billion in 2019, \u20ac6.68\u00a0billion in 2020, \u20ac6.49\u00a0billion in 2021, \u20ac7.15\u00a0billion in 2022, \u20ac7.46\u00a0billion in 2023 and \u20ac7.79\u00a0billion in 2024.\nEnglish and French are the two official languages of the ESA. Additionally, official documents are also provided in German and documents regarding the Spacelab have been also provided in Italian. If found appropriate, the agency may conduct its correspondence in any language of a member state.\nThe following table lists all the member states and adjunct members, their ESA convention ratification dates, and their contributions as of 2024:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNon-full member states.\nPreviously associated members were Austria, Norway, Finland and Slovenia, all of which later joined the ESA as full members. Since January 2025 there have been four associate members: Latvia, Lithuania, Slovakia and Canada. The three European members have shown interest in full membership and may eventually apply within the next years.\nLatvia.\nLatvia became the second current associated member on 30 June 2020, when the Association Agreement was signed by ESA Director Jan W\u00f6rner and the Minister of Education and Science of Latvia, Ilga \u0160uplinska in Riga. The Saeima ratified it on 27 July.\nLithuania.\nIn May 2021, Lithuania became the third current associated member. As a consequence its citizens became eligible to apply to the 2022 ESA Astronaut group, applications for which were scheduled to close one week later. The deadline was therefore extended by three weeks to allow Lithuanians a fair chance to apply.\nSlovakia.\nSlovakia's Associate membership came into effect on 13 October 2022, for an initial duration of seven years. The Association Agreement supersedes the European Cooperating State (ECS) Agreement, which entered into force upon Slovakia's subscription to the Plan for European Cooperating States Charter on 4 February 2016, a scheme introduced at ESA in 2001. The ECS Agreement was subsequently extended until 3 August 2022.\nCyprus.\nCyprus has signed an Associate Agreement in October 2025, with expectations of becoming an associate member in the coming months.\nCanada.\nSince 1 January 1979, Canada has had the special status of a Cooperating State within the ESA. By virtue of this accord, the Canadian Space Agency takes part in the ESA's deliberative bodies and decision-making and also in the ESA's programmes and activities. Canadian firms can bid for and receive contracts to work on programmes. The accord has a provision ensuring a fair industrial return to Canada. The most recent Cooperation Agreement was signed on 12 February 2019 with a term extending to 2030. For 2014, Canada's annual assessed contribution to the ESA general budget was \u20ac6,059,449 (CAD$8,559,050). This annual contribution increased in 2017 to \u20ac21,600,000 (CAD$30,000,000). In 2025, the Government of Canada announced a plan to increase contributions to the ESA by \u20ac326,000,000 (CAD$528,500,000) over the following three to five-year period.\nBudget appropriation and allocation.\nThe ESA is funded from annual contributions by national governments of members as well as from an annual contribution by the European Union (EU).\nThe budget of the ESA was \u20ac5.250\u00a0billion in 2016. Every 3\u20134 years, ESA member states agree on a budget plan for several years at an ESA member states conference. This plan can be amended in future years, however provides the major guideline for the ESA for several years. The 2016 budget allocations for major areas of the ESA activity are shown in the chart on the right.\nCountries typically have their own space programmes that differ in how they operate organisationally and financially with the ESA. For example, the French space agency CNES has a total budget of \u20ac2,015\u00a0million, of which \u20ac755\u00a0million is paid as direct financial contribution to the ESA. Several space-related projects are joint projects between national space agencies and the ESA (e.g. COROT). Also, the ESA is not the only European governmental space organisation (for example European Union Satellite Centre and the European Union Space Programme Agency).\nEnlargement.\nAfter the decision of the ESA Council of 21/22 March 2001, the procedure for accession of the European states was detailed as described the document titled \"The Plan for European Co-operating States (PECS)\". Nations that want to become a full member of the ESA do so in 3 stages. First a Cooperation Agreement is signed between the country and ESA. In this stage, the country has very limited financial responsibilities. If a country wants to co-operate more fully with ESA, it signs a European Cooperating State (ECS) Agreement, albeit to be a candidate for said agreement, a country must be European. The ECS Agreement makes companies based in the country eligible for participation in ESA procurements. The country can also participate in all ESA programmes, except for the Basic Technology Research Programme. While the financial contribution of the country concerned increases, it is still much lower than that of a full member state. The agreement is normally followed by a Plan For European Cooperating State (or PECS Charter). This is a 5-year programme of basic research and development activities aimed at improving the nation's space industry capacity. At the end of the 5-year period, the country can either begin negotiations to become a full member state or an associated state or sign a new PECS Charter. Many countries, most of which joined the EU in both 2004 and 2007, have started to co-operate with the ESA on various levels:\nDuring the Ministerial Meeting in December 2014, ESA ministers approved a resolution calling for discussions to begin with Israel, Australia and South Africa on future association agreements. The ministers noted that \"concrete cooperation is at an advanced stage\" with these nations and that \"prospects for mutual benefits are existing\".\nA separate space exploration strategy resolution calls for further co-operation with the United States, Russia and China on \"LEO exploration, including a continuation of ISS cooperation and the development of a robust plan for the coordinated use of space transportation vehicles and systems for exploration purposes, participation in robotic missions for the exploration of the Moon, the robotic exploration of Mars, leading to a broad Mars Sample Return mission in which Europe should be involved as a full partner, and human missions beyond LEO in the longer term.\"\nIn August 2019, the ESA and the Australian Space Agency signed a joint statement of intent \"to explore deeper cooperation and identify projects in a range of areas including deep space, communications, navigation, remote asset management, data analytics and mission support.\" Details of the cooperation were laid out in a framework agreement signed by the two entities.\nOn 17 November 2020, ESA signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the South African National Space Agency (SANSA). SANSA CEO Dr. Valanathan Munsami tweeted: \"Today saw another landmark event for SANSA with the signing of an MoU with the ESA. This builds on initiatives that we have been discussing for a while already and which gives effect to these. Thanks Jan for your hand of friendship and making this possible.\"\nLaunch vehicles.\nThe ESA currently has two operational launch vehicles Vega C and Ariane 6. Rocket launches are carried out by Arianespace, which has 23 shareholders representing the industry that manufactures the Ariane 5 as well as CNES, at the ESA's Guiana Space Centre. Because many communication satellites have equatorial orbits, launches from French Guiana are able to take larger payloads into space than from spaceports at higher latitudes. In addition, equatorial launches give spacecraft an extra 'push' of nearly 500\u00a0m/s due to the higher rotational velocity of the Earth at the equator compared to near the Earth's poles where rotational velocity approaches zero. In 2014, ESA proposed changes to the Ariane family development scheme by moving to competitive bids for the development of Ariane 6.\nAriane 6.\nAriane 6 is a heavy lift expendable launch vehicle developed by Arianespace. The Ariane 6 entered into its inaugural flight campaign on 26 April 2024 with the flight conducted on 9 July 2024.\nVega-C.\nVega is the ESA's carrier for small satellites. Developed by seven ESA members led by Italy. It is capable of carrying a payload with a mass of between 300 and 1500\u00a0kg to an altitude of 700\u00a0km, for low polar orbit. Its maiden launch from Kourou was on 13 February 2012. Vega began full commercial exploitation in December 2015.\nThe rocket has three solid propulsion stages and a liquid propulsion upper stage (the AVUM) for accurate orbital insertion and the ability to place multiple payloads into different orbits.\nA larger version of the Vega launcher, Vega-C had its first flight in July 2022. The new evolution of the rocket incorporates a larger first stage booster, the P120C replacing the P80, an upgraded Zefiro (rocket stage) second stage, and the AVUM+ upper stage. This new variant enables larger single payloads, dual payloads, return missions, and orbital transfer capabilities.\nFuture rocket development.\nFuture projects under development within the Future Launchers Preparatory Programme (FLPP) include the Prometheus reusable engine technology demonstrator, Phoebus (an upgraded second stage for Ariane 6), and Themis (a reusable first stage).\nHuman spaceflight.\nFormation and development.\nAt the time the ESA was formed, its main goals did not encompass human space flight; rather it considered itself to be primarily a scientific research organisation for uncrewed space exploration in contrast to its American and Soviet counterparts. It is therefore not surprising that the first non-Soviet European in space was not an ESA astronaut on a European space craft; it was Czechoslovak Vladim\u00edr Remek who in 1978 became the first non-Soviet or American in space (the first man in space being Yuri Gagarin of the Soviet Union) \u2013 on a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, followed by the Pole Miros\u0142aw Hermaszewski and East German Sigmund J\u00e4hn in the same year. This Soviet co-operation programme, known as Intercosmos, primarily involved the participation of Eastern bloc countries. In 1982, however, Jean-Loup Chr\u00e9tien became the first non-Communist Bloc astronaut on a flight to the Soviet Salyut 7 space station.\nBecause Chr\u00e9tien did not officially fly into space as an ESA astronaut, but rather as a member of the French CNES astronaut corps, the German Ulf Merbold is considered the first ESA astronaut to fly into space. He participated in the STS-9 Space Shuttle mission that included the first use of the European-built Spacelab in 1983. STS-9 marked the beginning of an extensive ESA/NASA joint partnership that included dozens of space flights of ESA astronauts in the following years. Some of these missions with Spacelab were fully funded and organisationally and scientifically controlled by the ESA (such as two missions by Germany and one by Japan) with European astronauts as full crew members rather than guests on board. Beside paying for Spacelab flights and seats on the shuttles, the ESA continued its human space flight co-operation with the Soviet Union and later Russia, including numerous visits to Mir.\nDuring the latter half of the 1980s, European human space flights changed from being the exception to routine and therefore, in 1990, the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany was established. It selects and trains prospective astronauts and is responsible for the co-ordination with international partners, especially with regard to the International Space Station. As of 2006, the ESA astronaut corps officially included twelve members, including nationals from most large European countries except the United Kingdom.\nIn 2008, the ESA started to recruit new astronauts so that final selection would be due in spring 2009. Almost 10,000 people registered as astronaut candidates before registration ended in June 2008. 8,413 fulfilled the initial application criteria. Of the applicants, 918 were chosen to take part in the first stage of psychological testing, which narrowed down the field to 192. After two-stage psychological tests and medical evaluation in early 2009, as well as formal interviews, six new members of the European Astronaut Corps were selected \u2013 five men and one woman.\nCrew vehicles.\nIn the 1980s, France pressed for an independent European crew launch vehicle. Around 1978, it was decided to pursue a reusable spacecraft model and starting in November 1987 a project to create a mini-shuttle by the name of Hermes was introduced. The craft was comparable to early proposals for the Space Shuttle and consisted of a small reusable spaceship that would carry 3 to 5 astronauts and 3 to 4 metric tons of payload for scientific experiments. With a total maximum weight of 21 metric tons it would have been launched on the Ariane 5 rocket, which was being developed at that time. It was planned solely for use in low Earth orbit space flights. The planning and pre-development phase concluded in 1991; the production phase was never fully implemented because at that time the political landscape had changed significantly. With the fall of the Soviet Union, the ESA looked forward to co-operation with Russia to build a next-generation space vehicle. Thus the Hermes programme was cancelled in 1995 after about 3\u00a0billion dollars had been spent. The Columbus space station programme had a similar fate.\nIn the 21st century, ESA started new programmes to create its own crew vehicles, most notable among its various projects and proposals is Hopper, whose prototype by EADS, called Phoenix, has already been tested. While projects such as Hopper are neither concrete nor to be realised within the next decade, other possibilities for human spaceflight in co-operation with the Russian Space Agency have emerged. Following talks with the Russian Space Agency in 2004 and June 2005, a co-operation between the ESA and the Russian Space Agency was announced to jointly work on the Russian-designed Kliper, a reusable spacecraft that would be available for space travel beyond LEO (e.g. the moon or even Mars). It was speculated that Europe would finance part of it. A\u20ac50\u00a0million participation study for Kliper, which was expected to be approved in December 2005, was finally not approved by ESA member states. The Russian state tender for the project was subsequently cancelled in 2006.\nIn June 2006, ESA member states granted 15\u00a0million to the Crew Space Transportation System (CSTS) study, a two-year study to design a spacecraft capable of going beyond Low-Earth orbit based on the current Soyuz design. This project was pursued with Roskosmos instead of the cancelled Kliper proposal. A decision on the actual implementation and construction of the CSTS spacecraft was contemplated for 2008. In mid-2009 EADS Astrium was awarded a \u20ac21\u00a0million study into designing a crew vehicle based on the European ATV which was believed to be the basis of the Advanced Crew Transportation System design. Neither of these projects was pursued further in the 2010s.\nIn November 2012, ESA decided to join NASA's Orion programme. The ATV would form the basis of the European Service Module (ESM) for NASA's new crewed spacecraft. ESA may also seek to work with NASA on Orion's launch system as well to secure a seat on the spacecraft for its own astronauts. The complete Orion with ESM flew on its first mission to Lunar orbit in 2022.\nIn September 2014, the ESA signed an agreement with Sierra Nevada Corporation for co-operation in Dream Chaser project. Further studies on the Dream Chaser for European Use or DC4EU project were funded, including the feasibility of launching a Europeanised Dream Chaser onboard Ariane 5.\nInternational Space Station (ISS).\nWith regard to the International Space Station (ISS), the ESA is not represented by all of its member states: 11 of the 22 ESA member states currently participate in the project: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. Austria, Finland and Ireland chose not to participate, because of lack of interest or concerns about the expense of the project. Portugal, Luxembourg, Greece, the Czech Republic, Romania, Poland, Estonia, and Hungary joined ESA after the agreement had been signed.\nESA takes part in the construction and operation of the ISS, with contributions such as Columbus, a science laboratory module that was brought into orbit by NASA's STS-122 Space Shuttle mission, and the Cupola observatory module that was completed in July 2005 by Alenia Spazio for the ESA. The current estimates for the ISS are approaching \u20ac100\u00a0billion in total (development, construction and 10 years of maintaining the station) of which the ESA has committed to paying \u20ac8\u00a0billion. About 90% of the costs of the ESA's ISS share will be contributed by Germany (41%), France (28%) and Italy (20%). German ESA astronaut Thomas Reiter was the first long-term ISS crew member.\nESA has developed the Automated Transfer Vehicle for ISS resupply. Each ATV has a cargo capacity of . The first ATV, \"Jules Verne\", was launched on 9 March 2008 and on 3 April 2008 successfully docked with the ISS. This manoeuvre, considered a major technical feat, involved using automated systems to allow the ATV to track the ISS, moving at 27,000\u00a0km/h, and attach itself with an accuracy of 2\u00a0cm. Five vehicles were launched before the program ended with the launch of the fifth ATV, \"Georges Lema\u00eetre\", in 2014.\nEuropean Life and Physical Sciences research on board the International Space Station (ISS) is mainly based on the European Programme for Life and Physical Sciences in Space programme that was initiated in 2001.\nCubeSats.\nSince the 2010s, ESA has launched numerous CubeSat-type small satellites supported through various programmes:\nGeneral Support Technology Programme (GSTP).\nGSTP also supports other non-CubeSat small satellite missions, e.g. the PROBA series.\nFly Your Satellite! (FYS).\nFYS is an educational programme for student teams developing CubeSats or PocketQubes\nInCubed.\nThe InCubed co-funding programme, managed by ESA's \u03a6-lab, supports innovative technologies for Earth observation satellities.\nIn-Orbit Demonstration and Validation (IOD/IOV).\nIOD/IOV is a European Union programme entrusted to ESA.\nCooperation with other countries and organisations.\nThe ESA has signed co-operation agreements with the following states that currently neither plan to integrate as tightly with ESA institutions as Canada, nor envision future membership of the ESA: Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Russia, and Turkey. Additionally, the ESA has joint projects with the EUSPA of the European Union, NASA of the United States and is participating in the International Space Station together with the United States (NASA), Russia (Roscosmos), Japan (JAXA), and Canada (CSA).\nNASA.\nThe ESA has a long history of collaboration with NASA. Since ESA's astronaut corps was formed, the Space Shuttle has been the primary launch vehicle used by the ESA's astronauts to get into space through partnership programmes with NASA. In the 1980s and 1990s, the Spacelab programme was an ESA-NASA joint research programme that had the ESA develop and manufacture orbital labs for the Space Shuttle for several flights in which the ESA participates with astronauts in experiments.\nIn October 2020, ESA entered into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with NASA to collaborate on the Artemis program, which will provide an orbiting Lunar Gateway and also accomplish the first crewed lunar landing in 50 years, whose team will include the first woman on the Moon. Astronaut selection announcements are expected within two years of the 2024 scheduled launch date. ESA also purchases seats on the NASA operated Commercial Crew Program. The first ESA astronaut to be on a Commercial Crew Program mission was Thomas Pesquet who launched into space aboard Crew Dragon Endeavour on the Crew-2 mission. Following ESA astronauts on Crew Dragon missions were Matthias Maurer (Crew-3), Samantha Cristoforetti (Crew-4), and others.\nIn robotic science mission and exploration missions, NASA has been the ESA's main partner. \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" was a joint NASA-ESA mission, along with the Infrared Space Observatory, INTEGRAL, SOHO, and others. The Hubble Space Telescope and James Webb Space Telescope are joint projects of NASA and ESA. Possible future ESA-NASA joint projects include the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna, Mars sample-return mission, and others.\nJAXA.\nESA and the Japanese Space Agency (JAXA) have engaged in long-standing collaboration in various domains of space exploration, satellite technology, space science, and human spaceflight. Their partnership has evolved over the decades, focusing on joint missions, technology sharing, and international cooperation in space exploration. Some of the programs include BepiColombo Mission, EarthCARE, Hera, and Comet Interceptor. In 2025, ESA opened its first Asian office in Tokyo, Japan.\nRoscosmos.\nIn the 2000s and 2010s, ESA collaborated with the Russian Space Agency (Roscosmos) on the development of the crewed vehicle CSTS (later cancelled), the use of French Guiana's Guiana Space Centre spaceport for launches of Soyuz-2 rockets, and the ExoMars programme including the \"Schiaparelli\" lander and the Trace Gas Orbiter. In 2022, most collaboration with the Russian Space Agency was terminated after Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nCNSA.\nESA and the Chinese Space Agency (CNSA) cooperated on development of the Double Star Mission. In 2017, ESA sent two astronauts to China for two weeks sea survival training with Chinese astronauts in Yantai, Shandong. In 2024, the joint Einstein Probe was launched. The joint SMILE mission will launch in 2025 to image for the first time the magnetosphere of the Sun in soft X-rays and UV\nISRO.\nESA provided instruments for the Indian Space Agency (ISRO)'s lunar mission Chandrayaan-1 in 2008. Since 2024, ESA has been supporting ISRO's human spaceflight programme Gaganyaan.\nAfSA.\nESA has been cooperating with the African Union's African Space Agency (AfSA) since its formation (itself inspired by ESA) in 2023.\nLink between ESA and EU.\nThe ESA is an independent space agency and not under the jurisdiction of the European Union, although they have common goals, share funding, and work together often. The initial aim of the European Union (EU) was to make the European Space Agency an agency of the EU by 2014. While the EU and its member states fund together 86% of the budget of the ESA, it is not an EU agency. Furthermore, the ESA has several non-EU members, most notably the United Kingdom which left the EU while remaining a full member of the ESA. The ESA is partnered with the EU on its two current flagship space programmes, the Copernicus series of Earth observation satellites and the Galileo satellite navigation system, with the ESA providing technical oversight and, in the case of Copernicus, some of the funding. The EU, though, has shown an interest in expanding into new areas, whence the proposal to rename and expand its satellite navigation agency (the European GNSS Agency) into the EU Agency for the Space Programme. The proposal drew strong criticism from the ESA, as it was perceived as encroaching on the ESA's turf.\nIn January 2021, after years of acrimonious relations, EU and ESA officials mended their relationship, with the EU Internal Market commissioner Thierry Breton saying \"The European space policy will continue to rely on the ESA and its unique technical, engineering and science expertise,\" and that the \"ESA will continue to be the European agency for space matters. If we are to be successful in our European strategy for space, and we will be, I will need the ESA by my side.\" ESA director Aschbacher reciprocated, saying \"I would really like to make the ESA the main agency, the go-to agency of the European Commission for all its flagship programmes.\" The ESA and EUSPA are now seen to have distinct roles and competencies, which will be officialised in the Financial Framework Partnership Agreement (FFPA). Whereas the ESA's focus will be on the technical elements of the EU space programmes, the EUSPA will handle the operational elements of those programmes.\nEmployment.\nAs of 2023, Many other facilities are operated by national space agencies in close collaboration with the ESA. The ESA employs around 2,547 people, and thousands of contractors. Initially, new employees are contracted for an expandable four-year term, which is until the organisation's retirement age of 63. According to the ESA's documents, the staff can receive myriad of perks, such as financial childcare support, retirement plans, and financial help when migrating. The ESA also prevents employees from disclosing any private documents or correspondences to outside parties. \"Ars Technica\"'s 2023 report, which contained testimonies of 18 people, suggested that there is a widespread harassment between management and its employees, especially with its contractors. Since the ESA is an international organisation, unaffiliated with any single nation, any form of legal action is difficult to raise against the organisation.\nSecurity incidents.\nOn 3 August 1984, the ESA's Paris headquarters were severely damaged and six people were hurt when a bomb exploded. It was planted by the far-left armed Action Directe group.\nOn 14 December 2015, hackers from Anonymous breached the ESA's subdomains and leaked thousands of login credentials.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10365", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10365", "title": "Embouchure", "text": "Player's mouth setup for a wind instrument\nEmbouchure () or lipping is the use of the lips, facial muscles, tongue, and teeth in playing a wind instrument. This includes shaping the lips to the mouthpiece of a woodwind or brass instrument. The word is of French origin and is related to the root \"\", 'mouth'. Proper embouchure allows an instrumentalist to play an instrument at its full range with a full, clear tone and without strain or damage to their muscles.\nBrass embouchure.\nWhile performing on a brass instrument, the sound is produced by the player buzzing their lips into a mouthpiece. Pitches are changed in part through altering the amount of muscular contraction in the lip formation. The performer's use of the air, tightening of cheek and jaw muscles, and tongue manipulation can affect how the embouchure works.\nMaintaining an effective embouchure is an essential skill for any brass instrumentalist, but its personal and particular characteristics mean that different pedagogues and researchers have advocated differing, even contradictory, advice on what proper embouchure is and how it should be taught. One point on which there is some agreement is that proper embouchure is not one-size-fits-all: individual differences in dental structure, lip shape and size, jaw shape and the degree of jaw malocclusion, and other anatomical factors will affect whether a particular embouchure technique will be effective or not.\nIn 1962, Philip Farkas hypothesized that the air stream traveling through the lip aperture should be directed straight down the shank of the mouthpiece. He believed that it would be illogical to \"violently deflect\" the air stream downward at the point of where the air moves past the lips. In this text, Farkas also recommends that the lower jaw be protruded so that the upper and lower teeth are aligned.\nIn 1970, Farkas published a second text which contradicted his earlier writing. Out of 40 subjects, Farkas showed that 39 subjects directed the air downward to varying degrees and one subject directed the air in an upward direction at various degrees. The lower jaw position seen in these photographs shows more variation from his earlier text as well.\nThis supports what was written by trombonist and brass pedagogue Donald S. Reinhardt in 1942. In 1972, Reinhardt described and labeled different embouchure patterns according to such characteristics as mouthpiece placement and the general direction of the air stream as it travels past the lips. According to this later text, players who place the mouthpiece higher on the lips, so that more upper lip is inside the mouthpiece, will direct the air downwards to varying degrees while playing. Performers who place the mouthpiece lower, so that more lower lip is inside the mouthpiece, will direct the air to varying degrees in an upward manner. In order for the performer to be successful, the air stream direction and mouthpiece placement need to be personalized based on individual anatomical differences. Lloyd Leno confirmed the existence of both upstream and downstream embouchures.\nMore controversial was Reinhardt's description and recommendations regarding a phenomenon he termed a \"pivot\". According to Reinhardt, a successful brass embouchure depends on a motion wherein the performer moves both the mouthpiece and lips as a single unit along the teeth in an upward and downward direction. As the performer ascends in pitch, he or she will either move the lips and mouthpiece together slightly up towards the nose or pull them down together slightly towards the chin, and use the opposite motion to descend in pitch. Whether the player uses one general pivot direction or the other, and the degree to which the motion is performed, depends on the performer's anatomical features and stage of development. The placement of the mouthpiece upon the lips doesn't change, but rather the relationship of the rim and lips to the teeth. While the angle of the instrument may change as this motion follows the shape of the teeth and placement of the jaw, contrary to what many brass performers and teachers believe, the angle of the instrument does not actually constitute the motion Reinhardt advised as a pivot.\nLater research supports Reinhardt's claim that this motion exists and might be advisable for brass performers to adopt. John Froelich describes how mouthpiece pressure towards the lips (vertical forces) and shear pressure (horizontal forces) functioned in three test groups, student trombonists, professional trombonists, and professional symphonic trombonists. Froelich noted that the symphonic trombonists used the least amount of both direct and shear forces and recommends this model be followed. Other research notes that virtually all brass performers rely upon the upward and downward embouchure motion. Other authors and pedagogues remain skeptical about the necessity of this motion, but scientific evidence supporting this view has not been sufficiently developed at this time.\nSome noted brass pedagogues prefer to instruct the use of the embouchure from a less analytical point of view. Arnold Jacobs, a tubist and well-regarded brass teacher, believed that it was best for the student to focus on his or her use of the air and musical expression to allow the embouchure to develop naturally on its own. Other instructors, such as Carmine Caruso, believed that the brass player's embouchure could best be developed through coordination exercises and drills that bring all the muscles into balance that focus the student's attention on his or her time perception. Still other authors who have differing approaches to embouchure development include Louis Maggio, Jeff Smiley, Jerome Callet and Clint McLaughlin.\nFarkas embouchure.\nMost professional performers, as well as instructors, use a combination called a puckered smile. Farkas told people to blow as if they were trying to cool soup. Raphael Mendez advised saying the letter \"M\". The skin under the lower lip will be taut with no air pocket. The lips do not overlap nor do they roll in or out. The corners of the mouth are held firmly in place. To play with an extended range one should use a pivot, tongue arch and lip to lip compression.\nAccording to Farkas the mouthpiece should have &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 upper lip and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 lower lip (French horn), &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 lower lip and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 upper lip (trumpet and cornet), and more latitude for lower brass (trombone, baritone, and tuba). For trumpet, some also advocate &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 upper lip and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 lower lip. Farkas claimed placement was more important for the instruments with smaller mouthpieces. The lips should not overlap each other, nor should they roll in or out. The mouth corners should be held firm. Farkas speculated that the horn should be held in a downward angle to allow the air stream to go straight into the mouthpiece, although his later text shows that air stream direction actually is either upstream or downstream and is dependent upon the ratio of upper or lower lip inside the mouthpiece, not the horn angle. Farkas advised to moisten the outside of the lips, then form the embouchure and gently place the mouthpiece on it. He also recommended there must be a gap of or so between the teeth so that the air flows freely.\nArban vs. Saint-Jacome.\nArban and Saint-Jacome were both cornet soloists and authors of well respected and still used method books. Arban stated undogmatically that he believed the mouthpiece should be placed &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 on the top lip. Saint-Jacome to the contrary said dogmatically that the mouthpiece should be placed \"two-thirds for the upper and the rest for the under according to all professors and one-third for the upper and two-thirds for the under according to one sole individual, whom I shall not name.\"\nBuzzing embouchure.\nThe Farkas set is the basis of most lip buzzing embouchures. Mendez did teach lip buzzing by making the student lip buzz for a month before they could play their trumpet and got great results. One can initiate this type of buzz by using the same sensation as spitting seeds, but maintaining a continued flow of air. This technique assists the development of the Farkas approach by preventing the player from using an aperture that is too open.\nStevens\u2013Costello embouchure.\nStevens\u2013Costello embouchure has its origins in the William Costello embouchure and was further developed by Roy Stevens. It uses a slight rolling in of both lips and touching evenly all the way across. It also uses mouthpiece placement of about 40\u201350% top lip and 50\u201360% lower lip. The teeth will be about apart and the teeth are parallel or the jaw slightly forward.\nThere is relative mouthpiece pressure to the given air column. One exercise to practice the proper weight to air relationship is the palm exercise where the player holds the horn by laying it on its side in the palm of the hand, not grasping it. The lips are placed on the mouthpiece and the player blows utilizing the weight of the horn in establishing a sound.\nMaggio embouchure.\nA puckered embouchure, used by most players, and sometimes used by jazz players for extremely high \"screamer\" notes. Maggio claimed that the pucker embouchure gives more endurance than some systems. Carlton MacBeth is the main proponent of the pucker embouchure. The Maggio system was established because Louis Maggio had sustained an injury which prevented him from playing. In this system the player cushions the lips by extending them or puckering (like a monkey). This puckering enables the players to overcome physical malformations. It also lets the player play for an extended time in the upper register. The pucker can make it easy to use to open an aperture. Much very soft practice can help overcome this. Claude Gordon was a student of Louis Maggio and Herbert L. Clarke and systematized the concepts of these teachers. Claude Gordon made use of pedal tones for embouchure development as did Maggio and Herbert L. Clarke. All three stressed that the mouthpiece should be placed higher on the top lip for a more free vibration of the lips.\nTongue-controlled embouchure.\nThis embouchure method, advocated by a minority of brass pedagogues such as Jerome Callet, has not yet been sufficiently researched to support the claims that this system is the most effective approach for all brass performers.\nAdvocates of Callet's approach believe that this method was recommended and taught by the great brass instructors of the early 20th century. Two French trumpet technique books, authored by Jean-Baptiste Arban and Saint-Jacome, were translated into English for use by American players. According to some, due to a misunderstanding arising from differences in pronunciation between French and English, the commonly used brass embouchure in Europe was incorrectly interpreted. Callet attributes this difference in embouchure technique as the reason the great players of the past were able to play at the level of technical virtuosity which they did, although the increased difficulty of contemporary compositions for brass seem to indicate that the level of brass technique achieved by today's performers equals or even exceeds that of most performers from the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nCallet's method of brass embouchure consists of the tongue remaining forward and through the teeth at all times. The corners of the mouth always remain relaxed, and only a small amount of air is used. The top and bottom lips curl inward and grip the forward tongue. The tongue will force the teeth, and subsequently the throat, wide open, supposedly resulting in a bigger, more open sound. The forward tongue resists the pressure of the mouthpiece, controls the flow of air for lower and higher notes, and protects the lips and teeth from damage or injury from mouthpiece pressure. Because of the importance of the tongue in this method many refer to this as a \"tongue-controlled embouchure\". This technique facilitates the use of a smaller mouthpiece and larger bore instruments. It results in improved intonation and stronger harmonically related partials across the player's range.\nWoodwind embouchure.\nFlute embouchure.\nA variety of transverse flute embouchures are employed by professional flautists, though the most natural form is perfectly symmetrical, the corners of the mouth relaxed (i.e. not smiling), the lower lip placed along and at a short distance from the embouchure hole. It must be stressed, however, that achieving a symmetrical, or perfectly centred blowing hole ought not to be an end in itself. Indeed, French flautist Marcel Moyse did not play with a symmetrical embouchure.\nThe end-blown xiao, kaval, shakuhachi and hocchiku flutes demand especially difficult embouchures, sometimes requiring many lessons before any sound can be produced.\nThe embouchure is an important element to tone production. The right embouchure, developed with \"time, patience, and intelligent work\", will produce a beautiful sound and a correct intonation. The embouchure is produced with the muscles around the lips: principally the orbicularis oris muscle and the depressor anguli oris, whilst avoiding activation of zygomaticus major, which will produce a smile, flattening the top lip against the maxillary (upper jaw) teeth. Beginner flute-players tend to suffer fatigue in these muscles, and notably struggle to use the depressor muscle, which necessarily helps to keep the top lip directing the flow of air across the embouchure hole. These muscles have to be properly warmed up and exercised before practicing. Tone-development exercises including long notes and harmonics must be done as part of the warm up daily.\nSome further adjustments to the embouchure are necessary when moving from the transverse orchestral flute to the piccolo. With the piccolo, it becomes necessary to place the near side of the embouchure hole slightly higher on the lower lip, i.e. above the lip margin, and greater muscle tone from the lip muscles is needed to keep the stream/pressure of air directed across the smaller embouchure hole, particularly when playing in higher piccolo registers.\nReed instrument embouchure.\nWith the woodwinds, aside from the flute, piccolo, and recorder, the sound is generated by a reed and not with the lips. The embouchure is therefore based on sealing the area around the reed and mouthpiece. This serves to prevent air from escaping while simultaneously supporting the reed, allowing it to vibrate, and constrict the reed preventing it from vibrating too much. With woodwinds, it is important to ensure that the mouthpiece is not placed too far into the mouth, which would result in too much vibration (no control), often creating a sound an octave (or harmonic twelfth for the clarinet) above the intended note. If the mouthpiece is not placed far enough into the mouth, no sound will be generated, as the reed will not vibrate.\nThe standard embouchures for single reed woodwinds like the clarinet and saxophone are variants of the \"single lip embouchure\", formed by resting the reed upon the bottom lip, which rests on the teeth and is supported by the chin muscles and the buccinator muscles on the sides of the mouth. The top teeth rest on top of the mouthpiece. The manner in which the lower lip rests against the teeth differs between clarinet and saxophone embouchures. In clarinet playing, the lower lip is rolled over the teeth and corners of the mouth are drawn back, which has the effect of drawing the upper lip around the mouthpiece to create a seal due to the angle at which the mouthpiece rests in the mouth. With the saxophone embouchure, the lower lip rests against, but not over, the teeth as in pronouncing the letter \"V\" and the corners of the lip are drawn in (similar to a drawstring bag). With the less common double-lip embouchure, the top lip is placed under (around) the top teeth, an alternative embouchure sometimes recommended by dentists for single-reed players for whom the single-lip approach is potentially harmful. In both instances, the position of the tongue in the mouth plays a vital role in focusing and accelerating the air stream blown by the player. This results in a more mature and full sound, rich in overtones.\nThe double reed woodwinds, the oboe and bassoon, have no mouthpiece. Instead the reed is two pieces of cane extending from a metal tube (oboe \u2013 staple) or placed on a bocal (bassoon, English horn). The reed is placed directly on the lips and then played like the double-lip embouchure described above. Compared to the single reed woodwinds, the reed is very small and subtle changes in the embouchure can have a dramatic effect on tuning, tone and pitch control.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10368", "revid": "42342156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10368", "title": "Elephant 6", "text": "American musical collective\nThe Elephant 6 Recording Company is a loosely defined indie rock musical collective from the United States. Notable bands associated with the collective include The Apples in Stereo, Beulah, Circulatory System, Elf Power, The Minders, Neutral Milk Hotel, of Montreal, and The Olivia Tremor Control. Although bands in Elephant 6 explore many different genres, they have a shared interest in psychedelic pop of the 1960s, with particular influence from bands such as the Beach Boys, the Beatles, and the Zombies. Their music sometimes features intentionally low fidelity production and experimental recording techniques.\nThe collective started in Ruston, Louisiana in the late 1980s. The name was occasionally used to denote the home recordings made by four high school friends: Bill Doss, Will Cullen Hart, Jeff Mangum, and Robert Schneider. After high school, Schneider formed the Apples in Stereo; Doss, Hart, and Mangum formed the Olivia Tremor Control; and Mangum independently formed Neutral Milk Hotel. These three bands would serve as the basis for Elephant 6, and soon, many other bands joined. Athens, Georgia, and Denver, Colorado, became major hub cities, and the mid-to-late 1990s represented the peak years of activity for the collective.\nDue to the confluence of new bands and the dissolution of Neutral Milk Hotel and the Olivia Tremor Control, the collective stagnated in activity in the early 2000s. A brief resurgence in the late 2000s ended with the death of Doss, and in recent years the collective has remained relatively dormant. Journalists have described Elephant 6 as an important underground music movement, and a key contributor to the emergence of alternative rock and indie rock in the 1990s.\nHistory.\nBackground and formation.\nNoel Murray and Marcus Gilmer of \"The A.V. Club\" note the difficulty in defining the exact parameters of the collective due to the multitude of associated acts. Each act has their own unique sound, and musicians are often members of multiple bands. This problem is compounded by the fact that members will sometimes obfuscate the truth, such as misleading a \"Rolling Stone\" reporter into believing they lived in a communal compound in Athens. In 2012, the official Elephant 6 website read: \"A collective, a label ... a cult? Elephant 6 may be all of these things or none of these depending on your point of view. And we're certainly not going to try to define what it is now!\"\nElephant 6 originated in Ruston, Louisiana, in the late 1980s. The name was occasionally used to denote home recordings made by four high school friends: Bill Doss, Will Cullen Hart, Jeff Mangum, and Robert Schneider. These recordings were circulated between the four of them, and they did not seek approval from record labels or fanzines. Musician Laura Carter said: \"They were just 13-year-old boys yelling, 'Fuck your mama,' and bashing on the drums as hard as they can. It was just kids having fun, and they would fill up a whole cassette tape with this.\" When the group decided to create an imaginary label for their music, Hart came up with the name Elephant 6.\nWhen the four friends graduated high school, they dispersed to different cities in the United States, but continued to mail tapes to each other. Schneider moved to Denver, Colorado and formed a band called the Apples in 1992 with Jim McIntyre, Hilarie Sidney and Chris Parfitt. Doss, Hart, and Mangum moved to Athens, Georgia. The three were drawn to the city's burgeoning music scene, and played in a band called the Synthetic Flying Machine. While in Athens, the group began collaborating with New York musician Julian Koster. In 1993, the Synthetic Flying Machine evolved into a band called the Olivia Tremor Control, and the band gained local attention for their psychedelic sound, which was in contrast to the prevalent grunge sound of the 1990s.\nIn the 1990s, bands joined Elephant 6 through invitation. Inspired by the Surrealist Manifestos, members of the collective issued their own manifesto in small hand-drawn catalogs, found within early releases. According to Schneider: \"We wanted [to find] these little pockets of people in different cities who listened to Pavement and the Beach Boys and were recording on 4-tracks.\" Schneider notes that another way a band may join is by simply having a similar sound. He uses Beulah as an example, and in reference to the band's sound, he said: \"This is a kindred spirit. This is Elephant 6.\"\nSchneider created a record label called the Elephant 6 Recording Company as a vehicle for the Apples music, and in 1993, the first recording released on the label was an extended play titled \"Tidal Wave\". Around this time, Mangum left the Olivia Tremor Control, and became a vagabond. While living in Seattle, Mangum released the song \"Everything Is\" on Cher Doll Records in 1994, and was the first member of the collective to have their music released on a mainstream label, although the release was not directly affiliated with the Elephant 6 collective and did not feature the Elephant 6 logo. Mangum released the song under the name Neutral Milk Hotel. The Apples were later known as the Apples in Stereo.\nPeak years.\nThe mid-to-late 1990s saw the greatest amount of activity for the collective. The three main bands associated with Elephant 6 at the time\u2013the Apples in Stereo, the Olivia Tremor Control, and Neutral Milk Hotel\u2013grew in popularity, and each respectively released a notable album: \"Fun Trick Noisemaker\", \"\", and \"In the Aeroplane Over the Sea\". \"The A.V. Club\" wrote highly of \"In the Aereoplane Over the Sea\", saying it \"is the culmination of everything the [Elephant 6] collective was about in the mid-'90s: distinctive, ragged, catchy records ripped straight from their makers' veins.\"\nMany bands associated with the collective were formed during this period, and Athens became a major hub city. Elf Power, of Montreal, and Doss' solo project the Sunshine Fix were among the more notable Athens based groups. of Montreal frontperson Kevin Barnes said: \"The heyday, most of the late 1990s, everyone was involved in each others lives, and we would collaborate more, have dinners where everyone would make something.\" Schneider compares this period to the Summer of Love, and said the driving force for many of the bands was \"out-weirding [their] neighbor\" with their music. Elephant 6 bands would tour with each other, the larger bands allowed the smaller bands to open for them.\nDenver was the smaller of the two hub cities. In addition to the Apples in Stereo, the major bands from Denver were the Minders, Dressy Bessy, and McIntyre's solo project Von Hemmling. The main draw for Elephant 6 bands in Denver was Pet Sounds Studio, a recording studio Schneider built in McIntyre's house. Many Elephant 6 albums were recorded at Pet Sounds, and were produced by Schneider. In addition to the two main hub cities, Elephant 6 bands began forming in various cities in the United States, such as the Essex Green and the Ladybug Transistor in Brooklyn, and Beulah in San Francisco.\nInactivity.\nIn the early 2000s, Elephant 6 stagnated in activity. Neutral Milk Hotel member and the Gerbils frontman Scott Spillane identifies the sudden uptick of bands across the country as an important factor to this period. \"At the time the Elephant 6 thing was getting out of hand, and we started seeing all of these bands that had little Elephant 6 logos on them all over the place\" said Spillane. Bands began to tour more often, and the members had less time to interact with each other. Additionally, Neutral Milk Hotel and the Olivia Tremor Control went on hiatus. Mangum became reclusive as he struggled to cope with his newfound stardom, while the members of the Olivia Tremor Control wanted to record their own solo music.\nBeulah member Pat Noel said many bands were dismayed at how journalists would \"pigeonhole\" them to the collective. \"We kind of made a conscious decision to distance ourselves a little bit from the whole thing.\" Schneider took a break from producing albums, and the final album to be affixed with the Elephant 6 Recording Company logo was \"Cul-De-Sacs and Dead Ends\" by the Minders in 1999. The collective slowly dissipated, although bands like the Apples in Stereo, Elf Power, and of Montreal continued making music throughout the 2000s.\nBrief reemergence.\nThe collective was relatively dormant until The Olivia Tremor Control reunited in 2005 to play the UK music festival All Tomorrow's Parties, curated by Vincent Gallo. The release of the album \"New Magnetic Wonder\" by the Apples in Stereo came in 2007. \"New Magnetic Wonder\" featured all four of the collective's originating members. While recording the album, they discussed new ideas, which in turn facilitated a need to make more music. The following year, Julian Koster and Nesey Gallons organized the \"Elephant 6 Holiday Surprise Tour,\" a short concert tour that featured fifteen artists and ten Elephant 6 bands. Koster said \"Elephant 6 is back,\" and added: \"Somehow, everything's happening for us now. I don't know why we were ever interrupted, and why all this is happening now. But we're all just so happy.\" Jeff Mangum returned to the public eye with solo concerts over the next few years.\nOn July 30, 2012, Doss died from a reported aneurysm. His death came as a shock to the collective, and stalled nearly all recordings at the time. Schneider said: \"I can't say what it means for the Elephant 6 or the Apples ... On a musical level it's too soon to say. I mean, I don't want to say definitively that I don't want to make music again, but on a musical level there's no way to come to terms with the loss.\" In 2017 Schneider confirmed he was producing unfinished recordings with the remaining members of The Olivia Tremor Control. Today, the Elephant 6 collective still exists, albeit on a much smaller scale. Bands like Elf Power and of Montreal continue to record music, and many bands have moved onto Elephant 6 offshoot labels such as Orange Twin Records and Cloud Recordings.\nInfluences and style.\nElephant 6 bands explore a variety of music genres, including indie rock, synth-pop, and twee pop. A common interest for nearly every associated band, however, is psychedelic pop of the 1960s. Bands such as the Beach Boys, the Beatles, and the Zombies are important influences for Elephant 6 groups like the Apples in Stereo, Beulah, and the Olivia Tremor Control. Elephant 6's de facto leader Robert Schneider notes the particular influence of the Beach Boys' unfinished album \"Smile\", calling it the \"Holy Grail\" for many members of the collective. He notes how he and other members were obsessed with Beach Boys albums, and attempted to create the type of music they felt would have been included in \"Smile\".\nMost Elephant 6 members are anti-consumerism and possess a DIY ethic. Their music sometimes features intentionally low quality production, and bands may experiment with unique recording methods; for example, \"Music from the Unrealized Film Script: Dusk at Cubist Castle\" features recording techniques such as tape manipulation and sound collages. Schneider notes his hatred of both indie music and modern pop music, and said that his vision for Elephant 6 is a \"perfect pop world,\" untarnished by commercial interests.\nImpact.\nSeveral journalists regard Elephant 6 as an important underground music movement, and a key contributor to the alternative rock and indie rock explosion in the 1990s. Lee M. Shook Jr. of \"Paste\" wrote: \"The Elephant 6 Recording Company would raise the bar for wide-scale countercultural activity and underground pop art\u2014both musical, visual and otherwise\u2014well into the 21st century.\" Tom Murphy of \"Westword\" expanded on this statement, by writing: \"It became a movement of sorts because the music was so accessible and inclusive of a wide range of musical expression, allowing for immediate and enduring growth, however loose the association.\"\nThe collective has influenced many indie rock bands, including Arcade Fire, Franz Ferdinand, and Tame Impala. Chris Chu of the Canadian band the Morning Benders said: \"Elephant 6 was the gateway for me. They seemed to be bridging that tradition from the 60s to a more modern, more indie approach. It was exactly what I was looking for, a new take on that stuff.\"\nDocumentary.\nIn 2022 a documentary was released called \"A Future History Of: The Elephant 6 Recording Co.\" On Rotten Tomatoes the film currently has a 100% positive review rate.\nAssociated acts.\nThe official Elephant 6 website lists forty-seven acts associated with the collective, although Shook Jr. reports there are more than fifty. Among the collective's more notable acts include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10369", "revid": "49403801", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10369", "title": "Echolocation", "text": "Echolocation is the use of sound as a form of navigation.\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "10370", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10370", "title": "Evangelicalism", "text": "Protestant Christian movement\nEvangelicalism (), also called evangelical Christianity or evangelical Protestantism, is a worldwide, interdenominational movement within Protestant Christianity that emphasizes evangelism, or the preaching and spreading of the Christian gospel. The term evangelical is derived from the Koine Greek word \"euangelion\", meaning \"good news,\" in reference to the message of salvation through Jesus Christ. Evangelicalism typically places a strong emphasis on personal conversion, often described as being \"born again\", and regards the Bible as the ultimate authority in matters of faith and practice. The definition and scope of evangelicalism are subjects of debate among theologians and scholars. Some critics argue that the term encompasses a wide and diverse range of beliefs and practices, making it difficult to define as a coherent or unified movement.\nThe theological roots of evangelicalism can be traced to the Protestant Reformation in 16th-century Europe, particularly Martin Luther's 1517 Ninety-five Theses, which emphasized the authority of Scripture and the preaching of the gospel over church tradition. The modern evangelical movement is generally dated to around 1738, influenced by theological currents such as Pietism, Puritanism, Quakerism, and Moravianism\u2014notably the work of Nicolaus Zinzendorf and the Herrnhut community. Evangelicalism gained momentum during the First Great Awakening, with figures like John Wesley and the early Methodists playing central roles.\nIt has had a longstanding presence in the Anglosphere, particularly in the United Kingdom and the United States, before expanding globally in the 19th, 20th, and early 21st centuries. The movement grew substantially during the 18th and 19th centuries, notably through the series of religious revivals known as the Great Awakening in the United States and various revival movements and reform efforts in Britain. Today, evangelicals are found across many Protestant denominations and global contexts, without being confined to a single tradition. Notable evangelical leaders have included Zinzendorf, George Fox, Wesley, George Whitefield, Jonathan Edwards, Billy Graham, Bill Bright, Harold Ockenga, Gudina Tumsa, John Stott, Francisco Olaz\u00e1bal, William J. Seymour, Luis Palau, Os Guinness, and Martyn Lloyd-Jones. \nAs of 2016, an estimated 619 million people identified as evangelical Christians worldwide, accounting for roughly one in four Christians. In the United States, evangelicals make up about a quarter of the population and represent the largest religious group. A growing number of individuals, often referred to as exvangelicals, have left evangelicalism due to discrimination, abuse, or theological disillusionment. Evangelicalism is a transdenominational movement found across many Protestant denominations, including Reformed traditions such as Presbyterianism and Congregationalism, Anglicanism, Plymouth Brethren, Baptists, Methodism (especially in the Wesleyan\u2013Arminian tradition), Lutheranism, Moravians, Free Church bodies, Mennonites, Quakers, Pentecostal and charismatic movements, and various non-denominational churches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nThe word \"evangelical\" has its etymological roots in the Greek word for 'gospel' or 'good news': , from 'good', the stem of, among other words, 'messenger, angel', and the neuter suffix . By the English Middle Ages, the term had expanded semantically to include not only the message, but also the New Testament which contained the message as well as more specifically the Gospels, which portray the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus. The first published use of \"evangelical\" in English was in 1531, when William Tyndale wrote \"He exhorteth them to proceed constantly in the evangelical truth.\" One year later, Thomas More wrote the earliest recorded use in reference to a theological distinction when he spoke of \"Tyndale [and] his evangelical brother Barns.\"\nDuring the Reformation, Protestant theologians embraced the term as referring to \"gospel truth.\" Martin Luther referred to the (\"evangelical church\") to distinguish Protestants from Catholics in the Catholic Church. Into the 21st century, \"evangelical\" has continued in use as a synonym for Mainline Protestant in continental Europe. This usage is reflected in the names of Protestant denominations, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. The German term more accurately corresponds to the broad English term \"Protestant\" and should not be confused with the narrower German term , or the term (a term etymologically related to the Pietist and Radical Pietist movements), which are used to describe Evangelicalism in the sense used in this article. Mainline Protestant denominations with a Lutheran or semi-Lutheran background, like the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of England, who are not evangelical in the sense but Protestant in the sense, have translated the German term (or Protestant) into the English term \"Evangelical\", although the two German words have different meanings. In other parts of the world, especially in the English-speaking world, evangelical (German: or ) is commonly applied to describe the interdenominational Born-Again believing movement.\nChristian historian David W. Bebbington writes that, \"Although 'evangelical,' with a lower-case initial, is occasionally used to mean 'of the gospel,' the term 'Evangelical' with a capital letter, is applied to any aspect of the movement beginning in the 1730s.\" According to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", \"evangelicalism\" was first used in 1831. In 1812, the term \"evangelicalism\" appeared in \"The History of Lynn\" by William Richards. In the summer of 1811 the term \"evangelicalists\" was used in \"The Sin and Danger of Schism\" by Rev. Dr. Andrew Burnaby, Archdeacon of Leicester.\nThe term may also be used outside any religious context to characterize a generic missionary, reforming, or redeeming impulse or purpose. For example, \"The Times Literary Supplement\" refers to \"the rise and fall of evangelical fervor within the Socialist movement.\" This usage refers to evangelism, rather than evangelicalism as discussed here; though sharing an etymology and conceptual basis, the words have diverged significantly in meaning.\nBeliefs.\nOne influential definition of evangelicalism has been proposed by historian David Bebbington. Bebbington notes four distinctive aspects of evangelical faith: conversionism, biblicism, crucicentrism, and activism, noting, \"Together they form a quadrilateral of priorities that is the basis of Evangelicalism.\"\nConversionism, or belief in the necessity of being \"born again,\" has been a constant theme of evangelicalism since its beginnings. To evangelicals, the central message of the gospel is justification by faith in Christ and repentance, or turning away, from sin. Conversion differentiates the Christian from the non-Christian, and the change in life it leads to is marked by both a rejection of sin and a corresponding personal holiness of life. A conversion experience can be emotional, including grief and sorrow for sin followed by great relief at receiving forgiveness. The stress on conversion differentiates evangelicalism from other forms of Protestantism by the associated belief that an assurance will accompany conversion. Among evangelicals, individuals have testified to both sudden and gradual conversions.\nBiblicism is reverence for the Bible and high regard for biblical authority. All evangelicals believe in biblical inspiration, though they disagree over how this inspiration should be defined. Many evangelicals believe in biblical inerrancy, while other evangelicals believe in biblical infallibility.\nCrucicentrism is the centrality that evangelicals give to the Atonement, the saving death and the resurrection of Jesus, that offers forgiveness of sins and new life. This is understood most commonly in terms of a substitutionary atonement, in which Christ died as a substitute for sinful humanity by taking on himself the guilt and punishment for sin.\nActivism describes the tendency toward active expression and sharing of the gospel in diverse ways that include preaching and social action. This aspect of evangelicalism continues to be seen today in the proliferation of evangelical voluntary religious groups and parachurch organizations.\nChurch government and organizations.\nThe word \"church\" has several meanings among evangelicals. It can refer to the universal church (the body of Christ) including all Christians everywhere. It can also refer to the church (congregation), which is the visible representation of the invisible church. It is responsible for teaching and administering the sacraments or ordinances (baptism and the Lord's Supper, but some evangelicals also count footwashing as an ordinance as well).\nMany evangelical traditions adhere to the doctrine of the believers' Church, which teaches that one becomes a member of the Church by the new birth and profession of faith. This originated in the Radical Reformation with Anabaptists but is held by denominations that practice believer's baptism. Evangelicals in the Anglican, Methodist and Reformed traditions practice infant baptism as one's initiation into the community of faith and the New Testament counterpart to circumcision, while also stressing the necessity of personal conversion later in life for salvation.\nSome evangelical denominations operate according to episcopal polity or presbyterian polity. However, the most common form of church government within Evangelicalism is congregational polity. This is especially common among nondenominational evangelical churches. Many churches are members of a national and international denomination for a cooperative relationship in common organizations, for the mission and social areas, such as humanitarian aid, schools, theological institutes and hospitals. Common ministries within evangelical congregations are pastor, elder, deacon, evangelist and worship leader. The ministry of bishop with a function of supervision over churches on a regional or national scale is present in all the Evangelical Christian denominations, even if the titles president of the council or general overseer are mainly used for this function. The term bishop is explicitly used in certain denominations. Some evangelical denominations are members of the World Evangelical Alliance and its 129 national alliances.\nSome evangelical denominations officially authorize the ordination of women in churches. The female ministry is justified by the fact that Mary Magdalene was chosen by Jesus to announce his resurrection to the apostles. The first Baptist woman who was consecrated pastor is the American Clarissa Danforth in the denomination Free Will Baptist in 1815. Since then, various other evangelical denominations have come to accept the ordination of women: in 1882, in the American Baptist Churches USA; in the Assemblies of God of the United States, since 1927; in 1965, in the National Baptist Convention, USA; in 1969, in the Progressive National Baptist Convention; and in 1975, in The Foursquare Church.\nWorship service.\nFor evangelicals, there are three interrelated meanings to the term \"worship\". It can refer to living a \"God-pleasing and God-focused way of life,\" specific actions of praise to God, and a public worship service. Diversity characterizes evangelical worship practices. Liturgical, contemporary, charismatic and seeker-sensitive worship styles can all be found among evangelical churches. Overall, evangelicals tend to be more flexible and experimental with worship practices than mainline Protestant churches. It is usually run by a Christian pastor. A service is often divided into several parts, including congregational singing, a sermon, intercessory prayer, and other ministry. During worship there is usually a nursery for babies. Children and young people receive an adapted education, Sunday school, in a separate room.\nPlaces of worship are usually called \"churches.\" In some megachurches, the building is called \"campus.\" The architecture of places of worship is mainly characterized by its sobriety. The Latin cross is one of the only spiritual symbols that can usually be seen on the building of an evangelical church and that identifies the place's belonging.\nSome services take place in theaters, schools or multipurpose rooms, rented for Sunday only. Because of their understanding of the second of the Ten Commandments, some evangelicals do not have religious material representations such as statues, icons, or paintings in their places of worship. There is usually a baptistery on what is variously known as the chancel (also called sanctuary) or stage, though they may be alternatively found in a separate room, for the baptisms by immersion.\nIn some countries of the world which apply sharia or communism, government authorizations for worship are complex for Evangelical Christians. Because of persecution of Christians, Evangelical house churches are the only option for many Christians to live their faith in community. For example, there is the Evangelical house churches in China movement. The meetings thus take place in private houses, in secret and in illegality.\nThe main Christian feasts celebrated by the Evangelicals are Christmas, Pentecost (by a majority of Evangelical denominations) and Easter for all believers.\nEducation.\nEvangelical churches have been involved in the establishment of elementary and secondary schools. It also enabled the development of several bible colleges, colleges and universities in the United States during the 19th century. Other evangelical universities have been established in various countries of the world.\nThe Council for Christian Colleges and Universities was founded in 1976. In 2023, the CCCU had 185 members in 21 countries.\nThe Association of Christian Schools International was founded in 1978 by 3 American associations of evangelical Christian schools. Various international schools have joined the network. In 2023, it had 23,000 schools in 100 countries.\nThe International Council for Evangelical Theological Education was founded in 1980 by the Theological Commission of the World Evangelical Alliance. In 2023, it had 850 member schools in 113 countries.\nSexuality.\nIn matters of sexuality, there is a wide variety of thought among evangelicals and evangelical churches, but they tend to be conservative and prescriptive in general. Many evangelical churches promote the virginity pledge (abstinence pledge) among young evangelical Christians, who are invited to commit themselves, during a public ceremony, to sexual abstinence until Christian marriage. This pledge is often symbolized by a purity ring.\nIn some evangelical churches, young adults and unmarried couples are encouraged to marry early in order to live a sexuality according to the will of God.\nA 2009 American study of the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy reported that 80 percent of young, unmarried evangelicals have had sex and that 42 percent were in a relationship with sex, when surveyed.\nThe majority of evangelical Christian churches are against abortion and support adoption agencies and social support agencies for young mothers.\nMasturbation is seen as forbidden by some evangelical pastors because of the sexual thoughts that may accompany it. However, evangelical pastors have pointed out that the practice has been erroneously associated with Onan by scholars, that it is not a sin if it is not practiced with fantasies or compulsively, and that it was useful in a married couple, if his or her partner did not have the same frequency of sexual needs.\nSome evangelical churches speak only of sexual abstinence and do not speak of sexuality in marriage. Other evangelical churches speak of satisfying sexuality as a gift from God and a component of a Christian marriage harmonious, in messages during worship services or conferences. Many evangelical books and websites are specialized on the subject. The book \"\" published in 1976 by Baptist pastor Tim LaHaye and his wife Beverly LaHaye was a pioneer in the field.\nThe perceptions of homosexuality in the Evangelical Churches are varied. They range from liberal to fundamentalist or moderate conservative and neutral. A 2011 Pew Research Center study found that 84 percent of evangelical leaders surveyed believed homosexuality should be discouraged. Some fundamentalist conservative evangelicals are of the belief that homosexuality is the cause of many social problems, such as terrorism. Meanwhile other churches have a conservative moderate position: although they do not approve homosexual practices, they claim to show sympathy and respect for homosexuals. Some evangelical denominations have adopted neutral positions, allowing local churches to choose their own policies on same-sex marriage, and there are some international evangelical denominations that are gay-friendly.\nChristian marriage is presented by some churches as a protection against sexual misconduct and a compulsory step to obtain a position of responsibility in the church. This concept, however, has been challenged by numerous sex scandals involving married evangelical leaders. Finally, evangelical theologians recalled that celibacy should be more valued in the Church today, since the gift of celibacy was taught and lived by Jesus Christ and Paul of Tarsus.\nOther views.\nFor a majority of evangelical Christians, a belief in biblical inerrancy ensures that the miracles described in the Bible are still relevant and may be present in the life of the believer. Healings, academic or professional successes, the birth of a child after several attempts, the end of an addiction, etc., would be tangible examples of God's intervention with the faith and prayer, by the Holy Spirit. In the 1980s, the neo-charismatic movement re-emphasized miracles and faith healing. In certain churches, a special place is thus reserved for faith healings with laying on of hands during worship services or for evangelization campaigns. Faith healing or divine healing is considered to be an inheritance of Jesus acquired by his death and resurrection. This view is typically ascribed to Pentecostal denominations, and not others that are cessationist (believing that miraculous gifts have ceased.)\nIn terms of denominational beliefs regarding science and the origin of the earth and human life, some evangelicals support young Earth creationism. For example, Answers in Genesis, founded in Australia in 1986, is an evangelical organization that seeks to defend the thesis. In 2007, they founded the Creation Museum in Petersburg, in Kentucky and in 2016 the Ark Encounter in Williamstown. Since the end of the 20th century, literalist creationism has been abandoned by some evangelicals in favor of intelligent design. For example, the think tank Discovery Institute, established in 1991 in Seattle, defends this thesis. Other evangelicals who accept the scientific consensus on evolution and the age of Earth believe in theistic evolution or evolutionary creation\u2014the notion that God used the process of evolution to create life; a Christian organization that espouses this view is the BioLogos Foundation.\nThe majority of evangelical Christians believe that holding private property is right and normal, while at the same time honoring tithing and generosity such as hospitality. Some groups such as the Bruderhof hold out shared property as an evangelical, biblical ideal that should be practiced.\nPentecostal Evangelical Roma communities in Romania that have been evangelized by American missionaries, who mostly belong to Kalderash and Muchwaya Roma groups and once belonged to the Eastern Orthodox Christian Church, do not see the Muslim Roma (Xoraxane) as Roma and call them gypsies or simply muzzi, as long as they belong to Islam.\nDiversity.\nThe Reformed, Baptist, Methodist, Pentecostal, Churches of Christ, Plymouth Brethren, charismatic Protestant, and nondenominational Protestant traditions have all had strong influence within contemporary evangelicalism. Some Anabaptist denominations (such as the Brethren Church) are evangelical, and some Lutherans self-identify as evangelicals. There are also evangelical Anglicans and Quakers.\nIn the early 20th century, evangelical influence declined within mainline Protestantism and Christian fundamentalism developed as a distinct religious movement. Between 1950 and 2000 a mainstream evangelical consensus developed that sought to be more inclusive and more culturally relevant than fundamentalism while maintaining theologically conservative Protestant teaching. According to Brian Stanley, professor of world Christianity, this new postwar consensus is termed \"neoevangelicalism\", the \"new evangelicalism\", or simply \"evangelicalism\" in the United States, while in Great Britain and in other English-speaking countries, it is commonly termed \"conservative evangelicalism\". Over the years, less conservative evangelicals have challenged this mainstream consensus to varying degrees. Such movements have been classified by a variety of labels, such as \"progressive\", \"open\", \"postconservative\", and \"postevangelical\".\nOutside of self-consciously evangelical denominations, there is a broader \"evangelical streak\" in mainline Protestantism. Mainline Protestant churches predominantly have a liberal theology while evangelical churches predominantly have a fundamentalist or moderate conservative theology.\nSome commentators have complained that Evangelicalism as a movement is too broad and its definition too vague to be of any practical value. Theologian Donald Dayton has called for a \"moratorium\" on use of the term. Historian D. G. Hart has also argued that \"evangelicalism needs to be relinquished as a religious identity because it does not exist\".\nChristian fundamentalism.\nChristian fundamentalism has been called a subset or \"subspecies\" of Evangelicalism. Fundamentalism regards biblical literalism, the virgin birth of Jesus, penal substitutionary atonement, the literal resurrection of Christ, and the Second Coming of Christ as fundamental Christian doctrines. \nFundamentalism arose among evangelicals in the 1920s\u2014primarily as an American phenomenon, but with counterparts in Britain and British Empire\u2014to combat modernist or liberal theology in mainline Protestant churches. Failing to reform the mainline churches, fundamentalists separated from them and established their own churches, refusing to participate in ecumenical organizations (such as the National Council of Churches, founded in 1950), and making separatism (rigid separation from nonfundamentalist churches and their culture) a true test of faith. Most fundamentalists are Baptists and dispensationalist or Pentecostals and Charismatics.\nGreat emphasis is placed on the literal interpretation of the Bible as the primary method of Bible study as well as the biblical inerrancy and the infallibility of their interpretation.\nMainstream varieties.\nMainstream evangelicalism is historically divided between two main orientations: confessionalism and revivalism. These two streams have been critical of each other. Confessional evangelicals have been suspicious of unguarded religious experience, while revivalist evangelicals have been critical of overly intellectual teaching that (they suspect) stifles vibrant spirituality. In an effort to broaden their appeal, many contemporary evangelical congregations intentionally avoid identifying with any single form of evangelicalism. These \"generic evangelicals\" are usually theologically and socially conservative, but their churches often present themselves as nondenominational (or, if a denominational member, strongly deemphasize its ties to such, such as a church name which excludes the denominational name) within the broader evangelical movement.\nIn the words of Albert Mohler, president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, confessional evangelicalism refers to \"that movement of Christian believers who seek a constant convictional continuity with the theological formulas of the Protestant Reformation\". While approving of the evangelical distinctions proposed by Bebbington, confessional evangelicals believe that authentic evangelicalism requires more concrete definition in order to protect the movement from theological liberalism and from heresy. According to confessional evangelicals, subscription to the ecumenical creeds and to the Reformation-era confessions of faith (such as the confessions of the Reformed churches) provides such protection. Confessional evangelicals are represented by conservative Presbyterian churches (emphasizing the Westminster Confession), certain Baptist churches that emphasize historic Baptist confessions such as the Second London Confession, evangelical Anglicans who emphasize the Thirty-Nine Articles (such as in the Anglican Diocese of Sydney, Australia), Methodist churches that adhere to the Articles of Religion, and some confessional Lutherans with pietistic convictions.\nThe emphasis on historic Protestant orthodoxy among confessional evangelicals stands in direct contrast to an anticreedal outlook that has exerted its own influence on evangelicalism, particularly among churches strongly affected by revivalism and by pietism. Revivalist evangelicals are represented by some quarters of Methodism, the Wesleyan Holiness churches, the Pentecostal and charismatic churches, some Anabaptist churches, and some Baptists and Presbyterians. Revivalist evangelicals tend to place greater emphasis on religious experience than their confessional counterparts.\nProgressive evangelicals.\nEvangelicals dissatisfied with the movement's fundamentalism mainstream have been variously described as progressive evangelicals, postconservative evangelicals, open evangelicals and postevangelicals. Progressive evangelicals, also known as the evangelical left, share theological or social views with other progressive Christians while also identifying with evangelicalism. Progressive evangelicals commonly advocate for women's equality, pacifism and social justice.\nAs described by Baptist theologian Roger E. Olson, postconservative evangelicalism is a theological school of thought that adheres to the four marks of evangelicalism, while being less rigid and more inclusive of other Christians. According to Olson, postconservatives believe that doctrinal truth is secondary to spiritual experience shaped by Scripture. Postconservative evangelicals seek greater dialogue with other Christian traditions and support the development of a multicultural evangelical theology that incorporates the voices of women, racial minorities, and Christians in the developing world. Some postconservative evangelicals also support open theism and the possibility of near universal salvation.\nThe term \"open evangelical\" refers to a particular Christian school of thought or churchmanship, primarily in Great Britain (especially in the Church of England). Open evangelicals describe their position as combining a traditional evangelical emphasis on the nature of scriptural authority, the teaching of the ecumenical creeds and other traditional doctrinal teachings, with an approach towards culture and other theological points-of-view which tends to be more inclusive than that taken by other evangelicals. Some open evangelicals aim to take a middle position between conservative and charismatic evangelicals, while others would combine conservative theological emphases with more liberal social positions.\nBritish author Dave Tomlinson coined the phrase \"postevangelical\" to describe a movement comprising various trends of dissatisfaction among evangelicals. Others use the term with comparable intent, often to distinguish evangelicals in the emerging church movement from postevangelicals and antievangelicals. Tomlinson argues that \"linguistically, the distinction \"[between evangelical and postevangelical]\" resembles the one that sociologists make between the modern and postmodern eras\".\nHistory.\nBackground.\nModern evangelicalism emerged in the 18th century, first in Britain and its North American colonies. Nevertheless, there were earlier developments within the larger Protestant world that preceded and influenced the later evangelical revivals. According to religion scholar Randall Balmer, Evangelicalism resulted \"from the confluence of Pietism, Presbyterianism, and the vestiges of Puritanism. Evangelicalism picked up the peculiar characteristics from each strain \u2013 warmhearted spirituality from the Pietists (for instance), doctrinal precisionism from the Presbyterians, and individualistic introspection from the Puritans\". Historian Mark Noll adds to this list High Church Anglicanism, which contributed to Evangelicalism a legacy of \"rigorous spirituality and innovative organization.\" Historian Rick Kennedy has identified New England Puritan clergyman Cotton Mather as the \"first American Evangelical\".\nDuring the 17th century, Pietism emerged in Europe as a movement for the revival of piety and devotion within the Lutheran church. As a protest against \"cold orthodoxy\" or against an overly formal and rational Christianity, Pietists advocated for an experiential religion that stressed high moral standards both for clergy and for lay people. The movement included both Christians who remained in the liturgical, state churches as well as separatist groups who rejected the use of baptismal fonts, altars, pulpits, and confessionals. As Radical Pietism spread, the movement's ideals and aspirations influenced and were absorbed by evangelicals.\nWhen George Fox, who is considered the founder of Quakerism, was eleven, he wrote that God spoke to him about \"keeping pure and being faithful to God and man.\" After being troubled when his friends asked him to drink alcohol with them at the age of nineteen, Fox spent the night in prayer and soon afterwards he left his home in a four year search for spiritual satisfaction. In his \"Journal\", at age 23, he believed that he \"found through faith in Jesus Christ the full assurance of salvation.\" Fox began to spread his message and his emphasis on \"the necessity of an inward transformation of heart\", as well as the possibility of Christian perfection, drew opposition from English clergy and laity. In the mid-1600s, many people became attracted to Fox's preaching and his followers became known as the Religious Society of Friends. By 1660, the Quakers grew to 35,000, and while the two movements are distinct and have important differences like the doctrine of the Inward Light, they are considered by some to be among the first in the evangelical Christian movement.\nThe Presbyterian heritage not only gave Evangelicalism a commitment to Protestant orthodoxy but also contributed a revival tradition that stretched back to the 1620s in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Central to this tradition was the communion season, which normally occurred in the summer months. For Presbyterians, celebrations of Holy Communion were infrequent but popular events preceded by several Sundays of preparatory preaching and accompanied with preaching, singing, and prayers.\nPuritanism combined Calvinism with a doctrine that conversion was a prerequisite for church membership and with an emphasis on the study of Scripture by lay people. It took root in the colonies of New England, where the Congregational church became an established religion. There the Half-Way Covenant of 1662 allowed parents who had not testified to a conversion experience to have their children baptized, while reserving Holy Communion for converted church members alone. By the 18th century Puritanism was in decline and many ministers expressed alarm at the loss of religious piety. This concern over declining religious commitment led many people to support evangelical revival.\nHigh-Church Anglicanism also exerted influence on early Evangelicalism. High Churchmen were distinguished by their desire to adhere to primitive Christianity. This desire included imitating the faith and ascetic practices of early Christians as well as regularly partaking of Holy Communion. High Churchmen were also enthusiastic organizers of voluntary religious societies. Two of the most prominent were the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (founded in London in 1698), which distributed Bibles and other literature and built schools, and the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, which was founded in England in 1701 to facilitate missionary work in British colonies (especially among colonists in North America). Samuel and Susanna Wesley, the parents of John and Charles Wesley (born 1703 and 1707 respectively), were both devoted advocates of High-Church ideas.\n18th century.\nIn the 1730s, Evangelicalism emerged as a distinct phenomenon out of religious revivals that began in Britain and New England. While religious revivals had occurred within Protestant churches in the past, the evangelical revivals that marked the 18th century were more intense and radical. Evangelical revivalism imbued ordinary men and women with a confidence and enthusiasm for sharing the gospel and converting others outside of the control of established churches, a key discontinuity with the Protestantism of the previous era.\nIt was developments in the doctrine of assurance that differentiated Evangelicalism from what went before. Bebbington says, \"The dynamism of the Evangelical movement was possible only because its adherents were assured in their faith.\" He goes on:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whereas the Puritans had held that assurance is rare, late and the fruit of struggle in the experience of believers, the Evangelicals believed it to be general, normally given at conversion and the result of simple acceptance of the gift of God. The consequence of the altered form of the doctrine was a metamorphosis in the nature of popular Protestantism. There was a change in patterns of piety, affecting devotional and practical life in all its departments. The shift, in fact, was responsible for creating in Evangelicalism a new movement and not merely a variation on themes heard since the Reformation.\nThe first local revival occurred in Northampton, Massachusetts, under the leadership of Congregationalist minister Jonathan Edwards. In the fall of 1734, Edwards preached a sermon series on \"Justification By Faith Alone\", and the community's response was extraordinary. Signs of religious commitment among the laity increased, especially among the town's young people. The revival ultimately spread to 25 communities in western Massachusetts and central Connecticut until it began to wane by the spring of 1735. Edwards was heavily influenced by Pietism, so much so that one historian has stressed his \"American Pietism\". One practice clearly copied from European Pietists was the use of small groups divided by age and gender, which met in private homes to conserve and promote the fruits of revival.\nAt the same time, students at Yale University (at that time Yale College) in New Haven, Connecticut, were also experiencing revival. Among them was Aaron Burr Sr., who would become a prominent Presbyterian minister and future president of Princeton University. In New Jersey, Gilbert Tennent, another Presbyterian minister, was preaching the evangelical message and urging the Presbyterian Church to stress the necessity of converted ministers.\nThe spring of 1735 also marked important events in England and Wales. Howell Harris, a Welsh schoolteacher, had a conversion experience on May 25 during a communion service. He described receiving assurance of God's grace after a period of fasting, self-examination, and despair over his sins. Sometime later, Daniel Rowland, the Anglican curate of Llangeitho, Wales, experienced conversion as well. Both men began preaching the evangelical message to large audiences, becoming leaders of the Welsh Methodist revival. At about the same time that Harris experienced conversion in Wales, George Whitefield was converted at Oxford University after his own prolonged spiritual crisis. Whitefield later remarked, \"About this time God was pleased to enlighten my soul and bring me into the knowledge of His free grace, and the necessity of being justified in His sight by \"faith only.\"\"\nWhitefield's fellow Holy Club member and spiritual mentor, Charles Wesley, reported an evangelical conversion in 1738. In the same week, Charles' brother and future founder of Methodism, John Wesley was also converted after a long period of inward struggle. During this spiritual crisis, John Wesley was directly influenced by Pietism. Two years before his conversion, Wesley had traveled to the newly established colony of Georgia as a missionary for the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. He shared his voyage with a group of Moravian Brethren led by August Gottlieb Spangenberg. The Moravians' faith and piety deeply impressed Wesley, especially their belief that it was a normal part of Christian life to have an assurance of one's salvation. Wesley recounted the following exchange with Spangenberg on February 7, 1736:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Spangenberg] said, \"My brother, I must first ask you one or two questions. Have you the witness within yourself? Does the Spirit of God bear witness with your spirit that you are a child of God?\" I was surprised, and knew not what to answer. He observed it, and asked, \"Do you know Jesus Christ?\" I paused, and said, \"I know he is the Savior of the world.\" \"True,\" he replied, \"but do you know he has saved you?\" I answered, \"I hope he has died to save me.\" He only added, \"Do you know yourself?\" I said, \"I do.\" But I fear they were vain words.\nWesley finally received the assurance he had been searching for at a meeting of a religious society in London. While listening to a reading from Martin Luther's preface to the Epistle to the Romans, Wesley felt spiritually transformed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;About a quarter before nine, while [the speaker] was describing the change which God works in the heart through faith in Christ, I felt my heart strangely warmed. I felt I did trust in Christ, Christ alone for salvation, and an assurance was given me that he had taken away \"my\" sins, even \"mine\", and saved \"me\" from the law of sin and death.\nPietism continued to influence Wesley, who had translated 33 Pietist hymns from German to English. Numerous German Pietist hymns became part of the English Evangelical repertoire. By 1737, Whitefield had become a national celebrity in England where his preaching drew large crowds, especially in London where the Fetter Lane Society had become a center of evangelical activity. Whitfield joined forces with Edwards to \"fan the flame of revival\" in the Thirteen Colonies in 1739\u201340. Soon the First Great Awakening stirred Protestants throughout America.\nEvangelical preachers emphasized personal salvation and piety more than ritual and tradition. Pamphlets and printed sermons crisscrossed the Atlantic, encouraging the revivalists. The Awakening resulted from powerful preaching that gave listeners a sense of deep personal revelation of their need of salvation by Jesus Christ. Pulling away from ritual and ceremony, the Great Awakening made Christianity intensely personal to the average person by fostering a deep sense of spiritual conviction and redemption, and by encouraging introspection and a commitment to a new standard of personal morality. It reached people who were already church members. It changed their rituals, their piety and their self-awareness. To the evangelical imperatives of Reformation Protestantism, 18th century American Christians added emphases on divine outpourings of the Holy Spirit and conversions that implanted within new believers an intense love for God. Revivals encapsulated those hallmarks and forwarded the newly created Evangelicalism into the early republic.\nBy the 1790s, the Evangelical party in the Church of England remained a small minority but were not without influence. John Newton and Joseph Milner were influential evangelical clerics. Evangelical clergy networked together through societies such as the Eclectic Society in London and the Elland Society in Yorkshire. The Old Dissenter denominations (the Baptists, Congregationalists and Quakers) were falling under evangelical influence, with the Baptists most affected and Quakers the least. Evangelical ministers dissatisfied with both Anglicanism and Methodism often chose to work within these churches. In the 1790s, all of these evangelical groups, including the Anglicans, were Calvinist in orientation.\nMethodism (the \"New Dissent\") was the most visible expression of evangelicalism by the end of the 18th century. The Wesleyan Methodists boasted around 70,000 members throughout the British Isles, in addition to the Calvinistic Methodists in Wales and the Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion, which was organized under George Whitefield's influence. The Wesleyan Methodists, however, were still nominally affiliated with the Church of England and would not completely separate until 1795, four years after Wesley's death. The Wesleyan Methodist Church's Arminianism distinguished it from the other evangelical groups.\nAt the same time, evangelicals were an important faction within the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Influential ministers included John Erskine, Henry Wellwood Moncrieff and Stevenson Macgill. The church's General Assembly, however, was controlled by the Moderate Party, and evangelicals were involved in the First and Second Secessions from the national church during the 18th century.\n19th century.\nThe start of the 19th century saw an increase in missionary work and many of the major missionary societies were founded around this time (see Timeline of Christian missions). Both the Evangelical and high church movements sponsored missionaries.\nThe Second Great Awakening (which actually began in 1790) was primarily an American revivalist movement and resulted in substantial growth of the Methodist and Baptist churches. Charles Grandison Finney was an important preacher of this period.\nIn Britain in addition to stressing the traditional Wesleyan combination of \"Bible, cross, conversion, and activism\", the revivalist movement sought a universal appeal, hoping to include rich and poor, urban and rural, and men and women. Special efforts were made to attract children and to generate literature to spread the revivalist message.\n\"Christian conscience\" was used by the British Evangelical movement to promote social activism. Evangelicals believed activism in government and the social sphere was an essential method in reaching the goal of eliminating sin in a world drenched in wickedness. The Evangelicals in the Clapham Sect included figures such as William Wilberforce who successfully campaigned for the abolition of slavery.\nIn the late 19th century, the revivalist Wesleyan-Holiness movement based on John Wesley's doctrine of \"entire sanctification\" came to the forefront, and while many adherents remained within mainline Methodism, others established new denominations, such as the Free Methodist Church and Wesleyan Methodist Church. In urban Britain the Holiness message was less exclusive and censorious.\nKeswickianism taught the doctrine of the second blessing in non-Methodist circles and came to influence evangelicals of the Calvinistic (Reformed) tradition, leading to the establishment of denominations such as the Christian and Missionary Alliance.\nJohn Nelson Darby of the Plymouth Brethren was a 19th-century Irish Anglican minister who devised modern dispensationalism, an innovative Protestant theological interpretation of the Bible that was incorporated in the development of modern Evangelicalism. Cyrus Scofield further promoted the influence of dispensationalism through the explanatory notes to his Scofield Reference Bible. According to scholar Mark S. Sweetnam, who takes a cultural studies perspective, dispensationalism can be defined in terms of its Evangelicalism, its insistence on the literal interpretation of Scripture, its recognition of stages in God's dealings with humanity, its expectation of the imminent return of Christ to rapture His saints, and its focus on both apocalypticism and premillennialism.\nDuring the 19th century, the megachurches, churches with more than 2,000 people, began to develop. The first evangelical megachurch, the Metropolitan Tabernacle with a 6000-seat auditorium, was inaugurated in 1861 in London by Charles Spurgeon. Dwight L. Moody founded the Illinois Street Church in Chicago.\nAn advanced theological perspective came from the Princeton theologians from the 1850s to the 1920s, such as Charles Hodge, Archibald Alexander and B. B. Warfield.\n20th century.\nAfter 1910 the Fundamentalist movement dominated Evangelicalism in the early part of the 20th century; the Fundamentalists rejected liberal theology and emphasized the inerrancy of the Scriptures.\nFollowing the 1904\u20131905 Welsh revival, the Azusa Street Revival in 1906 began the spread of Pentecostalism in North America.\nThe 20th century also marked by the emergence of the televangelism. Aimee Semple McPherson, who founded the megachurch \"Angelus Temple\" in Los Angeles, used radio in the 1920s to reach a wider audience.\nAfter the Scopes trial in 1925, \"Christian Century\" wrote of \"Vanishing Fundamentalism\". In 1929 Princeton University, once the bastion of conservative theology, added several modernists to its faculty, resulting in the departure of J. Gresham Machen and a split in the Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.\nEvangelicalism began to reassert itself in the second half of the 1930s. One factor was the advent of the radio as a means of mass communication. When [Charles E. Fuller] began his \"Old Fashioned Revival Hour\" on October 3, 1937, he sought to avoid the contentious issues that had caused fundamentalists to be characterized as narrow.\nOne hundred forty-seven representatives from thirty-four denominations met from April 7 through 9, 1942, in St. Louis, Missouri, for a \"National Conference for United Action among Evangelicals.\" The next year six hundred representatives in Chicago established the National Association of Evangelicals (NAE) with Harold Ockenga as its first president. The NAE was partly a reaction to the founding of the American Council of Christian Churches (ACCC) under the leadership of the fundamentalist Carl McIntire. The ACCC in turn had been founded to counter the influence of the Federal Council of Churches (later merged into the National Council of Churches), which fundamentalists saw as increasingly embracing modernism in its ecumenism. Those who established the NAE had come to view the name fundamentalist as \"an embarrassment instead of a badge of honor.\"\nEvangelical revivalist radio preachers organized themselves in the National Religious Broadcasters in 1944 in order to regulate their activity. With the founding of the NAE, American Protestantism was divided into three large groups\u2014the fundamentalists, the modernists, and the new evangelicals, who sought to position themselves between the other two.\nIn 1947, Harold Ockenga coined the term neo-evangelicalism to identify a movement distinct from fundamentalism. The neo-evangelicals had three broad characteristics that distinguished them from the conservative fundamentalism of the ACCC:\nEach of these characteristics took concrete shape by the mid-1950s. In 1947 Carl F. H. Henry's book \"The Uneasy Conscience of Fundamentalism\" called on evangelicals to engage in addressing social concerns:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[I]t remains true that the evangelical, in the very proportion that the culture in which he lives is not actually Christian, must unite with non-evangelicals for social betterment if it is to be achieved at all, simply because the evangelical forces do not predominate. To say that evangelicalism should not voice its convictions in a non-evangelical environment is simply to rob evangelicalism of its missionary vision.\nIn the same year Fuller Theological Seminary was established with Ockenga as its president and Henry as the head of its theology department.\nThe strongest impetus, however, was the development of the work of Billy Graham. In 1951, with producer Dick Ross, he founded the film production company World Wide Pictures. Graham had begun his career with the support of McIntire and fellow conservatives Bob Jones Sr. and John R. Rice. However, in broadening the reach of his London crusade of 1954, he accepted the support of denominations that those men disapproved of. When he went even further in his 1957 New York crusade, conservatives strongly condemned him and withdrew their support. According to William Martin:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The New York crusade did not cause the division between the old Fundamentalists and the New Evangelicals; that had been signaled by the nearly simultaneous founding of the NAE and McIntire's American Council of Christian Churches 15 years earlier. But it did provide an event around which the two groups were forced to define themselves.\nA fourth development\u2014the founding of \"Christianity Today\" (\"CT\") with Henry as its first editor\u2014was strategic in giving neo-evangelicals a platform to promote their views and in positioning them between the fundamentalists and modernists. In a letter to Harold Lindsell, Graham said that \"CT\" would:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;plant the evangelical flag in the middle of the road, taking a conservative theological position but a definite liberal approach to social problems. It would combine the best in liberalism and the best in fundamentalism without compromising theologically.\nThe postwar period also saw growth of the ecumenical movement and the founding of the World Council of Churches, which the Evangelical community generally regarded with suspicion.\nIn the United Kingdom, John Stott (1921\u20132011) and Martyn Lloyd-Jones (1899\u20131981) emerged as key leaders in Evangelical Christianity.\nThe charismatic movement began in the 1960s and resulted in the introduction of Pentecostal theology and practice into many mainline denominations. New charismatic groups such as the Association of Vineyard Churches and Newfrontiers trace their roots to this period (see also British New Church Movement).\nThe closing years of the 20th century saw controversial postmodern influences entering some parts of Evangelicalism, particularly with the emerging church movement. Also controversial is the relationship between spiritualism and contemporary military metaphors and practices animating many branches of Christianity but especially relevant in the sphere of Evangelicalism. Spiritual warfare is the latest iteration in a long-standing partnership between religious organization and militarization, two spheres that are rarely considered together, although aggressive forms of prayer have long been used to further the aims of expanding Evangelical influence. Major moments of increased political militarization have occurred concurrently with the growth of prominence of militaristic imagery in evangelical communities. This paradigmatic language, paired with an increasing reliance on sociological and academic research to bolster militarized sensibility, serves to illustrate the violent ethos that effectively underscores militarized forms of evangelical prayer.\nGlobal statistics.\nAccording to a 2011 Pew Forum study on global Christianity, 285,480,000 or 13.1 percent of all Christians are Evangelicals. These figures do not include the Pentecostalism and Charismatic movements. The study states that the category \"Evangelicals\" should not be considered as a separate category of \"Pentecostal and Charismatic\" categories, since some believers consider themselves in both movements where their church is affiliated with an Evangelical association.\nIn 2015, the World Evangelical Alliance is \"a network of churches in 129 nations that have each formed an Evangelical alliance and over 100 international organizations joining together to give a world-wide identity, voice, and platform to more than 600 million Evangelical Christians\". The Alliance was formed in 1951 by Evangelicals from 21 countries. It has worked to support its members to work together globally.\nAccording to S\u00e9bastien Fath of CNRS, in 2016, there are 619 million Evangelicals in the world, one in four Christians. In 2017, about 630 million, an increase of 11\u00a0million, including Pentecostals.\nOperation World estimates the number of Evangelicals at 545.9\u00a0million, which makes for 7.9 percent of the world's population. From 1960 to 2000, the global growth of the number of reported Evangelicals grew three times the world's population rate, and twice that of Islam. According to Operation World, the Evangelical population's current annual growth rate is 2.6 percent, still more than twice the world's population growth rate.\nAfrica.\nIn the 21st century, there are Evangelical churches active in many African countries. They have grown especially since independence came in the 1960s, the strongest movements are based on Pentecostal beliefs. There is a wide range of theology and organizations, including some international movements.\nNigeria.\nIn Nigeria the Evangelical Church Winning All (formerly \"Evangelical Church of West Africa\") is the largest church organization with five thousand congregations and over ten million members. It sponsors three seminaries and eight Bible colleges, and 1600 missionaries who serve in Nigeria and other countries with the Evangelical Missionary Society (EMS). There have been serious confrontations since 1999 between Muslims and Christians standing in opposition to the expansion of Sharia law in northern Nigeria. The confrontation has radicalized and politicized the Christians. Violence has been escalating.\nEthiopia and Eritrea.\nIn Ethiopia, Eritrea, and the Ethiopian and Eritrean diaspora, P'ent'ay (from Ge'ez: \u1334\u1295\u1324), also known as Ethiopian\u2013Eritrean Evangelicalism, or Wenig\u0113law\u012b (from Ge'ez: \u12c8\u1295\u130c\u120b\u12ca \u2013 which directly translates to \"Evangelical\") are terms used for Evangelical Christians and other Eastern/Oriental-oriented Protestant Christians within Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the Ethiopian and Eritrean diaspora abroad. Prominent movements among them have been Pentecostalism (Ethiopian Full Gospel Believers' Church), the Baptist tradition (Ethiopian Kale Heywet Church), Lutheranism (Ethiopian Evangelical Church Mekane Yesus and Evangelical Lutheran Church of Eritrea), and the Mennonite-Anabaptist tradition (Meserete Kristos Church).\nKenya.\nIn Kenya, mainstream Evangelical denominations have taken the lead in promoting political activism and backers, with the smaller Evangelical sects of less importance. Daniel arap Moi was president 1978 to 2002 and claimed to be an Evangelical; he proved intolerant of dissent or pluralism or decentralization of power.\nSouth Africa.\nThe Berlin Missionary Society (BMS) was one of four German Protestant mission societies active in South Africa before 1914. It emerged from the German tradition of Pietism after 1815 and sent its first missionaries to South Africa in 1834. There were few positive reports in the early years, but it was especially active 1859\u20131914. It was especially strong in the Boer republics. The World War cut off contact with Germany, but the missions continued at a reduced pace. After 1945 the missionaries had to deal with decolonization across Africa and especially with the apartheid government. At all times the BMS emphasized spiritual inwardness, and values such as morality, hard work and self-discipline. It proved unable to speak and act decisively against injustice and racial discrimination and was disbanded in 1972.\nMalawi.\nSince 1974, young professionals have been the active proselytizers of Evangelicalism in the cities of Malawi.\nMozambique.\nIn Mozambique, Evangelical Protestant Christianity emerged around 1900 from black migrants whose converted previously in South Africa. They were assisted by European missionaries, but, as industrial workers, they paid for their own churches and proselytizing. They prepared southern Mozambique for the spread of Evangelical Protestantism. During its time as a colonial power in Mozambique, the Catholic Portuguese government tried to counter the spread of Evangelical Protestantism.\nEast African Revival.\nThe East African Revival was a renewal movement within Evangelical churches in East Africa during the late 1920s and 1930s that began at a Church Missionary Society mission station in the Belgian territory of Ruanda-Urundi in 1929, and spread to: Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya during the 1930s and 1940s contributing to the significant growth of the church in East Africa through the 1970s and had a visible influence on Western missionaries who were observer-participants of the movement.\nLatin America.\nIn modern Latin America, the term \"Evangelical\" is often simply a synonym for \"Protestant\".\nBrazil.\nProtestantism in Brazil largely originated with German immigrants and British and American missionaries in the 19th century, following up on efforts that began in the 1820s.\nIn the late nineteenth century, while the vast majority of Brazilians were nominal Catholics, the nation was underserved by priests, and for large numbers their religion was only nominal. The Catholic Church in Brazil was de-established in 1890, and responded by increasing the number of dioceses and the efficiency of its clergy. Many Protestants came from a large German immigrant community, but they were seldom engaged in proselytism and grew mostly by natural increase.\nMethodists were active along with Presbyterians and Baptists. The Scottish missionary Robert Reid Kalley, with support from the Free Church of Scotland, moved to Brazil in 1855, founding the first Evangelical church among the Portuguese-speaking population there in 1856. It was organized according to the Congregational policy as the Igreja Evang\u00e9lica Fluminense; it became the mother church of Congregationalism in Brazil. The Seventh-day Adventists arrived in 1894, and the YMCA was organized in 1896. The missionaries promoted schools colleges and seminaries, including a liberal arts college in S\u00e3o Paulo, later known as Mackenzie, and an agricultural school in Lavras. The Presbyterian schools in particular later became the nucleus of the governmental system. In 1887 Protestants in Rio de Janeiro formed a hospital. The missionaries largely reached a working-class audience, as the Brazilian upper-class was wedded either to Catholicism or to secularism. By 1914, Protestant churches founded by American missionaries had 47,000 communicants, served by 282 missionaries. In general, these missionaries were more successful than they had been in Mexico, Argentina or elsewhere in Latin America.\nThere were 700,000 Protestants by 1930, and increasingly they were in charge of their own affairs. In 1930, the Methodist Church of Brazil became independent of the missionary societies and elected its own bishop. Protestants were largely from a working-class, but their religious networks help speed their upward social mobility.\nProtestants accounted for fewer than 5 percent of the population until the 1960s but grew exponentially by proselytizing and by 2000 made up over 15 percent of Brazilians affiliated with a church. Pentecostals and charismatic groups account for the vast majority of this expansion.\nPentecostal missionaries arrived early in the 20th century. Pentecostal conversions surged during the 1950s and 1960s, when native Brazilians began founding autonomous churches. The most influential included Brasil Para o Cristo (Brazil for Christ), founded in 1955 by Manoel de Mello. With an emphasis on personal salvation, on God's healing power, and on strict moral codes these groups have developed broad appeal, particularly among the booming urban migrant communities. In Brazil, since the mid-1990s, groups committed to uniting black identity, antiracism, and Evangelical theology have rapidly proliferated. Pentecostalism arrived in Brazil with Swedish and American missionaries in 1911. it grew rapidly but endured numerous schisms and splits. In some areas the Evangelical Assemblies of God churches have taken a leadership role in politics since the 1960s. They claimed major credit for the election of Fernando Collor de Mello as president of Brazil in 1990.\nAccording to the 2000 census, 15.4 percent of the Brazilian population was Protestant. Recent research conducted by the Datafolha institute shows that 25 percent of Brazilians are Protestants, of which 19 percent are followers of Pentecostal denominations. The 2010 census found out that 22.2 percent were Protestant at that date. Protestant denominations saw a rapid growth in their number of followers since the last decades of the 20th century. They are politically and socially conservative, and emphasize that God's favor translates into business success. The rich and the poor remained traditional Catholics, while most Evangelical Protestants were in the new lower-middle class \u2013 known as the \"C class\" (in a A\u2013E classification system).\nChesnut argues that Pentecostalism has become \"one of the principal organizations of the poor\", for these churches provide the sort of social network that teach members the skills they need to thrive in a rapidly developing meritocratic society.\nOne large Evangelical church that originated from Brazil is the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (IURD), a neo\u2010Pentecostal denomination begun in 1977. It now has a presence in many countries, and claims millions of members worldwide.\nGuatemala.\nProtestants remained a small portion of the population until the late-twentieth century, when various Protestant groups experienced a demographic boom that coincided with the increasing violence of the Guatemalan Civil War. Two former Guatemalan heads of state, General Efra\u00edn R\u00edos Montt and Jorge Serrano El\u00edas have been practicing Evangelical Protestants, as is Guatemala's former President, Jimmy Morales. General Montt, an Evangelical from the Pentecostal tradition, came to power through a coup. He escalated the war against leftist guerrilla insurgents as a holy war against atheistic \"forces of evil\".\nAsia.\nChina.\nEvangelical Christianity came to China through Protestant missionaries in the 19th century. Starting in 1907, with the Manchurian Revival, evangelicalism grew through native preachers with homegrown traditions.\nCounting the number of Christians in China presents numerous difficulties. French researcher Sebastian Fath has estimated that there are 66 million evangelicals in mainland China as of 2020. Showing the issues in counting, a 2023 survey showed only a total of 18 million Protestant adults.\nSouth Korea.\nProtestant missionary activity in Asia was most successful in Korea. American Presbyterians and Methodists arrived in the 1880s and were well received. Between 1910 and 1945, when Korea was a Japanese colony, Christianity became in part an expression of nationalism in opposition to Japan's efforts to enforce the Japanese language and the Shinto religion. In 1914, out of 16 million people, there were 86,000 Protestants and 79,000 Catholics; by 1934, the numbers were 168,000 and 147,000. Presbyterian missionaries were especially successful. Since the Korean War (1950\u201353), many Korean Christians have migrated to the U.S., while those who remained behind have risen sharply in social and economic status. Most Korean Protestant churches in the 21st century emphasize their Evangelical heritage. Korean Evangelicalism is characterized by theological conservatism coupled with an emotional revivalist style. Most churches sponsor revival meetings once or twice a year. Missionary work is a high priority, with 13,000 men and women serving in missions across the world, putting Korea in second place just behind the US.\nSukman argues that since 1945, Protestantism has been widely seen by Koreans as the religion of the middle class, youth, intellectuals, urbanites, and modernists. It has been a powerful force supporting South Korea's pursuit of modernity and emulation of the United States, and opposition to the old Japanese colonialism and to the authoritarianism of North Korea.\nSouth Korea has been referred as an \"evangelical superpower\" for being the home to some of the largest and most dynamic Christian churches in the world; South Korea is also second to the U.S. in the number of missionaries sent abroad.\nAccording to 2015 South Korean census, 9.7\u00a0million or 19.7 percent of the population described themselves as Protestants, many of whom belong to Presbyterian churches shaped by Evangelicalism.\nPhilippines.\nAccording to the 2010 census, 2.68 percent of Filipinos are Evangelicals. The Philippine Council of Evangelical Churches (PCEC), an organization of more than seventy Evangelical and Mainline Protestant churches, and more than 210 para-church organizations in the Philippines, counts more than 11 million members as of 2011.\nEurope.\nFrance.\nIn 2019, it was reported that Evangelicalism in France was growing, and a new Evangelical church was built every 10 days and now counts 700,000 followers across France.\nGreat Britain.\nJohn Wesley (1703\u20131791) was an Anglican cleric and theologian who, with his brother Charles Wesley (1707\u20131788) and fellow cleric George Whitefield (1714\u20131770), founded Methodism. After 1791 the movement became independent of the Anglican Church as the \"Methodist Connection\". It became a force in its own right, especially among the working class.\nThe \"Clapham Sect\" was a group of Church of England evangelicals and social reformers based in Clapham, London; they were active 1780s\u20131840s). John Newton (1725\u20131807) was the founder. They are described by the historian Stephen Tomkins as \"a network of friends and families in England, with William Wilberforce as its center of gravity, who were powerfully bound together by their shared moral and spiritual values, by their religious mission and social activism, by their love for each other, and by marriage\".\nEvangelicalism was a major force in the Anglican Church from about 1800 to the 1860s. By 1848 when an evangelical John Bird Sumner became Archbishop of Canterbury, between a quarter and a third of all Anglican clergy were linked to the movement, which by then had diversified greatly in its goals and they were no longer considered an organized faction.\nIn the 21st century there are an estimated 2 million Evangelicals in the UK. According to research performed by the Evangelical Alliance in 2013, 87 percent of UK evangelicals attend Sunday morning church services every week and 63 percent attend weekly or fortnightly small groups. An earlier survey conducted in 2012 found that 92 percent of evangelicals agree it is a Christian's duty to help those in poverty and 45 percent attend a church which has a fund or scheme that helps people in immediate need, and 42 percent go to a church that supports or runs a foodbank. 63 percent believe in tithing, and so give around 10 percent of their income to their church, Christian organizations and various charities. 83 percent of UK evangelicals believe that the Bible has supreme authority in guiding their beliefs, views and behavior and 52 percent read or listen to the Bible daily. The Evangelical Alliance, formed in 1846, was the first ecumenical evangelical body in the world and works to unite evangelicals, helping them listen to, and be heard by, the government, media and society.\nSwitzerland.\nSince the 1970s, the number of Evangelicals and Evangelical congregations has grown strongly in Switzerland. Population censuses suggest that these congregations saw the number of their members triple from 1970 to 2000, qualified as a \"spectacular development\" by specialists. Sociologists J\u00f6rg Stolz and Olivier Favre show that the growth is due to charismatic and Pentecostal groups, while classical evangelical groups are stable and fundamentalist groups are in decline. A quantitative national census on religious congregations reveals the important diversity of evangelicalism in Switzerland.\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nBy the late 19th to early 20th century, most American Protestants were Evangelicals. A bitter divide had arisen between the more liberal-modernist mainline denominations and the fundamentalist denominations, the latter typically consisting of Evangelicals. Key issues included the truth of the Bible\u2014literal or figurative, and teaching of evolution in the schools.\nDuring and after World War II, Evangelicals became increasingly organized. There was a great expansion of Evangelical activity within the United States, \"a revival of revivalism\". Youth for Christ was formed; it later became the base for Billy Graham's revivals. The National Association of Evangelicals formed in 1942 as a counterpoise to the mainline Federal Council of Churches. In 1942\u201343, the Old-Fashioned Revival Hour had a record-setting national radio audience. With this organization, though, fundamentalist groups separated from Evangelicals.\nAccording to a Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life study, Evangelicals can be broadly divided into three camps: traditionalist, centrist, and modernist. A 2004 Pew survey identified that while 70.4 percent of Americans call themselves \"Christian\", Evangelicals only make up 26.3 percent of the population, while Catholics make up 22 percent and mainline Protestants make up 16 percent. Among the Christian population in 2020, mainline Protestants began to outnumber Evangelicals. In 2024, approximately 13.2% of Americans were non-Hispanic white Evangelicals while 13.1% were white mainline Protestants according to the Public Religion Research Institute's \"Census of American Religion.\"\nEvangelicals have been socially active throughout US history, a tradition dating back to the abolitionist movement of the Antebellum period and the prohibition movement. As a group, evangelicals are most often associated with the Christian right. However, a large number of black self-labeled Evangelicals, and a small proportion of liberal white self-labeled Evangelicals, gravitate towards the Christian left.\nRecurrent themes within American Evangelical discourse include abortion, evolution denial, secularism, and the notion of the United States as a Christian nation.\nEvangelical humanitarian aid.\nIn the 1940s, in the United States, neo-evangelicalism developed the importance of social justice and Christian humanitarian aid actions in Evangelical churches. The majority of evangelical Christian humanitarian organizations were founded in the second half of the 20th century. Among those with the most partner countries, there was the foundation of World Vision International (1950), Samaritan's Purse (1970), Mercy Ships (1978), Prison Fellowship International (1979), International Justice Mission (1997).\nCriticism.\nExvangelical is a term to describe people who have left evangelicalism, especially white evangelical churches in the United States, for atheism, agnosticism, progressive Christianity, or any other religious belief, or lack thereof.\nMany exvangelicals attribute their departure to experiences of anti-LGBTQ beliefs and practices, misogyny, and racism in evangelicalism, to skepticism toward the Church's moral and social teachings, to a personal crisis of faith or to sexual abuse in a religious setting.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* ; https://.\nMissions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* ."}
{"id": "10371", "revid": "50548440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10371", "title": "Euphonium", "text": "Brass instrument\nThe euphonium ( ; ; ) is a tenor- and baritone-voiced valved brass instrument pitched in 9-foot (9\u2032) B\u266d an octave below the B\u266d trumpet or cornet, employed chiefly in brass, military, and concert bands. The euphonium is a member of the large family of valved bugles, along with the tuba and flugelhorn, characterised by a wide conical bore. Most instruments have four valves, usually compensating piston valves, although instruments with four or five rotary valves are common in Eastern and Central Europe.\nEuphonium repertoire can be notated in concert pitch in the bass clef, or in the treble clef as a transposing instrument in B\u266d. In British brass bands, it is typically treated as a treble-clef instrument, while in American band music, parts may be written in either treble clef or bass clef, or both. A musician who plays the euphonium is known as a \"euphoniumist\", a \"euphonist\", or simply a \"euphonium player\".\nName.\nThe euphonium derives its name from the Ancient Greek word (\"euph\u014dnos\"), meaning \"pleasant-sounding\" or \"sweet-voiced\".\nThe euphonium has many relatives in the large and diverse family of valved bugles to which it belongs. The \"baritone horn\" found in British brass bands, although similar, has a narrower conical bore, smaller bell, and often lacks a fourth valve. The \"American baritone\" with three front-mounted piston valves, a narrower conical bore, and a curved forward-pointing bell, was dominant in American school marching bands throughout most of the 20th century. This instrument, along with the euphonium and similar-looking cylindrical bore instruments like the \"trombonium\", were almost universally lumped together and labelled \"baritone\" by both band directors and composers. Band scores and manufacturers have sometimes treated them as the same instrument, or used the word \"baritone\" to refer to the euphonium, thus contributing to a confusion of terminology in the United States.\nFerdinand Sommer's \"Sommerophone\" was patented in Berlin in 1844 as the \"Euphonion\", and adopted in Britain as the \"euphonium\" after Sommer toured it in the 1850s. The euphonium is sometimes called the \"tenor tuba\" particularly by British composers, although this term can also refer to other types of tuba. Names in scores in other languages include the French \"basse\", \"saxhorn basse\", and \"tuba basse\"; German \"Baryton\", \"Tenorbass\", and \"Tenorbasshorn\"; Italian \"baritono\", \"bombardino\", \"eufonio\", and \"flicorno basso\". In Italy, refers to the narrower bore baritone, while and refer to the euphonium with three or four valves, respectively.\nThe most common German name, \"Baryton\", may have influenced Americans to adopt the name \"baritone\" for the instrument, due to the influx of German musicians and instrument makers to the United States in the 19th century.\nBy the 1890s, American euphoniums were sometimes called the \"B\u266d bass\" (with only one \"B\"). The 1894 Lyon &amp; Healy catalog depicts instruments called the \"B\u266d tenor\", \"B\u266d baritone\", and \"B\u266d bass\" with the same pitch and overall three-valve construction, differing only in bore and bell widths (while also listing \"EE\u266d bass\" and \"BB\u266d bass\" tubas). In the 1930s, American drum and bugle corps introduced the \"baritone bugle\" (or \"Baro-tone\") in G with a single D piston valve, before a \"euphonium bugle\" in the same key but with a much wider bore had largely replaced it by the end of the 1960s.\nHistory.\nThe history of the euphonium is tied to the history of the tuba, which is itself the search for a practical valved bass-voiced brass instrument suitable for use in bands and orchestras. Before the invention of valves in the 1820s, brass instruments were either restricted to a single harmonic series like the natural trumpet or bugle, or used a slide like the trombone, or used keys and tone holes like the keyed bugle or serpent. For low-pitched brass instruments, none of these solutions were ideal; the bass trombones with slide handles were unwieldy for fast passages, and the \"timbre\" of the serpent was often criticised.\nThe euphonium can trace its origins partly to the ophicleide, an all-metal, conical bore keyed brass instrument developed by the Paris instrument maker Jean Hilaire Ast\u00e9 in 1817 to extend the keyed bugle into the bass range and replace the serpent. The ophicleide improved on the serpent, in use particularly in France since the late 16th century, by using keys covering larger tone holes sized proportionally to the bore width, in their acoustically correct positions. The wide conical bore of the ophicleide, extrapolated from the keyed bugle, imparted the warm, noble \"timbre\" characteristic of the modern euphonium. The ophicleide was widely used in French and British military bands, orchestras, and the emerging civic brass band movement for several decades, even after the invention of valves, and as late as the 1870s.\nThe invention of valves.\nThe invention of the St\u00f6lzel valve in 1814, the Berlin valve in 1833 used on the 1835 and Adolphe Sax's early brass instruments, and especially the modern piston valve by Fran\u00e7ois P\u00e9rinet in 1839, allowed the construction of brass instruments with an even sound and facility of playing in all registers. Combined with steam power and other advances in manufacturing brought about by the Industrial Revolution, this led to the 19th century becoming a time of intense transformation in brass instrument design.\nAs early as 1829 in Berlin, the Prussian military conductor Wilhelm Friedrich Wieprecht required for his trumpet corps a in B\u266d with three valves, a name which was later sometimes used for the euphonium. No specimens or images survive, but the historian Clifford Bevan claims it was likely to have been a larger bore version of the , later often called the .\nSeveral instruments appeared in the 1830s and 1840s that fit the broad description of a baritone valved bugle (in B\u266d or C) with a wide conical bore. In Vienna, valves were applied to the ophicleide to replace its keyed tone holes, otherwise retaining its bore and shape. The larger versions of these became known as \"bombardons\".\nIn 1838, Carl Wilhelm Moritz, son of Johann Gottfried Moritz, who (with Wieprecht) had patented the five-valved in F in 1835, built a similar but smaller tenor tuba in B\u266d with four valves. In Italy around this time, the Milan instrument maker Giuseppe Pelitti developed his with four valves based on the larger , a valved ophicleide in F. While Pelitti preferred to call his instruments , other makers in Italy made similar instruments and called them (pl.; sing. \"flicorno\"). Built in B\u266d with either three valves as or four valves as , they became the equivalent respectively of the modern baritone horn and euphonium.\nThe earliest modern euphoniums.\nFerdinand Sommer, a bandmaster in Weimar, developed his in 1843, which was built and patented as the by Franz Bock in Vienna the following year. In Paris at around the same time, Sax invented his family of saxhorns c.\u20091843\u201345. Sommer toured his instrument in solo performances, and at the 1851 London Great Exhibition, presented it as both \"Sommerophone\" and \"Euphonion\". The latter term was rapidly adopted as the anglicised \"euphonium\", but it was the (bass saxhorn in B\u266d) that can be considered the earliest modern euphonium. It had a slightly narrower bore, but was often used interchangeably with the euphonium in British brass bands.\nAdolphe Sax's saxhorns became popular in bands in Britain and the United States due largely to the Distin family, who helped popularise the British brass band movement by promoting and performing widely on Sax's brass instruments. By 1850, Distin &amp; Co. was manufacturing them in London, and in New York and Pennsylvania by the 1870s after the London business was purchased by Boosey &amp; Co. The bass saxhorn also formed the basis of the six-valve French tuba in C, the standard tuba used by French composers and orchestras well into the 20th century.\nIn Austria-Hungary, the instrument maker V\u00e1clav Franti\u0161ek \u010cerven\u00fd built his \"Baroxyton\", a baritone instrument with four valves, in 1852. \u010cerven\u00fd developed several instrument families in ophicleide, helicon, and tuba shapes, but is especially notable for his later \"Kaiser\" instruments, with rotary valves and large conical bores. These included the \"Kaiserbaryton\", in a distinctive oval shape. This design was quickly adopted by other makers, and has become the standard configuration for euphoniums in central and eastern Europe.\nModern instruments.\nWith their more consistent \"timbre\" and playing facility throughout the range, and simpler fingering using three or four valves, valved brass instruments eventually led to the disappearance of the ophicleide by the end of the 19th century. In Britain, ophiceides were replaced by euphoniums, offered in competitions as prizes for winning ophicleide players.\nThe modern \"British-style\" compensating euphonium was developed in the 1870s by David Blaikley, the factory manager at Boosey &amp; Co. Blaikley, after experimenting with a three-valve compensation system, obtained a patent in 1878 for a four-valve version where the fourth valve returns the airway through the first three valves a second time, adding smaller tubing loops to rectify intonation. Similar designs were patented earlier by Gustave Auguste Besson in 1859, and Pierre-Louis Gautrot's , found on his instruments of the period, was patented in 1864. Blaikley's compensation system was the most successful and has since been in continuous use in Britain, little-changed, on instruments by Boosey &amp; Co. (later, Boosey &amp; Hawkes), and Besson after their acquisition by Boosey &amp; Hawkes in the mid-20th century. In 1974, the patent expired, and many euphonium manufacturers added the compensation system to their euphonium models, including Hirsbrunner, Miraphone, Sterling, Willson, and Yamaha.\nModern euphonium makers have introduced some improvements, such as tapered and wider-bore valve tubing, small adjustments to the compensation tubing to soften some of the sharp bends, and triggers for the main tuning slide. Adams developed an adjustable lead-pipe receiver for their euphoniums, which allows players to customise the timbre and responsiveness of the instrument.\nConstruction.\nThe euphonium, like the tenor trombone, is pitched in 9-foot (9\u2032) B\u266d an octave below the trumpet or cornet, and played with a mouthpiece similar to those used on the ophicleide or bass trombone. When no valves are in use, the instrument will produce partials of the B\u266d harmonic series which result from the vibrating air column within its of tubing.\nThe euphonium has a wide conical bore, gradually increasing in diameter throughout its length (apart from the necessarily cylindrical valve tubing). The bore ranges from at the first valve, and the bell ranges from . Like the flugelhorn and tuba, the conical bore of the euphonium emphasises lower frequency spectral content by favouring the lower partials, resulting in a mellower tone compared to cylindrical-bore instruments such as the trumpet or trombone.\nThe valves each add lengths of tubing to lower the pitch of the instrument, combining to produce a fully chromatic scale and range. Euphoniums commonly have three top-action piston valves, played with the first three fingers of the right hand, plus a fourth valve, generally found midway down the right side of the instrument and played with the left index or middle finger. On most models the fourth valve is a compensating valve which resolves intonation issues below E2. On European instruments with rotary valves, the three or four valves are operated together by the right hand and are non-compensating; some include a fifth valve to allow for alternate intonation fingerings instead. Beginner models often have only the three top-action valves and no fourth valve, while some intermediate models may have a non-compensating fourth top-action valve placed next to the other three and played with the fourth finger of the right hand.\nCompensating valves.\nThe modern compensating euphonium uses four valves, and routes the tubing of the fourth valve back through the other three valves to add an extra set of small correcting tubing loops. This achieves correct intonation in the lower range of the instrument when using the fourth valve, the range being from E2 down to B1.\nLess commonly, there are three-valve compensating euphoniums. Usually older instruments, these have a similar compensating mechanism, but route the tubing of the third valve back through extra loops on the other two valves. This corrects the intonation, of C3 and B2 in particular. This compensating system is also found on some three-valve British style baritone horns.\nTypes.\nDouble bell euphonium.\nFirst built as early as 1847 by the Italian maker Giuseppe Pelitti, the double bell euphonium was a creation uniquely popular in the United States in the early 20th century, featuring a second smaller bell in addition to the main one. The player could switch bells for certain passages, or even for individual notes, by use of an additional valve. The smaller bell, using a narrower and more cylindrical bore, was intended to emulate the sound of a trombone. Harry Whittier of the Gilmore Band, and Josef Michele Raffayalo in Sousa's band introduced the instrument to the United States in the late 1880s, and it was used widely in both school and service bands for several decades, as late as the 1960s, built largely by American manufacturers. They were last listed by Conn in the 1940s and King's catalog in the 1960s. They are now rare, chiefly known through their mention in the song \"Seventy-Six Trombones\" from Meredith Willson's 1957 musical, \"The Music Man\". A model with four compensating valves (and a fifth to switch bells) is made by Wessex Tubas.\nFive-valved euphonium.\nIn Britain, a non-compensating five-valve euphonium was manufactured in the late 19th and early 20th centuries by Besson, and Highams of Manchester. The five-valve euphonium improved intonation by providing more valve fingering combinations, and was more economical to build than complex compensating instruments, but they were not widely adopted.\nThe Besson five-valved euphonium mounted the first three piston valves horizontally, and an additional two off to the side.\nIn central and eastern Europe, euphoniums usually have rotary valves, and an oval form. \u010cerven\u00fd and other manufacturers make models with five non-compensating rotary valves.\nMarching euphonium.\nEuphoniums built in a horizontal bell-forward configuration are used in the marching arts. Marching euphoniums lack a fourth valve, partly to conserve weight. They are currently produced by B.A.C. Music, Eastman, Jupiter, Dynasty, and Yamaha, as well as by several Chinese-made stencil brands like Schiller, John Packer, and O'Malley.\nIn American drum and bugle corps, the Canadian instrument maker Whaley, Royce &amp; Co. introduced the euphonium bugle in the mid-1960s, pitched a third lower in G with two valves. These were mainly made by the American makers Olds, King, Conn, and Kanstul. Whether a drum corps uses marching euphoniums, marching baritones, or a combination of both depends on the preference of the arranger. In mixes, euphoniums will typically play the lower parts and the baritones will play the higher.\nRepertoire.\nThe euphonium repertoire began in the mid-19th century with adaptations of existing (lit.\u2009'air and variations'), a large body of popular music particularly in France and Britain. Works such as Jean-Baptiste Arban's \"Fantaisie et variations sur \"Le carnaval de Venise\"\" (1864) were quickly adapted for ophicleide, and then euphonium. The earliest surviving solo composition written specifically for euphonium is the \"Concerto per Flicorno Basso\" (1872) by the Italian composer Amilcare Ponchielli. The solo and band repertoire grew in the period from around 1880 to 1920, as the euphonium became an important instrument in bands, and exemplified in the United States by the bands and publications of John Philip Sousa and Arthur Pryor.\nAmerican composers writing for the concert band since the mid-20th century continued the British brass and concert band tradition of using the euphonium as the principal tenor-voiced solo instrument, akin to the cello in the string section of the orchestra. A large body of more serious works, including challenging concertos for solo euphonium with brass or concert band accompaniment, has been amassed since 1960 including works from American, German, Scandinavian and British composers. This has also included concertos for euphonium and orchestra, newly commissioned and recorded, as well as existing band concertos newly adapted for orchestra.\nMusic for unaccompanied solo euphonium until the late 20th century had been largely adaptations of works for other instruments, often trombone, cornet, tuba, cello, or bassoon. The International Tuba Euphonium Association (ITEA) sponsored new solo works for euphonium through its \"GEM Series\" published in its journal.\nOrchestral repertoire.\nThough the euphonium is primarily a brass and symphonic band instrument, it also finds occasional use in orchestral repertoire, where it is often scored as \"tenor tuba\". It appeared as early as 1898 with important excerpts in the tone poems \"Don Quixote\" and \"Ein Heldenleben\" by Richard Strauss, and it has notable solo appearances in the British composer Gustav Holst's \"The Planets\" (1914\u20131917):\n&lt;score lang=\"lilypond\"&gt;\n \\relative c' {\n \\clef bass \\time 5/4 \\key c \\major\n f2 d8. d16 f4 d~\n d2.~ d8 r8 r4\n }&lt;/score&gt; Tenor tuba solo at bar 68 of \"Mars, the Bringer of War\" from Holst's \"The Planets\" (1914\u201317) &lt;br&gt;\n \nThe euphonium is also called for in Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek's \"Sinfonietta\" (1926), Shostakovich's ballet \"The Golden Age\" (1930), and several symphonies by the composers Havergal Brian, Roy Harris, Arnold Bax, and Samuel Barber. Despite the successes of these early works and of its larger tuba cousin, the euphonium has not gained a permanent place in the regular symphony orchestra, although it is commonly used to play parts originally scored for the ophicleide, and sometimes the bass (in F) Wagner tuba.\nPerformance.\nAlthough modern performers and composers are pushing the boundaries of the instrument into other genres, the euphonium remains predominantly a band instrument, with full-time professional positions almost entirely with military bands. This has not deterred new players from learning the instrument, partly due to the increasing worldwide popularity of British-style brass bands, with substantial repertoire that commands much from the euphonium's agility and expressive tone.\nAs with the cornet and flugelhorn, the euphonium and baritone horn are easily doubled by one player, with some adjustment of breath and embouchure, since they have essentially identical range and fingering.\nNotation.\nIn British brass bands, all instruments except the bass trombone are transposing instruments using the treble clef notation popularized in France by instrument maker Adolphe Sax for his families of instruments. Thus the euphonium, along with the tenor trombones and baritones, are notated as B\u266d instruments in treble clef sounding a major ninth lower than written, like the tenor saxophone and bass clarinet.\n&lt;score lang=\"lilypond\"&gt; \\relative {\n \\cadenzaOn\n \\clef treble \\key c \\major\n c'8[ ^ \\markup \\tiny \"transposing\" d e f] g4 c\n s4 \\bar \" Euphonium notation: the same notes in transposing treble clef a ninth above pitch, and in concert pitch in bass clef\nIn orchestras, concert bands, and US military bands, the euphonium is generally written at concert pitch in the bass clef, treating the euphonium as a non-transposing instrument like the orchestral trombone, with high passages often written in tenor clef. Concert band music often provides the euphonium parts in both bass and B\u266d treble clef, to accommodate players from either background, although professional players are usually familiar with either notation. In continental European band music, parts for the euphonium are occasionally written in transposing B\u266d in bass clef, sounding a major second lower than written.\nRange.\nThe euphonium has a large range of at least four octaves. The range from E2 to about G4 is easily accessible, but the full working range from contemporary solo repertoire includes the pedal range from B\u266d1 down to B0, and extends up to at least D5. Higher notes are possible since the upper range is limited only by the fitness of the players' embouchure, although notes above the \"bell cutoff frequency\", around the tenth harmonic in tuba family instruments (D5 on euphonium), are difficult to centre and continuous \"glissandi\" are possible, making valve fingering largely redundant.\n&lt;score lang=\"lilypond\"&gt; {\n \\clef bass \\key c \\major \\cadenzaOn \\omit Stem\n b,,4 ^ \"pedal\" _ \\markup \\tiny \"B\u2080\"\n \\glissando s bes, _ \\markup \\tiny \"B\u266d\u2081\"\n \\bar \" Range of the modern four-valve euphonium\nThe lowest notes obtainable depend on the valve set-up of the instrument. All instruments are chromatic down to E2, and four-valved instruments extend that down to at least C2. Non-compensating four-valved instruments suffer from intonation problems in this range and cannot produce low B1. These problems are solved with the modern compensating fourth valve, or with five non-compensating rotary valves on European models, using a flat whole-tone tuning for the fifth valve, as is common on five-valve tubas. Although less satisfactory, a good player can also provide these notes on a three-valve instrument using falset tones, which are more distinct on instruments with wide conical bores and large bells. From B\u266d1 down lies the pedal range, the fundamentals of the instrument's harmonic series. They are more easily produced on the euphonium and tuba than on other brass instruments, and the extent of the pedal range similarly depends on the instrument.\nNotable players.\nFerdinand Sommer toured Europe with Jullien's orchestra to promote the \"Sommerophone\" he invented in 1843, patented the following year as \"Euphonion\". As a virtuoso soloist, his performances in Britain helped to popularise the euphonium in British brass and military bands. Alfred James Phasey (1834\u20131888) was a distinguished British ophicleide player who, unlike his fellow ophicleidist Samuel Hughes (1823\u20131898), switched to euphonium and became just as renowned for his euphonium playing.\nIn Brazil, Irineu de Almeida (1863\u20131916) was an influential musician and professor of the genre of Choro music, composing and performing on ophicleide and (euphonium). He participated in the first early 20th century recordings of Brazilian music, and he and his influential student Pixinguinha (1897\u20131973) established and popularized Choro music and its instruments.\n20th century.\nIn the United States, the Italian-born trombone, baritone and euphonium virtuoso Simone Mantia (1873\u20131951) toured with the bands of both John Philip Sousa and Arthur Pryor, made some of the first solo euphonium recordings, and helped to popularize the instrument in the United States. Leonard Falcone (1899\u20131985), also Italian-born, was appointed Director of Bands at Michigan State University in 1927, and, as professor of euphonium, taught many artists until his death in 1985. The Leonard Falcone International Tuba and Euphonium Festival, a principal venue for the instrument in the United States, was established in his honour.\nArthur (\"Art\") Lehman (1917\u20132009), euponiumist with the United States Marine Band, was an early proponent of the double bell euphonium and wrote \"The Art of Euphonium\", a significant pedagogical text. Lehman was a student of Harold Brasch and Simone Mantia, and advanced a rich sound concept with sparing use of vibrato, pioneered by Mantia. Brian Bowman, euphonium soloist with the United States Navy Band and United States Air Force Band, was professor of euphonium at the University of North Texas and co-edited \"Arban's Method for Trombone and Euphonium\", an adaptation of Arban's 1864 method for cornet. Bowman developed a sound based on a fusion of the mellow British sound and Falcone's recordings, and played the first euphonium recital at Carnegie Hall.\nIn Japan, the euphonium soloist and clinician Toru Miura was a founding member in 1973 of the International Tuba Euphonium Association (ITEA; founded as TUBA). He is professor of euphonium at the Kunitachi College of Music in Tokyo, and in 2008 was awarded the ITEA Lifetime Achievement Award for his role in promoting the instrument.\n21st century.\nIn the late 20th century, many players from brass and concert band backgrounds became virtuoso performers and promoters of euphonium music. English soloist Steven Mead, professor at the Royal Northern College of Music, is recognised for advancing the British euphonium sound. He has commissioned many solo works for euphonium, and his extensive discography includes most of the major modern works composed for euphonium. David Thornton, a student of Steven Mead, has won several international competitions, and played principal euphonium in and conducted several prestigious British brass bands. He has also recorded many works, including a CD that won the 2016 ITEA Roger Bobo Award for Excellence in Recording. He is Director of Brass Band Studies at the Royal Northern College of Music.\nThe Welsh brothers Robert and Nicholas Childs have recorded and commissioned many works for euphonium, as well as conducting and adjudicating brass bands. Robert's son David Childs is also a euphonium soloist and recording artist, and professor of euphonium at the University of North Texas, succeeding Brian Bowman. He commissioned a euphonium concerto, \"The Sunne Rising \u2013 The King Will Ride\" (2004), from the Welsh composer Alun Hoddinott, and published and recorded an adaptation of the Vaughan Williams tuba concerto for euphonium and orchestra.\nJazz and popular music.\nIn jazz, Rich Matteson (1929\u20131993) and Bernard Atwell McKinney, later Kiane Zawadi (1932\u20132024), were two of the few jazz soloists to use euphonium. Matteson formed the Matteson-Phillips Tubajazz Consort, a big band scored for tubas and euphoniums, with the tuba player Harvey Phillips, founder of the annual Tubachristmas events. Some trombone artists have occasionally used euphonium, such as Gus Mancuso, Bill Reichenbach, and John Allred.\nIn popular music, the New Zealand musician Don McGlashan began his musical career as an orchestral horn player, before including euphonium in his switch to popular music with bands such as Blam Blam Blam and The Mutton Birds.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10372", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10372", "title": "Entire function", "text": "Function that is holomorphic on the whole complex plane\nIn complex analysis, an entire function, also called an integral function, is a complex-valued function that is holomorphic on the whole complex plane. Typical examples of entire functions are polynomials and the exponential function, and any finite sums, products and compositions of these, such as the trigonometric functions sine and cosine and their hyperbolic counterparts sinh and cosh, as well as derivatives and integrals of entire functions such as the error function. If an entire function formula_1 has a \nroot at &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, taking the limit value at &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is an entire function. On the other hand, the natural logarithm, the reciprocal function, and the square root are all not entire functions, nor can they be continued analytically to an entire function.\nA transcendental entire function is an entire function that is not a polynomial.\nJust as meromorphic functions can be viewed as a generalization of rational functions, entire functions can be viewed as a generalization of polynomials. In particular, if for meromorphic functions one can generalize the factorization into simple fractions (the Mittag-Leffler theorem on the decomposition of a meromorphic function), then for entire functions there is a generalization of the factorization \u2013 the Weierstrass theorem on entire functions.\nProperties.\nEvery entire function formula_2 can be represented as a single power series:\nformula_3\nthat converges everywhere in the complex plane, hence uniformly on compact sets. The radius of convergence is infinite, which implies that\nformula_4\nor, equivalently,\nformula_5\nAny power series satisfying this criterion will represent an entire function.\nIf (and only if) the coefficients of the power series are all real then the function evidently takes real values for real arguments, and the value of the function at the complex conjugate of formula_6 will be the complex conjugate of the value at &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Such functions are sometimes called self-conjugate (the conjugate function, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, being given by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;).\nIf the real part of an entire function is known in a (complex) neighborhood of a point then both the real and imaginary parts are known for the whole complex plane, up to an imaginary constant. For instance, if the real part is known in a neighborhood of zero, then we can find the coefficients for formula_7 from the following derivatives with respect to a real variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_8\n(Likewise, if the imaginary part is known in such a neighborhood then the function is determined up to a real constant.) In fact, if the real part is known just on an arc of a circle, then the function is determined up to an imaginary constant.\nNote however that an entire function is not necessarily determined by its real part on some other curves. In particular, if the real part is given on any curve in the complex plane where the real part of some other entire function is zero, then any multiple of that function can be added to the function we are trying to determine. For example, if the curve where the real part is known is the real line, then we can add formula_9 times any self-conjugate function. If the curve forms a loop, then it is determined by the real part of the function on the loop since the only functions whose real part is zero on the curve are those that are everywhere equal to some imaginary number.\nThe Weierstrass factorization theorem asserts that any entire function can be represented by a product involving its zeroes (or \"roots\").\nThe entire functions on the complex plane form an integral domain (in fact a Pr\u00fcfer domain). They also form a commutative unital associative algebra over the complex numbers.\nLiouville's theorem states that any bounded entire function must be constant.\nAs a consequence of Liouville's theorem, any function that is entire on the whole Riemann sphere\nis constant. Thus any non-constant entire function must have a singularity at the complex point at infinity, either a pole for a polynomial or an essential singularity for a transcendental entire function. Specifically, by the Casorati\u2013Weierstrass theorem, for any transcendental entire function formula_10 and any complex formula_11 there is a sequence formula_12 such that\n formula_13\nPicard's little theorem is a much stronger result: Any non-constant entire function takes on every complex number as value, possibly with a single exception. When an exception exists, it is called a lacunary value of the function. The possibility of a lacunary value is illustrated by the exponential function, which never takes on the value &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. One can take a suitable branch of the logarithm of an entire function that never hits &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, so that this will also be an entire function (according to the Weierstrass factorization theorem). The logarithm hits every complex number except possibly one number, which implies that the first function will hit any value other than formula_14 an infinite number of times. Similarly, a non-constant, entire function that does not hit a particular value will hit every other value an infinite number of times.\nLiouville's theorem is a special case of the following statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nf(z)\u2014Assume &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_15 are positive constants and formula_16 is a non-negative integer. An entire function formula_10 satisfying the inequality formula_18 there exists an entire function formula_10 such that formula_20 for all real &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Such a function formula_10 may be easily found of the form:\nformula_22\nfor a constant formula_23 and a strictly increasing sequence of positive integers &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Any such sequence defines an entire function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and if the powers are chosen appropriately we may satisfy the inequality formula_20 for all real &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. (For instance, it certainly holds if one chooses formula_25 and, for any integer formula_26 one chooses an even exponent formula_27 such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;).\nOrder and type.\nThe order (at infinity) of an entire function formula_1 is defined using the limit superior as:\nformula_29\nwhere formula_30 is the disk of radius formula_31 and formula_32 denotes the supremum norm of formula_1 on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The order is a non-negative real number or infinity (except when formula_34 for all &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;). In other words, the order of formula_1 is the infimum of all formula_36 such that:\nformula_37\nThe example of formula_38 shows that this does not mean formula_39 if \nformula_1 is of order &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, one can also define the type:\nformula_41\nIf the order is 1 and the type is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the function is said to be \"of exponential type &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\". If it is of order less than 1 it is said to be of exponential type 0.\nIf formula_42 then the order and type can be found by the formulas\nformula_43\nLet formula_44 denote the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;th derivative of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Then we may restate these formulas in terms of the derivatives at any arbitrary point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;:\nformula_45\nThe type may be infinite, as in the case of the reciprocal gamma function, or zero (see example below under ).\nAnother way to find out the order and type is Matsaev's theorem.\nExamples.\nHere are some examples of functions of various orders:\nOrder \"\u03c1\".\nFor arbitrary positive numbers formula_46 and formula_47 one can construct an example of an entire function of order formula_46 and type formula_47 using:\nformula_50\nOrder 1/4.\nformula_52 \nwhere formula_53\nOrder 1/3.\nformula_54\nwhere\nformula_55\nOrder 1/2.\nformula_56 with formula_57 (for which the type is given by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;)\nGenus.\nEntire functions of finite order have Hadamard's canonical representation (Hadamard factorization theorem):\nformula_71\nwhere formula_72 are those roots of formula_10 that are not zero (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;), formula_36 is the order of the zero of formula_10 at formula_76 (the case formula_77 being taken to mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;), formula_78 a polynomial (whose degree we shall call formula_79), and formula_80 is the smallest non-negative integer such that the series\nformula_81\nconverges. The non-negative integer formula_82 is called the genus of the entire function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIf the order formula_46 is not an integer, then formula_84 is the integer part of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. If the order is a positive integer, then there are two possibilities: formula_85 or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nFor example, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_86 and formula_87 are entire functions of genus &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nOther examples.\nAccording to J. E. Littlewood, the Weierstrass sigma function is a 'typical' entire function. This statement can be made precise in the theory of random entire functions: the asymptotic behavior of almost all entire functions is similar to that of the sigma function. Other examples include the Fresnel integrals, the Jacobi theta function, and the reciprocal Gamma function. The exponential function and the error function are special cases of the Mittag-Leffler function. According to the fundamental theorem of Paley and Wiener, Fourier transforms of functions (or distributions) with bounded support are entire functions of order formula_88 and finite type.\nOther examples are solutions of linear differential equations with polynomial coefficients. If the coefficient at the highest derivative is constant, then all solutions of such equations are entire functions. For example, the exponential function, sine, cosine, Airy functions and Parabolic cylinder functions arise in this way. The class of entire functions is closed with respect to compositions. This makes it possible to study dynamics of entire functions.\nAn entire function of the square root of a complex number is entire if the original function is even, for example &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIf a sequence of polynomials all of whose roots are real converges in a neighborhood of the origin to a limit which is not identically equal to zero, then this limit is an entire function. Such entire functions form the Laguerre\u2013P\u00f3lya class, which can also be characterized in terms of the Hadamard product, namely, formula_10 belongs to this class if and only if in the Hadamard representation all formula_90 are real, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and \n&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where formula_91 and formula_23 are real, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For example, the sequence of polynomials\nformula_93\nconverges, as formula_16 increases, to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The polynomials\nformula_95\nhave all real roots, and converge to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The polynomials\nformula_96\nalso converge to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, showing the buildup of the Hadamard product for cosine.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10373", "revid": "206179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10373", "title": "Elliptical curve", "text": ""}
{"id": "10374", "revid": "49194911", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10374", "title": "Essay", "text": "Written work often reflecting the author's personal point of view\nAn essay (, ) is, generally, a piece of writing that gives the author's own argument, but the definition is vague, overlapping with those of a letter, a paper, an article, a pamphlet, and a short story. Essays have been sub-classified as formal and informal: formal essays are characterized by \"serious purpose, dignity, logical organization, length,\" whereas the informal essay is characterized by \"the personal element (self-revelation, individual tastes and experiences, confidential manner), humor, graceful style, rambling structure, unconventionality or novelty of theme,\" etc.\nEssays are commonly used as literary criticism, political manifestos, learned arguments, observations of daily life, recollections, and reflections of the author. Almost all modern essays are written in prose, but works in verse have been dubbed essays (e.g., Alexander Pope's \"An Essay on Criticism\" and \"An Essay on Man\"). While brevity usually defines an essay, voluminous works like John Locke's \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" and Thomas Malthus's \"An Essay on the Principle of Population\" are counterexamples.\nIn some countries, such as the United States and Canada, essays have become a major part of formal education. Secondary students are taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills; admission essays are often used by universities in selecting applicants, and in the humanities and social sciences essays are often used as a way of assessing the performance of students during final exams.\nThe concept of an \"essay\" has been extended to other media beyond writing. A film essay is a movie that often incorporates documentary filmmaking styles and focuses more on the evolution of a theme or idea. A photographic essay covers a topic with a linked series of photographs that may have accompanying text or captions.\nDefinitions.\nThe word \"essay\" derives from the French infinitive , \"to try\" or \"to attempt\". In English \"essay\" first meant \"a trial\" or \"an attempt\", and this is still an alternative meaning. The Frenchman Michel de Montaigne (1533\u20131592) was the first author to describe his work as essays; he used the term to characterize these as \"attempts\" to put his thoughts into writing.\nSubsequently, \"essay\" has been defined in a variety of ways. One definition is a \"prose composition with a focused subject of discussion\" or a \"long, systematic discourse\".\nIt is difficult to define the genre into which essays fall. Aldous Huxley, a leading essayist, gives guidance on the subject. He notes that \"the essay is a literary device for saying almost everything about almost anything\", and adds that \"by tradition, almost by definition, the essay is a short piece\". Furthermore, Huxley argues that \"essays belong to a literary species whose extreme variability can be studied most effectively within a three-poled frame of reference\".\nThese three poles (or worlds in which the essay may exist) are:\nHuxley adds that the most satisfying essays \"...make the best not of one, not of two, but of all the three worlds in which it is possible for the essay to exist.\"\nHistory.\nMontaigne.\nMontaigne's \"attempts\" grew out of his commonplacing. Inspired in particular by the works of Plutarch, a translation of whose \"\u0152uvres Morales\" (\"Moral works\") into French had just been published by Jacques Amyot, Montaigne began to compose his essays in 1572; the first edition, entitled \"Essais\", was published in two volumes in 1580. For the rest of his life, he continued revising previously published essays and composing new ones. A third volume was published posthumously; together, their over 100 examples are widely regarded as the predecessor of the modern essay.\nEurope.\nWhile Montaigne's philosophy was admired and copied in France, none of his most immediate disciples tried to write essays. But Montaigne, who liked to fancy that his family (the Eyquem line) was of English extraction, had spoken of the English people as his \"cousins\", and he was early read in England, notably by Francis Bacon.\nBacon's essays, published in book form in 1597 (only five years after the death of Montaigne, containing the first ten of his essays), 1612, and 1625, were the first works in English that described themselves as \"essays\". Ben Jonson first used the word \"essayist\" in 1609, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nOther English essayists included Sir William Cornwallis, who published essays in 1600 and 1617 that were popular at the time, Robert Burton (1577\u20131641) and Sir Thomas Browne (1605\u20131682). In Italy, Baldassare Castiglione wrote about courtly manners in his essay \"Il Cortigiano\". In the 17th century, the Spanish Jesuit Baltasar Graci\u00e1n wrote about the theme of wisdom.\nIn England, during the Age of Enlightenment, essays were a favored tool of polemicists who aimed at convincing readers of their position; they also featured heavily in the rise of periodical literature, as seen in the works of Joseph Addison, Richard Steele and Samuel Johnson. Addison and Steele used the journal \"Tatler\" (founded in 1709 by Steele) and its successors as storehouses of their work, and they became the most celebrated eighteenth-century essayists in England. Johnson's essays appear during the 1750s in various similar publications. As a result of the focus on journals, the term also acquired a meaning synonymous with \"article\", although the content may not the strict definition. On the other hand, Locke's \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" is not an essay at all, or cluster of essays, in the technical sense, but still it refers to the experimental and tentative nature of the inquiry which the philosopher was undertaking.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, Edmund Burke and Samuel Taylor Coleridge wrote essays for the general public. The early 19th century, in particular, saw a proliferation of great essayists in English\u2014William Hazlitt, Charles Lamb, Leigh Hunt and Thomas De Quincey all penned numerous essays on diverse subjects, reviving the earlier graceful style. Thomas Carlyle's essays were highly influential, and one of his readers, Ralph Waldo Emerson, became a prominent essayist himself. Later in the century, Robert Louis Stevenson also raised the form's literary level. In the 20th century, a number of essayists, such as T.S. Eliot, tried to explain the new movements in art and culture by using essays. Virginia Woolf, Edmund Wilson, and Charles du Bos wrote literary criticism essays.\nIn France, several writers produced longer works with the title of that were not true examples of the form. However, by the mid-19th century, the \"Causeries du lundi\", newspaper columns by the critic Sainte-Beuve, are literary essays in the original sense. Other French writers followed suit, including Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, Anatole France, Jules Lema\u00eetre and \u00c9mile Faguet.\nJapan.\nAs with the novel, essays existed in Japan several centuries before they developed in Europe with a genre of essays known as \"zuihitsu\"\u2014loosely connected essays and fragmented ideas. Zuihitsu have existed since almost the beginnings of Japanese literature. Many of the most noted early works of Japanese literature are in this genre. Notable examples include \"The Pillow Book\" (c. 1000), by court lady Sei Sh\u014dnagon, and \"Tsurezuregusa\" (1330), by particularly renowned Japanese Buddhist monk Yoshida Kenk\u014d. Kenk\u014d described his short writings similarly to Montaigne, referring to them as \"nonsensical thoughts\" written in \"idle hours\". Another noteworthy difference from Europe is that women have traditionally written in Japan, though the more formal, Chinese-influenced writings of male writers were more prized at the time.\nChina.\nThe eight-legged essay (Chinese: \u516b\u80a1\u6587; pinyin: \"b\u0101g\u01d4w\u00e9n\"; 'eight bone text') was a style of essay in imperial examinations during the Ming and Qing dynasties in China. The eight-legged essay was needed for those test takers in these civil service tests to show their merits for government service, often focusing on Confucian thought and knowledge of the Four Books and Five Classics, in relation to governmental ideals. Test takers could not write in innovative or creative ways, but needed to conform to the standards of the eight-legged essay. Various skills were examined, including the ability to write coherently and to display basic logic. In certain times, the candidates were expected to spontaneously compose poetry upon a set theme, whose value was also sometimes questioned, or eliminated as part of the test material. This was a major argument in favor of the eight-legged essay, arguing that it were better to eliminate creative art in favor of prosaic literacy. In the history of Chinese literature, the eight-legged essay is often said to have caused China's \"cultural stagnation and economic backwardness\" in the 19th century.\nForms and styles.\nThis section describes the different forms and styles of essay writing. These are used by an array of authors, including university students and professional essayists.\nCause and effect.\nThe defining features of a \"cause and effect\" essay are causal chains that connect from a cause to an effect, careful language, and chronological or emphatic order. A writer using this rhetorical method must consider the subject, determine the purpose, consider the audience, think critically about different causes or consequences, consider a thesis statement, arrange the parts, consider the language, and decide on a conclusion.\nClassification and division.\nClassification is the categorization of objects into a larger whole while division is the breaking of a larger whole into smaller parts.\nCompare and contrast.\nCompare and contrast essays are characterized by a basis for comparison, points of comparison, and analogies. It is grouped by the object (chunking) or by point (sequential). The comparison highlights the similarities between two or more similar objects while contrasting highlights the differences between two or more objects. When writing a compare/contrast essay, writers need to determine their purpose, consider their audience, consider the basis and points of comparison, consider their thesis statement, arrange and develop the comparison, and reach a conclusion. Compare and contrast is arranged emphatically.\nExpository.\nAn expository essay is used to inform, describe or explain a topic, using important facts to teach the reader about a topic. Mostly written in third-person, using \"it\", \"he\", \"she\", \"they,\" the expository essay uses formal language to discuss someone or something. Examples of expository essays are: a medical or biological condition, social or technological process, life or character of a famous person. The writing of an expository essay often consists of the following steps: organizing thoughts (brainstorming), researching a topic, developing a thesis statement, writing the introduction, writing the body of essay, and writing the conclusion. Expository essays are often assigned as a part of SAT and other standardized testing or as homework for high school and college students.\nDescriptive.\nDescriptive writing is characterized by sensory details, which appeal to the physical senses, and details that appeal to a reader's emotional, physical, or intellectual sensibilities. Determining the purpose, considering the audience, creating a dominant impression, using descriptive language, and organizing the description are the rhetorical choices to consider when using a description. A description is usually arranged spatially but can also be chronological or emphatic. The focus of a description is the scene. Description uses tools such as denotative language, connotative language, figurative language, metaphor, and simile to arrive at a dominant impression. One university essay guide states that \"descriptive writing says what happened or what another author has discussed; it provides an account of the topic\". Lyric essays are an important form of descriptive essays.\nDialectic.\nIn the dialectic form of the essay, which is commonly used in philosophy, the writer makes a thesis and argument, then objects to their own argument (with a counterargument), but then counters the counterargument with a final and novel argument. This form benefits from presenting a broader perspective while countering a possible flaw that some may present. This type is sometimes called an ethics paper.\nExemplification.\nAn exemplification essay is characterized by a generalization and relevant, representative, and believable examples including anecdotes. Writers need to consider their subject, determine their purpose, consider their audience, decide on specific examples, and arrange all the parts together when writing an exemplification essay.\nFamiliar.\nAn essayist writes a \"familiar essay\" if speaking to a single reader, writing about both themselves, and about particular subjects. Anne Fadiman notes that \"the genre's heyday was the early nineteenth century,\" and that its greatest exponent was Charles Lamb. She also suggests that while critical essays have more brain than the heart, and personal essays have more heart than brain, familiar essays have equal measures of both.\nHistory (thesis).\nA history essay sometimes referred to as a thesis essay describes an argument or claim about one or more historical events and supports that claim with evidence, arguments, and references. The text makes it clear to the reader why the argument or claim is as such.\nNarrative.\nA narrative uses tools such as flashbacks, flash-forwards, and transitions that often build to a climax. The focus of a narrative is the plot. When creating a narrative, authors must determine their purpose, consider their audience, establish their point of view, use dialogue, and organize the narrative. A narrative is usually arranged chronologically.\nArgumentative.\nAn argumentative essay is a critical piece of writing, aimed at presenting objective analysis of the subject matter, narrowed down to a single topic. The main idea of all the criticism is to provide an opinion either of positive or negative implication. As such, a critical essay requires research and analysis, strong internal logic and sharp structure. Its structure normally builds around introduction with a topic's relevance and a thesis statement, body paragraphs with arguments linking back to the main thesis, and conclusion. In addition, an argumentative essay may include a refutation section where conflicting ideas are acknowledged, described, and criticized. Each argument of an argumentative essay should be supported with sufficient evidence, relevant to the point.\nProcess.\nA process essay is used for an explanation of making or breaking something. Often, it is written in chronological order or numerical order to show step-by-step processes. It has all the qualities of a technical document with the only difference is that it is often written in the descriptive mood, while a technical document is mostly in the imperative mood.\nEconomic.\nAn economic essay can start with a thesis, or it can start with a theme. It can take a narrative course and a descriptive course. It can even become an argumentative essay if the author feels the need. After the introduction, the author has to do his/her best to expose the economic matter at hand, to analyze it, evaluate it, and draw a conclusion. If the essay takes more of a narrative form then the author has to expose each aspect of the economic puzzle in a way that makes it clear and understandable for the reader\nReflective.\nA \"reflective essay\" is an analytical piece of writing in which the writer describes a real or imaginary scene, event, interaction, passing thought, memory, or form\u2014adding a personal reflection on the meaning of the topic in the author's life. Thus, the focus is not merely descriptive. The writer doesn't just describe the situation, but revisits the scene with more detail and emotion to examine what went well, or reveal a need for additional learning\u2014and may relate what transpired to the rest of the author's life.\nOther logical structures.\nThe logical progression and organizational structure of an essay can take many forms. Understanding how the movement of thought is managed through an essay has a profound impact on its overall cogency and ability to impress. A number of alternative logical structures for essays have been visualized as diagrams, making them easy to implement or adapt in the construction of an argument.\nAcademic.\nIn countries like the United States and the United Kingdom, essays have become a major part of a formal education in the form of free response questions. Secondary students in these countries are taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills, and essays are often used by universities in these countries in selecting applicants (\"see\" admissions essay). In both secondary and tertiary education, essays are used to judge the mastery and comprehension of the material. Students are asked to explain, comment on, or assess a topic of study in the form of an essay. In some courses, university students must complete one or more essays over several weeks or months. In addition, in fields such as the humanities and social sciences, mid-term and end of term examinations often require students to write a short essay in two or three hours.\nIn these countries, so-called academic essays, also called \"papers\", are usually more formal than literary ones. They may still allow the presentation of the writer's own views, but this is done in a logical and factual manner, with the use of the first person often discouraged. Longer academic essays (often with a word limit of between 2,000 and 5,000 words) are often more discursive. They sometimes begin with a short summary analysis of what has previously been written on a topic, which is often called a literature review.\nLonger essays may also contain an introductory page that defines words and phrases of the essay's topic. Most academic institutions require that all substantial facts, quotations, and other supporting material in an essay be referenced in a bibliography or works cited page at the end of the text. This scholarly convention helps others (whether teachers or fellow scholars) to understand the basis of facts and quotations the author uses to support the essay's argument. The bibliography also helps readers evaluate to what extent the argument is supported by evidence and to evaluate the quality of that evidence. The academic essay tests the student's ability to present their thoughts in an organized way and is designed to test their intellectual capabilities.\nOne of the challenges facing universities is that in some cases, students may submit essays purchased from an essay mill (or \"paper mill\") as their own work. An \"essay mill\" is a ghostwriting service that sells pre-written essays to university and college students. Since plagiarism is a form of academic dishonesty or academic fraud, universities and colleges may investigate papers they suspect are from an essay mill by using plagiarism detection software, which compares essays against a database of known mill essays and by orally testing students on the contents of their papers.\nMagazine or newspaper.\nEssays often appear in magazines, especially magazines with an intellectual bent, such as \"The Atlantic\" and \"Harpers\". Magazine and newspaper essays use many of the essay types described in the section on forms and styles (e.g., descriptive essays, narrative essays, etc.). Some newspapers also print essays in the op-ed section.\nEmployment.\nEmployment essays detailing experience in a certain occupational field are required when applying for some jobs, especially government jobs in the United States. Essays known as Knowledge Skills and Executive Core Qualifications are required when applying to certain US federal government positions.\nA KSA, or \"Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities\", is a series of narrative statements that are required when applying to Federal government job openings in the United States. KSAs are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. The knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary for the successful performance of a position are contained on each job vacancy announcement. KSAs are brief and focused essays about one's career and educational background that presumably qualify one to perform the duties of the position being applied for.\nAn Executive Core Qualification, or ECQ, is a narrative statement that is required when applying to Senior Executive Service positions within the US Federal government. Like the KSAs, ECQs are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. The Office of Personnel Management has established five executive core qualifications that all applicants seeking to enter the Senior Executive Service must demonstrate.\nNon-literary types.\nFilm.\nA film essay (also essay film or cinematic essay) consists of the evolution of a theme or an idea rather than a plot per se, or the film literally being a cinematic accompaniment to a narrator reading an essay. From another perspective, an essay film could be defined as a documentary film visual basis combined with a form of commentary that contains elements of self-portrait (rather than autobiography), where the signature (rather than the life story) of the filmmaker is apparent. The cinematic essay often blends documentary, fiction, and experimental film making using tones and editing styles.\nThe genre is not well-defined but might include propaganda works of early Soviet filmmakers like Dziga Vertov, present-day filmmakers including Chris Marker, Michael Moore (\"Roger &amp; Me\", \"Bowling for Columbine\" and \"Fahrenheit 9/11\"), Errol Morris (\"The Thin Blue Line\"), Morgan Spurlock (\"Supersize Me\") and Agn\u00e8s Varda. Jean-Luc Godard describes his recent work as \"film-essays\". Two filmmakers whose work was the antecedent to the cinematic essay include Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s and Bertolt Brecht. M\u00e9li\u00e8s made a short film (\"The Coronation of Edward VII\" (1902)) about the 1902 coronation of King Edward VII, which mixes actual footage with shots of a recreation of the event. Brecht was a playwright who experimented with film and incorporated film projections into some of his plays. Orson Welles made an essay film in his own pioneering style, released in 1974, called \"F for Fake\", which dealt specifically with art forger Elmyr de Hory and with the themes of deception, \"fakery\", and authenticity in general.\nDavid Winks Gray's article \"The essay film in action\" states that the \"essay film became an identifiable form of filmmaking in the 1950s and '60s\". He states that since that time, essay films have tended to be \"on the margins\" of the filmmaking the world. Essay films have a \"peculiar searching, questioning tone ... between documentary and fiction\" but without \"fitting comfortably\" into either genre. Gray notes that just like written essays, essay films \"tend to marry the personal voice of a guiding narrator (often the director) with a wide swath of other voices\". The University of Wisconsin Cinematheque website echoes some of Gray's comments; it calls a film essay an \"intimate and allusive\" genre that \"catches filmmakers in a pensive mood, ruminating on the margins between fiction and documentary\" in a manner that is \"refreshingly inventive, playful, and idiosyncratic\".\nIn the 21st century, the essay film has continued to evolve with new technologies and narrative approaches. The accessibility of digital video production tools and online distribution has broadened the essay film\u2019s reach beyond its early niche, allowing more filmmakers to experiment with the form. Contemporary essay films frequently blur the boundaries between documentary and fiction, functioning as a hybrid genre that fuses elements of both. They also tend toward a personal, reflective mode of storytelling, often incorporating first-person perspectives or autobiographical material as directors explore subjective experiences alongside broader social or political themes.\nVideo.\nVideo essays are an emerging media type similar to film essays. Video essays have gained significant prominence on YouTube, as YouTube's policies on free uploads of arbitrary lengths have made it a hotbed. Some video essays feature long, documentary style writing and editing, going deep into the research and history of a particular topic. Others are more akin to an argumentative essay in which a single argument is developed and supported throughout the video. Video essay styles have become especially prominent among BreadTube creators such as ContraPoints and PhilosophyTube.\nMusic.\nIn the realm of music, composer Samuel Barber wrote a set of \"Essays for Orchestra\", relying on the form and content of the music to guide the listener's ear, rather than any extra-musical plot or story.\nPhotography.\nA photographic essay strives to cover a topic with a linked series of photographs. Photo essays range from purely photographic works to photographs with captions or small notes to full-text essays with a few or many accompanying photographs. Photo essays can be sequential in nature, intended to be viewed in a particular order\u2014or they may consist of non-ordered photographs viewed all at once or in an order that the viewer chooses. All photo essays are collections of photographs, but not all collections of photographs are photo essays. Photo essays often address a certain issue or attempt to capture the character of places and events.\nVisual arts.\nIn the visual arts, an essay is a preliminary drawing or sketch that forms a basis for a final painting or sculpture, made as a test of the work's composition (this meaning of the term, like several of those following, comes from the word \"essay\"'s meaning of \"attempt\" or \"trial\").\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10375", "revid": "15638483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10375", "title": "Error detection and correction", "text": "Reliable digital data delivery methods on unreliable channels\nIn information theory and coding theory with applications in computer science and telecommunications, error detection and correction (EDAC) or error control are techniques that enable reliable delivery of digital data over unreliable communication channels. Many communication channels are subject to channel noise, and thus errors may be introduced during transmission from the source to a receiver. Error detection techniques allow detecting such errors, while error correction enables reconstruction of the original data in many cases.\nDefinitions.\n\"Error detection\" is the detection of errors caused by noise or other impairments during transmission from the transmitter to the receiver.\n\"Error correction\" is the detection of errors and reconstruction of the original, error-free data.\nHistory.\nIn classical antiquity, copyists of the Hebrew Bible were paid for their work according to the number of s (lines of verse). As the prose books of the Bible were hardly ever written in stichs, the copyists, in order to estimate the amount of work, had to count the letters. This also helped ensure accuracy in the transmission of the text with the production of subsequent copies. Between the 7th and 10th centuries CE a group of Jewish scribes formalized and expanded this to create the Numerical Masorah to ensure accurate reproduction of the sacred text. It included counts of the number of words in a line, section, book and groups of books, noting the middle stich of a book, word use statistics, and commentary. Standards became such that a deviation in even a single letter in a Torah scroll was considered unacceptable. The effectiveness of their error correction method was verified by the accuracy of copying through the centuries demonstrated by discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls in 1947\u20131956, dating from c.\u2009150 BCE-75 CE.\nThe modern development of error correction codes is credited to Richard Hamming in 1947. A description of Hamming's code appeared in Claude Shannon's \"A Mathematical Theory of Communication\" and was quickly generalized by Marcel J. E. Golay.\nPrinciples.\nAll error-detection and correction schemes add some redundancy (i.e., some extra data) to a message, which receivers can use to check consistency of the delivered message and to recover data that has been determined to be corrupted. Error detection and correction schemes can be either systematic or non-systematic. In a systematic scheme, the transmitter sends the original (error-free) data and attaches a fixed number of \"check bits\" (or \"parity data\"), which are derived from the data bits by some encoding algorithm. If error detection is required, a receiver can simply apply the same algorithm to the received data bits and compare its output with the received check bits; if the values do not match, an error has occurred at some point during the transmission. If error correction is required, a receiver can apply the decoding algorithm to the received data bits and the received check bits to recover the original error-free data. In a system that uses a non-systematic code, the original message is transformed into an encoded message carrying the same information and that has at least as many bits as the original message.\nGood error control performance requires the scheme to be selected based on the characteristics of the communication channel. Common channel models include memoryless models where errors occur randomly and with a certain probability, and dynamic models where errors occur primarily in bursts. Consequently, error-detecting and -correcting codes can be generally distinguished between \"random-error-detecting/correcting\" and \"burst-error-detecting/correcting\". Some codes can also be suitable for a mixture of random errors and burst errors.\nIf the channel characteristics cannot be determined, or are highly variable, an error-detection scheme may be combined with a system for retransmissions of erroneous data. This is known as automatic repeat request (ARQ), and is most notably used in the Internet. An alternate approach for error control is hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ), which is a combination of ARQ and error-correction coding.\nTypes of error correction.\nThere are three major types of error correction:\nAutomatic repeat request.\nAutomatic repeat request (ARQ) is an error control method for data transmission that makes use of error-detection codes, acknowledgment and/or negative acknowledgment messages, and timeouts to achieve reliable data transmission. An \"acknowledgment\" is a message sent by the receiver to indicate that it has correctly received a data frame.\nUsually, when the transmitter does not receive the acknowledgment before the timeout occurs (i.e., within a reasonable amount of time after sending the data frame), it retransmits the frame until it is either correctly received or the error persists beyond a predetermined number of retransmissions.\nThree types of ARQ protocols are Stop-and-wait ARQ, Go-Back-N ARQ, and Selective Repeat ARQ.\nARQ is appropriate if the communication channel has varying or unknown capacity, such as is the case on the Internet. However, ARQ requires the availability of a back channel, results in possibly increased latency due to retransmissions, and requires the maintenance of buffers and timers for retransmissions, which in the case of network congestion can put a strain on the server and overall network capacity.\nFor example, ARQ is used on shortwave radio data links in the form of ARQ-E, or combined with multiplexing as ARQ-M.\nForward error correction.\nForward error correction (FEC) is a process of adding redundant data such as an error-correcting code (ECC) to a message so that it can be recovered by a receiver even when a number of errors (up to the capability of the code being used) are introduced, either during the process of transmission or on storage. Since the receiver does not have to ask the sender for retransmission of the data, a backchannel is not required in forward error correction. Error-correcting codes are used in lower-layer communication such as cellular network, high-speed fiber-optic communication and Wi-Fi, as well as for reliable storage in media such as flash memory, hard disk and RAM.\nError-correcting codes are usually distinguished between convolutional codes and block codes:\nShannon's theorem is an important theorem in forward error correction, and describes the maximum information rate at which reliable communication is possible over a channel that has a certain error probability or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). This strict upper limit is expressed in terms of the channel capacity. More specifically, the theorem says that there exist codes such that with increasing encoding length the probability of error on a discrete memoryless channel can be made arbitrarily small, provided that the code rate is smaller than the channel capacity. The code rate is defined as the fraction \"k/n\" of \"k\" source symbols and \"n\" encoded symbols.\nThe actual maximum code rate allowed depends on the error-correcting code used, and may be lower. This is because Shannon's proof was only of existential nature, and did not show how to construct codes that are both optimal and have efficient encoding and decoding algorithms.\nHybrid schemes.\nHybrid ARQ is a combination of ARQ and forward error correction. There are two basic approaches:\nThe latter approach is particularly attractive on an erasure channel when using a rateless erasure code.\nTypes of error detection.\nError detection is most commonly realized using a suitable hash function (or specifically, a checksum, cyclic redundancy check or other algorithm). A hash function adds a fixed-length \"tag\" to a message, which enables receivers to verify the delivered message by recomputing the tag and comparing it with the one provided.\nThere exists a vast variety of different hash function designs. However, some are of particularly widespread use because of either their simplicity or their suitability for detecting certain kinds of errors (e.g., the cyclic redundancy check's performance in detecting burst errors).\nMinimum distance coding.\nA random-error-correcting code based on minimum distance coding can provide a strict guarantee on the number of detectable errors, but it may not protect against a preimage attack.\nRepetition codes.\nA repetition code is a coding scheme that repeats the bits across a channel to achieve error-free communication. Given a stream of data to be transmitted, the data are divided into blocks of bits. Each block is transmitted some predetermined number of times. For example, to send the bit pattern 1011, the four-bit block can be repeated three times, thus producing 1011 1011 1011. If this twelve-bit pattern was received as 1010 1011 1011 \u2013 where the first block is unlike the other two \u2013 an error has occurred.\nA repetition code is very inefficient and can be susceptible to problems if the error occurs in exactly the same place for each group (e.g., 1010 1010 1010 in the previous example would be detected as correct). The advantage of repetition codes is that they are extremely simple, and are in fact used in some transmissions of numbers stations.\nParity bit.\nA \"parity bit\" is a bit that is added to a group of source bits to ensure that the number of set bits (i.e., bits with value 1) in the outcome is even or odd. It is a very simple scheme that can be used to detect single or any other odd number (i.e., three, five, etc.) of errors in the output. An even number of flipped bits will make the parity bit appear correct even though the data is erroneous.\nParity bits added to each \"word\" sent are called transverse redundancy checks, while those added at the end of a stream of \"words\" are called longitudinal redundancy checks. For example, if each of a series of m-bit \"words\" has a parity bit added, showing whether there were an odd or even number of ones in that word, any word with a single error in it will be detected. It will not be known where in the word the error is, however. If, in addition, after each stream of n words a parity sum is sent, each bit of which shows whether there were an odd or even number of ones at that bit-position sent in the most recent group, the exact position of the error can be determined and the error corrected. This method is only guaranteed to be effective, however, if there are no more than 1 error in every group of n words. With more error correction bits, more errors can be detected and in some cases corrected.\nThere are also other bit-grouping techniques.\nChecksum.\nA \"checksum\" of a message is a modular arithmetic sum of message code words of a fixed word length (e.g., byte values). The sum may be negated by means of a ones'-complement operation prior to transmission to detect unintentional all-zero messages.\nChecksum schemes include parity bits, check digits, and longitudinal redundancy checks. Some checksum schemes, such as the Damm algorithm, the Luhn algorithm, and the Verhoeff algorithm, are specifically designed to detect errors commonly introduced by humans in writing down or remembering identification numbers.\nCyclic redundancy check.\nA \"cyclic redundancy check\" (CRC) is a non-secure hash function designed to detect accidental changes to digital data in computer networks. It is not suitable for detecting maliciously introduced errors. It is characterized by specification of a \"generator polynomial\", which is used as the divisor in a polynomial long division over a finite field, taking the input data as the dividend. The remainder becomes the result.\nA CRC has properties that make it well suited for detecting burst errors. CRCs are particularly easy to implement in hardware and are therefore commonly used in computer networks and storage devices such as hard disk drives.\nThe parity bit can be seen as a special-case 1-bit CRC.\nCryptographic hash function.\nThe output of a \"cryptographic hash function\", also known as a \"message digest\", can provide strong assurances about data integrity, whether changes of the data are accidental (e.g., due to transmission errors) or maliciously introduced. Any modification to the data will likely be detected through a mismatching hash value. Furthermore, given some hash value, it is typically infeasible to find some input data (other than the one given) that will yield the same hash value. If an attacker can change not only the message but also the hash value, then a \"keyed hash\" or message authentication code (MAC) can be used for additional security. Without knowing the key, it is not possible for the attacker to easily or conveniently calculate the correct keyed hash value for a modified message.\nDigital signature.\nDigital signatures can provide strong assurances about data integrity, whether the changes of the data are accidental or maliciously introduced.\nDigital signatures are perhaps most notable for being part of the HTTPS protocol for securely browsing the web.\nError correction code.\nAny error-correcting code can be used for error detection. A code with \"minimum Hamming distance\", \"d\", can detect up to \"d\" \u2212 1 errors in a code word. Using minimum-distance-based error-correcting codes for error detection can be suitable if a strict limit on the minimum number of errors to be detected is desired.\nCodes with minimum Hamming distance \"d\" = 2 are degenerate cases of error-correcting codes and can be used to detect single errors. The parity bit is an example of a single-error-detecting code.\nApplications.\nApplications that require low latency (such as telephone conversations) cannot use automatic repeat request (ARQ); they must use forward error correction (FEC). By the time an ARQ system discovers an error and re-transmits it, the re-sent data will arrive too late to be usable.\nApplications where the transmitter immediately forgets the information as soon as it is sent (such as most television cameras) cannot use ARQ; they must use FEC because when an error occurs, the original data is no longer available.\nApplications that use ARQ must have a return channel; applications having no return channel cannot use ARQ. Applications that require extremely low error rates (such as digital money transfers) must use ARQ due to the possibility of uncorrectable errors with FEC.\nReliability and inspection engineering also make use of the theory of error-correcting codes, as well as natural language.&lt;ref name=\"DOI10.7275/bjvb-2n37\"&gt;\n&lt;/ref&gt;\nInternet.\nIn a typical TCP/IP stack, error control is performed at multiple levels:\nDeep-space telecommunications.\nThe development of error-correction codes was tightly coupled with the history of deep-space missions due to the extreme dilution of signal power over interplanetary distances, and the limited power availability aboard space probes. Whereas early missions sent their data uncoded, starting in 1968, digital error correction was implemented in the form of (sub-optimally decoded) convolutional codes and Reed\u2013Muller codes. The Reed\u2013Muller code was well suited to the noise the spacecraft was subject to (approximately matching a bell curve), and was implemented for the Mariner spacecraft and used on missions between 1969 and 1977.\nThe Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 missions, which started in 1977, were designed to deliver color imaging and scientific information from Jupiter and Saturn. This resulted in increased coding requirements, and thus, the spacecraft were supported by (optimally Viterbi-decoded) convolutional codes that could be concatenated with an outer Golay (24,12,8) code. The Voyager 2 craft additionally supported an implementation of a Reed\u2013Solomon code. The concatenated Reed\u2013Solomon\u2013Viterbi (RSV) code allowed for very powerful error correction, and enabled the spacecraft's extended journey to Uranus and Neptune. After ECC system upgrades in 1989, both crafts used V2 RSV coding.\nThe Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems currently recommends usage of error correction codes with performance similar to the Voyager 2 RSV code as a minimum. Concatenated codes are increasingly falling out of favor with space missions, and are replaced by more powerful codes such as Turbo codes or LDPC codes.\nThe different kinds of deep space and orbital missions that are conducted suggest that trying to find a one-size-fits-all error correction system will be an ongoing problem. For missions close to Earth, the nature of the noise in the communication channel is different from that which a spacecraft on an interplanetary mission experiences. Additionally, as a spacecraft increases its distance from Earth, the problem of correcting for noise becomes more difficult.\nSatellite broadcasting.\nThe demand for satellite transponder bandwidth continues to grow, fueled by the desire to deliver television (including new channels and high-definition television) and IP data. Transponder availability and bandwidth constraints have limited this growth. Transponder capacity is determined by the selected modulation scheme and the proportion of capacity consumed by FEC.\nData storage.\nError detection and correction codes are often used to improve the reliability of data storage media. A parity track capable of detecting single-bit errors was present on the first magnetic tape data storage in 1951. The optimal rectangular code used in group coded recording tapes not only detects but also corrects single-bit errors. Some file formats, particularly archive formats, include a checksum (most often CRC-32]) to detect corruption and truncation and can employ redundancy or parity files to recover portions of corrupted data. Reed-Solomon codes are used in compact discs to correct errors caused by scratches.\nModern hard drives use Reed\u2013Solomon codes to detect and correct minor errors in sector reads, and to recover corrupted data from failing sectors and store that data in the spare sectors. RAID systems use a variety of error correction techniques to recover data when a hard drive completely fails. Filesystems such as ZFS or Btrfs, as well as some RAID implementations, support data scrubbing and resilvering, which allows bad blocks to be detected and (hopefully) recovered before they are used. The recovered data may be re-written to exactly the same physical location, to spare blocks elsewhere on the same piece of hardware, or the data may be rewritten onto replacement hardware.\nError-correcting memory.\nDynamic random-access memory (DRAM) may provide stronger protection against soft errors by relying on error-correcting codes. Such error-correcting memory, known as \"ECC\" or \"EDAC-protected\" memory, is particularly desirable for mission-critical applications, such as scientific computing, financial, medical, etc. as well as extraterrestrial applications due to the increased radiation in space.\nError-correcting memory controllers traditionally use Hamming codes, although some use triple modular redundancy. Interleaving allows distributing the effect of a single cosmic ray potentially upsetting multiple physically neighboring bits across multiple words by associating neighboring bits to different words. As long as a single-event upset (SEU) does not exceed the error threshold (e.g., a single error) in any particular word between accesses, it can be corrected (e.g., by a single-bit error-correcting code), and the illusion of an error-free memory system may be maintained.\nIn addition to hardware providing features required for ECC memory to operate, operating systems usually contain related reporting facilities that are used to provide notifications when soft errors are transparently recovered. One example is the Linux kernel's \"EDAC\" subsystem (previously known as \"Bluesmoke\"), which collects the data from error-checking-enabled components inside a computer system; besides collecting and reporting back the events related to ECC memory, it also supports other checksumming errors, including those detected on the PCI bus. A few systems also support memory scrubbing to catch and correct errors early before they become unrecoverable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10376", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10376", "title": "Euclidean domain", "text": "Commutative ring with a Euclidean division\nIn mathematics, more specifically in ring theory, a Euclidean domain (also called a Euclidean ring) is an integral domain that can be endowed with a Euclidean function which allows a suitable generalization of Euclidean division of integers. This generalized Euclidean algorithm can be put to many of the same uses as Euclid's original algorithm in the ring of integers: in any Euclidean domain, one can apply the Euclidean algorithm to compute the greatest common divisor of any two elements. In particular, the greatest common divisor of any two elements exists and can be written as a linear combination \nof them (B\u00e9zout's identity). In particular, the existence of efficient algorithms for Euclidean division of integers and of polynomials in one variable over a field is of basic importance in computer algebra.\nIt is important to compare the class of Euclidean domains with the larger class of principal ideal domains (PIDs). An arbitrary PID has much the same \"structural properties\" of a Euclidean domain (or, indeed, even of the ring of integers), but lacks an analogue of the Euclidean algorithm and extended Euclidean algorithm to compute greatest common divisors. So, given an integral domain R, it is often very useful to know that R has a Euclidean function: in particular, this implies that R is a PID. However, if there is no \"obvious\" Euclidean function, then determining whether R is a PID is generally a much easier problem than determining whether it is a Euclidean domain.\nEvery ideal in a Euclidean domain is principal, which implies a suitable generalization of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic: every Euclidean domain is also a unique factorization domain. Euclidean domains appear in the following chain of class inclusions:\n rngs \u2283 rings \u2283 commutative\u00a0rings \u2283 integral\u00a0domains \u2283 integrally\u00a0closed\u00a0domains \u2283 GCD\u00a0domains \u2283 unique\u00a0factorization\u00a0domains \u2283 principal\u00a0ideal\u00a0domains \u2283 Euclidean\u00a0domains \u2283 fields \u2283 algebraically\u00a0closed fields\nDefinition.\nLet R be an integral domain. A Euclidean function on R is a function f from \"R\"\u2009\\&amp;hairsp;{0}to the non-negative integers satisfying the following fundamental division-with-remainder property:\n \"bq\" + \"r\" and either \"r\" = 0 or \"f\"\u2009(\"r\") &lt; \"f\"\u2009(\"b\").\nA Euclidean domain is an integral domain which can be endowed with at least one Euclidean function. A particular Euclidean function f is \"not\" part of the definition of a Euclidean domain, as, in general, a Euclidean domain may admit many different Euclidean functions.\nIn this context, q and r are called respectively a \"quotient\" and a \"remainder\" of the \"division\" (or \"Euclidean division\") of a by b. In contrast with the case of integers and polynomials, the quotient is generally not uniquely defined, but when a quotient has been chosen, the remainder is uniquely defined. \nMost algebra texts require a Euclidean function to have the following additional property:\nHowever, one can show that (EF1) alone suffices to define a Euclidean domain; if an integral domain R is endowed with a function g satisfying (EF1), then R can also be endowed with a function satisfying both (EF1) and (EF2) simultaneously. Indeed, for a in \"R\"\u2009\\&amp;hairsp;{0}, one can define \"f\"\u2009(\"a\") as follows:\nformula_1\nIn words, one may define \"f\"\u2009(\"a\") to be the minimum value attained by g on the set of all non-zero elements of the principal ideal generated by a.\nA Euclidean function f is multiplicative if \"f\"\u2009(\"ab\") \n \"f\"\u2009(\"a\")\u2009\"f\"\u2009(\"b\") and \"f\"\u2009(\"a\") is never zero. It follows that \"f\"\u2009(1) \n 1. More generally, \"f\"\u2009(\"a\") \n 1 if and only if a is a unit.\nNotes on the definition.\nMany authors use other terms in place of \"Euclidean function\", such as \"degree function\", \"valuation function\", \"gauge function\" or \"norm function\". Some authors also require the domain of the Euclidean function to be the entire ring R; however, this does not essentially affect the definition, since (EF1) does not involve the value of \"f\"\u2009(0). The definition is sometimes generalized by allowing the Euclidean function to take its values in any well-ordered set; this weakening does not affect the most important implications of the Euclidean property.\nThe property (EF1) can be restated as follows: for any principal ideal I of R with nonzero generator b, all nonzero classes of the quotient ring \"R\"/\"I\" have a representative r with \"f\"\u2009(\"r\") &lt; \"f\"\u2009(\"b\"). Since the possible values of f are well-ordered, this property can be established by showing that \"f\"\u2009(\"r\") &lt; \"f\"\u2009(\"b\") for any \"r\" \u2209 \"I\" with minimal value of \"f\"\u2009(\"r\") in its class. Note that, for a Euclidean function that is so established, there need not exist an effective method to determine q and r in (EF1).\nExamples.\nExamples of Euclidean domains include:\n 1 for all nonzero x.\n |\"n\"|, the absolute value of n.\n \"a\"2 + \"b\"2, the norm of the Gaussian integer \"a\" + \"bi\".\n \"a\"2 \u2212 \"ab\" + \"b\"2, the norm of the Eisenstein integer \"a\" + \"b\u03c9\".\n |\"a\"2 + \"ab\" \u2212 \"b\"2|, the absolute value of the field norm of \"a\" + \"b\u03c6\". \n \"v\". The previous example \"K\"\"X\" is a special case of this.\nExamples of domains that are \"not\" Euclidean domains include:\nProperties.\nLet \"R\" be a domain and \"f\" a Euclidean function on \"R\". Then:\nHowever, in many finite extensions of Q with trivial class group, the ring of integers is Euclidean (not necessarily with respect to the absolute value of the field norm; see below).\nAssuming the extended Riemann hypothesis, if \"K\" is a finite extension of Q and the ring of integers of \"K\" is a PID with an infinite number of units, then the ring of integers is Euclidean.\nIn particular this applies to the case of totally real quadratic number fields with trivial class group.\nIn addition (and without assuming ERH), if the field \"K\" is a Galois extension of Q, has trivial class group and unit rank strictly greater than three, then the ring of integers is Euclidean.\nAn immediate corollary of this is that if the number field is Galois over Q, its class group is trivial and the extension has degree greater than 8 then the ring of integers is necessarily Euclidean.\nNorm-Euclidean fields.\nAlgebraic number fields \"K\" come with a canonical norm function on them: the absolute value of the field norm \"N\" that takes an algebraic element \"\u03b1\" to the product of all the conjugates of \"\u03b1\". This norm maps the ring of integers of a number field \"K\", say \"O\"\"K\", to the nonnegative rational integers, so it is a candidate to be a Euclidean norm on this ring. If this norm satisfies the axioms of a Euclidean function then the number field \"K\" is called \"norm-Euclidean\" or simply \"Euclidean\". Strictly speaking it is the ring of integers that is Euclidean since fields are trivially Euclidean domains, but the terminology is standard.\nIf a field is not norm-Euclidean then that does not mean the ring of integers is not Euclidean, just that the field norm does not satisfy the axioms of a Euclidean function. In fact, the rings of integers of number fields may be divided in several classes:\nThe norm-Euclidean quadratic fields have been fully classified; they are formula_6 where formula_12 takes the values\n\u221211, \u22127, \u22123, \u22122, \u22121, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 29, 33, 37, 41, 57, 73 (sequence in the OEIS).\nEvery Euclidean imaginary quadratic field is norm-Euclidean and is one of the five first fields in the preceding list."}
{"id": "10377", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10377", "title": "Euclidean algorithm", "text": "Algorithm for computing greatest common divisors\nIn mathematics, the Euclidean algorithm, or Euclid's algorithm, is an efficient method for computing the greatest common divisor (GCD) of two integers, the largest number that divides them both without a remainder. It is named after the ancient Greek mathematician Euclid, who first described it in his \"Elements\" (c.\u2009300 BC).\nIt is an example of an \"algorithm\", and is one of the oldest algorithms in common use. It can be used to reduce fractions to their simplest form, and is a part of many other number-theoretic and cryptographic calculations.\nThe Euclidean algorithm is based on the principle that the greatest common divisor of two numbers does not change if the larger number is replaced by its difference with the smaller number. For example, 21 is the GCD of 252 and 105 (as 252 \n 21 \u00d7 12 and 105 \n 21 \u00d7 5), and the same number 21 is also the GCD of 105 and 252 \u2212 105 \n 147. Since this replacement reduces the larger of the two numbers, repeating this process gives successively smaller pairs of numbers until the two numbers become equal. When that occurs, that number is the GCD of the original two numbers. By reversing the steps or using the extended Euclidean algorithm, the GCD can be expressed as a linear combination of the two original numbers, that is the sum of the two numbers, each multiplied by an integer (for example, 21 \n 5 \u00d7 105 + (\u22122) \u00d7 252). The fact that the GCD can always be expressed in this way is known as B\u00e9zout's identity.\nThe version of the Euclidean algorithm described above\u2014which follows Euclid's original presentation\u2014may require many subtraction steps to find the GCD when one of the given numbers is much bigger than the other. A more efficient version of the algorithm shortcuts these steps, instead replacing the larger of the two numbers by its remainder when divided by the smaller of the two (with this version, the algorithm stops when reaching a zero remainder). With this improvement, the algorithm never requires more steps than five times the number of digits (base 10) of the smaller integer. This was proven by Gabriel Lam\u00e9 in 1844 (Lam\u00e9's Theorem), and marks the beginning of computational complexity theory. Additional methods for improving the algorithm's efficiency were developed in the 20th century.\nThe Euclidean algorithm has many theoretical and practical applications. It is used for reducing fractions to their simplest form and for performing division in modular arithmetic. Computations using this algorithm form part of the cryptographic protocols that are used to secure internet communications, and in methods for breaking these cryptosystems by factoring large composite numbers. The Euclidean algorithm may be used to solve Diophantine equations, such as finding numbers that satisfy multiple congruences according to the Chinese remainder theorem, to construct continued fractions, and to find accurate rational approximations to real numbers. Finally, it can be used as a basic tool for proving theorems in number theory such as Lagrange's four-square theorem and the uniqueness of prime factorizations.\nThe original algorithm was described only for natural numbers and geometric lengths (real numbers), but the algorithm was generalized in the 19th century to other types of numbers, such as Gaussian integers and polynomials of one variable. This led to modern abstract algebraic notions such as Euclidean domains.\nBackground: greatest common divisor.\nThe Euclidean algorithm calculates the greatest common divisor (GCD) of two natural numbers a and b. The greatest common divisor g is the largest natural number that divides both a and b without leaving a remainder. Synonyms for GCD include \"greatest common factor\" (GCF), \"highest common factor\" (HCF), \"highest common divisor\" (HCD), and \"greatest common measure\" (GCM). The greatest common divisor is often written as gcd(\"a\", \"b\") or, more simply, as (\"a\", \"b\"), although the latter notation is ambiguous, also used for concepts such as an ideal in the ring of integers, which is closely related to GCD.\nIf gcd(\"a\", \"b\") \n 1, then a and b are said to be coprime (or relatively prime). This property does not imply that a or b are themselves prime numbers. For example, 6 and 35 factor as 6 = 2 \u00d7 3 and 35 = 5 \u00d7 7, so they are not prime, but their prime factors are different, so 6 and 35 are coprime, with no common factors other than\u00a01.\nLet \"g\" \n gcd(\"a\", \"b\"). Since a and b are both multiples of g, they can be written \"a\" \n \"mg\" and \"b\" \n \"ng\", and there is no larger number \"G\" &gt; \"g\" for which this is true. The natural numbers m and n must be coprime, since any common factor could be factored out of m and n to make g greater. Thus, any other number c that divides both a and b must also divide g. The greatest common divisor g of a and b is the unique (positive) common divisor of a and b that is divisible by any other common divisor c.\nThe greatest common divisor can be visualized as follows. Consider a rectangular area a by b, and any common divisor c that divides both a and b exactly. The sides of the rectangle can be divided into segments of length c, which divides the rectangle into a grid of squares of side length c. The GCD g is the largest value of c for which this is possible. For illustration, a 24\u00d760 rectangular area can be divided into a grid of: 1\u00d71 squares, 2\u00d72 squares, 3\u00d73 squares, 4\u00d74 squares, 6\u00d76 squares or 12\u00d712 squares. Therefore, 12 is the GCD of 24 and 60. A 24\u00d760 rectangular area can be divided into a grid of 12\u00d712 squares, with two squares along one edge (24/12 \n 2) and five squares along the other (60/12 \n 5).\nThe greatest common divisor of two numbers a and b is the product of the prime factors shared by the two numbers, where each prime factor can be repeated as many times as it divides both a and b. For example, since 1386 can be factored into 2 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 7 \u00d7 11, and 3213 can be factored into 3 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 7 \u00d7 17, the GCD of 1386 and 3213 equals 63 \n 3 \u00d7 3 \u00d7 7, the product of their shared prime factors (with 3 repeated since 3 \u00d7 3 divides both). If two numbers have no common prime factors, their GCD is 1 (obtained here as an instance of the empty product); in other words, they are coprime. A key advantage of the Euclidean algorithm is that it can find the GCD efficiently without having to compute the prime factors. Factorization of large integers is believed to be a computationally very difficult problem, and the security of many widely used cryptographic protocols is based upon its infeasibility.\nAnother definition of the GCD is helpful in advanced mathematics, particularly ring theory. The greatest common divisor g of two nonzero numbers a and b is also their smallest positive integral linear combination, that is, the smallest positive number of the form \"ua\" + \"vb\" where u and v are integers. The set of all integral linear combinations of a and b is actually the same as the set of all multiples of g (mg, where m is an integer). In modern mathematical language, the ideal generated by a and b is the ideal generated by\u00a0g alone (an ideal generated by a single element is called a principal ideal, and all ideals of the integers are principal ideals). Some properties of the GCD are in fact easier to see with this description, for instance the fact that any common divisor of a and b also divides the GCD (it divides both terms of \"ua\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"vb\"). The equivalence of this GCD definition with the other definitions is described below.\nThe GCD of three or more numbers equals the product of the prime factors common to all the numbers, but it can also be calculated by repeatedly taking the GCDs of pairs of numbers. For example,\n gcd(\"a\", \"b\", \"c\") = gcd(\"a\", gcd(\"b\", \"c\")) = gcd(gcd(\"a\", \"b\"), \"c\") = gcd(gcd(\"a\", \"c\"), \"b\").\nThus, Euclid's algorithm, which computes the GCD of two integers, suffices to calculate the GCD of arbitrarily many integers.\nDescription.\nProcedure.\nCompute the Euclidean algorithm step by step&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Calculator-hideifzero/styles.css\"/&gt;a = 1071; b = 462\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Calculator-hideifzero/styles.css\"/&gt;a = 119; b = 61\n-1\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Calculator-hideifzero/styles.css\"/&gt;Number is too big for the calculator\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Calculator-hideifzero/styles.css\"/&gt;Restart\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Calculator-hideifzero/styles.css\"/&gt;Start\nThe Euclidean algorithm can be thought of as constructing a sequence of non-negative integers that begins with the two given integers formula_1 and formula_2 and will eventually terminate with the integer zero: formula_3 with formula_4 The integer formula_5 will then be the GCD and we can state formula_6 The algorithm indicates how to construct the intermediate remainders formula_7 via division-with-remainder on the preceding pair formula_8 by finding an integer quotient formula_9 so that:\n formula_10\nBecause the sequence of non-negative integers formula_11 is strictly decreasing, it eventually must terminate. In other words, since formula_12 for every formula_13 and each formula_7 is an integer that is strictly smaller than the preceding formula_15 there eventually cannot be a non-negative integer smaller than zero, and hence the algorithm must terminate. In fact, the algorithm will always terminate at the \"n\"th step with formula_16 equal to zero.\nTo illustrate, suppose the GCD of 1071 and 462 is requested. The sequence is initially formula_17 and in order to find formula_18 we need to find integers formula_19 and formula_20 such that:\n formula_21\nThis is the quotient formula_22 since formula_23 This determines formula_24 and so the sequence is now formula_25 The next step is to continue the sequence to find formula_26 by finding integers formula_27 and formula_28 such that:\n formula_29\nThis is the quotient formula_30 since formula_31 This determines formula_32 and so the sequence is now formula_33 The next step is to continue the sequence to find formula_34 by finding integers formula_35 and formula_36 such that:\n formula_37\nThis is the quotient formula_38 since formula_39 This determines formula_40 and so the sequence is completed as formula_41 as no further non-negative integer smaller than formula_42 can be found. The penultimate remainder formula_43 is therefore the requested GCD:\n formula_44\nWe can generalize slightly by dropping any ordering requirement on the initial two values formula_45 and formula_46 If formula_47 the algorithm may continue and trivially find that formula_48 as the sequence of remainders will be formula_49 If formula_50 then we can also continue since formula_51 suggesting the next remainder should be formula_45 itself, and the sequence is formula_53 Normally, this would be invalid because it breaks the requirement formula_20 but now we have formula_55 by construction, so the requirement is automatically satisfied and the Euclidean algorithm can continue as normal. Therefore, dropping any ordering between the first two integers does not affect the conclusion that the sequence must eventually terminate because the next remainder will always satisfy formula_56 and everything continues as above. The only modifications that need to be made are that formula_57 only for formula_58 and that the sub-sequence of non-negative integers formula_59 for formula_60 is strictly decreasing, therefore excluding formula_61 from both statements.\nProof of validity.\nThe validity of the Euclidean algorithm can be proven by a two-step argument. In the first step, the final nonzero remainder \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 is shown to divide both \"a\" and\u00a0\"b\". Since it is a common divisor, it must be less than or equal to the greatest common divisor\u00a0\"g\". In the second step, it is shown that any common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\", including\u00a0\"g\", must divide \"r\"\"N\"\u22121; therefore, \"g\" must be less than or equal to \"r\"\"N\"\u22121. These two opposite inequalities imply \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 = \"g\".\nTo demonstrate that \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 divides both \"a\" and \"b\" (the first step), \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 divides its predecessor \"r\"\"N\"\u22122\n \"r\"\"N\"\u22122 = \"q\"\"N\" \"r\"\"N\"\u22121\nsince the final remainder \"r\"\"N\" is zero. \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 also divides its next predecessor \"r\"\"N\"\u22123\n \"r\"\"N\"\u22123 = \"q\"\"N\"\u22121 \"r\"\"N\"\u22122 + \"r\"\"N\"\u22121\nbecause it divides both terms on the right-hand side of the equation. Iterating the same argument, \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 divides all the preceding remainders, including \"a\" and \"b\". None of the preceding remainders \"r\"\"N\"\u22122, \"r\"\"N\"\u22123, etc. divide \"a\" and \"b\", since they leave a remainder. Since \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 is a common divisor of \"a\" and\u00a0\"b\", \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 \u2264 \"g\".\nIn the second step, any natural number \"c\" that divides both \"a\" and \"b\" (in other words, any common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\") divides the remainders \"r\"\"k\". By definition, \"a\" and \"b\" can be written as multiples of \"c\": \"a\" = \"mc\" and \"b\" = \"nc\", where \"m\" and \"n\" are natural numbers. Therefore, \"c\" divides the initial remainder \"r\"0, since \"r\"0 = \"a\" \u2212 \"q\"0\"b\" = \"mc\" \u2212 \"q\"0\"nc\" = (\"m\" \u2212 \"q\"0\"n\")\"c\". An analogous argument shows that \"c\" also divides the subsequent remainders \"r\"1, \"r\"2, etc. Therefore, the greatest common divisor \"g\" must divide \"r\"\"N\"\u22121, which implies that \"g\" \u2264 \"r\"\"N\"\u22121. Since the first part of the argument showed the reverse (\"r\"\"N\"\u22121 \u2264 \"g\"), it follows that \"g\" = \"r\"\"N\"\u22121. Thus, \"g\" is the greatest common divisor of all the succeeding pairs:\n formula_62\nWorked example.\nFor illustration, the Euclidean algorithm can be used to find the greatest common divisor of \"a\" = 1071 and \"b\" = 462. To begin, multiples of 462 are subtracted from 1071 until the remainder is less than 462. Two such multiples can be subtracted (\"q\"0 = 2), leaving a remainder of 147:\n 1071 = 2 \u00d7 462 + 147.\nThen multiples of 147 are subtracted from 462 until the remainder is less than 147. Three multiples can be subtracted (\"q\"1 = 3), leaving a remainder of 21:\n 462 = 3 \u00d7 147 + 21.\nThen multiples of 21 are subtracted from 147 until the remainder is less than 21. Seven multiples can be subtracted (\"q\"2 = 7), leaving no remainder:\n 147 = 7 \u00d7 21 + 0.\nSince the last remainder is zero, the algorithm ends with 21 as the greatest common divisor of 1071 and 462. This agrees with the gcd(1071, 462) found by prime factorization . In tabular form, the steps are:\nVisualization.\nThe Euclidean algorithm can be visualized in terms of the tiling analogy given above for the greatest common divisor. Assume that we wish to cover an \"a\"\u00d7\"b\" rectangle with square tiles exactly, where \"a\" is the larger of the two numbers. We first attempt to tile the rectangle using \"b\"\u00d7\"b\" square tiles; however, this leaves an \"r\"0\u00d7\"b\" residual rectangle untiled, where \"r\"0 &lt; \"b\". We then attempt to tile the residual rectangle with \"r\"0\u00d7\"r\"0 square tiles. This leaves a second residual rectangle \"r\"1\u00d7\"r\"0, which we attempt to tile using \"r\"1\u00d7\"r\"1 square tiles, and so on. The sequence ends when there is no residual rectangle, i.e., when the square tiles cover the previous residual rectangle exactly. The length of the sides of the smallest square tile is the GCD of the dimensions of the original rectangle. For example, the smallest square tile in the adjacent figure is 21\u00d721 (shown in red), and 21 is the GCD of 1071 and 462, the dimensions of the original rectangle (shown in green).\nEuclidean division.\nAt every step \"k\", the Euclidean algorithm computes a quotient \"q\"\"k\" and remainder \"r\"\"k\" from two numbers \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22122\n \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 = \"q\"\"k\" \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 + \"r\"\"k\",\nwhere the \"r\"\"k\" is non-negative and is strictly less than the absolute value of \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. The theorem which underlies the definition of the Euclidean division ensures that such a quotient and remainder always exist and are unique.\nIn Euclid's original version of the algorithm, the quotient and remainder are found by repeated subtraction; that is, \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 is subtracted from \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 repeatedly until the remainder \"r\"\"k\" is smaller than \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. After that \"r\"\"k\" and \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 are exchanged and the process is iterated. Euclidean division reduces all the steps between two exchanges into a single step, which is thus more efficient. Moreover, the quotients are not needed, thus one may replace Euclidean division by the modulo operation, which gives only the remainder. Thus the iteration of the Euclidean algorithm becomes simply\n \"r\"\"k\" = \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 mod \"r\"\"k\"\u22121.\nImplementations.\nImplementations of the algorithm may be expressed in pseudocode. For example, the division-based version may be programmed as\n function gcd(a, b)\n while b \u2260 0\n t := b\n b := a mod b\n a := t\n return a\nAt the beginning of the \"k\"th iteration, the variable \"b\" holds the latest remainder \"r\"\"k\"\u22121, whereas the variable \"a\" holds its predecessor, \"r\"\"k\"\u22122. The step \"b\" := \"a\" mod \"b\" is equivalent to the above recursion formula \"r\"\"k\" \u2261 \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 mod \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. The temporary variable \"t\" holds the value of \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 while the next remainder \"r\"\"k\" is being calculated. At the end of the loop iteration, the variable \"b\" holds the remainder \"r\"\"k\", whereas the variable \"a\" holds its predecessor, \"r\"\"k\"\u22121.\nIn the subtraction-based version, which was Euclid's original version, the remainder calculation (codice_3) is replaced by repeated subtraction. Contrary to the division-based version, which works with arbitrary integers as input, the subtraction-based version supposes that the input consists of positive integers and stops when \"a\" = \"b\":\n function gcd(a, b)\n while a \u2260 b \n if a &gt; b\n a := a \u2212 b\n else\n b := b \u2212 a\n return a\nThe variables \"a\" and \"b\" alternate holding the previous remainders \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22122. Assume that \"a\" is larger than \"b\" at the beginning of an iteration; then \"a\" equals \"r\"\"k\"\u22122, since \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 &gt; \"r\"\"k\"\u22121. During the loop iteration, \"a\" is reduced by multiples of the previous remainder \"b\" until \"a\" is smaller than \"b\". Then \"a\" is the next remainder \"r\"\"k\". Then \"b\" is reduced by multiples of \"a\" until it is again smaller than \"a\", giving the next remainder \"r\"\"k\"+1, and so on.\nThe recursive version is based on the equality of the GCDs of successive remainders and the stopping condition gcd(\"r\"\"N\"\u22121, 0) = \"r\"\"N\"\u22121.\n function gcd(a, b)\n if b = 0\n return a\n else\n return gcd(b, a mod b)\nFor illustration, the gcd(1071, 462) is calculated from the equivalent gcd(462, 1071 mod 462) = gcd(462, 147). The latter GCD is calculated from the gcd(147, 462 mod 147) = gcd(147, 21), which in turn is calculated from the gcd(21, 147 mod 21) = gcd(21, 0) = 21.\nMethod of least absolute remainders.\nIn another version of Euclid's algorithm, the quotient at each step is increased by one if the resulting negative remainder is smaller in magnitude than the typical positive remainder. Previously, the equation\n \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 = \"q\"\"k\" \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 + \"r\"\"k\"\nassumed that |\"r\"\"k\"\u22121| &gt; \"r\"\"k\" &gt; 0. However, an alternative negative remainder \"e\"\"k\" can be computed:\n \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 = (\"q\"\"k\" + 1) \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 + \"e\"\"k\"\nif \"r\"\"k\"\u22121\u00a0&gt;\u00a00 or\n \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 = (\"q\"\"k\" \u2013 1) \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 + \"e\"\"k\"\nif \"r\"\"k\"\u22121\u00a0&lt;\u00a00.\nIf \"r\"\"k\" is replaced by \"e\"\"k\". when |\"e\"\"k\"| &lt; |\"r\"\"k\"|, then one gets a variant of Euclidean algorithm such that\n |\"r\"\"k\"| \u2264 |\"r\"\"k\"\u22121| / 2\nat each step.\nLeopold Kronecker has shown that this version requires the fewest steps of any version of Euclid's algorithm. More generally, it has been proven that, for every input numbers \"a\" and \"b\", the number of steps is minimal if and only if \"q\"\"k\" is chosen in order that formula_63 where formula_64 is the golden ratio.\nHistorical development.\nThe Euclidean algorithm is one of the oldest algorithms in common use. It appears in Euclid's \"Elements\" (c.\u00a0300\u00a0BC), specifically in Book\u00a07 (Propositions 1\u20132) and Book\u00a010 (Propositions 2\u20133). In Book\u00a07, the algorithm is formulated for integers, whereas in Book\u00a010, it is formulated for lengths of line segments. (In modern usage, one would say it was formulated there for real numbers. But lengths, areas, and volumes, represented as real numbers in modern usage, are not measured in the same units and there is no natural unit of length, area, or volume; the concept of real numbers was unknown at that time.) The latter algorithm is geometrical. The GCD of two lengths \"a\" and \"b\" corresponds to the greatest length \"g\" that measures \"a\" and \"b\" evenly; in other words, the lengths \"a\" and \"b\" are both integer multiples of the length \"g\".\nThe algorithm was probably not discovered by Euclid, who compiled results from earlier mathematicians in his \"Elements\". The mathematician and historian B. L. van der Waerden suggests that Book VII derives from a textbook on number theory written by mathematicians in the school of Pythagoras. The algorithm was probably known by Eudoxus of Cnidus (about 375 BC). The algorithm may even pre-date Eudoxus, judging from the use of the technical term \u1f00\u03bd\u03b8\u03c5\u03c6\u03b1\u03af\u03c1\u03b5\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 (\"anthyphairesis\", reciprocal subtraction) in works by Euclid and Aristotle. Claude Brezinski, following remarks by Pappus of Alexandria, credits the algorithm to Theaetetus (c. 417 \u2013 c. 369 BC).\nCenturies later, Euclid's algorithm was discovered independently both in India and in China, primarily to solve Diophantine equations that arose in astronomy and making accurate calendars. In the late 5th century, the Indian mathematician and astronomer Aryabhata described the algorithm as the \"pulverizer\", perhaps because of its effectiveness in solving Diophantine equations. Although a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem had already been described in the Chinese book \"Sunzi Suanjing\", the general solution was published by Qin Jiushao in his 1247 book \"Shushu Jiuzhang\" (\u6578\u66f8\u4e5d\u7ae0 \"Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections\"). The Euclidean algorithm was first described \"numerically\" and popularized in Europe in the second edition of Bachet's \"Probl\u00e8mes plaisants et d\u00e9lectables\" (\"Pleasant and enjoyable problems\", 1624). In Europe, it was likewise used to solve Diophantine equations and in developing continued fractions. The extended Euclidean algorithm was published by the English mathematician Nicholas Saunderson, who attributed it to Roger Cotes as a method for computing continued fractions efficiently.\nIn the 19th century, the Euclidean algorithm led to the development of new number systems, such as Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers. In 1815, Carl Gauss used the Euclidean algorithm to demonstrate unique factorization of Gaussian integers, although his work was first published in 1832. Gauss mentioned the algorithm in his \"Disquisitiones Arithmeticae\" (published 1801), but only as a method for continued fractions. Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet seems to have been the first to describe the Euclidean algorithm as the basis for much of number theory. Lejeune Dirichlet noted that many results of number theory, such as unique factorization, would hold true for any other system of numbers to which the Euclidean algorithm could be applied. Lejeune Dirichlet's lectures on number theory were edited and extended by Richard Dedekind, who used Euclid's algorithm to study algebraic integers, a new general type of number. For example, Dedekind was the first to prove Fermat's two-square theorem using the unique factorization of Gaussian integers. Dedekind also defined the concept of a Euclidean domain, a number system in which a generalized version of the Euclidean algorithm can be defined (as described below). In the closing decades of the 19th century, the Euclidean algorithm gradually became eclipsed by Dedekind's more general theory of ideals.\nOther applications of Euclid's algorithm were developed in the 19th century. In 1829, Charles Sturm showed that the algorithm was useful in the Sturm chain method for counting the real roots of polynomials in any given interval.\nThe Euclidean algorithm was the first integer relation algorithm, which is a method for finding integer relations between commensurate real numbers. Several novel integer relation algorithms have been developed, such as the algorithm of Helaman Ferguson and R.W. Forcade (1979) and the LLL algorithm.\nIn 1969, Cole and Davie developed a two-player game based on the Euclidean algorithm, called \"The Game of Euclid\", which has an optimal strategy. The players begin with two piles of \"a\" and \"b\" stones. The players take turns removing \"m\" multiples of the smaller pile from the larger. Thus, if the two piles consist of \"x\" and \"y\" stones, where \"x\" is larger than \"y\", the next player can reduce the larger pile from \"x\" stones to \"x\" \u2212 \"my\" stones, as long as the latter is a nonnegative integer. The winner is the first player to reduce one pile to zero stones.\nMathematical applications.\nB\u00e9zout's identity.\nB\u00e9zout's identity states that the greatest common divisor \"g\" of two integers \"a\" and \"b\" can be represented as a linear sum of the original two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". In other words, it is always possible to find integers \"s\" and \"t\" such that \"g\" = \"sa\" + \"tb\".\nThe integers \"s\" and \"t\" can be calculated from the quotients \"q\"0, \"q\"1, etc. by reversing the order of equations in Euclid's algorithm. Beginning with the next-to-last equation, \"g\" can be expressed in terms of the quotient \"q\"\"N\"\u22121 and the two preceding remainders, \"r\"\"N\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"N\"\u22123:\n \"g\" = \"r\"\"N\"\u22121 = \"r\"\"N\"\u22123 \u2212 \"q\"\"N\"\u22121 \"r\"\"N\"\u22122.\nThose two remainders can be likewise expressed in terms of their quotients and preceding remainders,\n \"r\"\"N\"\u22122 = \"r\"\"N\"\u22124 \u2212 \"q\"\"N\"\u22122 \"r\"\"N\"\u22123 and\n \"r\"\"N\"\u22123 = \"r\"\"N\"\u22125 \u2212 \"q\"\"N\"\u22123 \"r\"\"N\"\u22124.\nSubstituting these formulae for \"r\"\"N\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"N\"\u22123 into the first equation yields \"g\" as a linear sum of the remainders \"r\"\"N\"\u22124 and \"r\"\"N\"\u22125. The process of substituting remainders by formulae involving their predecessors can be continued until the original numbers \"a\" and \"b\" are reached:\n \"r\"2 = \"r\"0 \u2212 \"q\"2 \"r\"1\n \"r\"1 = \"b\" \u2212 \"q\"1 \"r\"0\n \"r\"0 = \"a\" \u2212 \"q\"0 \"b\".\nAfter all the remainders \"r\"0, \"r\"1, etc. have been substituted, the final equation expresses \"g\" as a linear sum of \"a\" and \"b\", so that \"g\" = \"sa\" + \"tb\".\nThe Euclidean algorithm, and thus B\u00e9zout's identity, can be generalized to the context of Euclidean domains.\nPrincipal ideals and related problems.\nB\u00e9zout's identity provides yet another definition of the greatest common divisor \"g\" of two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". Consider the set of all numbers \"ua\" + \"vb\", where \"u\" and \"v\" are any two integers. Since \"a\" and \"b\" are both divisible by \"g\", every number in the set is divisible by \"g\". In other words, every number of the set is an integer multiple of \"g\". This is true for every common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\". However, unlike other common divisors, the greatest common divisor is a member of the set; by B\u00e9zout's identity, choosing \"u\" = \"s\" and \"v\" = \"t\" gives \"g\". A smaller common divisor cannot be a member of the set, since every member of the set must be divisible by \"g\". Conversely, any multiple \"m\" of \"g\" can be obtained by choosing \"u\" = \"ms\" and \"v\" = \"mt\", where \"s\" and \"t\" are the integers of B\u00e9zout's identity. This may be seen by multiplying B\u00e9zout's identity by \"m\",\n \"mg\" = \"msa\" + \"mtb\".\nTherefore, the set of all numbers \"ua\" + \"vb\" is equivalent to the set of multiples \"m\" of \"g\". In other words, the set of all possible sums of integer multiples of two numbers (\"a\" and \"b\") is equivalent to the set of multiples of gcd(\"a\", \"b\"). The GCD is said to be the generator of the ideal of \"a\" and \"b\". This GCD definition led to the modern abstract algebraic concepts of a principal ideal (an ideal generated by a single element) and a principal ideal domain (a domain in which every ideal is a principal ideal).\nCertain problems can be solved using this result. For example, consider two measuring cups of volume \"a\" and \"b\". By adding/subtracting \"u\" multiples of the first cup and \"v\" multiples of the second cup, any volume \"ua\" + \"vb\" can be measured out. These volumes are all multiples of \"g\" = gcd(\"a\", \"b\").\nExtended Euclidean algorithm.\nThe integers \"s\" and \"t\" of B\u00e9zout's identity can be computed efficiently using the extended Euclidean algorithm. This extension adds two recursive equations to Euclid's algorithm\n \"s\"\"k\" = \"s\"\"k\"\u22122 \u2212 \"q\"\"k\"\"s\"\"k\"\u22121\n \"t\"\"k\" = \"t\"\"k\"\u22122 \u2212 \"q\"\"k\"\"t\"\"k\"\u22121\nwith the starting values\n \"s\"\u22122 = 1, \"t\"\u22122 = 0\n \"s\"\u22121 = 0, \"t\"\u22121 = 1.\nUsing this recursion, B\u00e9zout's integers \"s\" and \"t\" are given by \"s\" = \"s\"\"N\" and \"t\" = \"t\"\"N\", where \"N\" + 1 is the step on which the algorithm terminates with \"r\"\"N\"+1 = 0.\nThe validity of this approach can be shown by induction. Assume that the recursion formula is correct up to step \"k\" \u2212 1 of the algorithm; in other words, assume that\n \"r\"\"j\" = \"s\"\"j\" \"a\" + \"t\"\"j\" \"b\"\nfor all \"j\" less than \"k\". The \"k\"th step of the algorithm gives the equation\n \"r\"\"k\" = \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 \u2212 \"q\"\"k\"\"r\"\"k\"\u22121.\nSince the recursion formula has been assumed to be correct for \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22121, they may be expressed in terms of the corresponding \"s\" and \"t\" variables\n \"r\"\"k\" = (\"s\"\"k\"\u22122 \"a\" + \"t\"\"k\"\u22122 \"b\") \u2212 \"q\"\"k\"(\"s\"\"k\"\u22121 \"a\" + \"t\"\"k\"\u22121 \"b\").\nRearranging this equation yields the recursion formula for step \"k\", as required\n \"r\"\"k\" = \"s\"\"k\" \"a\" + \"t\"\"k\" \"b\" = (\"s\"\"k\"\u22122 \u2212 \"q\"\"k\"\"s\"\"k\"\u22121) \"a\" + (\"t\"\"k\"\u22122 \u2212 \"q\"\"k\"\"t\"\"k\"\u22121) \"b\".\nMatrix method.\nThe integers \"s\" and \"t\" can also be found using an equivalent matrix method. The sequence of equations of Euclid's algorithm\n formula_65\ncan be written as a product of 2\u00d72 quotient matrices multiplying a two-dimensional remainder vector\n formula_66\nLet M represent the product of all the quotient matrices\n formula_67\nThis simplifies the Euclidean algorithm to the form\n formula_68\nTo express \"g\" as a linear sum of \"a\" and \"b\", both sides of this equation can be multiplied by the inverse of the matrix M. The determinant of M equals (\u22121)\"N\"+1, since it equals the product of the determinants of the quotient matrices, each of which is negative one. Since the determinant of M is never zero, the vector of the final remainders can be solved using the inverse of M\n formula_69\nSince the top equation gives\n \"g\" = (\u22121)\"N\"+1 ( \"m\"22 \"a\" \u2212 \"m\"12 \"b\"),\nthe two integers of B\u00e9zout's identity are \"s\" = (\u22121)\"N\"+1\"m\"22 and \"t\" = (\u22121)\"N\"\"m\"12. The matrix method is as efficient as the equivalent recursion, with two multiplications and two additions per step of the Euclidean algorithm.\nEuclid's lemma and unique factorization.\nB\u00e9zout's identity is essential to many applications of Euclid's algorithm, such as demonstrating the unique factorization of numbers into prime factors. To illustrate this, suppose that a number \"L\" can be written as a product of two factors \"u\" and \"v\", that is, \"L\" = \"uv\". If another number \"w\" also divides \"L\" but is coprime with \"u\", then \"w\" must divide \"v\", by the following argument: If the greatest common divisor of \"u\" and \"w\" is 1, then integers \"s\" and \"t\" can be found such that\n 1 = \"su\" + \"tw\"\nby B\u00e9zout's identity. Multiplying both sides by \"v\" gives the relation:\n \"v\" = \"suv\" + \"twv\" = \"sL\" + \"twv\"\nSince \"w\" divides both terms on the right-hand side, it must also divide the left-hand side, \"v\". This result is known as Euclid's lemma. Specifically, if a prime number divides \"L\", then it must divide at least one factor of \"L\". Conversely, if a number \"w\" is coprime to each of a series of numbers \"a\"1, \"a\"2, ..., \"a\"\"n\", then \"w\" is also coprime to their product, \"a\"1 \u00d7 \"a\"2 \u00d7 ... \u00d7 \"a\"\"n\".\nEuclid's lemma suffices to prove that every number has a unique factorization into prime numbers. To see this, assume the contrary, that there are two independent factorizations of \"L\" into \"m\" and \"n\" prime factors, respectively\n \"L\" = \"p\"1\"p\"2...\"p\"\"m\" = \"q\"1\"q\"2...\"q\"\"n\"\u00a0.\nSince each prime \"p\" divides \"L\" by assumption, it must also divide one of the \"q\" factors; since each \"q\" is prime as well, it must be that \"p\" = \"q\". Iteratively dividing by the \"p\" factors shows that each \"p\" has an equal counterpart \"q\"; the two prime factorizations are identical except for their order. The unique factorization of numbers into primes has many applications in mathematical proofs, as shown below.\nLinear Diophantine equations.\nDiophantine equations are equations in which the solutions are restricted to integers; they are named after the 3rd-century Alexandrian mathematician Diophantus. A typical \"linear\" Diophantine equation seeks integers \"x\" and \"y\" such that\n \"ax\" + \"by\" = \"c\"\nwhere \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" are given integers. This can be written as an equation for \"x\" in modular arithmetic:\n \"ax\" \u2261 \"c\" mod \"b\".\nLet \"g\" be the greatest common divisor of \"a\" and \"b\". Both terms in \"ax\" + \"by\" are divisible by \"g\"; therefore, \"c\" must also be divisible by \"g\", or the equation has no solutions. By dividing both sides by \"c\"/\"g\", the equation can be reduced to Bezout's identity\n \"sa\" + \"tb\" = \"g\",\nwhere \"s\" and \"t\" can be found by the extended Euclidean algorithm. This provides one solution to the Diophantine equation, \"x\"1 = \"s\" (\"c\"/\"g\") and \"y\"1 = \"t\" (\"c\"/\"g\").\nIn general, a linear Diophantine equation has no solutions, or an infinite number of solutions. To find the latter, consider two solutions, (\"x\"1, \"y\"1) and (\"x\"2, \"y\"2), where\n \"ax\"1 + \"by\"1 = \"c\" = \"ax\"2 + \"by\"2\nor equivalently\n \"a\"(\"x\"1 \u2212 \"x\"2) = \"b\"(\"y\"2 \u2212 \"y\"1).\nTherefore, the smallest difference between two \"x\" solutions is \"b\"/\"g\", whereas the smallest difference between two \"y\" solutions is \"a\"/\"g\". Thus, the solutions may be expressed as\n \"x\" = \"x\"1 \u2212 \"bu\"/\"g\"\n \"y\" = \"y\"1 + \"au\"/\"g\".\nBy allowing \"u\" to vary over all possible integers, an infinite family of solutions can be generated from a single solution (\"x\"1, \"y\"1). If the solutions are required to be \"positive\" integers (\"x\" &gt; 0, \"y\" &gt; 0), only a finite number of solutions may be possible. This restriction on the acceptable solutions allows some systems of Diophantine equations with more unknowns than equations to have a finite number of solutions; this is impossible for a system of linear equations when the solutions can be any real number (see Underdetermined system).\nMultiplicative inverses and the RSA algorithm.\nA finite field is a set of numbers with four generalized operations. The operations are called addition, subtraction, multiplication and division and have their usual properties, such as commutativity, associativity and distributivity. An example of a finite field is the set of 13 numbers {0,\u00a01,\u00a02,\u00a0...,\u00a012} using modular arithmetic. In this field, the results of any mathematical operation (addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division) is reduced modulo 13; that is, multiples of 13 are added or subtracted until the result is brought within the range 0\u201312. For example, the result of 5 \u00d7 7 = 35 mod 13 = 9. Such finite fields can be defined for any prime \"p\"; using more sophisticated definitions, they can also be defined for any power \"m\" of a prime \"p\"\"m\". Finite fields are often called Galois fields, and are abbreviated as GF(\"p\") or GF(\"p\"\"m\").\nIn such a field with \"m\" numbers, every nonzero element \"a\" has a unique modular multiplicative inverse, \"a\"\u22121 such that \"aa\"\u22121 = \"a\"\u22121\"a\" \u2261 1 mod \"m\". This inverse can be found by solving the congruence equation \"ax\" \u2261 1 mod \"m\", or the equivalent linear Diophantine equation\n \"ax\" + \"my\" = 1.\nThis equation can be solved by the Euclidean algorithm, as described above. Finding multiplicative inverses is an essential step in the RSA algorithm, which is widely used in electronic commerce; specifically, the equation determines the integer used to decrypt the message. Although the RSA algorithm uses rings rather than fields, the Euclidean algorithm can still be used to find a multiplicative inverse where one exists. The Euclidean algorithm also has other applications in error-correcting codes; for example, it can be used as an alternative to the Berlekamp\u2013Massey algorithm for decoding BCH and Reed\u2013Solomon codes, which are based on Galois fields.\nChinese remainder theorem.\nEuclid's algorithm can also be used to solve multiple linear Diophantine equations. Such equations arise in the Chinese remainder theorem, which describes a novel method to represent an integer \"x\". Instead of representing an integer by its digits, it may be represented by its remainders \"x\"\"i\" modulo a set of \"N\" coprime numbers \"m\"\"i\":\n formula_70\nThe goal is to determine \"x\" from its \"N\" remainders \"x\"\"i\". The solution is to combine the multiple equations into a single linear Diophantine equation with a much larger modulus \"M\" that is the product of all the individual moduli \"m\"\"i\", and define \"M\"\"i\" as\n formula_71\nThus, each \"M\"\"i\" is the product of all the moduli \"except\" \"m\"\"i\". The solution depends on finding \"N\" new numbers \"h\"\"i\" such that\n formula_72\nWith these numbers \"h\"\"i\", any integer \"x\" can be reconstructed from its remainders \"x\"\"i\" by the equation\n formula_73\nSince these numbers \"h\"\"i\" are the multiplicative inverses of the \"M\"\"i\", they may be found using Euclid's algorithm as described in the previous subsection.\nStern\u2013Brocot tree.\nThe Euclidean algorithm can be used to arrange the set of all positive rational numbers into an infinite binary search tree, called the Stern\u2013Brocot tree.\nThe number 1 (expressed as a fraction 1/1) is placed at the root of the tree, and the location of any other number \"a\"/\"b\" can be found by computing gcd(\"a\",\"b\") using the original form of the Euclidean algorithm, in which each step replaces the larger of the two given numbers by its difference with the smaller number (not its remainder), stopping when two equal numbers are reached. A step of the Euclidean algorithm that replaces the first of the two numbers corresponds to a step in the tree from a node to its right child, and a step that replaces the second of the two numbers corresponds to a step in the tree from a node to its left child. The sequence of steps constructed in this way does not depend on whether \"a\"/\"b\" is given in lowest terms, and forms a path from the root to a node containing the number \"a\"/\"b\". This fact can be used to prove that each positive rational number appears exactly once in this tree.\nFor example, 3/4 can be found by starting at the root, going to the left once, then to the right twice:\n formula_74\nThe Euclidean algorithm has almost the same relationship to another binary tree on the rational numbers called the Calkin\u2013Wilf tree. The difference is that the path is reversed: instead of producing a path from the root of the tree to a target, it produces a path from the target to the root.\nContinued fractions.\nThe Euclidean algorithm has a close relationship with continued fractions. The sequence of equations can be written in the form\n formula_75\nThe last term on the right-hand side always equals the inverse of the left-hand side of the next equation. Thus, the first two equations may be combined to form\n formula_76\nThe third equation may be used to substitute the denominator term \"r\"1/\"r\"0, yielding\n formula_77\nThe final ratio of remainders \"r\"\"k\"/\"r\"\"k\"\u22121 can always be replaced using the next equation in the series, up to the final equation. The result is a continued fraction\n formula_78\nIn the worked example above, the gcd(1071, 462) was calculated, and the quotients \"q\"\"k\" were 2, 3 and 7, respectively. Therefore, the fraction 1071/462 may be written\n formula_79\nas can be confirmed by calculation.\nFactorization algorithms.\nCalculating a greatest common divisor is an essential step in several integer factorization algorithms, such as Pollard's rho algorithm, Shor's algorithm, Dixon's factorization method and the Lenstra elliptic curve factorization. The Euclidean algorithm may be used to find this GCD efficiently. Continued fraction factorization uses continued fractions, which are determined using Euclid's algorithm.\nAlgorithmic efficiency.\nThe computational efficiency of Euclid's algorithm has been studied thoroughly. This efficiency can be described by the number of division steps the algorithm requires, multiplied by the computational expense of each step. The first known analysis of Euclid's algorithm is due to A. A. L. Reynaud in 1811, who showed that the number of division steps on input (\"u\", \"v\") is bounded by \"v\"; later he improved this to \"v\"/2\u00a0+\u00a02. Later, in 1841, P. J. E. Finck showed that the number of division steps is at most 2\u00a0log2\u00a0\"v\"\u00a0+\u00a01, and hence Euclid's algorithm runs in time polynomial in the size of the input. \u00c9mile L\u00e9ger, in 1837, studied the worst case, which is when the inputs are consecutive Fibonacci numbers. Finck's analysis was refined by Gabriel Lam\u00e9 in 1844, who showed that the number of steps required for completion is never more than five times the number \"h\" of base-10 digits of the smaller number\u00a0\"b\".\nIn the uniform cost model (suitable for analyzing the complexity of gcd calculation on numbers that fit into a single machine word), each step of the algorithm takes constant time, and Lam\u00e9's analysis implies that the total running time is also \"O\"(\"h\"). However, in a model of computation suitable for computation with larger numbers, the computational expense of a single remainder computation in the algorithm can be as large as \"O\"(\"h\"2). In this case the total time for all of the steps of the algorithm can be analyzed using a telescoping series, showing that it is also \"O\"(\"h\"2). Modern algorithmic techniques based on the Sch\u00f6nhage\u2013Strassen algorithm for fast integer multiplication can be used to speed this up, leading to quasilinear algorithms for the GCD.\nNumber of steps.\nThe number of steps to calculate the GCD of two natural numbers, \"a\" and \"b\", may be denoted by \"T\"(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\"). If \"g\" is the GCD of \"a\" and \"b\", then \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"mg\" and \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"ng\" for two coprime numbers \"m\" and \"n\". Then\n \"T\"(\"a\", \"b\") = \"T\"(\"m\", \"n\")\nas may be seen by dividing all the steps in the Euclidean algorithm by \"g\". By the same argument, the number of steps remains the same if \"a\" and \"b\" are multiplied by a common factor \"w\": \"T\"(\"a\", \"b\") = \"T\"(\"wa\", \"wb\"). Therefore, the number of steps \"T\" may vary dramatically between neighboring pairs of numbers, such as T(\"a\", \"b\") and T(\"a\",\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a01), depending on the size of the two GCDs.\nThe recursive nature of the Euclidean algorithm gives another equation\n \"T\"(\"a\", \"b\") = 1 + \"T\"(\"b\", \"r\"0) = 2 + \"T\"(\"r\"0, \"r\"1) = \u2026 = \"N\" + \"T\"(\"r\"\"N\"\u22122, \"r\"\"N\"\u22121) = \"N\" + 1\nwhere \"T\"(\"x\", 0)\u00a0=\u00a00 by assumption.\nWorst-case.\nIf the Euclidean algorithm requires \"N\" steps for a pair of natural numbers \"a\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a00, the smallest values of \"a\" and \"b\" for which this is true are the Fibonacci numbers \"F\"\"N\"+2 and \"F\"\"N\"+1, respectively. More precisely, if the Euclidean algorithm requires \"N\" steps for the pair \"a\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"b\", then one has \"a\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"N\"+2 and \"b\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"N\"+1. This can be shown by induction. If \"N\"\u00a0=\u00a01, \"b\" divides \"a\" with no remainder; the smallest natural numbers for which this is true is \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a01 and \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a02, which are \"F\"2 and \"F\"3, respectively. Now assume that the result holds for all values of \"N\" up to \"M\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01. The first step of the \"M\"-step algorithm is \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"q\"0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"r\"0, and the Euclidean algorithm requires \"M\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 steps for the pair \"b\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a0\"r\"0. By induction hypothesis, one has \"b\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"+1 and \"r\"0\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"M\". Therefore, \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"q\"0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"r\"0\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"r\"0\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"+1\u00a0+\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"F\"\"M\"+2,\nwhich is the desired inequality.\nThis proof, published by Gabriel Lam\u00e9 in 1844, represents the beginning of computational complexity theory, and also the first practical application of the Fibonacci numbers.\nThis result suffices to show that the number of steps in Euclid's algorithm can never be more than five times the number of its digits (base 10). For if the algorithm requires \"N\" steps, then \"b\" is greater than or equal to \"F\"\"N\"+1 which in turn is greater than or equal to \"\u03c6\"\"N\"\u22121, where \"\u03c6\" is the golden ratio. Since \"b\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a0\"\u03c6\"\"N\"\u22121, then \"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01\u00a0\u2264\u00a0log\"\u03c6\"\"b\". Since log10\"\u03c6\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a01/5, (\"N\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01)/5\u00a0&lt;\u00a0log10\"\u03c6\"\u00a0log\"\u03c6\"\"b\"\u00a0=\u00a0log10\"b\". Thus, \"N\"\u00a0\u2264\u00a05\u00a0log10\"b\". Thus, the Euclidean algorithm always needs less than \"O\"(\"h\") divisions, where \"h\" is the number of digits in the smaller number \"b\".\nAverage.\nThe average number of steps taken by the Euclidean algorithm has been defined in three different ways. The first definition is the average time \"T\"(\"a\") required to calculate the GCD of a given number \"a\" and a smaller natural number \"b\" chosen with equal probability from the integers 0 to \"a\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01\n formula_80\nwith the residual error being of order \"a\"\u2212(1/6)+\"\u03b5\", where \"\u03b5\" is infinitesimal. The constant \"C\" in this formula is called Porter's constant and equals\n formula_81\nwhere \"\u03b3\" is the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant and \"\u03b6\"\u2032 is the derivative of the Riemann zeta function. The leading coefficient (12/\u03c02) ln 2 was determined by two independent methods.\nSince the first average can be calculated from the tau average by summing over the divisors \"d\" of\u00a0\"a\"\n formula_82\nit can be approximated by the formula\n formula_83\nwhere \u039b(\"d\") is the Mangoldt function.\nA third average \"Y\"(\"n\") is defined as the mean number of steps required when both \"a\" and \"b\" are chosen randomly (with uniform distribution) from 1 to \"n\"\n formula_84\nSubstituting the approximate formula for \"T\"(\"a\") into this equation yields an estimate for \"Y\"(\"n\")\n formula_85\nComputational expense per step.\nIn each step \"k\" of the Euclidean algorithm, the quotient \"q\"\"k\" and remainder \"r\"\"k\" are computed for a given pair of integers \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 and \"r\"\"k\"\u22121\n \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 = \"q\"\"k\" \"r\"\"k\"\u22121 + \"r\"\"k\".\nThe computational expense per step is associated chiefly with finding \"q\"\"k\", since the remainder \"r\"\"k\" can be calculated quickly from \"r\"\"k\"\u22122, \"r\"\"k\"\u22121, and \"q\"\"k\"\n \"r\"\"k\" = \"r\"\"k\"\u22122 \u2212 \"q\"\"k\" \"r\"\"k\"\u22121.\nThe computational expense of dividing \"h\"-bit numbers scales as \"O\"(\"h\"(\"\u2113\" + 1)), where \u2113 is the length of the quotient.\nFor comparison, Euclid's original subtraction-based algorithm can be much slower. A single integer division is equivalent to the quotient \"q\" number of subtractions. If the ratio of \"a\" and \"b\" is very large, the quotient is large and many subtractions will be required. On the other hand, it has been shown that the quotients are very likely to be small integers. The probability of a given quotient \"q\" is approximately where \"u\" = (\"q\" + 1)2. For illustration, the probability of a quotient of 1, 2, 3, or 4 is roughly 41.5%, 17.0%, 9.3%, and 5.9%, respectively. Since the operation of subtraction is faster than division, particularly for large numbers, the subtraction-based Euclid's algorithm is competitive with the division-based version. This is exploited in the binary version of Euclid's algorithm.\nCombining the estimated number of steps with the estimated computational expense per step shows that the Euclid's algorithm grows quadratically (\"h\"2) with the average number of digits \"h\" in the initial two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". Let \"h\"0, \"h\"1, ..., \"h\"\"N\"\u22121 represent the number of digits in the successive remainders \"r\"0, \"r\"1, ..., \"r\"\"N\"\u22121. Since the number of steps \"N\" grows linearly with \"h\", the running time is bounded by\n formula_86\nAlternative methods.\nEuclid's algorithm is widely used in practice, especially for small numbers, due to its simplicity. For comparison, the efficiency of alternatives to Euclid's algorithm may be determined.\nOne inefficient approach to finding the GCD of two natural numbers \"a\" and \"b\" is to calculate all their common divisors; the GCD is then the largest common divisor. The common divisors can be found by dividing both numbers by successive integers from 2 to the smaller number \"b\". The number of steps of this approach grows linearly with \"b\", or exponentially in the number of digits. Another inefficient approach is to find the prime factors of one or both numbers. As noted above, the GCD equals the product of the prime factors shared by the two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". Present methods for prime factorization are also inefficient; many modern cryptography systems even rely on that inefficiency.\nThe binary GCD algorithm is an efficient alternative that substitutes division with faster operations by exploiting the binary representation used by computers. However, this alternative also scales like \"O\"(\"h\"\u00b2). It is generally faster than the Euclidean algorithm on real computers, even though it scales in the same way. Additional efficiency can be gleaned by examining only the leading digits of the two numbers \"a\" and \"b\". The binary algorithm can be extended to other bases (\"k\"-ary algorithms), with up to fivefold increases in speed. Lehmer's GCD algorithm uses the same general principle as the binary algorithm to speed up GCD computations in arbitrary bases.\nA recursive approach for very large integers (with more than 25,000 digits) leads to quasilinear integer GCD algorithms, such as those of Sch\u00f6nhage, and Stehl\u00e9 and Zimmermann. These algorithms exploit the 2\u00d72 matrix form of the Euclidean algorithm given above. These quasilinear methods generally scale as \"O\"(\"h\" log \"h\"2 log log \"h\").\nGeneralizations.\nAlthough the Euclidean algorithm is used to find the greatest common divisor of two natural numbers (positive integers), it may be generalized to the real numbers, and to other mathematical objects, such as polynomials, quadratic integers and Hurwitz quaternions. In the latter cases, the Euclidean algorithm is used to demonstrate the crucial property of unique factorization, i.e., that such numbers can be factored uniquely into irreducible elements, the counterparts of prime numbers. Unique factorization is essential to many proofs of number theory.\nRational and real numbers.\nEuclid's algorithm can be applied to real numbers, as described by Euclid in Book 10 of his \"Elements\". The goal of the algorithm is to identify a real number g such that two given real numbers, a and b, are integer multiples of it: \"a\" = \"mg\" and \"b\" = \"ng\", where m and n are integers. This identification is equivalent to finding an integer relation among the real numbers a and b; that is, it determines integers s and t such that \"sa\" + \"tb\" = 0. If such an equation is possible, \"a\" and \"b\" are called commensurable lengths, otherwise they are incommensurable lengths.\nThe real-number Euclidean algorithm differs from its integer counterpart in two respects. First, the remainders \"r\"\"k\" are real numbers, although the quotients \"q\"\"k\" are integers as before. Second, the algorithm is not guaranteed to end in a finite number N of steps. If it does, the fraction \"a\"/\"b\" is a rational number, i.e., the ratio of two integers\n formula_87\nand can be written as a finite continued fraction [\"q\"0; \"q\"1, \"q\"2, ..., \"q\"\"N\"]. If the algorithm does not stop, the fraction \"a\"/\"b\" is an irrational number and can be described by an infinite continued fraction [\"q\"0; \"q\"1, \"q\"2, \u2026]. Examples of infinite continued fractions are the golden ratio \"\u03c6\" = [1; 1, 1, ...] and the square root of two, \u221a2 = [1; 2, 2, ...]. When applied to two arbitrary real numbers, the algorithm is unlikely to stop, since almost all ratios \"a\"/\"b\" of two real numbers are irrational.\nAn infinite continued fraction may be truncated at a step \"k\" [\"q\"0; \"q\"1, \"q\"2, ..., \"q\"\"k\"] to yield an approximation to \"a\"/\"b\" that improves as k is increased. The approximation is described by convergents \"m\"\"k\"/\"n\"\"k\"; the numerator and denominators are coprime and obey the recurrence relation\n formula_88\nwhere \"m\"\u22121 = \"n\"\u22122 = 1 and \"m\"\u22122 = \"n\"\u22121 = 0 are the initial values of the recursion. The convergent \"m\"\"k\"/\"n\"\"k\" is the best rational number approximation to \"a\"/\"b\" with denominator \"n\"\"k\":\n formula_89\nPolynomials.\nPolynomials in a single variable \"x\" can be added, multiplied and factored into irreducible polynomials, which are the analogs of the prime numbers for integers. The greatest common divisor polynomial \"g\"(\"x\") of two polynomials \"a\"(\"x\") and \"b\"(\"x\") is defined as the product of their shared irreducible polynomials, which can be identified using the Euclidean algorithm. The basic procedure is similar to that for integers. At each step k, a quotient polynomial \"q\"\"k\"(\"x\") and a remainder polynomial \"r\"\"k\"(\"x\") are identified to satisfy the recursive equation\n formula_90\nwhere \"r\"\u22122(\"x\") = \"a\"(\"x\") and \"r\"\u22121(\"x\") = \"b\"(\"x\"). Each quotient polynomial is chosen such that each remainder is either zero or has a degree that is smaller than the degree of its predecessor: deg[\"r\"\"k\"(\"x\")] &lt; deg[\"r\"\"k\"\u22121(\"x\")]. Since the degree is a nonnegative integer, and since it decreases with every step, the Euclidean algorithm concludes in a finite number of steps. The last nonzero remainder is the greatest common divisor of the original two polynomials, \"a\"(\"x\") and \"b\"(\"x\").\nFor example, consider the following two quartic polynomials, which each factor into two quadratic polynomials\n formula_91\nDividing \"a\"(\"x\") by \"b\"(\"x\") yields a remainder \"r\"0(\"x\") = \"x\"3 + (2/3)\"x\"2 + (5/3)\"x\" \u2212 (2/3). In the next step, \"b\"(\"x\") is divided by \"r\"0(\"x\") yielding a remainder \"r\"1(\"x\") = \"x\"2 + \"x\" + 2. Finally, dividing \"r\"0(\"x\") by \"r\"1(\"x\") yields a zero remainder, indicating that \"r\"1(\"x\") is the greatest common divisor polynomial of \"a\"(\"x\") and \"b\"(\"x\"), consistent with their factorization.\nMany of the applications described above for integers carry over to polynomials. The Euclidean algorithm can be used to solve linear Diophantine equations and Chinese remainder problems for polynomials; continued fractions of polynomials can also be defined.\nThe polynomial Euclidean algorithm has other applications, such as Sturm chains, a method for counting the zeros of a polynomial that lie inside a given real interval. This in turn has applications in several areas, such as the Routh\u2013Hurwitz stability criterion in control theory.\nFinally, the coefficients of the polynomials need not be drawn from integers, real numbers or even the complex numbers. For example, the coefficients may be drawn from a general field, such as the finite fields GF(\"p\") described above. The corresponding conclusions about the Euclidean algorithm and its applications hold even for such polynomials.\nGaussian integers.\nThe Gaussian integers are complex numbers of the form \"\u03b1\" = \"u\" + \"vi\", where u and v are ordinary integers and i is the square root of negative one. By defining an analog of the Euclidean algorithm, Gaussian integers can be shown to be uniquely factorizable, by the argument above. This unique factorization is helpful in many applications, such as deriving all Pythagorean triples or proving Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares. In general, the Euclidean algorithm is convenient in such applications, but not essential; for example, the theorems can often be proven by other arguments.\nThe Euclidean algorithm developed for two Gaussian integers \u03b1 and \u03b2 is nearly the same as that for ordinary integers, but differs in two respects. As before, we set \"r\"\u22122 = \"\u03b1\" and \"r\"\u22121 = \"\u03b2\", and the task at each step k is to identify a quotient \"q\"\"k\" and a remainder \"r\"\"k\" such that\n formula_92\nwhere every remainder is strictly smaller than its predecessor: . The first difference is that the quotients and remainders are themselves Gaussian integers, and thus are complex numbers. The quotients \"q\"\"k\" are generally found by rounding the real and complex parts of the exact ratio (such as the complex number \"\u03b1\"/\"\u03b2\") to the nearest integers. The second difference lies in the necessity of defining how one complex remainder can be \"smaller\" than another. To do this, a norm function \"f\"(\"u\" + \"vi\") = \"u\"2 + \"v\"2 is defined, which converts every Gaussian integer \"u\" + \"vi\" into an ordinary integer. After each step k of the Euclidean algorithm, the norm of the remainder \"f\"(\"r\"\"k\") is smaller than the norm of the preceding remainder, \"f\"(\"r\"\"k\"\u22121). Since the norm is a nonnegative integer and decreases with every step, the Euclidean algorithm for Gaussian integers ends in a finite number of steps. The final nonzero remainder is gcd(\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\"), the Gaussian integer of largest norm that divides both \u03b1 and \u03b2; it is unique up to multiplication by a unit, \u00b11 or \u00b1\"i\".\nMany of the other applications of the Euclidean algorithm carry over to Gaussian integers. For example, it can be used to solve linear Diophantine equations and Chinese remainder problems for Gaussian integers; continued fractions of Gaussian integers can also be defined.\nEuclidean domains.\nA set of elements under two binary operations, denoted as addition and multiplication, is called a Euclidean domain if it forms a commutative ring R and, roughly speaking, if a generalized Euclidean algorithm can be performed on them. The two operations of such a ring need not be the addition and multiplication of ordinary arithmetic; rather, they can be more general, such as the operations of a mathematical group or monoid. Nevertheless, these general operations should respect many of the laws governing ordinary arithmetic, such as commutativity, associativity and distributivity.\nThe generalized Euclidean algorithm requires a \"Euclidean function\", i.e., a mapping f from R into the set of nonnegative integers such that, for any two nonzero elements a and b in R, there exist q and r in R such that \"a\" = \"qb\" + \"r\" and \"f\"(\"r\") &lt; \"f\"(\"b\"). Examples of such mappings are the absolute value for integers, the degree for univariate polynomials, and the norm for Gaussian integers above. The basic principle is that each step of the algorithm reduces \"f\" inexorably; hence, if f can be reduced only a finite number of times, the algorithm must stop in a finite number of steps. This principle relies on the well-ordering property of the non-negative integers, which asserts that every non-empty set of non-negative integers has a smallest member.\nThe fundamental theorem of arithmetic applies to any Euclidean domain: Any number from a Euclidean domain can be factored uniquely into irreducible elements. Any Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain (UFD), although the converse is not true. The Euclidean domains and the UFD's are subclasses of the GCD domains, domains in which a greatest common divisor of two numbers always exists. In other words, a greatest common divisor may exist (for all pairs of elements in a domain), although it may not be possible to find it using a Euclidean algorithm. A Euclidean domain is always a principal ideal domain (PID), an integral domain in which every ideal is a principal ideal. Again, the converse is not true: not every PID is a Euclidean domain.\nThe unique factorization of Euclidean domains is useful in many applications. For example, the unique factorization of the Gaussian integers is convenient in deriving formulae for all Pythagorean triples and in proving Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares. Unique factorization was also a key element in an attempted proof of Fermat's Last Theorem published in 1847 by Gabriel Lam\u00e9, the same mathematician who analyzed the efficiency of Euclid's algorithm, based on a suggestion of Joseph Liouville. Lam\u00e9's approach required the unique factorization of numbers of the form \"x\" + \"\u03c9y\", where x and y are integers, and \"\u03c9\" = \"e\"2\"i\u03c0\"/\"n\" is an nth root of 1, that is, \"\u03c9\"\"n\" = 1. Although this approach succeeds for some values of n (such as \"n\" = 3, the Eisenstein integers), in general such numbers do not factor uniquely. This failure of unique factorization in some cyclotomic fields led Ernst Kummer to the concept of ideal numbers and, later, Richard Dedekind to ideals.\nUnique factorization of quadratic integers.\nThe quadratic integer rings are helpful to illustrate Euclidean domains. Quadratic integers are generalizations of the Gaussian integers in which the imaginary unit \"i\" is replaced by a number \u03c9. Thus, they have the form \"u\" + \"v\u03c9\", where u and v are integers and \u03c9 has one of two forms, depending on a parameter D. If D does not equal a multiple of four plus one, then\n formula_93\nIf, however, \"D\" does equal a multiple of four plus one, then\n formula_94\nIf the function f corresponds to a norm function, such as that used to order the Gaussian integers above, then the domain is known as \"norm-Euclidean\". The norm-Euclidean rings of quadratic integers are exactly those where D is one of the values \u221211, \u22127, \u22123, \u22122, \u22121, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 29, 33, 37, 41, 57, or 73. The cases \"D\" = \u22121 and \"D\" = \u22123 yield the Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers, respectively.\nIf f is allowed to be any Euclidean function, then the list of possible values of D for which the domain is Euclidean is not yet known. The first example of a Euclidean domain that was not norm-Euclidean (with \"D\" = 69) was published in 1994. In 1973, Weinberger proved that a quadratic integer ring with \"D\" &gt; 0 is Euclidean if, and only if, it is a principal ideal domain, provided that the generalized Riemann hypothesis holds.\nNoncommutative rings.\nThe Euclidean algorithm may be applied to some noncommutative rings such as the set of Hurwitz quaternions. Let \u03b1 and \u03b2 represent two elements from such a ring. They have a common right divisor \u03b4 if \"\u03b1\" = \"\u03be\u03b4\" and \"\u03b2\" = \"\u03b7\u03b4\" for some choice of \u03be and \u03b7 in the ring. Similarly, they have a common left divisor if \"\u03b1\" = \"d\u03be\" and \"\u03b2\" = \"d\u03b7\" for some choice of \u03be and \u03b7 in the ring. Since multiplication is not commutative, there are two versions of the Euclidean algorithm, one for right divisors and one for left divisors. Choosing the right divisors, the first step in finding the gcd(\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\") by the Euclidean algorithm can be written\n formula_95\nwhere \"\u03c8\"0 represents the quotient and \"\u03c1\"0 the remainder. Here the quotient and remainder are chosen so that (if nonzero) the remainder has \"N\"(\"\u03c1\"0) &lt; \"N\"(\"\u03b2\") for a \"Euclidean function\" \"N\" defined analogously to the Euclidean functions of Euclidean domains in the non-commutative case. This equation shows that any common right divisor of \u03b1 and \u03b2 is likewise a common divisor of the remainder \"\u03c1\"0. The analogous equation for the left divisors would be\n formula_96\nWith either choice, the process is repeated as above until the greatest common right or left divisor is identified. As in the Euclidean domain, the \"size\" of the remainder \"\u03c1\"0 (formally, its Euclidean function or \"norm\") must be strictly smaller than \u03b2, and there must be only a finite number of possible sizes for \"\u03c1\"0, so that the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate.\nMany results for the GCD carry over to noncommutative numbers. For example, B\u00e9zout's identity states that the right gcd(\"\u03b1\", \"\u03b2\") can be expressed as a linear combination of \u03b1 and \u03b2. In other words, there are numbers \u03c3 and \u03c4 such that\n formula_97\nThe analogous identity for the left GCD is nearly the same:\n formula_98\nB\u00e9zout's identity can be used to solve Diophantine equations. For instance, one of the standard proofs of Lagrange's four-square theorem, that every positive integer can be represented as a sum of four squares, is based on quaternion GCDs in this way.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10378", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10378", "title": "European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts", "text": "European intergovernmental weather computation organisation based in the UK\nThe European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) is an independent intergovernmental organisation supported by most of the nations of Europe. It is based at three sites: Shinfield Park, Reading, United Kingdom; Bologna, Italy; and Bonn, Germany. It operates one of the largest supercomputer complexes in Europe and the world's largest archive of numerical weather prediction data.\nHistory.\nECMWF was established in 1975, in recognition of the need to pool the scientific and technical resources of Europe's meteorological services and institutions for the production of weather forecasts for medium-range timescales (up to approximately two weeks) and of the economic and social benefits expected from it. The Centre employs about 350 staff, mostly appointed from across the member states and co-operating states.\nIn 2017, the centre's member states accepted an offer from the Italian Government to move ECMWF's data centre to Bologna, Italy. The new site, a former tobacco factory, would be redesigned by the architecture firm gmp.\nDuring 2020, the Centre arranged to move its Copernicus operations away from Reading and into European Union territory. Following bids from Toulouse, Italy, Austria, Germany, Spain and Ireland, eventually Bonn (Germany) was chosen. The move has been directly attributed to Brexit.\nIn early 2024, it was announced that the ECMWF's headquarters, currently at Shinfield Road in the English town of Reading, would be relocated to a new complex to be constructed on the Whiteknights Park campus of the University of Reading. Construction of this complex started in early 2025, with completion expected in early 2027.\nObjectives.\nECMWF aims to provide accurate medium-range global weather forecasts out to 15 days and seasonal forecasts out to 12 months. Its products are provided to the national weather services of its member states and co-operating states as a complement to their national short-range and climatological activities, and those national states use ECMWF's products for their own national duties, in particular to give early warning of potentially damaging severe weather.\nECMWF's core mission is to:\nTo deliver this core mission, the Centre provides:\nThe Centre develops and operates global atmospheric models and data assimilation systems for the dynamics, thermodynamics and composition of the Earth's atmosphere and for interacting parts of the Earth-system. It uses numerical weather prediction methods to prepare forecasts and their initial conditions, and it contributes to monitoring the relevant parts of the Earth system.\nCopernicus.\nThe centre currently serves as the Entrusted Entity responsible for delivery of two of the Services of the EU's Copernicus Programme. The two services are the Copernicus Atmosphere Monitoring Service (CAMS) and the Copernicus Climate Change Service (C3S).\nThe Centre arranged to move its Copernicus operations away from Reading and into Bonn (Germany) in 2020. The move has been directly attributed to Brexit.\nWork and projects.\nForecasting.\nNumerical weather prediction (NWP) requires input of meteorological data, collected by satellites and earth observation systems such as automatic and crewed weather stations, aircraft (including commercial flights), ships and weather balloons. Assimilation of this data is used to produce an initial state of a computer model of the atmosphere, from which an atmospheric model is used to forecast the weather. These forecasts are typically:\nOver the past three decades ECMWF's wide-ranging programme of research has played a major role in developing such assimilation and modelling systems. This improves the accuracy and reliability of weather forecasting by about a day per decade, so that a seven-day forecast now (2015) is as accurate as a three-day forecast was four decades ago (1975).\nMonthly and seasonal forecasts.\nECMWF's monthly and seasonal forecasts provide early predictions of events such as heat waves, cold spells and droughts, as well as their impacts on sectors such as agriculture, energy and health. Since ECMWF runs a wave model, there are also predictions of coastal waves and storm surges in European waters which can be used to provide warnings.\nEarly warning of severe weather events.\nForecasts of severe weather events allow appropriate mitigating action to be taken and contingency plans to be put into place by the authorities and the public. The increased time gained by issuing accurate warnings can save lives, for instance by evacuating people from a storm surge area. Authorities and businesses can plan to maintain services around threats such as high winds, floods or snow.\nIn October 2012 the ECMWF model suggested seven days in advance that Hurricane Sandy was likely to make landfall on the East Coast of the United States.\nIt also predicted the intensity and track of the November 2012 nor'easter, which impacted the east coast a week after Sandy.\nECMWF's Extreme Forecast Index (EFI) was developed as a tool to identify where the EPS (Ensemble Prediction System) forecast distribution differs substantially from that of the model climate. It contains information regarding variability of weather parameters, in location and time and can highlight an abnormality of a weather situation without having to define specific space- and time-dependent thresholds.\nSatellite data.\nECMWF, through its partnerships with EUMETSAT, ESA, the EU and others, exploits satellite data for operational numerical weather prediction and operational seasonal forecasting with coupled atmosphere\u2013ocean\u2013land models. The increasing amount of satellite data and the development of more sophisticated ways of extracting information from that data have made a major contribution to improving the accuracy and utility of NWP forecasts. \nReanalysis.\nECMWF supports research on climate variability using an approach known as reanalysis. This involves feeding weather observations collected over decades into a NWP system to recreate past atmospheric, sea- and land-surface conditions over specific time periods to obtain a clearer picture of how the climate has changed. Reanalysis provides a four-dimensional picture of the atmosphere and effectively allows monitoring of the variability and change of global climate, thereby contributing also to the understanding and attribution of climate change.\nTo date, and with support from Europe's National Meteorological Services and the European Commission, ECMWF has conducted several major reanalyses of the global atmosphere: the first ECMWF re-analysis (ERA-15) project generated reanalyses from December 1978 to February 1994; the ERA-40 project generated reanalyses from September 1957 to August 2002. The ERA-Interim reanalysis covered the period from 1979 onwards. A reanalysis product (ERA5) with higher spatial resolution (31\u00a0km) was released by ECMWF in 2019 as part of the Copernicus Climate Change Service.\nOperational forecast model.\nECMWF's operational forecasts are produced from its \"Integrated Forecast System\" (sometimes informally known in the United States as the \"European model\") which is run every twelve hours and forecasts out to ten days.\nIt includes both a \"deterministic forecast\" mode and an ensemble. The deterministic forecast is a single model run that is relatively high in resolution as well as in computational expense. The ensemble is relatively low (about half that of the deterministic) in resolution (and in computational expense), so less accurate. But it is run 51 times in parallel, from slightly different initial conditions to give a spread of likelihood over the range of the forecast.\nAs of 2021, the ECMWF's weather model is generally considered to be the most accurate weather forecasting model.\nMember and co-operating states.\nECMWF comprises 23 European countries:\nIt also has co-operation agreements with other states: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Georgia, Hungary, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Morocco, Romania and Slovakia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "10380", "revid": "17574339", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10380", "title": "European Broadcasting Union", "text": "Alliance of public service media entities\nThe European Broadcasting Union (EBU; , UER) is an alliance of public service media organisations in countries within the European Broadcasting Area (EBA) or who are members of the Council of Europe. As of 2024[ [update]], it is made up of 123 member organisations from 56 countries, and 31 associate members from a further 20 countries. It was established in 1950, and has its administrative headquarters in Geneva.\nThe EBU owns and operates the Eurovision and Euroradio telecommunications networks on which major television and radio broadcasts are distributed live to its members. It also operates the daily Eurovision news exchange in which members share breaking news footage. In 2017, the EBU launched the Eurovision Social Newswire, an eyewitness and video verification service. Led by Head of Social Newsgathering, Derek Bowler, the service provides members of the EBU with verified and cleared-for-use newsworthy eyewitness media emerging on social media.\nThe EBU, in co-operation with its members, produces programmes and organises events in which its members can participate, such as the Eurovision Song Contest, its best known production, or the Eurovision Debates between candidates for president of the European Commission for the 2014, 2019 and 2024 parliamentary elections. Noel Curran has been director-general since 2017.\nGeneral description.\nEBU members are public service media (PSM) broadcasters established by law but are non-partisan, independent, and run for the benefit of society as a whole.\nEBU members come from as far north as Iceland and as far south as Algeria, from Portugal in the west to Azerbaijan in the east, and almost every nation from geographical Europe in between. Associate members from the United States include ABC, CBS, NBC, CPB, NPR, APM, and the only individual station, Chicago-based classical music radio WFMT.\nMembership is for media organisations in countries within the European Broadcasting Area (EBA), as defined by the International Telecommunication Union, or who are members of the Council of Europe.\nMembers benefit from:\nThe EBU's highest-profile production is the Eurovision Song Contest. The EBU also organises the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, the Eurovision Young Musicians competition, and other competitions which are modeled along similar lines.\nRadio collaborations include Euroclassic Notturno\u2014an overnight classical music stream, produced by BBC Radio 3 and broadcast in the United Kingdom as \"Through the Night\"\u2014and special theme days, such as the annual Christmas music relays from around Europe. The EBU is a member of the International Music Council.\nMost EBU broadcasters have group deals to carry major sporting events including the FIFA World Cup and the inaugural European Championships. Another annually recurring event which is broadcast across Europe through the EBU is the Vienna New Year's Concert.\nEurovision Media Services is the business arm of the EBU and provides media services for many media organisations and sports federations around the world.\nIdent.\nThe hymn played before and after every EBU broadcast is Marc-Antoine Charpentier's \"Prelude to Te Deum\". It is played before and after the Eurovision Song Contest and other important events.\nHistory.\nThe EBU was a successor to the International Broadcasting Union (IBU) that was founded in 1925 and had its administrative headquarters in Geneva and technical office in Brussels. It fostered programming exchanges between members and mediated technical disputes between members that were mostly concerned with frequency and interference issues. It was in effect taken over by Nazi Germany during the Second World War, and thereafter the Allies viewed it as a compromised organisation that they could not trust.\nIn the spring of 1946, representatives of the Soviet radio committee proposed forming a new organisation; however, at the same time preparations were being made for an inter-governmental \"European Broadcasting Conference\" in Copenhagen in 1948 to draw up a new plan for frequency use in the European Broadcasting Area. It was considered necessary to have an organisation that could implement the \"Copenhagen Wavelength Plan\" but there was disagreement among broadcasters and particularly a fear expressed by the BBC that a new association might be dominated by the USSR and its proposal to give each of its constituent states one vote. France proposed that it would have four votes with the inclusion of its North African colonies. The United Kingdom felt it would have little influence with just one vote.\nOn 27 June 1946, the alternative International Broadcasting Organisation (IBO) was founded with 26 members and without British participation. The following day the IBU met in General Assembly and an attempt was made to dissolve it but failed; though 18 of its 28 members left to join the IBO. For a period of time in the late 1940s both the IBU and IBO vied for the role of organising frequencies but Britain decided to be in involved in neither. The BBC attempted but failed to find suitable working arrangements with them. However, for practical purposes, the IBO rented the IBU technical centre in Brussels and employed its staff. The BBC then proposed a new solution based on the IBO changing its constitution so there will be only one member per International Telecommunication Union (ITU) country, thus ensuring a Western majority over the USSR and its satellite states. In August 1949 a meeting took place in Stresa, Italy, but it resulted in disagreement between delegates on how to resolve the problems. One proposal was for the European Broadcasting Area to be replaced by one that would exclude Eastern Europe, the Levant, and North Africa.\nAfter Stresa, a consensus emerged among the Western Europeans to form a new organisation and the BBC proposed it be based in London. Meetings in Paris on 31 October and 1 November 1949 sealed the fate of the IBU and IBO, but it was decided not to allow any broadcaster from West Germany to be a founder of the new organisation. On 13 February 1950 the European Broadcasting Union had its first meeting with 23 members from the ITU defined European Broadcasting Area at the Imperial Hotel in Torquay, United Kingdom. The first president was Ian Jacob of the BBC who remained at the helm for ten years while its operation was largely dominated by the BBC due to its financial, technical, and staff input. The most important difference between the EBU and its predecessors was that EBU membership was for broadcasters and not governments. Early delegates said EBU meetings were cordial and professional and very different from the abrupt tone of its predecessors. Broadcasters from West Germany were admitted since 1951 and a working relationship forged with its Eastern counterpart, the International Radio and Television Organisation (OIRT), which existed in parallel with the EBU until its merger on 1 January 1993.\nIn 1967, the first concert in the International Concert Season of the European Broadcasting Union was broadcast from the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London.\nTechnical activities.\nThe objective of the https:// is simply to assist EBU Members (see below) in this period of unprecedented technological changes. This includes the provision of technical information to Members via conferences and workshops, as well as in written form (such as the https://, and the https:// magazine).\nThe EBU also encourages active collaboration between its Members on the basis that they can freely share their knowledge and experience, thus achieving considerably more than individual Members could achieve by themselves. Much of this collaboration is achieved through Project Groups which study specific technical issues of common interest: for example, EBU Members have long been preparing for the revision of the 1961 Stockholm Plan.\nThe EBU places great emphasis on the use of open standards. Widespread use of open standards (such as MPEG-2, DAB, DVB, etc.) ensures interoperability between products from different vendors, as well as facilitating the exchange of programme material between EBU Members and promoting \"horizontal markets\" for the benefit of all consumers.\nEBU Members and the EBU Technical Department have long played an important role in the development of many systems used in radio and television broadcasting, such as:\nThe EBU has also actively encouraged the development and implementation of:\nControversies.\nGreek state broadcaster (2013).\nOn 11 June 2013, the Greek government shut down the state broadcaster Hellenic Broadcasting Corporation (ERT) on short notice, citing government spending concerns related to the European debt crisis. In response, the EBU set up a makeshift studio the same day near the former ERT offices in Athens in order to continue providing EBU members with the news-gathering and broadcast relay services which had formerly been provided by ERT. The EBU put out a statement expressing its \"profound dismay\" at the shutdown, urging the Greek Prime Minister \"to use all his powers to immediately reverse this decision\" and offered the \"advice, assistance and expertise necessary for ERT to be preserved\". Starting on 4 May 2014, the new state broadcaster New Hellenic Radio, Internet and Television (NERIT) began nationwide transmissions, taking over ERT's vacant active membership slot in the EBU. On 11 June 2015, two years after ERT's closure, NERIT was renamed as Hellenic Broadcasting Corporation (ERT), which reopened with a comprehensive program in all radio stations (with nineteen regional, two world-range and five pan-Hellenic range radio stations) and three TV channels ERT1, ERT2 and ERT3.\nBelarusian state broadcaster (2021).\nThe Belarusian Television and Radio Company (BTRC) has been accused of repressing its own employees, having fired more than 100 people since a wave of anti-Lukashenko protests in 2020 following alleged election fraud. Many of them have also been jailed. Many voices have been raised against the participation of BTRC in the Eurovision Song Contest 2021 representing Belarus, the argument being that the EBU would make a political statement if it did endorse BTRC by essentially and silently saying that democracy is unimportant and so are basic human rights such as freedom of speech.\nOn 28 May 2021, the EBU suspended the BTRC's membership as they had been \"particularly alarmed by the broadcast of interviews apparently obtained under duress\". BTRC was given two weeks to respond before the suspension came into effect, but did not do so publicly. The suspension of the broadcaster was made effective on 1 July 2021. Although initial reports mentioned that it would expire after three years, in April 2024 the EBU confirmed that the suspension had been made indefinite.\nRussian state broadcasters (2022).\nThe three Russian members of the EBU, Channel One Russia, VGTRK, and Radio Dom Ostankino are all controlled by the Russian government. On 21 February 2022, the Russian government recognized the independence of the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics, disputed territories that are internationally recognized as part of Ukraine. Ukraine's public broadcaster Suspilne called on the EBU to terminate the membership of Channel One Russia and VGTRK, and to consider preventing them from participating in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022 representing Russia, citing the Russian government's use of both outlets to spread disinformation surrounding the Russo-Ukrainian war. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, several other public broadcasters joined UA:PBC in calling for Russia's exclusion from the 2022 Contest; Finland's Yle and Estonia's ERR stated that they would not send a representative if Russia was allowed to participate. After initially stating that both Russia and Ukraine would be allowed to compete, the EBU announced on 25 February 2022 that it would ban Russia from participating in the Contest.\nThe three Russian broadcasters announced, via a statement released by Russian state media, that they would withdraw from the EBU on 26 February, citing increased politicization of the organization. The EBU released a statement saying that it was aware of the reports, but that it had not received any formal confirmation. On 1 March, a further statement from the EBU announced that it had suspended its Russian members from its governance structures. On 26 May, the EBU made effective the suspension of its Russian members indefinitely.\nIn 2023, an extensive investigation by the EBU Investigative Journalism Network uncovered evidence of a Kremlin-sponsored initiative to take Ukrainian children from the war-torn country to Russia, a war crime under international law.\nIsrael in the Eurovision Song Contest.\nThe Gaza war has led to calls for the EBU to exclude Israel and its broadcaster Kan from the Eurovision Song Contest, and demonstrations against its participation took place in 2024 and 2025.\nMembers.\nCurrent members.\nAs of June 2024[ [update]], the list of EBU members comprises the following 75 broadcasting companies from 56 countries.\nAssociate members.\nAny group or organisation from an International Telecommunication Union (ITU) member country, which provides a radio or television service outside of the European Broadcasting Area, is permitted to submit applications to the EBU for Associate Membership.\nIt is also noted by the EBU that any broadcaster that is granted Associate Member status does not gain access into Eurovision events\u00a0\u2013 notable exceptions being those from Australia, who have participated in the Eurovision Song Contest since 2015 and the Junior Eurovision Song Contest between 2015 and 2019; Canada, who participated in the Eurovision Young Dancers between 1987 and 1989; and Kazakhstan, who participated in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest between 2018 and 2022\u00a0\u2013 all of which were individually invited.\nThe list of Associate Members of EBU comprised the following 30 broadcasting companies from 20 countries as of June 2024[ [update]].\nPast associate members.\nThe list of past associate members of EBU comprises the following 95 broadcasting companies from 55 countries and 1 autonomous territory.\nApproved participant members.\nAny groups or organisations from a country with International Telecommunication Union (ITU) membership, which does not qualify for either the EBU's Active or Associate memberships, but still provide a broadcasting activity for the EBU, are granted a unique Approved Participants membership, which lasts approximately five years. An application for this status may be submitted to the EBU at any given time, providing an annual fee is paid.\nThe following eight EBU broadcast members had status as Approved Participants in November 2024.\nThe following members previously had status as Approved Participants.\nOrganised events.\nThe EBU in co-operation with the respective host broadcaster organises competitions and events in which its members can participate if they wish to do so. These include:\nEurovision Song Contest.\nThe Eurovision Song Contest () is an annual international song competition between EBU members, that was first held in Lugano, Switzerland, on 24 May 1956. Seven countries participated\u00a0\u2013 each submitting two songs, for a total of 14. This was the only contest in which more than one song per country was performed: since 1957, all contests have allowed one entry per country. The 1956 contest was won by the host nation, Switzerland. The winner of the most recent contest, which took place in Basel, Switzerland, is Austria.\nLet the Peoples Sing.\nLet the Peoples Sing is a biennial choir competition, the participants of which are chosen from radio recordings entered by EBU radio members. The final, encompassing three categories and around ten choirs, is offered as a live broadcast to all EBU members. The overall winner is awarded the \"Silver Rose Bowl\". The first winner was Glasgow Phoenix Choir, conducted by their Chorus Master Peter Mooney, from Scotland in the 1961 competition that was held in London. The most recent winner is Copenhagen Girls Choir from Denmark, conducted by Anne-Terese Sales, in the 2024 competition that was held in London.\nJeux sans fronti\u00e8res.\nJeux sans fronti\u00e8res () was a Europe-wide television game show. In its original conception, it was broadcast from 1965 to 1999 under the auspices of the EBU. The original series' run ended in 1982, but was revived in 1988 with a different composition of nations and was hosted by smaller broadcasters.\nEurovision Young Musicians.\nEurovision Young Musicians is a competition for European musicians that are between the ages of 12 and 21 years old. It is organised by the EBU and is a member of EMCY. The first competition was held in Manchester, United Kingdom on 11 May 1982. The televised competition is held every other year, with some countries holding national finals. Since its inaugural edition in 1982, it has become one of the most important music competitions on an international level. The winner of the most recent contest, which took place in Bod\u00f8 Municipality, Norway, is Austria.\nEurovision Young Dancers.\nEurovision Young Dancers was a biennial dance showcase broadcast on television throughout Europe. The inaugural competition was held in Reggio Emilia, Italy on 16 June 1985. It uses a format similar to the Eurovision Song Contest. Every participating country has the opportunity to send a dance act to compete for the title of Eurovision Young Dancer. The competition is for solo dancers, and all contestants must be between the ages of 16 and 21, and not professionally engaged. The winner of the most recent contest, which took place in Prague, Czech Republic, is Poland.\nEuroclassic Notturno.\nEuroclassic Notturno is a six-hour sequence of classical music recordings, assembled by BBC Radio from material supplied by EBU members and streamed back to those broadcasters by satellite for use in their overnight classical-music schedules. The recordings used are taken not from commercial CDs, but from earlier (usually live) radio broadcasts.\nJunior Eurovision Song Contest.\nThe Junior Eurovision Song Contest () is an annual international song competition that was first held in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 15 November 2003. Sixteen countries participated in the inaugural edition, with each submitting one song. The inaugural contest was won by Croatia. The winner of the most recent contest, which took place in Madrid, Spain, is Georgia.\nEurovision Dance Contest.\nThe Eurovision Dance Contest (not to be confused with Eurovision Young Dancers) was an international dancing competition that was held for the first time in London, United Kingdom, on 1 September 2007. The inaugural contest was won by Finland. The competition was repeated in 2008 when it was held in Glasgow, United Kingdom, but has not been held since. The winner of the most recent contest is Poland.\nMagic Circus Show.\nThe Magic Circus Show was an entertainment show organised by the EBU, which took place in 2010, 2011 and 2012 in Geneva, Switzerland. Children aged between 7\u201314 representing eight countries within the EBU membership area performed a variety of circus acts at the Geneva Christmas Circus (). The main show was also accompanied by the Magic Circus Show Orchestra.\nEurovision Choir.\nThe inaugural Eurovision Choir, featuring non-professional choirs selected by EBU members, took place on 22 July 2017 in Riga, Latvia, hosted by the Latvian broadcaster Latvijas Telev\u012bzija (LTV). Nine countries took part in the first edition. Carmen Manet from Slovenia was the first winner and the winner of the most recent contest, which took place in Gothenburg, Sweden, was Vocal Line from Denmark.\nEuropean Sports Championships.\nThe European Sports Championships is a multi-sport event involving some of the leading sports in Europe. The European Governing Bodies for athletics, aquatics, cycling, rowing, golf, gymnastics and triathlon, coordinated their individual championships as part of the first edition in the summer of 2018, hosted by the cities of Berlin, Germany (already chosen as the host for the 2018 European Athletics Championships) and Glasgow, United Kingdom (already chosen as the host for the 2018 European Aquatics Championships, and which concurrently also hosted the events of the other sports).\nOlympic Games.\nThe EBU first covered the Olympic Games in 1956, and has historically acquired broadcasting rights on behalf of its members. The amount paid by the EBU steadily increased over time, paying US$22 million for broadcasting rights for Los Angeles 1984, US$240 million for Atlanta 1996, US$394 million for Athens 2004 and US$746million for Vancouver 2010 and London 2012.\nIn 2008, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) decided to negotiate individually with broadcasters for rights to the 2014-2016 Olympic Games \u2013 as the EBU had not \"offered enough money\". The IOC subsequently signed individual deals with broadcasters in France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Turkey and the UK, selling the remainder of the broadcasting rights to Sportfive for US$315 million. Despite an attempt by the EBU to purchase broadcasting rights for the 2018-2024 Olympic Games, the IOC awarded a contract to Discovery Communications in June 2015. The EBU criticised the decision, stating that it shows a \"shift in the IOC\u2019s positioning of the Olympic Games as a free-to-air event that reached all of the European television audience \u2013 to a pay event with minimum free-to-air obligations\".\nIn January 2023, the IOC announced that a joint bid from the EBU and Warner Bros. Discovery had been awarded rights for all Olympic Games from the 2026 Winter Olympics to the 2032 Summer Olympics. The joint bid follows criticism of the 2015 deal to award European television rights to Discovery. Each EBU member will broadcast at least 200 hours of coverage of the Summer Olympics and at least 100 hours of the Winter Olympics, whereas Warner Bros. Discovery will have unlimited rights.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10381", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10381", "title": "Electrothermal-Chemical technology", "text": ""}
{"id": "10382", "revid": "49982590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10382", "title": "Electrothermal-chemical technology", "text": "Plasma ignition of projectile propellent\nElectrothermal-chemical (ETC) technology is an attempt to increase accuracy and muzzle energy of future tank, artillery, and close-in weapon system guns by improving the predictability and rate of expansion of propellants inside the barrel.\nAn electrothermal-chemical gun uses a plasma cartridge to ignite and control the ammunition's propellant, using electrical energy to trigger the process. ETC increases the performance of conventional solid propellants, reduces the effect of temperature on propellant expansion and allows for more advanced, higher density propellants to be used.\nThe technology has been under development since the mid-1980s and in 1993 was actively being researched in the United States by the Army Research Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratories and defense industry contractors, including FMC Corporation, General Dynamics Land Systems, Olin Ordnance, and Soreq Nuclear Research Center. It is possible that electrothermal-chemical gun propulsion will be an integral part of US Army's future combat system and those of other countries such as Germany and the United Kingdom. \nElectrothermal-chemical technology is part of a broad research and development program that encompasses all electric gun technology, such as railguns and coil guns.\nBackground.\nThe constant battle between armour and armor-piercing round has led to continuous development of the main battle tank design. The evolution of American anti-tank weapons can be traced back to requirements to combat Soviet tanks. In the late 1980s, it was thought that the protection level of the Future Soviet Tank (FST) could exceed 700\u00a0mm of rolled homogeneous armour equivalence at its maximum thickness, which was effectively immune against the contemporary M829 armour piercing fin stabilized discarding sabot. In the 1980s the most immediate method available to NATO to counter Soviet advances in armour technology was the adoption of a 140\u00a0mm main gun, but this required a redesigned turret that could incorporate the larger breech and ammunition, and it also required some sort of automatic loader. Although the 140\u00a0mm gun was considered a real interim solution, it was decided after the fall of the Soviet Union that the increase in muzzle energy it provided was not worth the increase in weight. Resources were therefore spent on research into other programs that could provide the needed muzzle energy. One of the most successful alternative technologies remains electrothermal-chemical ignition.\nMost proposed advances in gun technology are based on the assumption that the solid propellant as a stand-alone propulsion system is no longer capable of delivering the required muzzle energy. This requirement has been underscored by the appearance of the Russian T-90 main battle tank. The elongation of current gun tubes, such as the new German 120\u00a0mm L/55, which was introduced by Rheinmetall is considered only an interim solution as it does not offer the required increase in muzzle velocity. Even advanced kinetic energy ammunition such as the United States' M829A3 is considered only an interim solution against future threats. To that extent the solid propellant is considered to have reached the end of its usefulness, although it will remain the principal propulsion method for at least the next decade until newer technologies mature. \nETC technology offers a medium-risk upgrade and is developed to the point that further improvements are so minor that it can be considered mature. The lightweight American 120\u00a0mm XM291 came close to achieving 17 MJ of muzzle energy, which is the lower-end muzzle energy spectrum for a 140\u00a0mm gun. However, the success of the XM291 does not imply the success of ETC technology as there are key parts of the propulsion system that are not yet understood or fully developed, such as the plasma ignition process. Nevertheless, there is substantial existing evidence that ETC technology is viable and worth the money to continue development. Furthermore, it can be integrated into current gun systems.\nOperational principle.\nAn electrothermal-chemical gun uses a plasma cartridge to ignite and control the ammunition's propellant, using electrical energy as a catalyst to begin the process. Originally researched by Dr. Jon Parmentola for the U.S. Army, it has grown into a very plausible successor to a standard solid propellant tank gun. Since the beginning of research the United States has funded the XM291 gun project with US$4,000,000, basic research with US$300,000, and applied research with US$600,000. Since then it has been proven to work, although efficiency to the level required has not yet been accomplished. ETC increases the performance of conventional solid propellants, reduces the effect of temperature on propellant expansion and allows for more advanced, higher density propellants to be used. It will also reduce pressure placed on the barrel in comparison to alternative technologies that offer the same muzzle energy given the fact that it helps spread the propellant's gas much more smoothly during ignition. Currently, there are two principal methods of plasma initiation: the flashboard large area emitter (FLARE) and the triple coaxial plasma igniter (TCPI).\nFlashboard large area emitter.\nFlashboards run in several parallel strings to provide a large area of plasma or ultraviolet radiation and uses the breakdown and vaporization of gaps of diamonds to produce the required plasma. These parallel strings are mounted in tubes and oriented to have their gaps azimuthal to the tube's axis. It discharges by using high pressure air to move air out of the way. FLARE initiators can ignite propellants through the release of plasma, or even through the use of ultraviolet heat radiation. The absorption length of a solid propellant is sufficient to be ignited by radiation from a plasma source. However, FLARE has most likely not reached optimal design requirements and further understanding of FLARE and how it works is completely necessary to ensure the evolution of the technology. If FLARE provided the XM291 gun project with the sufficient radiative heat to ignite the propellant to achieve a muzzle energy of 17 MJ one could only imagine the possibilities with a fully developed FLARE plasma igniter. Current areas of study include how plasma will affect the propellant through radiation, the deliverance of mechanical energy and heat directly and by driving gas flow. Despite these daunting tasks FLARE has been seen as the most plausible igniter for future application on ETC guns.\nTriple coaxial plasma igniter.\nA coaxial igniter consists of a fully insulated conductor, covered by four strips of aluminium foil. All of this is further insulated in a tube about 1.6\u00a0cm in diameter that is perforated with small holes. The idea is to use an electrical flow through the conductor and then exploding the flow into vapour and then breaking it down into plasma. Consequently, the plasma escapes through the constant perforations throughout the insulating tube and initiates the surrounding propellant. A TCPI igniter is fitted in individual propellant cases for each round of ammunition. However, TCPI is no longer considered a viable method of propellant ignition because it may damage the fins and does not deliver energy as efficiently as a FLARE igniter.\nFeasibility.\nThe XM291 is the best existing example of a working electrothermal-chemical gun. It was an alternative technology to the heavier caliber 140\u00a0mm gun by using the dual-caliber approach. It uses a breech that is large enough to accept 140\u00a0mm ammunition and be mounted with both a 120\u00a0mm barrel and a 135\u00a0mm or 140\u00a0mm barrel. The XM291 also mounts a larger gun tube and a larger ignition chamber than the existing M256 L/44 main gun. Through the application of electrothermal-chemical technology the XM291 has been able to achieve muzzle energy outputs that equate that to a low-level 140\u00a0mm gun, while achieving muzzle velocities greater than those of the larger 140\u00a0mm gun. Although the XM291 does not mean that ETC technology is viable it does offer an example that it is possible.\nETC requires much less energy input from outside sources, like a battery, than a railgun or a coilgun would. Tests have shown that energy output by the propellant is higher than energy input from outside sources on ETC guns. In comparison, a railgun currently cannot achieve a higher muzzle velocity than the amount of energy input. Even at 50% efficiency a rail gun launching a projectile with a kinetic energy of 20 MJ would require an energy input into the rails of 40 MJ, and 50% efficiency has not yet been achieved. To put this into perspective, a rail gun launching at 9 MJ of energy would need roughly 32 MJ worth of energy from capacitors. Current advances in energy storage allow for energy densities as high as 2.5 MJ/dm3, which means that a battery delivering 32 MJ of energy would require a volume of 12.8 dm3 per shot; this is not a viable volume for use in a modern main battle tank, especially one designed to be lighter than existing models. There has even been discussion about eliminating the necessity for an outside electrical source in ETC ignition by initiating the plasma cartridge through a small explosive force.\nFurthermore, ETC technology is not only applicable to solid propellants. To increase muzzle velocity even further electrothermal-chemical ignition can work with liquid propellants, although this would require further research into plasma ignition. ETC technology is also compatible with existing projects to reduce the amount of recoil delivered to the vehicle while firing. Understandably, recoil of a gun firing a projectile at 17 MJ or more will increase directly with the increase in muzzle energy in accordance to Newton's third law of motion and successful implementation of recoil reduction mechanisms will be vital to the installation of an ETC powered gun in an existing vehicle design. For example, OTO Melara's new lightweight 120\u00a0mm L/45 gun has achieved a recoil force of 25 t by using a longer recoil mechanism (550\u00a0mm) and a pepperpot muzzle brake. Reduction in recoil can also be achieved through mass attenuation of the thermal sleeve. The ability of ETC technology to be applied to existing gun designs means that for future gun upgrades there's no longer the necessity to redesign the turret to include a larger breech or caliber gun barrel.\nSeveral countries have already determined that ETC technology is viable for the future and have funded indigenous projects considerably. These include the United States, Germany and the United Kingdom, amongst others. The United States' XM360, which was planned to equip the Future Combat Systems Mounted Combat System light tank and may be the M1 Abrams' next gun upgrade, is reportedly based on the XM291 and may include ETC technology, or portions of ETC technology. Tests of this gun have been performed using \"precision ignition\" technology, which may refer to ETC ignition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10383", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10383", "title": "ES-3 Shadow", "text": ""}
{"id": "10384", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10384", "title": "Boeing E-3 Sentry", "text": "Airborne early warning and control aircraft based on Boeing 707 airframe\nThe Boeing E-3 Sentry is an American airborne early warning and control (AEW&amp;C) aircraft developed by Boeing. E-3s are commonly known as AWACS (Airborne Warning and Control System). Derived from the Boeing 707 airliner, it provides all-weather surveillance, command, control, and communications, and is used by the United States Air Force, NATO, French Air and Space Force, Royal Saudi Air Force and Chilean Air Force. The E-3 has a distinctive rotating radar dome (rotodome) above the fuselage. Production ended in 1992 after 68 aircraft had been built.\nIn the mid-1960s, the U.S. Air Force (USAF) was seeking an aircraft to replace its piston-engined Lockheed EC-121 Warning Star, which had been in service for over a decade. After issuing preliminary development contracts to three companies, the USAF picked Boeing to construct two airframes to test Westinghouse Electric's and Hughes's competing radars. Both radars used pulse-Doppler technology, with Westinghouse's design emerging as the contract winner. Testing on the first production E-3 began in October 1975.\nThe first USAF E-3 was delivered in March 1977, and during the next seven years, a total of 34 aircraft were manufactured. E-3s were also purchased by NATO (18), the United Kingdom (7), France (4) and Saudi Arabia (5). In 1991, when the last aircraft had been delivered, E-3s participated in the Persian Gulf War, playing a crucial role of directing coalition aircraft against Iraqi forces.\nThe aircraft was also the last of the Boeing 707 derivatives after 34 years of continuous production. The aircraft's capabilities have been maintained and enhanced through numerous upgrades. In 1996, Westinghouse Electric's Defense &amp; Electronic Systems division was acquired by Northrop Corporation, before being renamed Northrop Grumman Mission Systems, which currently supports the E-3's radar. In April 2022, the U.S. Air Force announced that the Boeing E-7 is to replace the E-3 beginning in 2027.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nIn 1963, the USAF asked for proposals for an Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) to replace its EC-121 Warning Stars, which had served in the airborne early warning role for over a decade. The new aircraft would take advantage of improvements in radar technology and computer-aided radar data analysis and data reduction. These developments allowed airborne radars to \"look down\", i.e. to detect the movement of low-flying aircraft, and discriminate, even over land, target aircraft's movements; previously this had been impossible due to the inability to discriminate an aircraft's track from ground clutter. Contracts were issued to Boeing, Douglas, and Lockheed, the latter being eliminated in July 1966. In 1967, a parallel program was put into place to develop the radar, with Westinghouse Electric Corporation and Hughes Aircraft being asked to compete in producing the radar system. In 1968, it was referred to as Overland Radar Technology (ORT) during development tests on the modified EC-121Q. The Westinghouse radar antenna was going to be used by whichever company won the radar competition since Westinghouse had pioneered the design of high-power radio frequency (RF) phase-shifters, which are used to both focus the RF into a pencil beam and scan electronically for altitude determination.\nBoeing initially proposed a purpose-built aircraft, but tests indicated it would not outperform the already-operational 707, so the latter was chosen instead. To increase endurance, this design was to be powered by eight General Electric TF34s. It would carry its radar in a rotating dome mounted at the top of a forward-swept tail, above the fuselage. Boeing was selected ahead of McDonnell Douglas's DC-8-based proposal in July 1970. Initial orders were placed for two aircraft, designated EC-137D, as test beds to evaluate the two competing radars. As the test beds did not need the same 14-hour endurance demanded of the production aircraft, the EC-137s retained the Pratt &amp; Whitney JT3D commercial engines, and a later reduction in the endurance requirement led to retention of the JT3D engines in production.\nThe first EC-137 made its maiden flight on 9 February 1972, with the fly-off between the two radars taking place from March to July of that year. Favorable test results led to the selection of Westinghouse's radar for the production aircraft. Hughes' radar was initially thought to be a certain winner due to its related development of the APG-63 radar for the new F-15 Eagle. The Westinghouse radar used a pipelined fast Fourier transform (FFT) to digitally resolve 128 Doppler frequencies, while Hughes's radars used analog filters based on the design for the F-15. Westinghouse's engineering team won this competition by using a programmable 18-bit computer whose software could be modified before each mission. This computer was the AN/AYK-8 design from the B-57G program, and designated AYK-8-EP1 for its much expanded memory. This radar also multiplexed a beyond-the-horizon (BTH) pulse mode that could complement the pulse-Doppler radar mode. This proved to be beneficial especially when the BTH mode is used to detect ships at sea when the radar beam is directed below the horizon.\nFull-scale development.\nApproval was given on 26 January 1973 for the full-scale development of the AWACS system. To allow further development of the aircraft's systems, orders were placed for three preproduction aircraft, the first of which performed its maiden flight in February 1975. IBM and Hazeltine were selected to develop the mission computer and display system. The IBM computer was designated 4PI, and the software was written in JOVIAL. A Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) or back-up interceptor control (BUIC) operator would immediately be at home with the track displays and tabular displays, but differences in symbology would create compatibility problems in tactical ground radar systems in Iceland, mainland Europe, and South Korea over Link-11 (TADIL-A). In 1977, Iran placed an order for ten E-3s, however this order was cancelled following the Iranian Revolution.\nEngineering, test and evaluation began on the first E-3 Sentry in October 1975. Between 1977 and 1992, a total of 68 E-3s were built.\nFuture status.\nBecause the Boeing 707 is no longer in production, the E-3 mission package has been fitted into the Boeing E-767 for the Japan Air Self Defense Forces. The E-10 MC2A was intended to replace USAF E-3s\u2014along with the RC-135 and the E-8 Joint STARS, but the program was canceled by the Department of Defense.\nNATO intends to extend the operational status of its AWACS until 2035 when it is due to be replaced by the Alliance Future Surveillance and Control (AFSC) program. The Royal Air Force (RAF) chose to limit investment in its E-3D fleet in the early 2000s, diverting Sentry upgrade funds to a replacement program. On 22 March 2019, the UK Defence Secretary announced a $1.98 billion (~$ in 2024) contract to purchase five Boeing E-7 Wedgetails. The U.S. Air Force intends to retire 15 of its 31 E-3s and acquire the E-7.\nOn 31 March 2023, the USAF retired an E-3 from service for the first time.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe E-3 Sentry's airframe is a modified Boeing 707-320B Advanced model. Modifications include a rotating radar dome (rotodome), uprated hydraulics from 241 to 345 bar (3500\u20135000 psi) to drive the rotodome, single-point ground refueling, air refueling, and a bail-out tunnel or chute. A second bail-out chute was deleted to cut mounting costs.\nUUSAF and NATO E-3s have an unrefueled range of more than and an endurance of 8 hours. The newer E-3 versions bought by France, Saudi Arabia, and the UK are equipped with newer CFM56-2 turbofan engines, and these can fly for about 11 hours or more than . The Sentry's range and on-station time can be increased through air-to-air refueling and the crews can work in shifts by the use of an on-board crew rest and meals area. The aircraft are equipped with one toilet in the rear, and a urinal behind the cockpit. Saudi E-3s were delivered with an additional toilet in the rear.\nWhen deployed, the E-3 monitors an assigned area of the battlefield and provides information for commanders of air operations to gain and maintain control of the battle; while as an air defense asset, E-3s can detect, identify, and track airborne enemy forces far from the boundaries of the U.S. or NATO countries and can direct interceptor aircraft to these targets. In support of air-to-ground operations, the E-3 can provide direct information needed for interdiction, reconnaissance, airlift, and close-air support for friendly ground forces.\nAvionics.\nThe unpressurized rotodome is in diameter, thick at the center, and is held above the fuselage by 2 struts. It is tilted down at the front to reduce its aerodynamic drag, which lessens its detrimental effect on take-offs and endurance. This tilt is corrected electronically by both the radar and secondary surveillance radar antenna phase shifters. The rotodome uses bleed air, outside cooling doors, and fluorocarbon-based cold plate cooling to maintain the electronic and mechanical equipment temperatures. The hydraulically rotated antenna system permits the AN/APY-1 and AN/APY-2 passive electronically scanned array radar system to provide surveillance from the Earth's surface up into the stratosphere, over land or water.\nOther major subsystems in the E-3 Sentry are navigation, communications, and computers. 14 consoles display computer-processed data in graphic and tabular format on screens. Its operators perform surveillance, identification, weapons control, battle management and communications functions. Data may be forwarded in real-time to any major command and control center in rear areas or aboard ships. In times of crisis, data may also be forwarded to the National Command Authority in the U.S. via RC-135 or aircraft carrier task forces.\nElectrical generators mounted in each of the E-3's four engines provide 1 megawatt of electrical power required by the aircraft's radars and electronics. Its pulse-Doppler radar has a range of more than 250\u00a0mi (400\u00a0km) for low-flying targets at its operating altitude, and the pulse (BTH) radar has a range of approximately 400\u00a0mi (650\u00a0km) for aircraft flying at medium to high altitudes. The radar, combined with a secondary surveillance radar (SSR) and electronic support measures (ESM), provides a look down capability, to detect, identify, and track low-flying aircraft, while eliminating ground clutter returns.\nUpgrades.\nBetween 1987 and 2001, USAF E-3s were upgraded under the \"Block 30/35 Modification Program\". Enhancements included:\nRSIP.\nThe Radar System Improvement Program (RSIP) was a joint US/NATO development program. RSIP enhances the operational capability of the E-3 radars' electronic countermeasures, and improves the system's reliability, maintainability, and availability. Essentially, this program replaced the older transistor-transistor logic (TTL) and emitter-coupled logic (MECL) electronic components, long-since out of production, with off-the-shelf computers that utilised a High-level programming language instead of assembly language. Significant improvement came from adding pulse compression to the pulse-Doppler mode. These hardware and software modifications improve the E-3 radars' performance, providing enhanced detection with an emphasis towards low radar cross-section (RCS) targets.\nThe RAF had also joined the USAF in adding RSIP to upgrade the E-3's radars. The retrofitting of the E-3 squadrons was completed in December 2000. Along with the RSIP upgrade was installation of the Global Positioning System/Inertial Navigation Systems which improved positioning accuracy. In 2002, Boeing was awarded a contract to add RSIP to the small French AWACS squadron. Installation was completed in 2006. Saudi Arabia began RSIP upgrades in 2013; the first aircraft being upgraded by Boeing in Seattle with the four remaining aircraft upgraded in Riyadh between 2014 and 2016.\nNATO Mid Term Program.\nBetween 2000 and 2008 NATO upgraded its E-3s to \"Mid Term Program\" (MTP) standard. This involved technical upgrades and a total multi-sensor-systems integration\nDRAGON.\nIn 2009, the USAF, in cooperation with NATO, entered into a major flight deck avionics modernization program in order to maintain compliance with worldwide airspace mandates. The program, called DRAGON (for DMS Replacement of Avionics for Global Operation and Navigation), was awarded to Boeing and Rockwell Collins in 2010. Drawing on their Flight2 flight management system (FMS), almost all the avionics were replaced with more modern digital equipment from Rockwell Collins. Main upgrades include a Digital Audio Distribution System, Mode-5/ADS-B transponder, Inmarsat and VDL datalinks, and a terrain awareness and warning system (TAWS). The centerpiece flight deck hardware consists of five 6x8 color graphics displays and two color CDUs. DRAGON laid the foundation for subsequent upgrades including GPS M-Code, Iridium ATC, and Autopilot. USAF DRAGON Production began in 2018.\nUSAF Block 40/45.\nIn 2014 the USAF began upgrading block 30/35 E-3B/Cs into block 40/45 E-3Gs. This upgrade replaces the main flight computer with a Red Hat Linux-based system, as well as replacing the DOS 2.0-like operating system with a Windows 95-like system on the operator workstations. In 2016, a three-week long cybersecurity vulnerability test revealed that the 40/45 block and its supporting ground equipment were vulnerable to cyber threats, and were thus deemed \"not survivable.\" This caused a delay of approximately two years. Twenty-four E-3s are projected to complete this upgrade to 40/45 by the end of fiscal year 2020, while seven aircraft will be retired to save upgrade costs and harvest out-of-production components.\nNATO Final Lifetime Extension Program.\nNATO intends to extend the operational status of its AWACS until 2035 by significantly upgrading fourteen aircraft in the \"Final Lifetime Extension Program\" (FLEP) between 2019 and 2026. Upgrades include the expansion of data capacity, expansion of bandwidth for satellite communications, new encryption equipment, new HAVE QUICK radios, upgraded mission computing software and new operator consoles. The supporting ground systems (mission training center and mission planning and evaluation system) will also be upgraded to the latest standard. NATO Airborne Early Warning &amp; Control Program Management Agency (NAPMA) is the preparing and executing authority for the FLEP. FLEP will be combined with the standard planned higher echelon technical maintenance.\nOperational history.\nUnited States.\nIn March 1977 the 552nd Airborne Warning and Control Wing received the first E-3 aircraft at Tinker AFB, Oklahoma. The 34th and last USAF Sentry was delivered in June 1984. The USAF has a total of thirty E-3s in active service. Twenty-six are stationed at Tinker AFB and belong to the Air Combat Command (ACC). Four are assigned to the Pacific Air Forces (PACAF) and stationed at Kadena AB, Okinawa and Elmendorf AFB, Alaska. One aircraft (TS-3) was assigned to Boeing for testing and development (retired/scrapped June 2012).\nE-3 Sentry aircraft were among the first to deploy during Operation Desert Shield, where they established a radar screen to monitor Iraqi forces. During Operation Desert Storm, E-3s flew 379 missions and logged 5,052 hours of on-station time. The data collection capability of the E-3 radar and computer subsystems allowed an entire air war to be recorded for the first time. In addition to providing senior leadership with time-critical information on the actions of enemy forces, E-3 controllers assisted in 38 of the 41 air-to-air kills recorded during the conflict.\nNATO, UK, French and USAF AWACS played an important role in the air campaign against Serbia and Montenegro in the former republic of FR Yugoslavia. From March to June 1999 the aircraft were deployed in the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia (operation Allied Force) directing allied strike and air defence aircraft to and from their targets. Over 1,000 aircraft operating from bases in Germany and Italy took part in the air campaign which was intended to destroy Yugoslav air defenses and high-value targets such as the bridges across the Danube river, factories, power stations, telecommunications facilities, and military installations.\nOn 18 November 2015, an E-3G was deployed to the Middle East to begin flying combat missions in support of Operation Inherent Resolve against ISIL, marking the first combat deployment of the upgraded Block 40/45 aircraft.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn February 1987 the UK and France ordered E-3 aircraft in a joint project which saw deliveries start in 1991. The British requirement arose due to the cancellation of the BAE Nimrod AEW3 project. UK E-3Ds contributed to the NATO Airborne Early Warning and Control Force (NAEWCF), receiving much of their tasking directly from NATO. However, RAF E-3Ds remained UK-crewed and capable of independent, national tasking.\nIn 2009, the UK effectively limited the service life of the E-3D fleet by de-funding the Project Eagle upgrade which would have seen it upgraded in line with the USAF Block 40/45 standard. \"AirForces Monthly\" reported that by December 2020, just 2 aircraft were available for operations at any one time. The Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 had announced the intention to retain the E-3D fleet until 2035, however in March 2019, the Ministry of Defence announced that the E-3Ds would be replaced by five E-7 Wedgetails from 2023. The \u00a31.51 billion contract was awarded to Boeing without a competitive procurement process, a decision criticised by both competitors of Boeing and the UK's Defence Select Committee. The 2021 Integrated Defence Review confirmed a reduced order of three aircraft. On 27 January 2015, the RAF deployed an E-3D Sentry to Cyprus in support of U.S.-led coalition airstrikes against Islamic State militants in Iraq and Syria. The last operational flight by an RAF E3 Sentry was in July 2021 with the Sentry subsequently retired from service.\nFrance.\nIn February 1987 the UK and France ordered E-3 aircraft in a joint project which saw deliveries start in 1991. France operates its E-3F aircraft independently of NATO. France operates four aircraft, all fitted with the newer CFM56-2 engines.\nIn early 2024, there were reports that France is looking to the Swedish Saab GlobalEye to replace its AWACS aircraft.\nChile.\nThree Boeing E-3D Sentry (Sentry AEW.1) aircraft, acquired second hand from the United Kingdom in September 2021, arrived in Chile in July 2022; units ZH103 and ZH106 will join the \"Grupo de Aviaci\u00f3n N.\u00ba 10\" of the II Air Brigade. The other E-3D will reportedly be used as a source of spare parts.\nNATO.\nNATO acquired 18 E-3As and support equipment, with the first aircraft delivered in January 1982. The aircraft are registered in Luxembourg. The eighteen E-3s were operated by Number 1, 2 and 3 Squadrons of NATO's E-3 Component, based at NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen.\nNATO E-3s participated in Operation Eagle Assist after the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center towers and the Pentagon. NATO and RAF E-3s participated in the military intervention in Libya.\nFrom January 2011 to September 2014, NATO E-3s were deployed to Mazar-i-Sharif International Airport, Afghanistan, as part of NATO's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission. The aircraft were used for air traffic control of military aircraft over the country, as well as surveillance, and tactical management of friendly aircraft. During the mission to Afghanistan, NATO E-3s flew 1,240 missions and accumulated 12,240 flying hours.\nPresently, 14 NATO E-3As are in the inventory, since one E-3 was lost in a crash and three were retired from service in 2015, 2017, and 2018. The first was due for its six-year cycle Depot Level Maintenance (DLM) inspection which would have been very costly. The \"449 Retirement Project\" resulted in reclamation of critical parts with a value of upwards of $40 million which will be used to support the remaining active aircraft. Some of the parts to be removed are no longer on the market or have become very expensive.\n2 prototype AWACS aircraft with JT3D engines, 1 fitted with a Westinghouse Electric radar and 1 with a Hughes Aircraft Company radar. Both converted to E-3A standard with TF33 engines.\nProduction aircraft with TF33 engines and AN/APY-1 radar, 24 built for USAF (later converted to E-3B standard), total of 34 ordered but the last 9 completed as E-3C. One additional aircraft retained by Boeing for testing, 18 built for NATO with TF33 engines and 5 for Saudi Arabia with CFM56 engines.\nThese are not AWACS aircraft but CFM56 powered tankers based on the E-3 design. 8 were sold to Saudi Arabia.\nThree KE-3 airframes delivered as CFM56\u2013powered strategic reconnaissance aircraft. Systems and external appearance are similar to the USAF\u2019s RC-135V/W Rivet Joint platform. At least one of the RE-3As has received the extended \"hog nose\" as fitted to the RC-135.\nUSAF Block 30 modification. E-3As with improvements, 24 conversions.\nUSAF Block 35 modification. Production aircraft with AN/APY-2 radar, additional electronic consoles and system improvements, ten built.\nOne E-3A aircraft used by Boeing for trials later redesignated E-3C.\nProduction aircraft for the RAF to E-3C standard with CFM56 engines and British modifications designated \"Sentry AEW.1\", 7 built. Modifications included the addition of a refueling probe next to the existing boom AAR receptacle, CFM-56 engines, wingtip ESM pods, an enhanced Maritime Surveillance Capability (MSC) offering Maritime Scan-Scan Processing (MSSP), JTIDS and Havequick 2 radios.\nProduction aircraft for the French Air and Space Force to E-3C standard with CFM56 engines and French modifications, 4 built.\nUSAF Block 40/45 modification. Includes hardware and software upgrades to improve communications, computer processing power, threat tracking, and others, and automates some previously manual functions. Initial operating capability (IOC) declared in July 2014. It also removed the 1970 vintage mission computing. E-3G(II) Block 40/45 modification that included a glass cockpit modification that reduced the crew size by one, and added a new avionics suite.\n 18 E-3 AWACS were purchased \u2013 1 was written off in Greece, 3 were retired from service. Mainly responsible for monitoring European NATO airspace, they have also been deployed outside the area in support of NATO commitments. The 20 multinational crews are provided by 15 of the 31 NATO member states.\n\"\u0627\u0644\u0633\u0631\u0628 \u0627\u0644\u062b\u0627\u0645\u0646 \u0639\u0634\u0631\" (\"al-Sarab al-Ththamin Eshr\" \u2013 No. 18 Squadron)\nNo. 19 Squadron \u2013 RE-3A/B (as well as Beechcraft 350ER-ISR)\nNo. 23 Squadron \u2013 KE-3A\nTactical Air Command 1976\u20131992\nAir Combat Command 1992\u2013present\n960th Airborne Air Control Squadron 2001\u2013present (NAS Keflavik, Iceland 1979\u20131992)\n963d Airborne Air Control Squadron 1976\u2013present\n964th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1977\u2013present\n965th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1978\u20131979, 1984\u2013present\n966th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1976\u2013present\n968th Expeditionary Airborne Air Control Squadron 2013\u2013present (Thumrait Air Base, Oman 2002\u20132003)\nAir Force Reserve Command\n970th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1996\u2013present (Personnel only, aircraft loaned by co-located 552nd ACW as needed)\n 10th Flight Test Squadron \u2013 Tinker AFB, Oklahoma 1994\u2013present\nPacific Air Forces\n962d Airborne Air Control Squadron 1986\u2013present\n961st Airborne Air Control Squadron 1979\u2013present\nNo. 8 Squadron (1991\u20132021)\nNo. 23 Squadron (1996\u20132009)\nNo. 54 Squadron (Operational Conversion Unit 2005\u2013?)\nNo. 56 Squadron (Operational Evaluation Unit 2008\u2013?)\nIncidents and accidents.\nE-3s have been involved in three hull-loss accidents, and one radar antenna was destroyed during RSIP development (see photo under Avionics).\nSpecifications (USAF/NATO).\n\"Data from\" : E-3 Sentry (AWACS)General characteristics* Crew: Flight crew: 4 (aircraft commander, pilot, navigator, flight engineer) \nMission crew: 13\u201319* Aspect ratio: \nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach * Endurance: more than 8 hours without refuelling (about 11 hours with CFM56 engine)* g limits: * Roll rate: \nAvionics\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10385", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10385", "title": "Northrop Grumman E-8 Joint STARS", "text": "Airborne ground surveillance aircraft based on Boeing 707 airliner\nThe Northrop Grumman E-8 Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) is a retired United States Air Force (USAF) airborne ground surveillance, battle management and command and control aircraft. It tracked ground vehicles and some aircraft, collected imagery, and relayed tactical pictures to ground and air theater commanders. Until its retirement in 2023 the aircraft was operated by both active duty USAF and Air National Guard units, with specially trained U.S. Army personnel as additional flight crew.\nDevelopment.\nJoint STARS evolved from separate U.S. Army and Air Force (USAF) programs to develop technology to detect, locate and attack enemy armor at ranges beyond the front line of a battle. In 1982, the programs were merged and the USAF became the lead agent. The concept and sensor technology for the E-8 was developed and tested on the Tacit Blue experimental aircraft. The prime contract was awarded to Grumman Aerospace Corporation in September 1985 for two E-8A development systems.\nIn late 2005, Northrop Grumman was awarded a contract for upgrading engines and other systems. Pratt &amp; Whitney, in a joint venture with Seven Q Seven (SQS), was contracted to produce and deliver JT8D-219 engines for the E-8s. Their greater efficiency would have allowed the Joint STARS to spend more time on station, take off from a wider range of runways, climb faster, fly higher, all with a much reduced cost per flying hour.\nIn December 2008, an E-8C test aircraft took its first flight with the new engines. In 2009, the company began engine replacement and additional upgrade efforts. The re-engining funding was halted in 2009 as the Air Force began to consider other options for performing the JSTARS mission.\nDesign.\nThe E-8C is an aircraft modified from the Boeing 707-300 series commercial airliner. The E-8 carries specialized radar, communications, operations and control subsystems. The most prominent external feature is the 40\u00a0ft (12\u00a0m) canoe-shaped radome under the forward fuselage that houses the 24\u00a0ft (7.3\u00a0m) APY-7 active electronically scanned array side looking airborne radar antenna.\nThe E-8C can respond quickly and effectively to support worldwide military contingency operations. It is a jam-resistant system capable of operating while experiencing heavy electronic countermeasures. The E-8C can fly a mission profile for 9 hours without refueling. Its range and on-station time can be substantially increased through in-flight refueling.\nRadar and systems.\nThe AN/APY-7 radar can operate in wide area surveillance, ground moving target indicator (GMTI), fixed target indicator (FTI) target classification, and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) modes.\nTo pick up moving targets, the Doppler radar looks at the Doppler frequency shift of the returned signal. It can look from a long-range, which the military refers to as a high standoff capability. The antenna can be tilted to either side of the aircraft for a 120-degree field of view covering nearly 19,305 square miles (50,000\u00a0km2) and can simultaneously track at more than 152 miles (250\u00a0km). The GMTI modes cannot pick up objects that are too small, insufficiently dense, or stationary. Data processing allows the APY-7 to differentiate between armored vehicles (tracked tanks) and trucks, allowing targeting personnel to better select the appropriate ordnance for various targets.\nThe system's SAR modes can produce images of stationary objects. Objects with many angles (for example, the interior of a pick-up bed) will give a much better radar signature, or specular return. In addition to being able to detect, locate and track large numbers of ground vehicles, the radar has a limited capability to detect helicopters, rotating antennas and low, slow-moving fixed-wing aircraft.\nThe radar and computer subsystems on the E-8C can gather and display broad and detailed battlefield information. Data is collected as events occur. This includes position and tracking information on enemy and friendly ground forces. The information is relayed in near-real time to the US Army's common ground stations via the secure jam-resistant surveillance and control data link (SCDL) and to other ground C4I nodes beyond line-of-sight via ultra high-frequency satellite communications.\nOther major E-8C prime mission equipment are the communications/datalink (COMM/DLX) and operations and control (O&amp;C) subsystems. Eighteen operator workstations display computer-processed data in graphic and tabular format on video screens. Operators and technicians perform battle management, surveillance, weapons, intelligence, communications and maintenance functions.\nNorthrop Grumman has tested the installation of a MS-177 camera on an E-8C to provide real time visual target confirmation.\nThe Multi-Platform Radar Technology Insertion Program (MP-RTIP) radar system was proposed as a more capable replacement of the AN/APY-7. The USAF ended up pursuing cheaper ways to modernize the E-8, though the MP-RTIP receiver technology did see use in the form of JSTARS Radar Modernization (JSRM).\nBattle management.\nIn missions from peacekeeping operations to major theater war, the E-8C can provide targeting data and intelligence for attack aviation, naval surface fire, field artillery and friendly maneuver forces. The information helps air and land commanders to control the battlespace.\nThe E-8's ground-moving radar can tell approximate number of vehicles, location, speed, and direction of travel. It cannot identify exactly what type of vehicle a target is, tell what equipment it has, or discern whether it is friendly, hostile, or a bystander, so commanders often crosscheck the JSTARS data against other sources. In the Army, JSTARS data is analyzed in and disseminated from a Ground Station Module (GSM).\nOther improvement programs that have been applied to the E-8C include JSTARS Net Enabled Weapons (JNEW) and Joint Surface Warfare (JSuW); Blue Force Tracker (BFT); and Battlefield Airborne Communications Node (BACN) compatibility.\nOperational history.\nThe two E-8A development aircraft were deployed in 1991 to participate in Operation Desert Storm under the direction of USAF Colonel Harry H. Heimple, Program Director, even though they were still in development. The joint program accurately tracked mobile Iraqi forces, including tanks and Scud missiles. Crews flew developmental aircraft on 49 combat sorties, accumulating more than 500 combat hours and a 100% mission effectiveness rate.\nThese Joint STARS developmental aircraft also participated in Operation Joint Endeavor, a NATO peacekeeping mission, in December 1995. While flying in friendly air space, the test-bed E-8A and pre-production E-8C aircraft monitored ground movements to confirm compliance with the Dayton Peace Accords agreements. Crews flew 95 consecutive operational sorties and more than 1,000 flight hours with a 98% mission effectiveness rate.\nThe 93d Air Control Wing, which activated 29 January 1996, accepted its first aircraft on 11 June 1996, and deployed in support of Operation Joint Endeavor in October. The provisional 93d Air Expeditionary Group monitored treaty compliance while NATO rotated troops through Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first production E-8C and a pre-production E-8C flew 36 operational sorties and more than 470 flight hours with a 100% effectiveness rate. The wing declared initial operational capability 18 December 1997 after receiving the second production aircraft. Operation Allied Force saw Joint STARS in action again from February to June 1999 accumulating more than 1,000 flight hours and a 94.5% mission-effectiveness rate in support of the U.S.-led Kosovo War.\nThe twelfth production aircraft, outfitted with an upgraded operations and control subsystem, was delivered to the USAF on 5 November 2001.\nOn 1 October 2002, the 93d Air Control Wing (93 ACW) was \"blended\" with the 116th Bomb Wing in a ceremony at Robins Air Force Base (AFB), Georgia. The 116 BW was an Air National Guard wing equipped with B-1B Lancer bombers at Robins. As a result of a USAF reorganization of the B-1B force, all B-1Bs were assigned to active duty wings, resulting in the 116 BW lacking a current mission. The newly created wing was designated 116th Air Control Wing (116 ACW) and the 93 ACW was inactivated the same day. The 116 ACW constituted the first fully blended wing of active duty and Air National Guard airmen. The wing took delivery of the 17th and final E-8C on 23 March 2005.\nThe E-8C Joint STARS routinely supports various taskings of the Combined Force Command Korea during the North Korean winter exercise cycle and for the United Nations enforcing resolutions on Iraq.\nIn March 2009, a Joint STARS aircraft was damaged beyond economical repair when a test plug was left on a fuel tank vent, subsequently causing the fuel tank to rupture during in-flight refueling. There were no casualties but the aircraft sustained $25 million in damage.\nIn September 2009, Loren B. Thompson of the Lexington Institute raised the question of why most of the Joint STARS fleet was sitting idle instead of being used to track insurgents in Afghanistan. Thompson states that the Joint STARS' radar has an inherent capacity to find what the Army calls 'dismounted' targets\u2014insurgents walking around or placing roadside bombs. Thompson's neutrality has been questioned by some since Lexington Institute has been heavily funded by defense contractors, including Northrop Grumman. Trials of Joint STARS in Afghanistan were destined to develop tactics, techniques and procedures in tracking dismounted, moving groups of Taliban.\nIn January 2011, Northrop Grumman's E-8C Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) test bed aircraft completed the second of two deployments to Naval Air Station Point Mugu, California, in support of the U.S. Navy Joint Surface Warfare Joint Capability Technology Demonstration to test its network-enabled weapon architecture. The Joint STARS aircraft executed three Operational Utility Assessment flights and demonstrated its ability to guide anti-ship weapons against surface combatants at a variety of standoff distances in the NEW architecture.\nFrom 2001 to January 2011 the Joint STARS fleet flew more than 63,000 hours in 5,200 combat missions in support of Operations Iraqi Freedom, Enduring Freedom and New Dawn.\nOn 1 October 2011, the \"blended\" wing construct of the 116th Air Control Wing (116 ACW), combining Air National Guard and Regular Air Force personnel in a single unit was discontinued. On this date, the 461st Air Control Wing (461 ACW) was established at Robins AFB as the Air Force's sole active duty E-8 Joint STARS wing while the 116 ACW reverted to a traditional Air National Guard wing within the Georgia Air National Guard. Both units share the same E-8 aircraft and will often fly with mixed crews, but now function as separate units.\nOn 1 October 2019, JSTARS ended its continuous presence in the United States Central Command (USCENTCOM) areas of responsibility. The 18\u2013year deployment was the second-longest deployment in U.S. Air Force history. In that time, the crews and aircraft flew 10,938 sorties, and 114,426.6 combat hours.\nOn 11 February 2022, the first of four JSTARS out of the remaining 16 operational JSTARS was retired as detailed in the Fiscal Year 2022 National Defence Authorisation Act (NDAA). The plane (serial number 92-3289/GA) which was the first to arrive at Robins AFB in 1996 has now been transferred to the 309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Group at Davis\u2013Monthan Air Force Base.\nFrom late 2021 to early 2022, E-8C JSTARS aircraft deployed to Europe during the prelude to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Thirty years after entering service, it was performing the type of mission it had originally been intended to: monitoring Russian military activity in Eastern Europe, which it did while operating over Ukrainian airspace until the start of the invasion in late February 2022.\nRetirement.\nThe USAF began an analysis of alternatives (AOA) in March 2010 for its next generation GMTI radar aircraft fleet. The study was completed in March 2012 and recommended buying a new business jet-based ISR aircraft, such as a version of the Boeing 737, and the Gulfstream 550. The Air Force said Joint STARS was expected to remain in operation through 2030.\nOn 23 January 2014, the USAF revealed a plan for the acquisition of a new business jet-class replacement for the E-8C Joint STARS. The program was called Joint STARS Recap and planned for the aircraft to reach initial operating capability (IOC) by 2022. The aircraft would be more efficient, and separate contracts would be awarded for developing the aircraft, airborne sensor, battle management command and control (BMC2) system, and communications subsystem.\nOn 8 April 2014, the Air Force held an industry day for companies interested in competing for JSTARS Recap; attendees included Boeing, Bombardier Aerospace, and Gulfstream Aerospace. Air Force procurement documents called for a replacement for the Boeing 707-based E-8C as a \"business jet class\" aircraft that is \"significantly smaller and more efficient.\" Indicative specification were for an aircraft with a 10-13 person crew with a radar array and capable of flying at 38,000\u00a0ft for eight hours. In August 2015, the Air Force issued contracts to Boeing, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman for a one-year pre-engineering and manufacturing development effort to mature and test competing designs ahead of a downselect in late 2017.\nDuring the fiscal 2019 budget rollout briefing it was announced that the Air Force would not move forward with an E-8C replacement aircraft. Funding for the JSTARS recapitalization program was instead be diverted to pay for development of an Advanced Battle Management System.\nThe E-8C JSTARS began to be retired in February 2022, and flew its last operational sortie on 21 September 2023. Rather than procure a replacement aircraft, the USAF intends to use a network of satellites, aircraft sensors and ground radars as a cheaper and more resilient approach to collecting similar targeting and tracking data. The JSTARS performed its last flight on 15 November 2023. The aircraft conducted some 14,000 operational sorties, flying more than 141,000 hours over 32 years of service.\n Original platform configuration\n Single aircraft with mission equipment removed, used for flight crew training.\n Single aircraft, was to be a U.S. Navy Boeing E-6 Mercury but transferred to the U.S. Air Force as a development aircraft before it was decided to convert second-hand Boeing 707s (one from a Canadian Boeing CC-137) for the JSTARS role.\n Production Joint STARS platform configuration, converted from second-hand Boeing 707s (1 from a CC-137).\nAccidents.\nOne E-8C was damaged beyond economical repair during an operational sortie.\nSpecifications.\n\"Data from\" USAF FactsheetGeneral characteristics* Crew: 4 flight crew (pilot, co-pilot, navigator, flight engineer)* Capacity: 18 specialists (crew size varies according to mission)\nPerformance* Endurance: 9 hours\nAvionics\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10388", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10388", "title": "Eric Cheney", "text": "British motorcycle racer (1924\u20132001)\nEric Cheney (5 January 1924 \u2013 30 December 2001) was an English motorcycle racer, designer and independent constructor. He was known as one of the best motorcycle frame designers of his era, concentrating mainly in the off-road competition aftermarket.\nEarly life.\nCheney attended a school in Winchester based on Lancasterian principles before joining the Royal Navy at the age of 18, where he served on wartime Arctic convoys and in motor torpedo boats and gained experience of engineering and working on high performance engines. Cheney also worked on the development of remote controlled submarines for the Royal Navy.\nCareer.\nAfter World War II, Cheney joined the motorcycle dealers Archers of Aldershot as a mechanic. Cheney began racing motocross and became one Britain's best riders, along with his travelling companion Les Archer, who went on to become European champion. He had ten successful years on the Continental circuit but a prolonged illness due to an infection contracted while racing in Algeria ended his riding career. He moved into bike preparation and designs for motorcycle chassis and suspension systems.\nCheney had no formal training as a motorcycle designer yet was able to create original and high-performance motorcycle chassis designs working in a simple workshop that was essentially a domestic garage. His approach has been described as \"like a medieval engineer\" as in an age of computer-aided design and significant resources for research and development teams, he worked entirely by intuition. Eric relied on his long personal experience of international off-road competition riding and would prepare his initial designs for a new motorcycle frame in chalk on the wall of his workshop. Experimenting with different lines until he was satisfied, Cheney would then form the steel tubing using his chalk drawings as a guide. Only when he had built a working prototype motorcycle would he start work on a final jig for mass production. He was once quoted as saying \"I know when it's right and it screams at me when it's wrong.\"\nIn the late 1960s, the British motorcycle industry was unable to support a national team to compete in the International Six Days Trial so, Cheney hand built a limited number of ISDT Cheney-Triumphs using his own design of twin down-tube frame with a specially tuned Triumph 5TA engine. Fitted with tapered conical hubs, special motocross forks and large alloy fuel tanks, a Cheney Triumph was first used in the 1968 British Trophy Team. In 1970 and 1971 three 504cc Cheney Triumphs were used by the British team in the ISDT, in which Cheney won a manufacturer's prize. Replicas were built, but production was short-lived due to a shortage of engines.\nCheney's most noted successes were in the Grand Prix road racing championships, with Phil Read using his chassis in tandem with a Yamaha engine to win the 1971 250cc world championship. His designs were the last British ones to win a Grand Prix. He never worked for any of the major manufacturers but maintained a productive relationship with BSA in its heyday. After the demise of BSA in 1972, Cheney joined with former BSA factory rider John Banks to develop and campaign a highly successful BSA powered motocross bike.\nSome of Cheney's motorcycle designs are now famous in their own right, such as the competition BSA Gold Stars of Jerry Scott and Keith Hickman and the John Banks replica which used a BSA B50 engine specially tuned by Cheney. He also built some racing frames for Suzuki Grand Prix motorcycles in 1968 and, it has been suggested that Suzuki engineers incorporated features of Cheney's designs, such as magnesium hubs and lower fork legs into production road going motorcycles. Cheney's company was originally known as Eric Cheney Designs, then changed to Inter-Moto, now known as Cheney Racing.\nSteve McQueen.\nAmerican actor Steve McQueen, an experienced off-road rider who represented the United States in the ISDT bought a number of Cheney's motorcycles at full price because he considered them better than other makes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10390", "revid": "20468248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10390", "title": "Econometrics", "text": "Empirical statistical testing of economic theories\nEconometrics is an application of statistical methods to economic data in order to give empirical content to economic relationships. More precisely, it is \"the quantitative analysis of actual economic phenomena based on the concurrent development of theory and observation, related by appropriate methods of inference.\" An introductory economics textbook describes econometrics as allowing economists \"to sift through mountains of data to extract simple relationships.\" Jan Tinbergen is one of the two founding fathers of econometrics. The other, Ragnar Frisch, also coined the term in the sense in which it is used today.\nA basic tool for econometrics is the multiple linear regression model. \"Econometric theory\" uses statistical theory and mathematical statistics to evaluate and develop econometric methods. Econometricians try to find estimators that have desirable statistical properties including unbiasedness, efficiency, and consistency. \"Applied econometrics\" uses theoretical econometrics and real-world data for assessing economic theories, developing econometric models, analysing economic history, and forecasting.\nHistory.\nSome of the forerunners include Gregory King, Francis Ysidro Edgeworth, Vilfredo Pareto, and Sir William Petty's \"Political Arithmetick\". Early pioneering works in econometrics include Henry Ludwell Moore's \"Synthetic Economics\".\nBasic models: linear regression.\nA basic tool for econometrics is the multiple linear regression model. In modern econometrics, other statistical tools are frequently used, but linear regression is still the most frequently used starting point for an analysis. Estimating a linear regression on two variables can be visualized as fitting a line through data points representing paired values of the independent and dependent variables.\nFor example, consider Okun's law, which relates GDP growth to the unemployment rate. This relationship is represented in a linear regression where the change in unemployment rate (formula_1) is a function of an intercept (formula_2), a given value of GDP growth multiplied by a slope coefficient formula_3 and an error term, formula_4:\nformula_5\nThe unknown parameters formula_2 and formula_3 can be estimated. Here formula_2 is estimated to be 0.83 and formula_3 is estimated to be -1.77. This means that if GDP growth increased by one percentage point, the unemployment rate would be predicted to drop by 1.77 * 1 points, other things held constant. The model could then be tested for statistical significance as to whether an increase in GDP growth is associated with a decrease in the unemployment, as hypothesized. If the estimate of formula_3 were not significantly different from 0, the test would fail to find evidence that changes in the growth rate and unemployment rate were related. The variance in a prediction of the dependent variable (unemployment) as a function of the independent variable (GDP growth) is given in polynomial least squares.\nTheory.\nEconometric theory uses statistical theory and mathematical statistics to evaluate and develop econometric methods. Econometricians try to find estimators that have desirable statistical properties including unbiasedness, efficiency, and consistency. An estimator is unbiased if its expected value is the true value of the parameter; it is consistent if it converges to the true value as the sample size gets larger, and it is efficient if the estimator has lower standard error than other unbiased estimators for a given sample size. Ordinary least squares (OLS) is often used for estimation since it provides the BLUE or \"best linear unbiased estimator\" (where \"best\" means most efficient, unbiased estimator) given the Gauss-Markov assumptions. When these assumptions are violated or other statistical properties are desired, other estimation techniques such as maximum likelihood estimation, generalized method of moments, or generalized least squares are used. Estimators that incorporate prior beliefs are advocated by those who favour Bayesian statistics over traditional, classical or \"frequentist\" approaches.\nMethods.\n\"Applied econometrics\" uses theoretical econometrics and real-world data for assessing economic theories, developing econometric models, analysing economic history, and forecasting.\nEconometrics uses standard statistical models to study economic questions, but most often these are based on observational data, rather than data from controlled experiments. In this, the design of observational studies in econometrics is similar to the design of studies in other observational disciplines, such as astronomy, epidemiology, sociology and political science. Analysis of data from an observational study is guided by the study protocol, although exploratory data analysis may be useful for generating new hypotheses. Economics often analyses systems of equations and inequalities, such as supply and demand hypothesized to be in equilibrium. Consequently, the field of econometrics has developed methods for identification and estimation of simultaneous equations models. These methods are analogous to methods used in other areas of science, such as the field of system identification in systems analysis and control theory. Such methods may allow researchers to estimate models and investigate their empirical consequences, without directly manipulating the system.\nIn the absence of evidence from controlled experiments, econometricians often seek illuminating natural experiments or apply quasi-experimental methods to draw credible causal inference. The methods include regression discontinuity design, instrumental variables, and difference-in-differences.\nExample.\nA simple example of a relationship in econometrics from the field of labour economics is:\nformula_11\nThis example assumes that the natural logarithm of a person's wage is a linear function of the number of years of education that person has acquired. The parameter formula_12 measures the increase in the natural log of the wage attributable to one more year of education. The term formula_4 is a random variable representing all other factors that may have direct influence on wage. The econometric goal is to estimate the parameters, formula_14 under specific assumptions about the random variable formula_4. For example, if formula_4 is uncorrelated with years of education, then the equation can be estimated with ordinary least squares.\nIf the researcher could randomly assign people to different levels of education, the data set thus generated would allow estimation of the effect of changes in years of education on wages. In reality, those experiments cannot be conducted. Instead, the econometrician observes the years of education of and the wages paid to people who differ along many dimensions. Given this kind of data, the estimated coefficient on years of education in the equation above reflects both the effect of education on wages and the effect of other variables on wages, if those other variables were correlated with education. For example, people born in certain places may have higher wages and higher levels of education. Unless the econometrician controls for place of birth in the above equation, the effect of birthplace on wages may be falsely attributed to the effect of education on wages.\nThe most obvious way to control for birthplace is to include a measure of the effect of birthplace in the equation above. Exclusion of birthplace, together with the assumption that formula_17 is uncorrelated with education produces a misspecified model. Another technique is to include in the equation additional set of measured covariates which are not instrumental variables, yet render formula_12 identifiable. An overview of econometric methods used to study this problem were provided by Card (1999).\nJournals.\nThe main journals that publish work in econometrics are:\nLimitations and criticisms.\nLike other forms of statistical analysis, badly specified econometric models may show a spurious relationship where two variables are correlated but causally unrelated. In a study of the use of econometrics in major economics journals, McCloskey concluded that some economists report \"p\"-values (following the Fisherian tradition of tests of significance of point null-hypotheses) and neglect concerns of type II errors; some economists fail to report estimates of the size of effects (apart from statistical significance) and to discuss their economic importance. She also argues that some economists also fail to use economic reasoning for model selection, especially for deciding which variables to include in a regression.\nIn some cases, economic variables cannot be experimentally manipulated as treatments randomly assigned to subjects. In such cases, economists rely on observational studies, often using data sets with many strongly associated covariates, resulting in enormous numbers of models with similar explanatory ability but different covariates and regression estimates. Regarding the plurality of models compatible with observational data-sets, Edward Leamer urged that \"professionals ... properly withhold belief until an inference can be shown to be adequately insensitive to the choice of assumptions\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10391", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10391", "title": "Ellen van Langen", "text": "Dutch middle-distance runner\nEllen Gezina Maria van Langen (; born 9 February 1966) is a Dutch former middle distance runner, who specialised in the 800 metres. A talented but injury-ridden athlete, she was the 1992 Olympic Champion for the women's 800 meters. She is now the director of the FBK Games (the Hengelo meeting).\nCareer.\nVan Langen was born in Oldenzaal, Overijssel. Before she started running she played football. She only started to run seriously at 20. In 1989, she won her first of four national championships in the 800 meters and went on to win a silver medal behind Ana Quirot (Cuba) at the World Student Games (Universiade), running 1:59.82. In 1990, she finished fourth in the final of the European Championships in Split, with a Dutch national record of 1:57.57, behind the East German athletes Sigrun Wodars (gold), Christine Wachtel (silver) and Liliya Nurutdinova (bronze) from the Soviet Union.\nDuring the year 1991, she was troubled by an Achilles tendon injury. At the Tokyo World Championships she was eliminated in the heats. The next year, leading up to the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, she defeated Tokyo gold medallist Liliya Nurutdinova at the Fanny Blankers-Koen Games in Hengelo on 28 June in 1:56.66, the fastest time of the season prior to the Games. Just two weeks before the Olympics, she ran another fast time of 1:56.92 at Hechtel.\nAt the 1992 Olympic Games in Barcelona, Van Langen won the Olympic title in the 800 metres in a time of 1:55.54, a time which is still the Dutch national record. Fearing her final sprint, her competitors including favorites Nurutdinova, Quirot, Ella Kovacs (Romania) and Maria Mutola (Mozambique) set a rapid pace, running the first lap in a very fast time of 55.73, with Van Langen only in 6th position. Entering the final stretch Nurutdinova, who had led the final from the start, had a slight lead but Van Langen moved through on the inside in the last 50 m to win a surprise victory, beating Nurutdinova (silver) and Quirot (bronze).\nThe year 1992 remained her top year, when she won 10 of her 11 800 m races. After her Olympic triumph, she was plagued by various injuries. Her best result after 1992 was a 6th-place finish at the 1995 World Championships at Gothenburg. The ongoing injuries prevented her from defending her Olympic title in 1996. She retired from the sport in 1998.\nVan Langen later explained the secret of her success. \"I think what I could do well is I could die very well in a race and still continue,\u201d she said. \u201cThat is very hard, because it hurts running the 800 meters. You have to overcome some boundaries in yourself to continue when it hurts like hell. I was good at it. If the Olympic race would have been run by each athlete individual and the fastest time was the winner I would not have won.\" She added: \"I was also good in tactics, looking around me and taking the right decisions.\"\nAfter her gold medal win in 1992 the Amsterdam unemployment benefits office terminated her dole on grounds that she might earn money from her victory in the future. She has a degree in economics from the University of Amsterdam, and currently works as an event manager for Global Sports Communication.\nVan Langen is the director of the Fanny Blankers-Koen Games in Hengelo.\nPersonal bests.\nInformation from World Athletics profile unless otherwise noted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10392", "revid": "1314009625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10392", "title": "Emacs Lisp", "text": "Dialect of Lisp in the Emacs text editor\nEmacs Lisp is a Lisp dialect made for Emacs.\nIt is used for implementing most of the editing functionality built into Emacs, the remainder being written in C, as is the Lisp interpreter.\nEmacs Lisp code is used to modify, extend and customize Emacs.\nThose not wanting to write the code themselves can use the https:// function instead. It provides a set of preferences pages allowing the user to set options and preview their effect in the running Emacs session. \nWhen the user saves their changes,\nCustomize simply writes the necessary Emacs Lisp code to the user's config file, which can be set to a special file that only Customize uses, to avoid the possibility of altering the user's own file.\nBesides being a programming language that can be compiled to bytecode\nand transcompiled to native code,\nEmacs Lisp can also function as an interpreted scripting language, much like the Unix Bourne shell or Perl, by calling Emacs in \"batch mode\". \nIn this way it may be called from the command line or via an executable file, and its editing functions, such as buffers and movement commands are available to the program just as in the normal mode. No user interface is presented when Emacs is started in batch mode; it simply executes the passed-in script and exits, displaying any output from the script.\nEmacs Lisp is also termed Elisp, although there are also older, unrelated Lisp dialects with that name.\nCompared to other Lisp dialects.\nEmacs Lisp is most closely related to Maclisp, with some later influence from Common Lisp. It supports imperative and functional programming methods. Lisp was the default extension language for Emacs derivatives such as EINE and ZWEI. When Richard Stallman forked Gosling Emacs into GNU Emacs, he also chose Lisp as the extension language, because of its powerful features, including the ability to treat functions as data. Although the Common Lisp standard had yet to be formulated, Scheme existed at the time, but Stallman chose not to use it because of its comparatively poor performance on workstations (relative to the minicomputers that were Emacs' traditional home), and he wanted to develop a dialect which he thought would be more easily optimized.\nThe Lisp dialect used in Emacs differs substantially from the more modern Common Lisp and Scheme dialects used for applications programming. A prominent characteristic of Emacs Lisp is in its use of dynamic rather than lexical scope by default. That is, a function may reference local variables in the scope it is called from, but not in the scope where it was defined. Recently, there has been an ongoing effort to update code to use lexical scoping, for reasons outlined below.\nExample.\nThe development of Emacs Lisp was guided by the goal of providing data structures and features specific to making a versatile text editor over implementing a general-purpose programming language. For example, Emacs Lisp cannot easily read a file a line at a time\u2014the entire file must be read into an Emacs buffer. However, Emacs Lisp provides many features for navigating and modifying buffer text at a sentence, paragraph, or higher syntactic level as defined by modes.\nHere follows a simple example of an Emacs extension written in Emacs Lisp. In Emacs, the editing area can be split into separate areas called \"windows\", each displaying a different \"buffer\". A buffer is a region of text loaded into Emacs' memory (possibly from a file) which can be saved into a text document.\nUsers can press the default C-x 2 key binding to open a new window. This runs the Emacs Lisp function codice_1. Normally, when the new window appears, it displays the same buffer as the previous one. Suppose we wish to make it display the next available buffer. In order to do this, the user writes the following Emacs Lisp code, in either an existing Emacs Lisp source file or an empty Emacs buffer:\n (interactive)\n (split-window-below)\n (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))\nThe first statement, codice_2, defines a new function, codice_3, which calls codice_1 (the old window-splitting function), then tells the new window to display another (new) buffer. The second statement, codice_5 re-binds the key sequence \"C-x 2\" to the new function.\nThis can also be written using the feature named \"advice\", which allows a user to create wrappers around extant functions instead of defining their own. This has the advantages of not needing keybindings to be changed, of working wherever the original function is called, and of being simpler to write, but the disadvantage of making debugging more complex. For this reason, \"advice\" is not allowed in the source code of GNU Emacs, but if a user wishes, the advice feature can be used in their code to reimplement the above code as follows:\n(defadvice split-window-below\n (after my-window-splitting-advice first () activate)\n (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))\nThis instructs codice_1 to execute the user-supplied code whenever it is called, after executing the rest of the function. Advice can also be specified to execute before the original function, around it (literally wrapping the original), or to conditionally execute the original function based on the results of the advice.\nEmacs 24.4 replaces this codice_7 mechanism with codice_8, which is claimed to be more flexible and simpler. The advice above could be reimplemented using the new system as:\n (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))\nThese changes take effect as soon as the code is evaluated. It is not necessary to recompile, restart Emacs, or even rehash a configuration file. If the code is saved into an Emacs init file, then Emacs will load the extension the next time it starts. Otherwise, the changes must be reevaluated manually when Emacs is restarted.\nSource code.\nEmacs Lisp source code is stored in filesystems as plain text files, by convention with the filename suffix \"codice_9\". The user's init file is an exception, often appearing as \"codice_10\" despite being evaluated as any Emacs Lisp code. Since the mid-1990s, Emacs also loads codice_11 and codice_12. Further, users may specify any file to load as a config file on the command line, or explicitly state that no config file is to be loaded. When the files are loaded, an interpreter component of the Emacs program reads and parses the functions and variables, storing them in memory. They are then available to other editing functions, and to user commands. Functions and variables can be freely modified and redefined without restarting the editor or reloading the config file.\nIn order to save time and memory space, much of the functionality of Emacs loads only when required. Each set of optional features shipped with Emacs is implemented by a collection of Emacs code called a package or library. For example, there is a library for highlighting keywords in program source code, and a library for playing the game of Tetris. Each library is implemented using one or more Emacs Lisp source files. Libraries can define one or more \"major modes\" to activate and control their function.\nEmacs developers write certain functions in C. These are \"primitives\", also termed \"built-in functions\" or \"subrs\". Although primitives can be called from Lisp code, they can only be modified by editing the C source files and recompiling. In GNU Emacs, primitives are not available as external libraries; they are part of the Emacs executable. In XEmacs, runtime loading of such primitives is possible, using the operating system's support for dynamic linking. Functions may be written as primitives because they need access to external data and libraries not otherwise available from Emacs Lisp, or because they are called often enough that the comparative speed of C versus Emacs Lisp makes a worthwhile difference.\nHowever, because errors in C code can easily lead to segmentation violations or to more subtle bugs, which crash the editor, and because writing C code that interacts correctly with the Emacs Lisp garbage collector is error-prone, the number of functions implemented as primitives is kept to a necessary minimum.\nByte code.\n\"Byte-compiling\" can make Emacs Lisp code execute faster. Emacs contains a compiler which can translate Emacs Lisp source files into a special representation termed bytecode. Emacs Lisp bytecode files have the filename suffix \"codice_13\". Compared to source files, bytecode files load and run faster, occupy less disk space, and use less memory when loaded.\nBytecode still runs more slowly than primitives, but functions loaded as bytecode can be easily modified and re-loaded, and bytecode files are cross-platform software. The standard Emacs Lisp code distributed with Emacs is loaded as bytecode, although the matching source files are usually provided for the user's reference as well. User-supplied extensions are typically not byte-compiled, as they are neither as large nor as computationally intensive.\nLanguage features.\nThe \"cl-lib\" package implements a fairly large subset of Common Lisp. This package replaces an earlier \"cl\" package, which would overwrite existing Emacs Lisp function definitions with ones more similar to those found in Common Lisp. The \"cl-lib\" package, on the other hand, follows Emacs Lisp style guidelines more closely and prefixes each function and macro it defines with \"cl-\" (e.g., codice_14, which doesn't conflict with the name of the built-in codice_15), avoiding the unexpected changes in behavior that could occur whenever the \"cl\" package was loaded.\nEmacs Lisp (unlike some other Lisp implementations) does not do tail-call optimization. Without this, tail recursions can eventually lead to stack overflow.\nThe apel library aids in writing portable Emacs Lisp code, with the help of the polysylabi platform bridge.\nEmacs Lisp is a Lisp-2 like Common Lisp, meaning that it has a function namespace which is separate from the namespace it uses for other variables.\nFrom dynamic to lexical scoping.\nLike MacLisp, Emacs Lisp uses dynamic scope, offering static (or lexical) as an option starting from version 24. It can be activated by setting the file local variable codice_16. Before this option was added, one could use the codice_17 macro from the (now deprecated) \"cl\" package to provide effective lexical scope.\nIn dynamic scoping, if a programmer declares a variable within the scope of a function, it is available to subroutines called from within that function. Originally, this was intended as an optimization; lexical scoping was still uncommon and of uncertain performance. In computer scientist Olin Shivers's recollection, \"I asked RMS when he was implementing emacs lisp why it was dynamically scoped and his exact reply was that lexical scope was too inefficient.\" Dynamic scoping was also meant to provide greater flexibility for user customizations. However, dynamic scoping has several disadvantages. Firstly, it can easily lead to bugs in large programs, due to unintended interactions between variables in different functions. Secondly, accessing variables under dynamic scoping is generally slower than under lexical scoping.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10393", "revid": "50687458", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10393", "title": "Edward Bulwer-Lytton", "text": "British statesman and writer (1803\u20131873)\nEdward George Earle Lytton Bulwer-Lytton, 1st Baron Lytton (; 25 May 1803 \u2013 18 January 1873) was an English writer and politician. He served as a Whig member of Parliament from 1831 to 1841 and a Conservative from 1851 to 1866. He was Secretary of State for the Colonies from June 1858 to June 1859, as which he selected Richard Clement Moody to found British Columbia. He was created Baron Lytton of Knebworth in 1866.\nBulwer-Lytton's works were well known in his time. He coined famous phrases like \"pursuit of the almighty dollar\", \"the pen is mightier than the sword\", \"dweller on the threshold\", \"the great unwashed\", and the opening phrase (incipit) \"It was a dark and stormy night.\" The sardonic Bulwer-Lytton Fiction Contest, held annually from 1982 to 2024, claims to seek the \"opening sentence of the worst of all possible novels\".\nLife.\nBulwer was born on 25 May 1803 to General William Earle Bulwer of Heydon Hall and Wood Dalling, Norfolk, and Elizabeth Barbara Lytton, daughter of Richard Warburton Lytton of Knebworth House, Hertfordshire. He had two older brothers, William Earle Lytton Bulwer (1799\u20131877) and Henry (1801\u20131872; later Baron Dalling and Bulwer).\nHis father died and his mother moved to London when he was four years old. When he was 15, a tutor named Wallington, who tutored him at Ealing, encouraged him to publish an immature work: \"Ishmael and Other Poems\". Around this time, Bulwer fell in love, but the woman's father induced her to marry another man. She died about the time that Bulwer went to Cambridge and he stated that her loss affected all his subsequent life.\nIn 1822 Bulwer-Lytton entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he met John Auldjo, but soon moved to Trinity Hall. In 1825 he won the Chancellor's Gold Medal for English verse. In the following year he took his BA degree and printed for private circulation a small volume of poems, \"Weeds and Wild Flowers\". He purchased an army commission in 1826, but sold it in 1829 without serving.\nIn August 1827, he married Rosina Doyle Wheeler (1802\u20131882), a noted Irish beauty, but against the wishes of his mother, who withdrew his allowance, forcing him to work for a living. They had two children, Emily Elizabeth Bulwer-Lytton (1828\u20131848), and (Edward) Robert Lytton Bulwer-Lytton, 1st Earl of Lytton (1831\u20131891) who became Governor-General and Viceroy of British India (1876\u20131880). His writing and political work strained their marriage and his infidelity embittered Rosina.\nIn 1833, they separated acrimoniously and in 1836 the separation became legal. Three years later, Rosina published \"Cheveley, or the Man of Honour\" (1839), satirising her husband's hypocrisy.\nIn June 1858, when her husband was standing as parliamentary candidate for Hertfordshire, she denounced him at the hustings. He retaliated by threatening her publishers, withholding her allowance and denying her access to their children. Finally he had her committed to a mental asylum, but she was released a few weeks later after a public outcry. This she chronicled in a memoir, \"A Blighted Life\" (1880). She continued attacking her husband's character for several years.\nThe death of Bulwer's mother in 1843 meant his \"exhaustion of toil and study had been completed by great anxiety and grief,\" and by \"about the January of 1844, I was thoroughly shattered.\"\nIn his mother's room at Knebworth House, which he inherited, he \"had inscribed above the mantelpiece a request that future generations preserve the room as his beloved mother had used it.\" It remains hardly changed to this day.\nOn 20 February 1844, in accordance with his mother's will, he changed his surname from Bulwer to Bulwer-Lytton and assumed the arms of Lytton by royal licence. His widowed mother had done the same in 1811. His brothers remained plain \"Bulwer\".\nBy chance, Bulwer-Lytton encountered a copy of \"Captain Claridge's work on the \"Water Cure\", as practised by Priessnitz, at Graefenberg\" and, \"making allowances for certain exaggerations therein\", pondered the option of travelling to Graefenberg, but preferred to find something closer to home, with access to his own doctors in case of failure: \"I who scarcely lived through a day without leech or potion!\". After reading a pamphlet by Doctor James Wilson, who operated a hydropathic establishment with James Manby Gully at Malvern, he stayed there for \"some nine or ten weeks\", after which he \"continued the system some seven weeks longer under Doctor Weiss, at Petersham\", then again at \"Doctor Schmidt's magnificent hydropathic establishment at Boppart\" (at the former Marienberg Convent at Boppard), after developing a cold and fever upon his return home.\nThe English Rosicrucian society, founded in 1867 by Robert Wentworth Little, claimed Bulwer-Lytton as their \"Grand Patron\", but he wrote to the society complaining that he was \"extremely surprised\" by their use of the title, as he had \"never sanctioned such.\" Nevertheless, a number of esoteric groups have continued to claim Bulwer-Lytton as their own, chiefly because some of his writings \u2013 such as the 1842 book \"Zanoni\" \u2013 have included Rosicrucian and other esoteric notions. According to the Fulham Football Club, he once resided in the original Craven Cottage, today the site of their stadium.\nBulwer-Lytton had long suffered from a disease of the ear, and for the last two or three years of his life lived in Torquay nursing his health. After an operation to cure deafness, an abscess formed in the ear and burst; he endured intense pain for a week and died at 2\u00a0am on 18 January 1873, just short of his 70th birthday. The cause of death was unclear but it was thought the infection had affected his brain and caused a fit. Rosina outlived him by nine years. Against his wishes, Bulwer-Lytton was honoured with a burial in Westminster Abbey. His unfinished history \"Athens: Its Rise and Fall\" was published posthumously.\nPolitical career.\nBulwer began his political career as a follower of Jeremy Bentham. In 1831 he was elected member for St Ives, Cornwall, after which he was returned for Lincoln in 1832, and sat in Parliament for that city for nine years. He spoke in favour of the Reform Bill and took the lead in securing the reduction, after he had vainly supported the repeal, of the newspaper stamp duties. His influence was perhaps most keenly felt after the Whig Party's dismissal from office in 1834, when he issued a pamphlet entitled \"A Letter to a Late Cabinet Minister on the Crisis\". Lord Melbourne, the Prime Minister, offered him a lordship of the Admiralty, which he declined as likely to interfere with his activity as an author.\nBulwer was created a baronet, of Knebworth House in the County of Hertford, in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom, in 1838. In 1841, he left Parliament and spent much of his time in travel. He did not return to politics until 1852, when, having differed from Lord John Russell over the Corn Laws, he stood for Hertfordshire as a Conservative. Bulwer-Lytton held that seat until 1866, when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Lytton of Knebworth in the County of Hertford. In 1858, he entered Lord Derby's government as Secretary of State for the Colonies, thus serving alongside his old friend Benjamin Disraeli. He was comparatively inactive in the House of Lords.\n\"Just prior to his government's defeat in 1859 the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton, notified Sir George Ferguson Bowen of his appointment as Governor of the new colony to be known as 'Queen's Land'.\" The draft letter was ranked #4 in the 'Top 150: Documenting Queensland' exhibition when it toured to venues around Queensland from February 2009 to April 2010. The exhibition was part of Queensland State Archives' events and exhibition program which contributed to the state's Q150 celebrations, marking the 150th anniversary of the separation of Queensland from New South Wales.\nBritish Columbia.\nWhen news of the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush reached London, Bulwer-Lytton, as Secretary of State for the Colonies, requested that the War Office recommend a field officer, \"a man of good judgement possessing a knowledge of mankind\", to lead a Corps of 150 (later increased to 172) Royal Engineers, who had been selected for their \"superior discipline and intelligence\". The War Office chose Richard Clement Moody, and Lord Lytton, who described Moody as his \"distinguished friend\", accepted the nomination in view of Moody's military record, his success as Governor of the Falkland Islands, and the distinguished record of his father, Colonel Thomas Moody, Kt. at the Colonial Office. Moody was charged to establish British order and transform the newly established Colony of British Columbia into the British Empire's \"bulwark in the farthest west\" and \"found a second England on the shores of the Pacific\". Lytton desired to send to the colony \"representatives of the best of British culture, not just a police force\", sought men who possessed \"courtesy, high breeding and urbane knowledge of the world\", and decided to send Moody, whom the Government considered to be the archetypal \"English gentleman and British Officer\" at the head of the Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment, to whom he wrote an impassioned letter.\nThe former HBC Fort Dallas at Camchin, the confluence of the Thompson and the Fraser Rivers, was renamed in his honour by Governor Sir James Douglas in 1858 as Lytton, British Columbia.\nLiterary works.\nBulwer-Lytton's literary career began in 1820 with the publication of a book of poems and spanned much of the 19th century. He wrote in a variety of genres, including historical fiction, mystery, romance, the occult and science fiction. He financed his extravagant way of life with a varied and prolific literary output, sometimes publishing anonymously. \nBulwer-Lytton published \"Falkland\" in 1827, a novel which was only a moderate success. But \"Pelham\" brought him public acclaim in 1828 and established his reputation as a wit and dandy. Its intricate plot and humorous, intimate portrayal of pre-Victorian dandyism kept gossips busy trying to associate public figures with characters in the book. \"Pelham\" resembled Benjamin Disraeli's first novel \"Vivian Grey\" (1827). The character of the villainous Richard Crawford in \"The Disowned\", also published in 1828, borrowed much from that of banker and forger Henry Fauntleroy, who was hanged in London in 1824 before a crowd of some 100,000.\nBulwer-Lytton admired Disraeli's father Isaac D'Israeli, himself a noted author. They began corresponding in the late 1820s and met for the first time in March 1830, when Isaac D'Israeli dined at Bulwer-Lytton's house. Also present that evening were Charles Pelham Villiers and Alexander Cockburn. The young Villiers had a long parliamentary career, while Cockburn became Lord Chief Justice of England in 1859.\nBulwer-Lytton reached his height of popularity with the publication of \"England and the English\", and \"Godolphin\" (1833). This was followed by \"The Pilgrims of the Rhine\" (1834), \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (1834), \"Rienzi, Last of the Roman Tribunes\" about Cola di Rienzo (1835), \"Ernest Maltravers; or, The Eleusinia\" (1837), \"Alice; or, The Mysteries\" (1838), \"Leila; or, The Siege of Granada\" (1838), and \"Harold: The Last of the Saxon Kings\" (1848). \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" was inspired by Karl Briullov's painting \"The Last Day of Pompeii\", which Bulwer-Lytton saw in Milan.\nHis \"New Timon\" lampooned Tennyson, who responded in kind. Bulwer-Lytton also wrote the horror story \"The Haunted and the Haunters; or, The House and the Brain\" (1859). Another novel with a supernatural theme was \"A Strange Story\" (1862), which was an influence on Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\".\nBulwer-Lytton wrote many other works, including \"Vril: The Power of the Coming Race\" (1871) which drew heavily on his interest in the occult and contributed to the early growth of the science fiction genre. Its story of a subterranean race waiting to reclaim the surface of the Earth is an early science fiction theme. The book popularised the Hollow Earth theory and may have inspired \"Nazi mysticism\". His term \"vril\" lent its name to Bovril meat extract. The book was also the theme of a fundraising event held at the Royal Albert Hall in 1891, the Vril-Ya Bazaar and Fete. \"Vril\" has been adopted by theosophists and occultists since the 1870s and became closely associated with the ideas of an esoteric neo-Nazism after 1945.\nHis play \"Money\" (1840) was first produced at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, London, on 8 December 1840. The first American production was at the Old Park Theater in New York on 1 February 1841. Subsequent productions include the Prince of Wales's Theatre's in 1872 and as the inaugural play at the new California Theatre in San Francisco in 1869.\nAmong Bulwer-Lytton's lesser-known contributions to literature was that he convinced Charles Dickens to revise the ending of \"Great Expectations\" to make it more palatable to the reading public, as in the original version of the novel, Pip and Estella remain apart.\nLegacy.\nBulwer-Lytton's works had an influence in a number of fields.\nQuotations.\nBulwer-Lytton's most famous quotation is \"The pen is mightier than the sword\" from his play \"Richelieu\":\nbeneath the rule of men entirely great, the pen is mightier than the sword\nHe popularized the phrase \"pursuit of the almighty dollar\" from his novel \"The Coming Race\", and he is credited with \"the great unwashed\", using this disparaging term in his 1830 novel \"Paul Clifford\":\nHe is certainly a man who bathes and \"lives cleanly\", (two especial charges preferred against him by Messrs. the Great Unwashed). \nTheosophy.\nThe writers of theosophy were among those influenced by Bulwer-Lytton's work. Annie Besant and especially Helena Blavatsky incorporated his thoughts and ideas, particularly from \"The Last Days of Pompeii\", \"Vril, the Power of the Coming Race\" and \"Zanoni\" in her own books.\nContest.\nBulwer-Lytton's name lives on in the annual Bulwer-Lytton Fiction Contest, in which contestants think up terrible openings for imaginary novels, inspired by the first line of his 1830 novel \"Paul Clifford\":\nIt was a dark and stormy night; the rain fell in torrents \u2013 except at occasional intervals, when it was checked by a violent gust of wind which swept up the streets (for it is in London that our scene lies), rattling along the housetops, and fiercely agitating the scanty flame of the lamps that struggled against the darkness.\nEntrants in the contest seek to capture the rapid changes in point of view, the florid language, and the atmosphere of the full sentence. The opening was popularized by the \"Peanuts\" comic strip, in which Snoopy's sessions on the typewriter usually began with \"It was a dark and stormy night\". The same words also form the first sentence of Madeleine L'Engle's Newbery Medal\u2013winning novel \"A Wrinkle in Time\". Similar wording appears in Edgar Allan Poe's 1831 short story \"The Bargain Lost\", although not at the very beginning. It reads:\nIt was a dark and stormy night. The rain fell in cataracts; and drowsy citizens started, from dreams of the deluge, to gaze upon the boisterous sea, which foamed and bellowed for admittance into the proud towers and marble palaces. Who would have thought of passions so fierce in that calm water that slumbers all day long? At a slight alabaster stand, trembling beneath the ponderous tomes which it supported, sat the hero of our story.\nOperas.\nSeveral of Bulwer-Lytton's novels were made into operas. One of them, \"Rienzi, der Letzte der Tribunen\" (1842) by Richard Wagner, eventually became more famous than the novel. \"Leonora\" (1846) by William Henry Fry, the first European-styled \"grand\" opera composed in the United States, is based on Bulwer-Lytton's play \"The Lady of Lyons\", as is Frederic Cowen's first opera \"Pauline\" (1876). Verdi rival Errico Petrella's most successful opera, \"Jone\" (1858), was based on Bulwer-Lytton's \"The Last Days of Pompeii\", and was performed all over the world until the 1880s, and in Italy until 1910. \"Harold: The Last of the Saxon Kings\" (1848) provided character names (but little else) for Verdi's opera \"Aroldo\" (1857).\nTheatrical adaptations.\nShortly after their first publication, \"The Last Days of Pompeii\", \"Rienzi\", and \"Ernest Maltravers\" all received successful stage performances in New York.\nThe plays were written by Louisa Medina, one of the most successful playwrights of the 19th century. \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" had the longest continuous stage run in New York at the time with 29 straight performances.\nMagazines.\nIn addition to his political and literary work, Bulwer-Lytton became the editor of the \"New Monthly\" in 1831, but he resigned the following year. In 1841, he started the \"Monthly Chronicle\", a semi-scientific magazine. During his career he wrote poetry, prose, and stage plays; his last novel was \"Kenelm Chillingly\", which was in course of publication in \"Blackwood's Magazine\" at the time of his death in 1873.\nTranslations.\nBulwer-Lytton's works of fiction and non-fiction were translated in his day and since then into many languages, including Serbian (by Laza Kostic), German, Russian, Norwegian, Swedish, French, Finnish, and Spanish. In 1879, his \"Ernest Maltravers\" was the first complete novel from the West to be translated into Japanese.\nPlace names.\nIn Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, the suburb of Lytton, the town of Bulwer on Moreton Island (Moorgumpin) and the neighbourhood (former island) of Bulwer Island are named after him. The township of Lytton, Quebec (today part of Montcerf-Lytton) was named after him as was Lytton, British Columbia, and Lytton, Iowa. Lytton Road in Gisborne, New Zealand, was named after the novelist. Later a state secondary school, Lytton High School, was founded in the road. Also in New Zealand, Bulwer is a small locality in Waihinau Bay in the outer Pelorus Sound, New Zealand. It can be reached by 77\u00a0km of winding, mostly unsealed, road from Rai Valley. A weekly mail boat service delivers mail and also offers passenger services. In London, Lytton Road in the suburb of Pinner, where the novelist lived, is named after him.\nPortrayal on television.\nBulwer-Lytton was portrayed by the actor Brett Usher in the 1978 television serial \"Disraeli\".\nWorks.\nNovels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlays.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10394", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10394", "title": "Euclidean ring", "text": ""}
{"id": "10400", "revid": "44595678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10400", "title": "History of Esperanto", "text": "L. L. Zamenhof developed Esperanto in the 1870s and '80s. \"Unua Libro\", the first print discussion of the language, appeared in 1887. The number of Esperanto speakers have increased gradually since then, without much support from governments and international organizations. Its use has, in some instances, been outlawed or otherwise suppressed.\nStandardized Yiddish.\nAround 1880, while in Moscow and approximately simultaneously with working on Esperanto, Zamenhof made an aborted attempt to standardize Yiddish, based on his native Bialystok (Northeastern) dialect, as a unifying language for the Jews of the Russian Empire. He even used a Latin alphabet, with the letters \"\u0107, h\u0301, \u015b, \u017a\" (the same as in early drafts of Esperanto, later \"\u0109, \u0125, \u015d, \u0135\") and \"\u011b\" for schwa. However, he concluded there was no future for such a project, and abandoned it, dedicating himself to Esperanto as a unifying language for all humankind. Paul Wexler proposed that Esperanto was not an arbitrary pastiche of major European languages but a Latinate relexification of Yiddish, a native language of its founder. This model is generally unsupported by mainstream linguists.\nDevelopment of the language before publication.\nZamenhof would later say that he had dreamed of a world language since he was a child. At first he considered a revival of Latin, but after learning it in school he decided it was too complicated to be a common means of international communication. When he learned English, he realised that verb conjugations were unnecessary, and that grammatical systems could be much simpler than he had expected. He still had the problem of memorising a large vocabulary, until he noticed two Russian signs labelled \"\u0428\u0432\u0435\u0439\u0446\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\" (\"\u0161vejtsarskaja,\" a porter's lodge \u2013 from \"\u0448\u0432\u0435\u0439\u0446\u0430\u0440\" \"\u0161vejtsar,\" a porter) and \"\u041a\u043e\u043d\u0434\u0438\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\" (\"konditerskaja,\" a confectioner's shop \u2013 from \"\u043a\u043e\u043d\u0434\u0438\u0442\u0435\u0440\" \"konditer,\" a confectioner). He then realised that a judicious use of affixes could greatly decrease the number of root words needed for communication. He chose to take his vocabulary from Romance and Germanic, the languages that were most widely taught in schools around the world and would therefore be recognisable to the largest number of people.\nZamenhof taught an early version of the language to his high-school classmates. Then, for several years, he worked on translations and poetry to refine his creation. In 1895 he wrote, \"I worked for six years perfecting and testing the language, even though it had seemed to me in 1878 that it was already completely ready.\" When he was ready to publish, the Czarist censors would not allow it. Stymied, he spent his time in translating works such as the Bible and Shakespeare. This enforced delay led to continued improvement. In July 1887 he published his \"Unua Libro\" (\"First Book\"), a basic introduction to the language. This was essentially the language spoken today.\n\"Unua Libro\" to Declaration of Boulogne (1887\u20131905).\n\"Unua Libro\" was published in 1887. At first the movement grew most in the Russian empire and eastern Europe, but soon spread to western Europe and beyond: to Argentina in 1889; to Canada in 1901; to Algeria, Chile, Japan, Mexico, and Peru in 1903; to Tunisia in 1904; and to Australia, the United States, Guinea, Indochina, New Zealand, Tonkin, and Uruguay in 1905.\nIn its first years Esperanto was used mainly in publications by Zamenhof and early adopters like Antoni Grabowski, in extensive correspondence (mostly now lost), in the magazine \"La Esperantisto\", published from 1889 to 1895 and only occasionally in personal encounters.\nIn 1894, under pressure from Wilhelm Trompeter, the publisher of the magazine \"La Esperantisto\", and some other leading users, Zamenhof reluctantly put forward a radical reform to be voted on by readers. He proposed the reduction of the alphabet to 22 letters (by eliminating the accented letters and most of their sounds), the change of the plural to \"-i\", the use of a positional accusative instead of the ending \"-n\", the removal of the distinction between adjectives and adverbs, the reduction of the number of participles from six to two, and the replacement of the table of correlatives with more Latinate words or phrases. These reforms were overwhelmingly rejected, but some were picked up in subsequent reforms (such as Ido) and criticisms of the language. In the following decade Esperanto spread into western Europe, especially France. By 1905 there were already 27 magazines being published (Auld 1988).\nA small international conference was held in 1904, leading to the first world congress in August 1905 in Boulogne-sur-Mer, France. There were 688 Esperanto speakers present from 20 nationalities. At this congress, Zamenhof officially resigned his leadership of the Esperanto movement, as he did not want personal prejudice against himself (or anti-Semitism) to hinder the progress of the language. He proposed a declaration on founding principles of the Esperanto movement, which the attendees of the congress endorsed.\nDeclaration of Boulogne to present (1905\u2013present).\nThe World Esperanto Congress has been held every year since 1905, except during the two world wars and the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe autonomous territory of Neutral Moresnet, between Belgium and Germany, had a sizable proportion of Esperanto-speakers among its small and multiethnic population. There was a proposal to make Esperanto its official language. In 1908, it was eventually accepted alongside Dutch, German, and French. There was also a large Esperanto group led by Anna Tuschinski in the Free City of Danzig.\nIn the early 1920s, a great opportunity seemed to arise for Esperanto when the Iranian delegation to the League of Nations proposed that it be adopted for use in international relations, following a report by Nitobe Inaz\u014d, an official delegate of League of Nations during the 13th World Congress of Esperanto in Prague. Ten delegates accepted the proposal with only one voice against, the French delegate, Gabriel Hanotaux, who employed France's Council veto privilege to squash all League attempts at the recognition of Esperanto, starting on the first vote on 18 December 1920 and continuing through the next three years. Hanotaux did not like how the French language was losing its position as the international language and saw Esperanto as a threat. However, two years later the League recommended that its member states include Esperanto in their educational curricula. The French retaliated by banning all instruction in Esperanto in French schools and universities. The French Ministry of Instruction said that acceptance of Esperanto would mean that \"French and English would perish and that the literary standard of the world would be debased\". Nonetheless, many people see the 1920s as the heyday of the Esperanto movement.\nIn 1941, the Soviet Union started performing mass arrests, deportations, and killings of many Esperantists and their relatives for fear of an anti-nationalistic movement, but it was interrupted by the Nazi invasion.\nHitler wrote in \"Mein Kampf\" that Esperanto was created as a universal language to unite the Jewish diaspora.\nThe creation of a Jew-free National German Esperanto League was not enough to placate the Nazis.\nThe teaching of Esperanto was not allowed in German prisoner-of-war camps during World War II. Esperantists sometimes were able to get around the ban by convincing guards that they were teaching Italian, the language of Germany's closest ally.\nIn the early years of the Soviet Union, Esperanto was given a measure of government support, and an officially recognized Soviet Esperanto Association came into being. However, in 1937, Stalin reversed this policy and the use of Esperanto was effectively banned until 1956.\nWhile Esperanto itself was not enough cause for execution, its use was extended among Jews or trade unionists and encouraged contacts with foreigners.\nFascist Italy, on the other hand, made some efforts of promoting tourism in Italy through Esperanto leaflets and appreciated the similarities of Italian and Esperanto.\nPortugal's right-wing governments cracked down on the language from 1936 until they were deposed in the Carnation Revolution of 1974. After the Spanish Civil War, Francoist Spain cracked down on the Anarchists and Catalan nationalists among whom the speaking of Esperanto had been quite widespread; but in the 1950s, the Esperanto movement was tolerated again, with Francisco Franco accepting the honorary patronage of the Madrid World Esperanto Congress.\nThe Cold War, especially in the 1950s and 1960s, put a damper on the Esperanto movement as well, as there were fears on both sides that Esperanto could be used for enemy propaganda. However, the language experienced something of a renaissance in the 1970s and spread to new parts of the world, such as its veritable explosion in popularity in Iran in 1975. By 1991 there were enough African Esperantists to warrant a pan-African congress. The language continues to spread, although it is not officially recognised by any country, and is part of the state educational curriculum of only a few.\nIn 2022 an Esperanto club was founded on the Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station making Antarctica the last continent with organized Esperantists.\nEvolution of the language.\nThe Declaration of Boulogne (1905) limited changes to Esperanto. That declaration stated, among other things, that the basis of the language should remain the (\"Foundation of Esperanto\", a group of early works by Zamenhof), which is to be binding forever: nobody has the right to make changes to it. The declaration also permits new concepts to be expressed as the speaker sees fit, but it recommends doing so in accordance with the original style.\nMany Esperantists believe this declaration stabilising the language is a major reason why the Esperanto speaker community grew beyond the levels attained by other constructed languages and has developed a flourishing culture. Other constructed languages have been hindered from developing a stable speaking community by continual tinkering. Also, many developers of constructed languages have been possessive of their creation and have worked to prevent others from contributing to the language. One such ultimately disastrous case was Schleyer's Volap\u00fck. In contrast, Zamenhof declared that \"Esperanto belongs to the Esperantists\", and moved to the background once the language was published, allowing others to share in the early development of the language.\nThe grammatical description in the earliest books was somewhat vague, so a consensus on usage (influenced by Zamenhof's answers to some questions) developed over time within boundaries set by the initial outline (Auld 1988). Even before the Declaration of Boulogne, the language was remarkably stable; only one set of lexical changes were made in the first year after publication, namely changing \"when\", \"then\", \"never\", \"sometimes\", \"always\" from \"kian\", \"tian\", \"nenian\", \"ian\", \"\u0109ian\" to \"kiam\", \"tiam\", \"neniam\" etc., to avoid confusion with the accusative forms of \"kia\" \"what sort of\", \"tia\" \"that sort of\", etc. Thus Esperanto achieved a stability of structure and grammar similar to that which natural languages enjoy by virtue of their native speakers and established bodies of literature. One could learn Esperanto without having it move from underfoot. Changes could and did occur in the language, but only by acquiring widespread popular support; there was no central authority making arbitrary changes, as happened with Volap\u00fck and some other languages.\nModern Esperanto usage may in fact depart from that originally described in the \"Fundamento\", though the differences are largely semantic (involving changed meaning of words) rather than grammatical or phonological. The translation given for \"I like this one\", in the sample phrases in the main Esperanto article, offers a significant example. According to the \"Fundamento\", \"Mi \u015datas \u0109i tiun\" would in fact have meant \"I esteem this one\". The traditional usage is \"Tiu \u0109i pla\u0109as al mi\" (literally, \"this one is pleasing to me\"), which reflects the phrasing of most European languages (French \"celui-ci me pla\u00eet\", Spanish \"\u00e9ste me gusta\", Russian \"\u044d\u0442\u043e \u043c\u043d\u0435 \u043d\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0438\u0442\u0441\u044f\" [eto mnye nravitsya], German \"Das gef\u00e4llt mir\", Italian \"mi piace\"). However, the original \"\u0108i tiu pla\u0109as al mi\" continues to be commonly used.\nFor later changes to the language, see Modern evolution of Esperanto.\nDialects, reform projects and derived languages.\nEsperanto has not fragmented into regional dialects through natural language use. This may be because it is the language of daily communication for only a small minority of its speakers. However at least three other factors work against dialects, namely the centripetal force of the Fundamento, the unifying influence of the Plena Vortaro and its successors, which exemplified usage from the works of Zamenhof and leading writers, and the transnational ambitions of the speech community itself. Slang and jargon have developed to some extent, but such features interfere with universal communication \u2013 the whole point of Esperanto \u2013 and so have generally been avoided.\nHowever, in the early twentieth century numerous reform projects were proposed. Almost all of these Esperantidos were stillborn, but the very first, Ido (\"offspring\"), had significant success for several years. Ido was proposed by the Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language in Paris in October 1907. Its main reforms were in bringing the alphabet, semantics, and some grammatical features into closer alignment with the Romance languages, as well as removal of adjectival agreement and the accusative case except when necessary. At first, a number of leading Esperantists put their support behind the Ido project, but the movement stagnated and declined, first with the accidental death of one of its main proponents and later as people proposed further changes, and the number of current speakers is estimated at between 250 and 5,000. However, Ido has proven to be a rich source of Esperanto vocabulary.\nSome more focused reform projects, affecting only a particular feature of the language, have gained a few adherents. One of these is riism, which modifies the language to incorporate non-sexist language and gender-neutral pronouns. However, most of these projects are specific to individual nationalities (riism from English speakers, for example), and the only changes that have gained acceptance in the Esperanto community have been the minor and gradual bottom-up reforms discussed in the last section.\nEsperanto is credited with influencing or inspiring several later competing language projects, such as Occidental (1922) and Novial (1928). These always lagged far behind Esperanto in their popularity. By contrast, Interlingua (1951) has greatly surpassed Ido in terms of popularity. It shows little or no Esperanto influence, however.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10402", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10402", "title": "Esperanto grammar", "text": "Grammatical features of Esperanto\nEsperanto is the most widely used constructed language intended for international communication; it was designed with highly regular grammatical rules, and is therefore considered easy to learn.\nEach part of speech has a characteristic ending: nouns end with \"\u2011o\"; adjectives with \"\u2011a\"; present\u2011tense indicative verbs with \"\u2011as\", and so on. An extensive system of prefixes and suffixes may be freely combined with roots to generate vocabulary, so that it is possible to communicate effectively with a vocabulary of 400 to 500 root words. The original vocabulary of Esperanto had around 900 root words, but was quickly expanded.\nGrammatical summary.\nEsperanto has an agglutinative morphology, no grammatical gender, and simple verbal and nominal inflections. Verbal suffixes indicate whether a verb is in the infinitive, a participle form (active or passive in three tenses), or one of three moods (indicative, conditional, or volitive; of which the indicative has three tenses), and are derived for several aspects, but do not agree with the grammatical person or number of their subjects. Nouns and adjectives have two cases, nominative/oblique and accusative/allative, and two numbers, singular and plural; the adjectival form of personal pronouns behaves like a genitive case. Adjectives generally agree with nouns in case and number. In addition to indicating direct objects, the accusative/allative case is used with nouns, adjectives and adverbs for showing the destination of a motion, or to replace certain prepositions; the nominative/oblique is used in all other situations. The case system allows for a flexible word order that reflects information flow and other pragmatic concerns, as in Russian, Greek, and Latin.\nScript and pronunciation.\nEsperanto uses a 28-letter Latin alphabet that contains the six additional letters \"\u0109\", \"\u011d\", \"\u0125\", \"\u0135\", \"\u015d\" and \"\u016d\", but does not use the letters \"q\", \"w\", \"x\" or \"y\". The extra diacritics are the circumflex and the breve. Occasionally, an acute accent (or an apostrophe) is used to indicate irregular stress in a proper name.\nZamenhof suggested Italian as a model for Esperanto pronunciation.\nThe article.\nEsperanto has a single definite article, \"la\", which is invariable. It is similar to English \"the\".\n\"La\" is used:\nFor individual objects whose existence has been previously mentioned or implied:\n\"Mi trovis botelon kaj deprenis la fermilon.\"\n\"I found a bottle and took off the lid.\"\nFor entire classes or types:\n\"La gepardo estas la plej rapida el la bestoj.\"\n\"The cheetah is the fastest of the animals.\"\n\"La abeloj havas harojn, sed ili ne ta\u016dgas por karesi.\"\n\"Bees have fur, but they're no good for petting.\"\nFor adjectives used as definite nouns, such as ethnic adjectives used as the names of languages:\n\"la blua\"\n \"the blue one\"\n\"la angla\"\n \"English\" (i.e. \"the English language\")\nThe adjective may be the adjectival form of a personal pronoun, which functions as a possessive pronoun:\n\"La mia bluas, la via ru\u011das.\"\n\"Mine is blue, yours is red\".\nThe article may also be used for inalienable possession of body parts and kin terms, where English would use a possessive adjective:\n\"Ili tran\u0109is la manon.\" (Or: \"Ili tran\u0109is sian manon.\")\n\"They cut their hands.\" (one hand each)\nThe article \"la\", like the demonstrative adjective \"tiu\" (this, that), occurs at the beginning of the noun phrase.\nThere is no grammatically required indefinite article: \"homo\" means either \"human being\" or \"a human being\", depending on the context, and similarly the plural \"homoj\" means \"human beings\" or \"some human beings\". The words \"iu\" and \"unu\" (or their plurals \"iuj\" and \"unuj\") may be used somewhat like indefinite articles, but they're closer in meaning to \"some\" and \"a certain\" than to English \"a\". This use of \"unu\" corresponds to English \"a\" when the \"a\" indicates a specific individual.\nFor example, it is used to introduce new participants (\"Unu viro ekvenis al mi kaj diris ...\" 'A man came up to me and said ...').\nParts of speech.\nThe suffixes \"\u2011o\", \"\u2011a\", \"\u2011e\", and \"\u2011i\" indicate that a word is a noun, adjective, adverb, and infinitive verb, respectively. Many new words can be derived simply by changing these suffixes. Derivations from the word \"vidi\" (to see) are \"vida\" (visual), \"vide\" (visually), and \"vido\" (vision).\nEach root word has an inherent part of speech: nominal, adjectival, verbal, or adverbial. These must be memorized explicitly and affect the use of the part-of-speech suffixes. With an adjectival or verbal root, the nominal suffix \"\u2011o\" indicates an abstraction: \"parolo\" (an act of speech, one's word) from the verbal root \"paroli\" (to speak); \"belo\" (beauty) from the adjectival root \"bela\" (beautiful); whereas with a noun, the nominal suffix simply indicates the noun. Nominal or verbal roots may likewise be modified with the adjectival suffix \"\u2011a\": \"re\u011da\" (royal), from the nominal root \"re\u011do\" (a king); \"parola\" (spoken). The various verbal endings mean \"to be [__]\" when added to an adjectival root: \"beli\" (to be beautiful); and with a nominal root they mean \"to act as\" the noun, \"to use\" the noun, etc., depending on the semantics of the root: \"re\u011di\" (to reign). There are relatively few adverbial roots, so most words ending in \"-e\" are derived: \"bele\" (beautifully). Often with a nominal or verbal root, the English equivalent is a prepositional phrase: \"parole\" (by speech, orally); \"vide\" (by sight, visually); \"re\u011de\" (like a king, royally).\nThe meanings of part-of-speech affixes depend on the inherent part of speech of the root they are applied to. For example, \"brosi\" (to brush) is based on a nominal root (and therefore listed in modern dictionaries under the entry \"broso),\" whereas \"kombi\" (to comb) is based on a verbal root (and therefore listed under \"kombi).\" Change the suffix to \"-o,\" and the similar meanings of \"brosi\" and \"kombi\" diverge: \"broso\" is a brush, the name of an instrument, whereas \"kombo\" is a combing, the name of an action. That is, changing verbal \"kombi\" (to comb) to a noun simply creates the name for the action; for the name of the tool, the suffix \"-ilo\" is used, which derives words for instruments from verbal roots: \"kombilo\" (a comb). On the other hand, changing the nominal root \"broso\" (a brush) to a verb gives the action associated with that noun, \"brosi\" (to brush). For the name of the action, the suffix \"-ado\" will change a derived verb back to a noun: \"brosado\" (a brushing). Similarly, an abstraction of a nominal root (changing it to an adjective and then back to a noun) requires the suffix \"-eco,\" as in \"infaneco\" (childhood), but an abstraction of an adjectival or verbal root merely requires the nominal \"-o: belo\" (beauty). Nevertheless, redundantly affixed forms such as \"beleco\" are acceptable and widely used.\nA limited number of basic adverbs do not end with \"-e,\" but with an undefined part-of-speech ending \"-a\u016d\". Not all words ending in \"-a\u016d\" are adverbs, and most of the adverbs that end in \"-a\u016d\" have other functions, such as \"hodia\u016d\" \"today\" [noun or adverb] or \"ankora\u016d\" \"yet, still\" [conjunction or adverb]. About a dozen other adverbs are bare roots, such as \"nun\" \"now\", \"tro\" \"too, too much\", not counting the adverbs among the correlatives. (See special Esperanto adverbs.)\nThe part-of-speech endings may double up. Apart from the \"-a\u016d\" suffix, where adding a second part-of-speech ending is nearly universal, this happens only occasionally. For example, \"vivu!\" \"viva!\" (the volitive of \"vivi\" 'to live') has a nominal form \"vivuo\" (a cry of 'viva!') and a doubly verbal form \"vivui\" (to cry 'viva!').\nNouns and adjectives.\nNouns end with the suffix \"-o\". To make a word plural, the suffix \"-j\" is added to the \"-o\". Without this suffix, a countable noun is understood to be singular. Direct objects take an accusative case suffix \"-n,\" which goes after any plural suffix; the resulting pluralized accusative sequence \"-ojn\" rhymes with English \"coin.\"\nNames may be pluralized when there is more than one person of that name being referenced:\n\"la fratoj Felikso kaj Leono Zamenhofoj\" (the brothers Felix and Leon Zamenhof)\nAdjectives agree with nouns. That is, they are generally plural if the noun that they modify is plural, and accusative if the noun is accusative. Compare \"bona tago; bonaj tagoj; bonan tagon; bonajn tagojn\" (good day/days). (The sequence \"-ajn\" rhymes with English \"fine.\") This requirement allows for the word orders \"adjective\u2013noun\" and \"noun\u2013adjective\", even when two noun phrases are adjacent in subject\u2013object\u2013verb or verb\u2013subject\u2013object clauses:\n\"la knabino feli\u0109an knabon kisis\" (the girl kissed a happy boy)\n\"la knabino feli\u0109a knabon kisis\" (the happy girl kissed a boy).\nAgreement clarifies the syntax in other ways as well. Adjectives take the plural suffix when they modify more than one noun, even when those nouns are singular:\n\"ru\u011daj domo kaj a\u016dto\" (a red house and [a red] car)\n\"ru\u011da domo kaj a\u016dto\" (a red house and a car).\nA predicative adjective does not take the accusative case suffix even when the noun that it modifies does:\n\"mi farbis la pordon ru\u011dan\" (I painted the red door)\n\"mi farbis la pordon ru\u011da\" (I painted the door red).\nPronouns.\nThere are three types of pronouns in Esperanto: personal \"(vi\" \"you\"), demonstrative \"(tio\" \"that\", \"iu\" \"someone\"), and relative/interrogative \"(kio\" \"what\").\nAccording to the fifth rule of the \"Fundamento de Esperanto\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;5. The personal pronouns are: \"mi\", \"I\"; \"vi\", \"thou\", \"you\"; \"li\", \"he\"; \"\u015di\", \"she\"; \"\u011di\", \"it\"; \"si\", \"self\"; \"ni\", \"we\"; \"ili\", \"they\"; \"oni\", \"one\", \"people\", (French \"on\").\u2014\u200a\nPersonal pronouns.\nThe Esperanto personal pronoun system is similar to that of English, but with the addition of a reflexive pronoun.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^1 Zamenhof introduced a singular second-person pronoun \"ci\", to be used in translations from languages where the T\u2013V distinction was important, but he discouraged its use. He added it in the \"Dua Libro\" in 1888 clarifying that \"this word is only found in the dictionary; in the language itself it is hardly ever used\", and excluded it from the list of pronouns in the \"Fundamento\". To this day, it is standard to use only \"vi\" regardless of number or formality.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^2 An unofficial gender-neutral third person singular pronoun \"ri\" has become relatively popular since about 2010, mostly among younger speakers. It is used when the gender of the referent is unknown or to be ignored. While the speakers that use the pronoun are a minority as of 2020, it is widely understood by active users of Esperanto. Its opponents often object that any new pronoun is an unacceptable change to the basic rules and paradigms formulated in the \"Fundamento\". Zamenhof himself proposed using \"\u011di\" in such situations; the common opposition to referring to people with gender-neutral \"\u011di\" today is primarily due to the traditional ubiquity of \"li\" or \"\u015di\" for people and of \"\u011di\" for non-human animals and inanimate objects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^3 A proposed specifically feminine plural pronoun \"i\u015di\" was proposed by K\u00e1lm\u00e1n Kalocsay and Gaston Waringhien to better translate languages with gendered plural pronouns.\nPersonal pronouns take the accusative suffix \"-n\" as nouns do: \"min\" (me), \"lin\" (him), \"\u015din\" (her). Possessive adjectives are formed with the adjectival suffix \"-a: mia\" (my), \"\u011dia\" (its), \"nia\" (our). These agree with their noun like any other adjective: \"ni salutis liajn amikojn\" (we greeted his friends). Esperanto does not have separate forms for the possessive pronouns; this sense is generally (though not always) indicated with the definite article: \"la mia\" (mine).\nThe reflexive pronoun is used in non-subject phrases only to refer back to the subject, usually only in the third and indefinite persons:\n\"li lavis sin\" \"he washed (himself)\"\n\"ili lavis sin\" \"they washed themselves (or each other)\"\n\"li lavis lin\" \"he washed \"him\" (someone else)\"\n\"li man\u011dis sian panon\" \"he ate his (own) bread\"\n\"li man\u011dis lian panon\" \"he ate \"his\" (someone else's) bread\"\nThe indefinite pronoun is used when making general statements, and is often used where English would have a passive verb,\n\"oni diras, ke ...\" \"one says that...\", \"they say that ...\" or \"it is said that ...\"\nWith impersonal verbs, no pronoun is used:\n\"pluvas\" \"it is raining\".\nHere the rain is falling by itself, and that idea is conveyed by the verb, so no subject pronoun is needed.\nWhen not referring to humans, \"\u011di\" is mostly used with items that have physical bodies, with \"tiu\" or \"tio\" used otherwise. Zamenhof proposed that \"\u011di\" could also be used as an epicene (gender-neutral) third-person singular pronoun, meaning for use when the gender of an individual is unknown or for when the speaker simply doesn't wish to clarify the gender. However, this proposal is only common when referring to children:\n\"La infano ploras, \u0109ar \u011di volas man\u011di\" \"the child is crying, because it wants to eat\".\nWhen speaking of adults or people in general, in popular usage it is much more common for the demonstrative adjective and pronoun \"tiu\" (\"that thing or person that is already known to the listener\") to be used in such situations. This mirrors languages such as Japanese, but it's not a method that can always be used. For example, in the sentence\n\"Iu \u0135us diris, ke tiu malsatas\" \"Someone just said that \"that thing/person\" is hungry\",\nthe word \"tiu\" would be understood as referring to someone other than the person speaking (like English pronouns \"this\" or \"that\" but also referring to people), and so cannot be used in place of \"\u011di\", \"li\" or \"\u015di.\" See gender-neutral pronouns in Esperanto for other approaches.\nOther pronouns.\nThe demonstrative and relative pronouns form part of the correlative system, and are described in that article. The pronouns are the forms ending in \"-o\" (simple pronouns) and \"-u\" (adjectival pronouns); these take plural \"-j\" and accusative \"-n\" as nouns and adjectives do. The possessive pronouns, however, are the forms ending in \"-es\"; they are indeclinable for number and case. Compare the nominative phases \"lia domo\" (his house) and \"ties domo\" (that one's house, those ones' house) with the plural \"liaj domoj (his houses) and \"ties domoj (that one's houses, those ones' houses), and with the accusative genitive \"lian domon\" and \"ties domon.\"\nPrepositions.\nAlthough Esperanto word order is fairly free, prepositions must come at the beginning of a noun phrase. Whereas in languages such as German, prepositions may require that a noun be in various cases (accusative, dative, \"and so on),\" in Esperanto all prepositions govern the nominative: \"por Johano\" (for John). The only exception is when there are two or more prepositions and one is \"replaced\" by the accusative.\nPrepositions should be used with a definite meaning. When no one preposition is clearly correct, the indefinite preposition \"je\" should be used:\n\"ili iros je la tria de majo\" (they'll go on the third of May: the \"on\" isn't literally true).\nAlternatively, the accusative may be used without a preposition:\n\"ili iros la trian de majo.\"\nNote that although \"la trian\" (the third) is in the accusative, \"de majo\" (of May) is still a prepositional phrase, and so the noun \"majo\" remains in the nominative case.\nA frequent use of the accusative is in place of \"al\" (to) to indicate the direction or goal of motion (allative construction). It is especially common when there would otherwise be a double preposition:\n\"la kato \u0109asis la muson en la domo\" (the cat chased the mouse in [inside of] the house)\n\"la kato \u0109asis la muson en la domon\" (the cat chased the mouse into the house).\nThe accusative/allative may stand in for other prepositions also, especially when they have vague meanings that do not add much to the clause. Adverbs, with or without the case suffix, are frequently used instead of prepositional phrases:\n\"li iris al sia hejmo\" (he went to his home)\n\"li iris hejmen\" (he went home)\nBoth \"por\" and \"pro\" can correspond to English 'for'. However, \"por\" indicates \"for a goal\" (the more usual sense of English 'for') while \"pro\" indicates \"for a cause\" and more often may be translated 'because of': To vote \"por\" your friend means to cast a ballot with their name on it, whereas to vote \"pro\" your friend would mean to vote because of something that happened to them or something they said or did.\nThe preposition most distinct from English usage is perhaps \"de\", which corresponds to English \"of, from, off,\" and \"(done) by\":\n\"libro de Johano\" (John's book)\n\"li venis de la butiko\" (he came from the shop)\n\"mordita de hundo\" (bitten by a dog)\nHowever, English \"of\" corresponds to several Esperanto prepositions also: \"de, el\" (out of, made of), and \"da\" (quantity of, unity of form and contents):\n\"tablo el ligno\" (a table of wood)\n\"glaso da vino\" (a glass of wine)\n\"listo da kondi\u0109oj de la kandidatoj\" (a list of conditions from the candidates)\nThe last of these, \"da\", is semantically Slavic and is difficult for Western Europeans, to the extent that even many Esperanto dictionaries and grammars define it incorrectly.\nBecause a bare root may indicate a preposition or interjection, removing the grammatical suffix from another part of speech can be used to derive a preposition or interjection. Thus the verbal root \"far-\" (do, make) has been unofficially used without a part-of-speech suffix as a preposition \"by\", marking the agent of a passive participle or an action noun in place of the standard \"de\".\nVerbs.\nAll verbal inflection is regular. There are three tenses of the indicative mood. The other moods are the conditional and volitive (treated as the jussive by some). There is also the infinitive. No aspectual distinctions are required by the grammar, but derivational expressions of Aktionsart are common.\nVerbs do not change form according to their subject. \"I am, we are,\" and \"he is\" are simply \"mi estas, ni estas,\" and \"li estas,\" respectively. Impersonal subjects are not used: \"pluvas\" (it is raining), \"estas muso en la domo\" (there is a mouse in the house).\nMost verbs are inherently transitive or intransitive. As with the inherent part of speech of a root, this is not apparent from the shape of the verb and must simply be memorized. Transitivity is changed with the affixes \"-ig-\" (the transitivizer or causative) and \"-i\u011d-\" (the intransitivizer or middle voice) after the root; for example:\n\"akvo bolas je cent gradoj\" (water boils at 100 degrees)\n\"ni boligas la akvon\" (we boil the water)\n\"mi movis la biciklon al la \u011dardeno\" (I moved the bicycle to the garden)\n\"la biciklo movi\u011dis tre rapide\" (the bicycle moved very fast)\nThe verbal paradigm.\nThe tenses have characteristic vowels. Namely, \"a\" indicates the present tense, \"i\" the past, and \"o\" the future. (However, \"i\" on its own is used for the infinitive.)\nThe verbal forms may be illustrated with the root \"esper-\" (hope):\n\"esperis\" (hoped, was hoping)\n\"esperas\" (hopes, is hoping)\n\"esperos\" (shall hope, will hope)\n\"esperus\" (were to hope, would hope)\n\"esperu\" (hope, hope! [a command])\n\"esperi\" (to hope)\nA verb can be made emphatic with the particle \"ja\" (indeed): \"mi ja esperas\" (I do hope), \"mi ja esperis\" (I did hope).\nTense.\nAs in English, the Esperanto present tense may be used for generic statements such as \"birds fly\" (\"la birdoj flugas\").\nThe Esperanto future is a true tense, used whenever future time is meant. For example, in English \"(I'll give it to you) when I see you\" the verb \"see\" is in the present tense despite the time being in the future; in Esperanto, future tense is required: \"(Mi donos \u011din al vi) kiam mi vidos vin\".\nIn indirect speech, Esperanto tense is relative. This differs from English absolute tense, where the tense is past, present, or future of the moment of speaking: In Esperanto, the tense of a subordinate verb is instead anterior or posterior to the time of the main verb. For example, \"John said that he would go\" is in Esperanto \"Johano diris, ke li iros\" (lit., \"John said that he will go\"); this does not mean that he will go at some point in the future from now (as \"John said that he will go\" means in English), but that at the time he said this, his going was still in the future.\nMood.\nThe conditional mood is used for such expressions as \"se mi povus, mi irus\" (if I could, I would go) and \"se mi estus vi, mi irus\" (if I were you, I'd go).\nThe volitive mood is used to indicate that an action or state is desired, requested, ordered, or aimed for. Although the verb form is formally called volitive, in practice it can be seen as a broader deontic form rather than a pure volitive form, as it is also used to express orders and commands besides wishes and desires. It serves as the imperative and performs some of the functions of a subjunctive:\n\"Iru!\" (Go!)\n\"Mi petis, ke li venu.\" (I asked him to come.)\n\"Li parolu.\" (Let him speak.)\n\"Ni iru.\" (Let's go.)\n\"Benu \u0109i tiun doma\u0109on.\" (Bless this shack.)\n\"Mia filino belu!\" (May my daughter be beautiful!)\nAspect.\nVerbal aspect is not grammatically required in Esperanto. However, aspectual distinctions may be expressed via participles (see below), and the Slavic aspectual system survives in two aktionsart affixes, perfective (often inceptive) \"ek-\" and imperfective \"-ad-\". Compare,\n\"Tio \u0109i interesis min\" (This interested me)\nand,\n\"Tio \u0109i ekinteresis min\" (This caught my interest).\nVarious prepositions may also be used as aktionsart prefixes, such as \"el\" (out of), used to indicate that an action is performed to completion or at least to a considerable degree, also as in Slavic languages, as in,\n\"Germanan kaj francan lingvojn mi ellernis en infaneco\" (I learned French and German in childhood).\nCopula.\nThe verb \"esti\" (to be) is both the copula (\"X is Y\") and the existential (\"there is\") verb. As a copula linking two noun phrases, it causes neither to take the accusative case. Therefore, unlike the situation with other verbs, word order with \"esti\" can be semantically important: compare \"hundoj estas personoj\" (dogs are people) and \"personoj estas hundoj\" (people are dogs).\nExistential verbs do not use dummy pronouns. Thus, the phrase \"estas pomo\" (there is an apple) does not contain a leading pronoun, as does its English translation.\nOne sometimes sees \"esti\"-plus-adjective rendered as a verb: \"la \u0109ielo estas blua\" as \"la \u0109ielo bluas\" (the sky is blue). This is a stylistic rather than grammatical change in the language, as the more economical verbal forms were always found in poetry.\nParticiples.\nParticiples are verbal derivatives. In Esperanto, there are six forms:\nfor each of:\nThe participles represent aspect by retaining the vowel of the related verbal tense: i, a, o. In addition to carrying aspect, participles are the principal means of representing voice, with either nt or t following the vowel (see next section).\nAdjectival participles.\nThe basic principle of the participles may be illustrated with the verb \"fali\" (to fall). Picture a cartoon character running off a cliff and hanging in the air for a moment. As it hangs in the air, it is \"falonta\" (about to fall). As it drops, it is \"falanta\" (falling). After it hits the ground, it is \"falinta\" (fallen).\nActive and passive pairs can be illustrated with the transitive verb \"haki\" (to chop). Picture a woodsman approaching a tree with an axe, intending to chop it down. He is \"hakonta\" (about to chop) and the tree is \"hakota\" (about to be chopped). While swinging the axe, he is \"hakanta\" (chopping) and the tree \"hakata\" (being chopped). After the tree has fallen, he is \"hakinta\" (having chopped) and the tree \"hakita\" (chopped).\nAdjectival participles agree with nouns in number and case, just as other adjectives do:\n\"ili \u015dparis la arbojn hakotajn\" (they spared the trees [that were] to be chopped down).\nCompound tense.\nCompound tenses are formed with the adjectival participles plus \"esti\" (to be) as the auxiliary verb. The participle reflects aspect and voice, while the verb carries tense. For example:\nThese are not used as often as their English equivalents. For \"I \"am\" go\"ing\" to the store\", you would normally use the simple present \"mi iras\" ('I go') in Esperanto.\nThe tense and mood of \"esti\" can be changed in these compound tenses:\nPast perfect: \"mi estis kaptinta\" (I had caught)\nConditional future: \"mi estus kaptonta\" (I would be about to catch)\nFuture present: \"mi estos kaptanta\" (I will be catching).\nSynthetic forms.\nAlthough such periphrastic constructions are familiar to speakers of most European languages, the option of contracting [\"esti\" + adjective] into a verb is theoretically possible for adjectival participles:\nPresent perfect: \"mi estas kaptita\" is equivalent to \"mi kaptitas\" (I am caught)\nPast perfect: \"mi estis kaptinta\" to \"mi kaptintis\" (I had caught)\nIn practice, only a few of these forms, notably \"-intus\" (conditional past progressive) and \"-atas\" (present passive), have entered the common usage. In general, most are rare for being more difficult to parse than periphrastic constructions.\nNominal participles.\nParticiples may be turned into adverbs or nouns by replacing the adjectival suffix \"-a\" with \"-e\" or \"-o.\" This means that, in Esperanto, some nouns may be inflected for tense.\nA nominal participle indicates \"one who participates\" in the action specified by the verbal root. For example, \"esperinto\" is a \"hoper\" (past tense), or \"one who had been hoping.\"\nAdverbial participles.\nAdverbial participles are used for circumstantial participial phrases:\n\"Kaptinte la pilkon, li ekkuris golon\" (Having caught the ball, he ran for the goal).\nConditional and tenseless participles (unofficial).\nOccasionally, the participle paradigm will be extended to include conditional participles, with the vowel \"u (-unt-, -ut-).\" If, for example, in our tree-chopping example, the woodsman found that the tree had been spiked and so couldn't be cut down after all, he would be \"hakunta\" and the tree \"hakuta\" (he, the one \"who would chop\", and the tree, the one that \"would be chopped\").\nThis can also be illustrated with the verb \"prezidi\" (to preside). Just after the recount of the 2000 United States presidential election:\nTense-neutral words such as \"prezidento\" and \"studento\" are formally considered distinct nominal roots, not derivatives of the verbs \"prezidi\" and \"studi\".\nThe suffix \"-enda\", as in \"pagenda\" 'payable, must be paid' from \"pagi\" 'to pay', is similar to a passive participle of the imperative mood.\nNegation.\nA statement is made negative by using \"ne\" or one of the negative \"(neni-)\" correlatives. Ordinarily, only one negative word is allowed per clause:\n \"Mi ne faris ion ajn.\" I didn't do anything.\nTwo negatives (double negative) within a clause cancel each other out, with the result being an affirmative sentence.\n \"Mi ne faris nenion. Mi ja faris ion.\" It is not the case that I did nothing. I did do something.\nThe word \"ne\" comes before the word it negates:\n \"Ne mi devas skribi tion\" (It's not I who has to write this)\n \"Mi ne devas skribi tion\" (I don't have to write this)\n \"Mi devas ne skribi tion\" (I must not write this)\n \"Mi devas skribi ne tion\" (It's not this that I have to write)\nThe latter will frequently be reordered as \"Ne tion mi devas skribi\" depending on the flow of information.\nQuestions.\n\"Wh\" questions are asked with one of the interrogative/relative \"(ki-\") correlatives. They are commonly placed at the beginning of the sentence, but different word orders are allowed for stress:\n\"Li scias, kion vi faris\" (He knows what you did.)\n\"Kion vi faris?\" (What did you do?)\n\"Vi faris kion?\" (You did \"what?)\"\nYes/no questions are marked with the conjunction \"\u0109u\" (whether):\n\"Mi ne scias, \u0109u li venos\" (I don't know whether he'll come)\n\"\u0108u li venos?\" (Will he come?)\nSuch questions can be answered \"jes\" (yes) or \"ne\" (no) in the European fashion of aligning with the polarity of the answer, or \"\u011duste\" (correct) or \"mal\u011duste\" (incorrect) in the Japanese fashion of aligning with the polarity of the question:\n\"\u0108u vi ne iris?\" (Did you not go?)\n\"\u2014 Ne, mi ne iris\" (No, I didn't go); \"\u2014 Jes, mi iris\" (Yes, I went)\n\"\u2014 \u011custe, mi ne iris\" (Correct, I didn't go); \"\u2014 Mal\u011duste, mi iris\" (Incorrect, I did go)\nConjunctions.\nBasic Esperanto conjunctions are \"kaj\" (both/and), \"a\u016d\" (either/or), \"nek\" (neither/nor), \"se\" (if), \"\u0109u\" (whether/or), \"sed\" (but), \"anstata\u016d\" (instead of), \"kiel\" (like, as), \"ke\" (that). Like prepositions, they \"precede\" the phrase or clause they modify:\n\"Mi vidis kaj lin kaj lian amikon\" (I saw both him and his friend)\n\"Estis nek hele nek agrable\" (it was neither clear [sunny] nor pleasant)\n\"\u0109u pro kaprico, \u0109u pro natura lingvo-evoluo\" (whether by whim, or by natural language development)\n\"Li volus, ke ni iru\" (he would like us to go)\nConjunctions followed by incomplete clauses may be mistaken for prepositions, but unlike prepositions, they may be followed by an accusative noun phrase if the implied full clause requires it, as in the following example from Don Harlow:\n\"Li traktis min kiel (li traktus) princon\" (He treated me as (he would) a prince)\n\"Li traktis min kiel princo (traktus min)\" (He treated me as a prince (would))\nInterjections.\nInterjections may be derived from bare affixes or roots: \"ek!\" (get going!), from the perfective prefix; \"um\" (um, er), from the indefinite/undefined suffix; \"fek!\" (shit!), from \"feki\" (to defecate).\nWord formation.\nEsperanto derivational morphology uses a large number of lexical and grammatical affixes (prefixes and suffixes). These, along with compounding, decrease the memory load of the language, as they allow for the expansion of a relatively small number of basic roots into a large vocabulary. For example, the Esperanto root \"vid-\" (see) regularly corresponds to several dozen English words: \"see (saw, seen), sight, blind, vision, visual, visible, nonvisual, invisible, unsightly, glance, view, vista, panorama, observant\" etc., though there are also separate Esperanto roots for a couple of these concepts.\nNumbers.\nNumerals.\nThe cardinal numerals are:\n\"nul\" (zero)\n\"unu\" (one)\n\"du\" (two)\n\"tri\" (three)\n\"kvar\" (four)\n\"kvin\" (five)\n\"ses\" (six)\n\"sep\" (seven)\n\"ok\" (eight)\n\"na\u016d\" (nine)\n\"dek\" (ten)\n\"cent\" (hundred)\n\"mil\" (thousand)\nGrammatically, these are numerals, not nouns, and as such do not take the accusative case suffix \"-n\". However, \"unu\" (and only \"unu\") is sometimes used adjectivally or demonstratively, meaning \"a certain\", and in such cases it may take the plural affix \"-j,\" just as the demonstrative pronoun \"tiu\" does:\n\"unuj homoj\" \"certain people\";\n\"ili kuris unuj post la aliaj\" \"they ran some after others\".\nIn such use \"unu\" is irregular in that it only rarely takes the accusative/prepositional case affix \"-n\" in the singular, but regularly does so in the plural:\n\"ian unu ideon\" \"some particular idea\",\nbut\n\"unuj objektoj venis en unujn manojn, aliaj en aliajn manojn\" \"some objects came into certain hands, others into other hands\".\nAdditionally, when counting off, the final \"u\" of \"unu\" may be dropped, as if it were a part-of-speech suffix:\n\"Un'! Du! Tri! Kvar!\"\nHigher numbers.\nAt numbers beyond the thousands, the international roots \"miliono\" (million) and \"miliardo\" (milliard) are used. Beyond this there are two systems: A \"billion\" in most English-speaking countries is different from a \"billion\" in most other countries (109 \"vs.\" 1012 respectively; that is, a thousand million \"vs.\" a million million). The international root \"biliono\" is likewise ambiguous in Esperanto, and is deprecated for this reason. An unambiguous system based on adding the Esperanto suffix \"-iliono\" to numerals is generally used instead, sometimes supplemented by a second suffix \"-iliardo:\"\n106: \"miliono\"\n109: \"miliardo\" (or \"mil milionoj\")\n1012: \"duiliono\"\n1015: \"duiliardo\" (or \"mil duilionoj\")\n1018: \"triiliono\"\n1021: \"triiliardo\" (or \"mil triilionoj\")\n\"... etc.\"\nNote that these forms are grammatically nouns, not numerals, and therefore cannot modify a noun directly: \"mil homojn\" (a thousand people [accusative]) but \"milionon da homoj\" (a million people [accusative]).\nCompound numerals and derivatives.\nTens and hundreds are pronounced and written together with their multipliers as one word, while all other parts of a number are pronounced and written separately (\"dudek\" 20, \"dek du\" 12, \"dudek du\" 22, \"dek du mil\" 12,000). Ordinals are formed with the adjectival suffix \"-a,\" quantities with the nominal suffix \"-o,\" multiples with \"-obl-,\" fractions with \"\u2011on\u2011\", collectives with \"\u2011op\u2011\", and repetitions with the root \"\u2011foj\u2011\".\n\"sescent sepdek kvin\" (675)\n\"tria\" (third [as in \"first, second, third\"])\n\"trie\" (thirdly)\n\"dudeko\" (a score [20])\n\"duobla\" (double)\n\"kvarono\" (one fourth, a quarter)\n\"duope\" (by twos)\n\"dufoje\" (twice)\nThe particle \"po\" is used to mark distributive numbers, that is, the idea of distributing a certain number of items to each member of a group:\n\"mi donis al ili po tri pomojn\" or \"pomojn mi donis al ili po tri\" (I gave [to] them three apples each).\nNote that particle \"po\" forms a phrase with the numeral \"tri\" and is not a preposition for the noun phrase \"tri pomojn,\" so it does not prevent a grammatical object from taking the accusative case.\nComparisons.\nComparisons are made with the adverbial correlatives \"tiel ... kiel\" (as ... as), the adverbial roots \"pli\" (more) and \"plej\" (most), the antonym prefix \"mal-,\" and the preposition \"ol\" (than):\n\"mi skribas tiel bone kiel vi\" (I write as well as you)\n\"tiu estas pli bona ol tiu\" (this one is better than that one)\n\"tio estas la plej bona\" (that's the best)\n\"la mia estas malpli multekosta ol la via\" (mine is less expensive than yours)\nImplied comparisons are made with \"tre\" (very) and \"tro\" (too [much]).\nPhrases like \"The more people, the smaller the portions\" and \"All the better!\" are translated using \"ju\" and \"des\" in place of \"the\":\n\"Ju pli da homoj, des malpli grandaj la porcioj\" (The more people, the smaller the portions)\n\"Des pli bone!\" (All the better!)\nWord order.\nEsperanto has a fairly flexible word order. However, word order does play a role in Esperanto grammar, even if a much lesser role than it does in English. For example, the negative particle \"ne\" generally comes before the element being negated; negating the verb has the effect of negating the entire clause (or rather, there is ambiguity between negating the verb alone and negating the clause):\n\"mi ne iris\" 'I didn't go'\n\"mi ne iris, mi revenis\" 'I didn't go, I came back'\n\"ne mi iris\" / \"iris ne mi\" 'it wasn't me who went'\n\"mi iris ne al la butiko sed hejmen\" 'I went not to the shop but home'.\nHowever, when the entire clause is negated, the \"ne\" may be left till last:\n\"mi iris ne\" Literally 'I went not' (i.e., 'I didn't go')\nPhrases typically follow a topic\u2013comment (or theme\u2013rheme) order: Known information, the topic under discussion, is introduced first, and what one has to say about it follows. (I went not: As for my going, there was none.) For example, \"ne iris mi\", would suggest that the possibility of not having gone was under discussion, and \"mi\" is given as an example of one who did not go.\nCompare:\n\"Pasintjare mi feriis en Italujo\"\n'Last year I vacationed in Italy' (Italy was the place I went on holiday)\n\"En Italujo mi feriis pasintjare\"\n'I vacationed in Italy last year' (last year was when I went)\n\"En Italujo pasintjare mi feriis\"\n'In Italy last year I went on vacation' (a vacation is why I went)\n\"En Italujo pasintjare feriis mi\"\n(I am the one who went)\nThe noun phrase.\nWithin a noun phrase, either the order \"adjective\u2013noun\" or \"noun\u2013adjective\" may occur, though the former is somewhat more common. \n\"blua \u0109ielo\" 'a blue sky'\n\"\u0109ielo blua\" (same)\nBecause of adjectival agreement, an adjective may be separated from the rest of the noun phrase without confusion, though this is only found in poetry, and then only occasionally: \n\"Mi estas certa, ke brilan vi havos sukceson\" 'I am certain that you will have a brilliant success',\nPossessive pronouns strongly favor initial position, though the opposite is well known from \"Patro nia\" 'Our Father' in the Paternoster.\nLess flexibility occurs with demonstratives and the article, with \"demonstrative\u2013noun\" being the norm, as in English:\n\"la \u0109ielo\" \"the sky\"\n\"tiu \u0109ielo\" 'that sky'\nalso \"\u0109ielo tiu\"\n\"la blua \u0109ielo\" \"the blue sky\"\n\"tiu blua \u0109ielo\" 'that blue sky'\nNoun\u2013demonstrative order is used primarily for emphasis (\"plumo tiu\" 'that pen'). \"La\" occurs at the very beginning of the noun phrase except rarely in poetry.\nEven less flexibility occurs with numerals, with \"numeral\u2013noun\" being almost universal:\n\"sep bluaj \u0109ieloj\" 'seven blue heavens',\nand noun\u2013numeral being practically unheard of outside poetry.\nAdjective\u2013noun order is much freer. With simple adjectives, adjective\u2013noun order predominates, especially if the noun is long or complex. However, a long or complex adjective typically comes after the noun, in some cases parallel to structures in English, as in the second example below:\n\"homo malgrandanima kaj ege avara\" 'a petty and extremely greedy person'\n\"viza\u011do plena de cikatroj\" 'a face full of scars'\n\"ideo fantazia sed tamen interesa\" 'a fantastic but still interesting idea'\nAdjectives also normally occur after correlative nouns. Again, this is one of the situations where adjectives come after nouns in English:\n\"okazis io stranga\" 'something strange happened'\n\"ne \u0109io brilanta estas diamanto\" 'not everything shiny is a diamond'\nChanging the word order here can change the meaning, at least with the correlative \"nenio\" 'nothing':\n\"li man\u011dis nenion etan\" 'he ate nothing little'\n\"li man\u011dis etan nenion\" 'he ate a little nothing'\nWith multiple words in a phrase, the order is typically demonstrative/pronoun\u2013numeral\u2013(adjective/noun):\n\"miaj du grandaj amikoj ~ miaj du amikoj grandaj\" 'my two great friends'.\nIn prepositional phrases, the preposition is \"required\" to come at the front of the noun phrase (that is, even before the article \"la\"), though it is commonly replaced by turning the noun into an adverb:\n\"al la \u0109ielo\" 'to the sky' or \"\u0109ielen\" 'skywards', never \"*\u0109ielo al\"\nConstituent order.\nConstituent order \"within\" a clause is generally free, apart from copular clauses.\nThe default order is subject\u2013verb\u2013object, though any order may occur, with subject and object distinguished by case, and other constituents distinguished by prepositions:\n\"la hundo \u0109asis la katon\" 'the dog chased/hunted the cat'\n\"la katon \u0109asis la hundo\"\n\"\u0109asis la hundo la katon\"\n\"\u0109asis la katon la hundo\"\n\"la hundo la katon \u0109asis\"\n\"la katon la hundo \u0109asis\"\nThe expectation of a topic\u2013comment (theme\u2013rheme) order apply here, so the context will influence word order: in \"la katon \u0109asis la hundo\", the cat is the topic of the conversation, and the dog is the news; in \"la hundo la katon \u0109asis\", the dog is the topic of the conversation, and it is the action of chasing that is the news; and in \"\u0109asis la hundo la katon\", the action of chasing is already the topic of discussion.\nContext is required to tell whether\n\"la hundo \u0109asis la katon en la \u011dardeno\"\nmeans the dog chased a cat which was in the garden, or there, in the garden, the dog chased the cat. These may be disambiguated with\n\"la hundo \u0109asis la katon, kiu estis en la \u011dardeno\"\n'The dog chased the cat, which was in the garden'\nand\n\"en la \u011dardeno, la hundo \u0109asis la katon\"\n'In the garden, the dog chased the cat'.\nOf course, if it chases the cat in\"to\" the garden, the case of 'garden' would change:\n\"la hundo \u0109asis la katon en la \u011dardenon\", \"en la \u011dardenon la hundo \u0109asis la katon\", etc.\nWithin copulative clauses, however, there are restrictions. Copulas are words such as \"esti\" 'be', \"i\u011di\" 'become', \"resti\" 'remain', and \"\u015dajni\" 'seem', for which neither noun phrase takes the accusative case. In such cases only two orders are generally found: noun-copula-predicate and, much less commonly, predicate-copula-noun.\nGenerally, if a characteristic of the noun is being described, the choice between the two orders is not important:\n\"sova\u011da estas la vento\" 'wild is the wind', \"la vento estas sova\u011da\" 'the wind is wild'\nHowever, \"la vento sova\u011da estas\" is unclear, at least in writing, as it could be interpreted as 'the wild wind exists.'\nWhen two noun phrases are linked by a copula, greater chance exists for ambiguity, at least in writing where prosody is not a cue. A demonstrative may help:\n\"bruto estas tiu viro\" 'that man is a brute'.\nBut in some cases word order is the only clue, in which case the subject comes before the predicate:\n\"glavoj i\u011du plugiloj\" 'let swords become ploughs'\n\"plugiloj i\u011du glavoj\" 'let ploughs become swords'.\nAttributive phrases and clauses.\nIn the sentence above, \"la hundo \u0109asis la katon, kiu estis en la \u011dardeno\" 'the dog chased the cat, which was in the garden', the relative pronoun \"kiu\" 'which' is restricted to a position \"after\" the noun 'cat'. In general, relative clauses and attributive prepositional phrases follow the noun they modify.\nAttributive prepositional phrases, which are dependent on nouns, include genitives (\"la libro de Johano\" 'John's book') as well as \"la kato en la \u011dardeno\" 'the cat in the garden' in the example above. Their order cannot be reversed: neither \"*la de Johano libro\" nor \"*la en la \u011dardeno kato\" is possible. This behavior is more restrictive than prepositional phrases which are dependent on verbs, and which can be moved around: both \"\u0109asis en la \u011dardeno\" and \"en la \u011dardeno \u0109asis\" are acceptable for 'chased in the garden'.\nRelative clauses are similar, in that they are attributive and are subject to the same word-order constraint, except that rather than being linked by a preposition, the two elements are linked by a relative pronoun such as \"kiu\" 'which':\n\"fu\u011dis la kato, kiun \u011di \u0109asis\" 'the cat which it chased fled'\n\"mi vidis la hundon, kiu \u0109asis la katon\" 'I saw the dog which chased the cat'\nNote that the noun and its adjacent relative pronoun do not agree in case. Rather, their cases depend on their relationships with their respective verbs. However, they do agree in number:\n\"fu\u011dis la katoj, kiujn \u011di \u0109asis\" 'the cats which it chased fled'\nOther word orders are possible, as long as the relative pronoun remains adjacent to the noun it depends on:\n\"fu\u011dis la kato, kiun \u0109asis \u011di\" 'the cat which it chased fled'\n\"vidis mi la hundon, kiu la katon \u0109asis\" 'I saw the dog which chased the cat'\nClause order.\nCoordinate clauses allow flexible word order, but tend to be iconic. For example, in\n\"la hundo \u0109asis la katon kaj la kato fu\u011dis\" 'the dog chased the cat and the cat fled',\nthe inference is that the cat fled after the dog started to chase it, not that the dog chased a cat which was already fleeing. For the latter reading, the clause order would be reversed:\n\"la kato fu\u011dis, kaj la hundo \u0109asis \u011din\" 'the cat fled, and the dog chased it'\nThis distinction is lost in subordinate clauses such as the relative clauses in the previous section:\n\"la hundo \u0109asis la katon, kiu fu\u011dis\" 'the dog chased the cat(,) which fled'\nIn written English, a comma disambiguates the two readings, but both take a comma in Esperanto.\nNon-relative subordinate clauses are similarly restricted. They follow the conjunction \"ke\" 'that', as in,\n\"Mi estas certa, ke vi havos brilan sukceson\" 'I am certain that you will have a brilliant success'.\nClaimed non-European aspects.\nEsperanto's vocabulary, syntax, and semantics derive predominantly from Standard Average European languages. Roots are typically Latinate or Germanic in origin. The semantics show a significant Slavic influence. However, those aspects do not derive directly from Esperanto's source languages, and are generally extensions of them. It is often claimed that there are elements of the grammar which are not found in these language families.\nFrequently mentioned is Esperanto's agglutinative morphology based on invariant morphemes, and the subsequent lack of ablaut (internal inflection of its roots), which Zamenhof thought would prove alien to non-European language speakers. Ablaut is an element of all the source languages; an English example is &lt;\"song, sing, sang, sung\"&gt;\".\" However, the majority of words in all European languages inflect without ablaut, as \"&lt;cat, cats\"&gt; and \"&lt;walk, walked\"&gt; do in English. (This is the so-called strong\u2013weak dichotomy.) Historically, many European languages have expanded the range of their 'weak' inflections, and Esperanto has merely taken this development closer to its logical conclusion, with the only remaining ablaut being frozen in a few sets of semantically related roots such as \"pli\", \"plej\", \"plu\" (more, most, further), \"tre\", \"tro\" (very, too much), and in the verbal morphemes \"\u2011as\", \"\u2011anta\", \"\u2011ata\"; \"\u2011is\", \"\u2011inta\", \"\u2011ita\"; \"\u2011os\", \"\u2011onta\", \"\u2011ota\"; and \"\u2011us\".\nOther features often cited as being alien for a European language, such as the dedicated suffixes for different parts of speech, or the \"-o\" suffix for nouns combined with \"-a\" for adjectives and \"la\" for 'the', actually do occur. More pertinent is the accusative plural in \"-jn\", which is derived through leveling of the Greek nominal\u2013adjectival paradigm: Esperanto nominative singular \"muzo (muse) vs. Greek \"mousa, nominative plural \"muzoj vs. Greek \"mousai,\" and accusative singular \"muzon vs. Greek \"mousan.\" (Latin and Lithuanian had very similar setups, with in the plural and a nasal in the accusative.) Esperanto is thus \"formally\" similar to the non\u2011Indo\u2011European languages Hungarian and Turkish\u2014that is, it is similar in its mechanics, but not in use. None of these proposed \"non-European\" elements of the original Esperanto proposal were actually taken from non-European or non-Indo-European languages, and any similarities with those languages are coincidental.\nEast Asian languages may have had some influence on the development of Esperanto grammar after its creation. The principally cited candidate is the replacement of predicate adjectives with verbs, such as \"la \u0109ielo bluas\" (the sky is blue) for \"la \u0109ielo estas blua\" and \"mia filino belu!\" (may my daughter be beautiful!) for the \"mia filino estu bela!\" mentioned above. However, this regularization of existing grammatical forms was always found in poetry; if there has been an influence of an East Asian language, it has only been in the spread of such forms, not in their origin. Such usage is not entirely unknown in Europe: Latin has an analogous \"folium viret\" for \"folium viride est\" (the leaf is green) and \"avis rubet\" for \"avis rubra est\" (the bird is red).\nPerhaps the best candidate for a \"non-European\" feature is the blurred distinction between root and affix. Esperanto derivational affixes may be used as independent roots and inflect for part of speech like other roots. This occurs only sporadically in other languages of the world. For example, \"ismo\" has an English equivalent in \"an ism\", but English has no adjectival form equivalent to Esperanto \"isma.\" For most such affixes, natural languages familiar to Europeans must use a separate lexical root.\nSample text.\nThe Pater noster, from the first Esperanto publication in 1887, illustrates many of the grammatical points presented above:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe morphologically complex words (see Esperanto word formation) are:\n\n\n\nReference books.\nReference grammars include the \"Plena Analiza Gramatiko\u200a\" () by K\u00e1lm\u00e1n Kalocsay and Gaston Waringhien, and the \"Plena Manlibro de Esperanta Gramatiko\" () by Bertilo Wennergren.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10404", "revid": "48035214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10404", "title": "Esperanto culture", "text": "Culture associated with speakers of Esperanto\nEsperanto culture refers to the shared cultural experience of the Esperantujo, or Esperanto-speaking community. Despite being a constructed language, Esperanto has a history dating back to the late 19th century, and shared socio-cultural mores have developed among its speakers. Some of these can be traced back to the initial ideas of the language's creator, Ludwig Zamenhof, including the theory that a global second language would foster international communication. Others have developed over time, as the language has allowed different national and linguistic cultures to blend together.\nEsperanto culture also includes art, literature, and music, as well as international celebrations and cultural exchanges such as the Pasporta Servo.\nWriting.\nEsperanto was originally a language that one had to learn entirely through books, and even today most people live apart from each other and converse through the internet, so writing and reading are a big part of Esperanto culture. Most people have created or translated some sort of written work whether fiction or nonfiction, published or available to read online for free.\nPenpals have been popular since Esperanto's earliest days, as Esperanto was originally advertised as a language where you could \"send a letter with a message, short list of grammar rules and a dictionary to a complete stranger, and they'll be able to look up the words and write a coherent reply back\". Many people did indeed do this in order to recruit more Esperanto speakers.\nAt the time, in the early 1900s, there was no major world language that could be used \"anywhere\" and it was difficult to get accurate information about foreign countries. On top of that, things like stamp collecting were popular hobbies for children. In the modern day, most Esperanto speakers talk to each other through the internet.\n\"Monato\" (\"month\") is a general news magazine \"like a genuinely international \"Time\" or \"Newsweek\"\", written by local correspondents.\nA magazine for the blind, \"A\u016droro\", has been published since 1920 and in general, Esperanto hosts the largest Braille publications in the world \u2014 starting in the early 1900s Esperanto was taught in schools of the blind in Europe, and that is where the trend started.\n\"Esperanto\" is the magazine used by the World Esperanto Association to inform its members about everything happening in the Esperanto community.\nThere are many more magazines created by individual Esperanto clubs from towns in places such as from Japan and China.\nLiterature.\nBooks that are translated to Esperanto are not always internationally famous books, because everyone can already read those in another language that they know. For example, several Japanese crime novels and several Icelandic novels that have never been translated to English (or any other language) have been translated to Esperanto. One reason for this is that people are actually translating their favourite stories instead of famous ones, and another is that it's simply cheaper and easier to get the rights to translate a small-time book compared to a famous one.\nThe first Harry Potter book, for example, was translated and the translator enquired about how to purchase translating rights so the book could be published, but J.K. Rowling refused to allow it to be published in Esperanto (despite \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" being one of the most-translated books in the whole world). In lieu of physical books, the translation now exists as a free download on the internet.\nSimilarly, famous books translated into Esperanto are often books fallen into public domain such as the Bible, the Quran, or works by Shakespeare, Moli\u00e8re, Balzac, etc., because there are no rights on them.\nEsperanto literature and organisations such as the Universal Esperanto Association (\"Sennacieca Asocio Tutmonda\" or SAT) often advocated against nationalism, leading to several fascist and communist governments attempting to ban and eradicate its usage: Germany, Francoist Spain, Portugal, as well as in the Soviet Union. However, the level to which this discrimination was due to association with Judaism and Jewish people cannot be fully known; Hitler wrote of it as intrinsically Jewish and called it a \"Jewish weapon\" in his \"Mein Kampf\". Following this history of suppression, Esperanto literature frequently concerns themes of resistance and anti-nationalism, though not all criticism of Esperanto is grounded in politics.\nThere are over 25,000 Esperanto books (originals and translations) as well as over a hundred regularly distributed Esperanto magazines. This is despite that Esperanto has only existed for around 100 years. In comparison, the entire literature of Iceland (a country created in the 900s, and with a population of around 320,000 people) totals fewer than 50,000 books.\nMedia.\nEsperanto music is usually done in the traditional style of a person's country, but \"international\" music (American pop music, rap music etc.) also exists. Many famous songs are translated to Esperanto as well, for example \"La vie en rose\" and \"En el frente de Gandesa\".\nThere are currently radio broadcasts from China Radio International, Melbourne Ethnic Community Radio, Radio Havana Cuba, Radio Audizioni Italiane (Rai), Radio Polonia, Radio F.R.E.I. and Radio Vatican. Many more people have personal podcasts and vlogs.\nIn 1964, Jacques-Louis Mah\u00e9 produced the first full-length feature film in Esperanto, entitled \"Angoroj\". This was followed in 1965 by the first American Esperanto-production: \"Incubus\", starring William Shatner. \"Incubus\" however is commonly seen as a funny way of introducing a person to Esperanto, as none of the actors even knew how to pronounce Esperanto in the first place, the dialogue being strange and bad due to the scriptwriter not getting a second opinion before the filming was done, and the plot being confusing in general.\nInternacia Televido, an internet television channel, began broadcasting in November 2005. Australia is the hotspot of much of the organization behind Esperanto television.\nSeveral short films have been produced, and at times plays have been recorded \"for television\". As of July 2003[ [update]], the Esperanto-language Wikipedia 14 films and 3 short films.\nIn 2011, Academy Award-nominated director Sam Green (\"The Weather Underground\") released a new documentary about Esperanto titled \"The Universal Language\" (La Universala Lingvo), tracing the history of Esperanto. It is known for excellent camera quality and filming sense, as well as being a good \"absolute introduction\" to what Esperanto is, but is criticized as too short at 30 minutes. \nThe American Good Film Festival (La Usona Bona Film-Festivalo) is a short film competition hosted by Esperanto-USA since 2021. The films must be less than five minutes long and entirely in Esperanto with at least ten unique spoken words and a visible required prop which is announced by the host at the beginning of each contest. The festival has produced over 175 short films in Esperanto which can be viewed for free on Esperanto-USA's YouTube channel.\nMany more films, cartoons and documentaries that aren't Esperanto originals are simply subtitled in Esperanto and put up on YouTube. Some fan-dubs exist, especially of Disney songs and short scenes.\nConventions.\nMany people wear their country's traditional clothing to Esperanto conventions, whether or not they would ever wear it in their own country. Swedish people, for example, who usually never wear their traditional clothing in their own country, may still wear traditional clothing for any meeting involving Esperanto speakers.\nEvery year, the World Congress of Esperanto (), which is held in different countries around the world according to year (though it mostly takes place in Europe). Each convention draws in an average of 1500\u20133000 attendees, and the best-attended conferences are those held in Central or Eastern Europe (generally meaning Poland, Hungary etc.), as Esperanto is an option for fulfilling mandatory foreign-language requirements in Hungarian schools, and the creator of Esperanto came from Poland (see statistics at World Congress of Esperanto).\nGufujo.\nEsperanto speakers create a makeshift caf\u00e9 (whether in a rented space or someone's home), using Esperanto coins or voucher-like items as well as real money to pay for food and drink. Live music, poetry reading, or literature reading are usual activities. This custom arose in 1995 in order to contrast with the more usual custom of after-convention partying at a bar.\nPasporta Servo.\nAn organisation called Pasporta Servo offers a free couchsurfing and homestay service, enabling cheaper and easier travel through a shared language.\nFood.\nAs Esperanto speakers are from all over the world, and families whose children speak Esperanto natively usually have parents from two vastly different countries, recipes incorporating elements from different countries are naturally born. Traditional foods are also enjoyed in settings where a native wouldn't normally mix or eat them.\nOne cookbook is \"Internacie kuiri\" \u201cCooking Internationally\u201d by Maria Becker-Meisberger, published by FEL (Flemish Esperanto League), Antwerp 1989, . Another is \"Man\u011doj el sanigaj plantoj\" \u201cMeals from Healthy Vegetable Dishes\u201d by Zlata Nani\u0107, published by BIO-ZRNO, Zagreb 2002, .\nSome Esperanto periodicals, such as \"MONATO\", include recipes from time to time.\nZamenhof Day.\nOn December 15 (L. L. Zamenhof's birthday), Esperanto speakers around the world celebrate Zamenhof Day, sometimes called Book Day. It's a common goal to have a book written in Esperanto published on or by that day, as Zamenhof was a strong advocate of the idea that in order to spread Esperanto around the world, its speakers need to create a large body of literature.\nThe poem \"La Espero\" is the Esperanto anthem, and most Esperanto speakers know the lyrics of the anthem by heart. It is often sung at conventions. Whether or not one enjoys the lyrics, the song is something that ties all Esperanto speakers together \u2014 as it has been around since Esperanto's early days. The tune of \"La Espero\" is known to most Esperanto speakers, and is a general tradition. The very short poem Ho, mia kor' (Zamenhof, 1887) and the longer La vojo (Zamenhof, 1896) are also very famous and often quoted in whole or in part; some distichs of \"La vojo\", in particular, have become proverbial (e.g. \"E\u0109 guto malgranda, konstante frapante, traboros la monton granitan\" \u201cEven a small drop, by constantly hitting, will pierce the mountain of granite\u201d as a metaphor for unyielding perseverance).\nReligion.\nEsperanto has had an influence on certain religious traditions (Oomoto, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, etc., see Esperanto and religion). While some Esperantists subscribe to these beliefs, they are not necessarily common, and are neither required nor encouraged by any Esperanto groups.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10405", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10405", "title": "Euclidean Algorithm", "text": ""}
{"id": "10406", "revid": "51037680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10406", "title": "Emotion", "text": "Conscious subjective experience of humans\nEmotions are physical and mental states brought on by neurophysiological changes, variously associated with thoughts, feelings, behavioral responses, and a degree of pleasure or displeasure. There is no scientific consensus on a definition. Emotions are often intertwined with mood, temperament, personality, disposition, or creativity.\nResearch on emotion has increased over the past two decades, with many fields contributing, including psychology, medicine, history, sociology of emotions, computer science and philosophy. The numerous attempts to explain the origin, function, and other aspects of emotions have fostered intense research on this topic. Theorizing about the evolutionary origin and possible purpose of emotion dates back to Charles Darwin. Current areas of research include the neuroscience of emotion, using tools like PET and fMRI scans to study the affective picture processes in the brain.\nFrom a mechanistic perspective, emotions can be defined as \"a positive or negative experience that is associated with a particular pattern of physiological activity\". Emotions are complex, involving multiple different components, such as subjective experience, cognitive processes, expressive behavior, psychophysiological changes, and instrumental behavior. At one time, academics attempted to identify the emotion with one of the components: William James with a subjective experience, behaviorists with instrumental behavior, psychophysiologists with physiological changes, and so on. More recently, emotion has been said to consist of all the components. The different components of emotion are categorized somewhat differently depending on the academic discipline. In psychology and philosophy, emotion typically includes a subjective, conscious experience characterized primarily by psychophysiological expressions, biological reactions, and mental states. A similar multi-componential description of emotion is found in sociology. For example, Peggy Thoits described emotions as involving physiological components, cultural or emotional labels (anger, surprise, etc.), expressive body actions, and the appraisal of situations and contexts. Cognitive processes, like reasoning and decision-making, are often regarded as separate from emotional processes, making a division between \"thinking\" and \"feeling\". However, not all theories of emotion regard this separation as valid.\nNowadays, most research into emotions in the clinical and well-being context focuses on emotion dynamics in daily life, predominantly the intensity of specific emotions and their variability, instability, inertia, and differentiation, as well as whether and how emotions augment or blunt each other over time and differences in these dynamics between people and along the lifespan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"emotion\" dates back to 1579, when it was adapted from the French word \"\u00e9mouvoir\", which means \"to stir up\". The term emotion was introduced into academic discussion as a catch-all term to passions, sentiments and affections. The word \"emotion\" was coined in the early 1800s by Thomas Brown and it is around the 1830s that the modern concept of emotion first emerged for the English language. \"No one felt emotions before about 1830. Instead they felt other things \u2013 'passions', 'accidents of the soul', 'moral sentiments' \u2013 and explained them very differently from how we understand emotions today.\"\nSome cross-cultural studies indicate that the categorization of \"emotion\" and classification of basic emotions such as \"anger\" and \"sadness\" are not universal and that the boundaries and domains of these concepts are categorized differently by all cultures. However, others argue that there are some universal bases of emotions (see Section 6.1). In psychiatry and psychology, an inability to express or perceive emotion is sometimes referred to as alexithymia.\nHistory.\nHuman nature and the accompanying bodily sensations have always been part of the interests of thinkers and philosophers. Far more extensively, this has also been of great interest to both Western and Eastern societies. Emotional states have been associated with the divine and with the enlightenment of the human mind and body. The ever-changing actions of individuals and their mood variations have been of great importance to most of the Western philosophers (including Aristotle, Plato, Descartes, Aquinas, and Hobbes), leading them to propose extensive theories\u2014often competing theories\u2014that sought to explain emotion and the accompanying motivators of human action, as well as its consequences.\nIn the Age of Enlightenment, Scottish thinker David Hume proposed a revolutionary argument that sought to explain the main motivators of human action and conduct. He proposed that actions are motivated by \"fears, desires, and passions\". As he wrote in his book \"A Treatise of Human Nature\" (1773): \"Reason alone can never be a motive to any action of the will\u2026 it can never oppose passion in the direction of the will\u2026 The reason is, and ought to be, the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them\". With these lines, Hume attempted to explain that reason and further action would be subject to the desires and experience of the self. Later thinkers would propose that actions and emotions are deeply interrelated with social, political, historical, and cultural aspects of reality that would also come to be associated with sophisticated neurological and physiological research on the brain and other parts of the physical body.\nDefinitions.\nThe Lexico definition of emotion is \"A strong feeling deriving from one's circumstances, mood, or relationships with others\". Emotions are responses to significant internal and external events.\nEmotions can be occurrences (e.g., panic) or dispositions (e.g., hostility), and short-lived (e.g., anger) or long-lived (e.g., grief). Psychotherapist Michael C. Graham describes all emotions as existing on a continuum of intensity. Thus fear might range from mild concern to terror or shame might range from simple embarrassment to toxic shame. Emotions have been described as consisting of a coordinated set of responses, which may include verbal, physiological, behavioral, and neural mechanisms.\nEmotions have been categorized, with some relationships existing between emotions and some direct opposites existing. Graham differentiates emotions as functional or dysfunctional and argues all functional emotions have benefits.\nIn some uses of the word, emotions are intense feelings that are directed at someone or something. On the other hand, emotion can be used to refer to states that are mild (as in annoyed or content) and to states that are not directed at anything (as in anxiety and depression). One line of research looks at the meaning of the word emotion in everyday language and finds that this usage is rather different from that in academic discourse.\nIn practical terms, Joseph LeDoux has defined emotions as the result of a cognitive and conscious process which occurs in response to a body system response to a trigger.\nComponents.\nAccording to Scherer's Component Process Model (CPM) of emotion, there are five crucial elements of emotion. From the component process perspective, emotional experience requires that all of these processes become coordinated and synchronized for a short period of time, driven by appraisal processes. Although the inclusion of cognitive appraisal as one of the elements is slightly controversial, since some theorists make the assumption that emotion and cognition are separate but interacting systems, the CPM provides a sequence of events that effectively describes the coordination involved during an emotional episode.\nDifferentiation.\nEmotion can be differentiated from a number of similar constructs within the field of affective neuroscience:\nClassification.\nA distinction can be made between emotional episodes and emotional dispositions. Emotional dispositions are also comparable to character traits, where someone may be said to be generally disposed to experience certain emotions. For example, an irritable person is generally disposed to feel irritation more easily or quickly than others do. Finally, some theorists place emotions within a more general category of \"affective states\" where affective states can also include emotion-related phenomena such as pleasure and pain, motivational states (for example, hunger or curiosity), moods, dispositions and traits.\nBasic emotions theory.\nFor more than 40 years, Paul Ekman has supported the view that emotions are discrete, measurable, and physiologically distinct. Ekman's most influential work revolved around the finding that certain emotions appeared to be universally recognized, even in cultures that were preliterate and could not have learned associations for facial expressions through media. Another classic study found that when participants contorted their facial muscles into distinct facial expressions (for example, disgust), they reported subjective and physiological experiences that matched the distinct facial expressions. Ekman's facial-expression research examined six basic emotions: anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness and surprise.\nLater in his career, Ekman theorized that other universal emotions may exist beyond these six. In light of this, recent cross-cultural studies led by Daniel Cordaro and Dacher Keltner, both former students of Ekman, extended the list of universal emotions. In addition to the original six, these studies provided evidence for amusement, awe, contentment, desire, embarrassment, pain, relief, and sympathy in both facial and vocal expressions. They also found evidence for boredom, confusion, interest, pride, and shame facial expressions, as well as contempt, relief, and triumph vocal expressions.\nRobert Plutchik agreed with Ekman's biologically driven perspective but developed the \"wheel of emotions\", suggesting eight primary emotions grouped on a positive or negative basis: joy versus sadness; anger versus fear; trust versus disgust; and surprise versus anticipation. Some basic emotions can be modified to form complex emotions. The complex emotions could arise from cultural conditioning or association combined with the basic emotions. Alternatively, similar to the way primary colors combine, \"primary emotions\" could blend to form the full spectrum of human emotional experience. For example, interpersonal anger and disgust could blend to form contempt. Relationships exist between basic emotions, resulting in positive or negative influences.\nJaak Panksepp carved out seven biologically inherited primary affective systems called SEEKING (expectancy), FEAR (anxiety), RAGE (anger), LUST (sexual excitement), CARE (nurturance), PANIC/GRIEF (sadness), and PLAY (social joy). He proposed what is known as \"core-SELF\" to be generating these affects.\nMulti-dimensional analysis theory.\nPsychologists have used methods such as factor analysis to attempt to map emotion-related responses onto a more limited number of dimensions. Such methods attempt to boil emotions down to underlying dimensions that capture the similarities and differences between experiences. Often, the first two dimensions uncovered by factor analysis are valence (how negative or positive the experience feels) and arousal (how energized or enervated the experience feels). These two dimensions can be depicted on a 2D coordinate map. This two-dimensional map has been theorized to capture one important component of emotion called core affect. Core affect is not theorized to be the only component to emotion, but to give the emotion its hedonic and felt energy.\nUsing statistical methods to analyze emotional states elicited by short videos, Cowen and Keltner identified 27 varieties of emotional experience: admiration, adoration, aesthetic appreciation, amusement, anger, anxiety, awe, awkwardness, boredom, calmness, confusion, craving, disgust, empathic pain, entrancement, excitement, fear, horror, interest, joy, nostalgia, relief, romance, sadness, satisfaction, sexual desire, and surprise.\nTheories.\nPre-modern history.\nIn Hinduism, Bharata Muni enunciated the nine rasas (emotions) in the \"N\u0101tyas\u0101stra\", an ancient Sanskrit text of dramatic theory and other performance arts, written between 200 BC and 200 AD. The theory of rasas still forms the aesthetic underpinning of all Indian classical dance and theatre, such as Bharatanatyam, kathak, Kuchipudi, Odissi, Manipuri, Kudiyattam, Kathakali and others. Bharata Muni established the following: \u015a\u1e5b\u1e45g\u0101ra\u1e25 (\u0936\u0943\u0919\u094d\u0917\u093e\u0930\u0903): Romance / Love / attractiveness, H\u0101syam (\u0939\u093e\u0938\u094d\u092f\u0902): Laughter / mirth / comedy, Raudram (\u0930\u094c\u0926\u094d\u0930\u0902): Fury / Anger, K\u0101ru\u1e47yam (\u0915\u093e\u0930\u0941\u0923\u094d\u092f\u0902): Compassion / mercy, B\u012bbhatsam (\u092c\u0940\u092d\u0924\u094d\u0938\u0902): Disgust / aversion, Bhay\u0101nakam (\u092d\u092f\u093e\u0928\u0915\u0902): Horror / terror, Veeram (\u0935\u0940\u0930\u0902): Pride / Heroism, Adbhutam (\u0905\u0926\u094d\u092d\u0941\u0924\u0902): Surprise / wonder.\nIn Buddhism, emotions occur when an object is considered attractive or repulsive. There is a felt tendency impelling people towards attractive objects and propelling them to move away from repulsive or harmful objects; a disposition to possess the object (greed), to destroy it (hatred), to flee from it (fear), to get obsessed or worried over it (anxiety), and so on.\nIn Stoic theories, normal emotions (like delight and fear) are described as irrational impulses that come from incorrect appraisals of what is 'good' or 'bad'. Alternatively, there are 'good emotions' (like joy and caution) experienced by those that are wise, which come from correct appraisals of what is 'good' and 'bad'.\nAristotle believed that emotions were an essential component of virtue. In the Aristotelian view all emotions (called passions) corresponded to appetites or capacities. During the Middle Ages, the Aristotelian view was adopted and further developed by scholasticism and Thomas Aquinas in particular.\nIn Chinese antiquity, excessive emotion was believed to cause damage to \"qi\", which in turn, damages the vital organs. The four humors theory made popular by Hippocrates contributed to the study of emotion in the same way that it did for medicine.\nIn the early 11th century, Avicenna theorized about the influence of emotions on health and behaviors, suggesting the need to manage emotions.\nEarly modern views on emotion are developed in the works of philosophers such as Ren\u00e9 Descartes, Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli, Baruch Spinoza, Thomas Hobbes and David Hume. In the 19th century emotions were considered adaptive and were studied more frequently from an empiricist psychiatric perspective.\nWestern theological.\nChristian perspective on emotion presupposes a theistic origin to humanity. God who created humans gave humans the ability to feel emotion and interact emotionally. Biblical content expresses that God is a person who feels and expresses emotion. Though a somatic view would place the locus of emotions in the physical body, Christian theory of emotions would view the body more as a platform for the sensing and expression of emotions. Therefore, emotions themselves arise from the person, or that which is \"imago-dei\" or Image of God in humans. In Christian thought, emotions have the potential to be controlled through reasoned reflection. That reasoned reflection also mimics God who made mind. The purpose of emotions in human life is therefore summarized in God's call to enjoy Him and creation, humans are to enjoy emotions and benefit from them and use them to energize behavior.\nEvolutionary theories.\n19th century.\nEvolutionary perspectives on emotion began in the mid-to-late 19th century with Charles Darwin's 1872 book \"The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals\". In that work Darwin argued that emotional expressions have evolutionary origins and can serve adaptive and communicative functions. He pioneered the systematic study of nonverbal behaviour, concluding that expressions are universal across human cultures and that homologous forms of emotional expression occur in other animals. Darwin interpreted these similarities as evidence that emotional expression had been shaped by evolutionary processes such as natural selection.\nContemporary.\nMore contemporary views along the evolutionary psychology spectrum posit that both basic emotions and social emotions evolved to motivate (social) behaviors that were adaptive in the ancestral environment. Emotion is an essential part of any human decision-making and planning, and the famous distinction made between reason and emotion is not as clear as it seems. Paul D. MacLean claims that emotion competes with even more instinctive responses, on one hand, and the more abstract reasoning, on the other hand. The increased potential in neuroimaging has also allowed investigation into evolutionarily ancient parts of the brain. Important neurological advances were derived from these perspectives in the 1990s by Joseph E. LeDoux and Antonio Damasio. For example, in an extensive study of a subject with ventromedial frontal lobe damage described in the book Descartes' Error, Damasio demonstrated how loss of physiological capacity for emotion resulted in the subject's lost capacity to make decisions despite having robust faculties for rationally assessing options. Research on physiological emotion has caused modern neuroscience to abandon the model of emotions and rationality as opposing forces. In contrast to the ancient Greek ideal of dispassionate reason, the neuroscience of emotion shows that emotion is necessarily integrated with intellect.\nResearch on social emotion also focuses on the physical displays of emotion including body language of animals and humans (see affect display). For example, spite seems to work against the individual but it can establish an individual's reputation as someone to be feared. Shame and pride can motivate behaviors that help one maintain one's standing in a community, and self-esteem is one's estimate of one's status.\nSomatic theories.\nSomatic theories of emotion claim that bodily responses, rather than cognitive interpretations, are essential to emotions. The first modern version of such theories came from William James in the 1880s. The theory lost favor in the 20th century, but has regained popularity more recently due largely to theorists such as John T. Cacioppo, Antonio Damasio, Joseph E. LeDoux and Robert Zajonc who are able to appeal to neurological evidence.\nJames\u2013Lange theory.\nIn his 1884 article William James argued that feelings and emotions were \"secondary\" to physiological phenomena. In his theory, James proposed that the perception of what he called an \"exciting fact\" directly led to a physiological response, known as \"emotion\". To account for different types of emotional experiences, James proposed that stimuli trigger activity in the autonomic nervous system, which in turn produces an emotional experience in the brain. The Danish psychologist Carl Lange also proposed a similar theory at around the same time, and therefore this theory became known as the James\u2013Lange theory. As James wrote, \"the perception of bodily changes, as they occur, \"is\" the emotion\". James further claims that \"we feel sad because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we tremble, and either we cry, strike, or tremble because we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be\".\nAn example of this theory in action would be as follows: An emotion-evoking stimulus (snake) triggers a pattern of physiological response (increased heart rate, faster breathing, etc.), which is interpreted as a particular emotion (fear). This theory is supported by experiments in which by manipulating the bodily state induces a desired emotional state. Some people may believe that emotions give rise to emotion-specific actions, for example, \"I'm crying because I'm sad\", or \"I ran away because I was scared\". The issue with the James\u2013Lange theory is that of causation (bodily states causing emotions and being \"a priori\"), not that of the bodily influences on emotional experience (which can be argued and is still quite prevalent today in biofeedback studies and embodiment theory).\nAlthough mostly abandoned in its original form, Tim Dalgleish argues that most contemporary neuroscientists have embraced the components of the James-Lange theory of emotions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The James\u2013Lange theory has remained influential. Its main contribution is the emphasis it places on the embodiment of emotions, especially the argument that changes in the bodily concomitants of emotions can alter their experienced intensity. Most contemporary neuroscientists would endorse a modified James\u2013Lange view in which bodily feedback modulates the experience of emotion. (p. 583)\nCannon\u2013Bard theory.\nWalter Bradford Cannon agreed that physiological responses played a crucial role in emotions, but did not believe that physiological responses alone could explain subjective emotional experiences. He argued that physiological responses were too slow and often imperceptible and this could not account for the relatively rapid and intense subjective awareness of emotion. He also believed that the richness, variety, and temporal course of emotional experiences could not stem from physiological reactions, that reflected fairly undifferentiated fight or flight responses. An example of this theory in action is as follows: An emotion-evoking event (snake) triggers simultaneously both a physiological response and a conscious experience of an emotion.\nPhillip Bard contributed to the theory with his work on animals. Bard found that sensory, motor, and physiological information all had to pass through the diencephalon (particularly the thalamus), before being subjected to any further processing. Therefore, Cannon also argued that it was not anatomically possible for sensory events to trigger a physiological response prior to triggering conscious awareness and emotional stimuli had to trigger both physiological and experiential aspects of emotion simultaneously.\nTwo-factor theory.\nStanley Schachter formulated his theory on the earlier work of a Spanish physician, Gregorio Mara\u00f1\u00f3n, who injected patients with epinephrine and subsequently asked them how they felt. Mara\u00f1\u00f3n found that most of these patients felt something but in the absence of an actual emotion-evoking stimulus, the patients were unable to interpret their physiological arousal as an experienced emotion. Schachter did agree that physiological reactions played a big role in emotions. He suggested that physiological reactions contributed to emotional experience by facilitating a focused cognitive appraisal of a given physiologically arousing event and that this appraisal was what defined the subjective emotional experience. Emotions were thus a result of two-stage process: general physiological arousal, and experience of emotion. For example, the physiological arousal, heart pounding, in a response to an evoking stimulus, the sight of a bear in the kitchen. The brain then quickly scans the area, to explain the pounding, and notices the bear. Consequently, the brain interprets the pounding heart as being the result of fearing the bear. With his student, Jerome Singer, Schachter demonstrated that subjects can have different emotional reactions despite being placed into the same physiological state with an injection of epinephrine. Subjects were observed to express either anger or amusement depending on whether another person in the situation (a confederate) displayed that emotion. Hence, the combination of the appraisal of the situation (cognitive) and the participants' reception of adrenalin or a placebo together determined the response. This experiment has been criticized in Jesse Prinz's (2004) \"Gut Reactions\".\nCognitive theories.\nWith the two-factor theory now incorporating cognition, several theories began to argue that cognitive activity in the form of judgments, evaluations, or thoughts were entirely necessary for an emotion to occur.\nThese theories acknowledge that emotions are not automatic reactions but result from the interplay of cognitive interpretations, physiological responses, and the social context. A prominent philosophical exponent is Robert C. Solomon (for example, \"The Passions, Emotions and the Meaning of Life\", 1993). Solomon claims that emotions are judgments. He has put forward a more nuanced view which responds to what he has called the 'standard objection' to cognitivism, the idea that a judgment that something is fearsome can occur with or without emotion, so judgment cannot be identified with emotion.\nTwo-Process Theory.\nGeorge Mandler provided an extensive theoretical and empirical discussion of emotion as influenced by cognition, consciousness, and the autonomic nervous system in two books (\"Mind and Emotion\", 1975, and \"Mind and Body: Psychology of Emotion and Stress\", 1984)\nSituated perspective on emotion.\nA situated perspective on emotion, developed by Paul E. Griffiths and Andrea Scarantino, emphasizes the importance of external factors in the development and communication of emotion, drawing upon the situationism approach in psychology. This theory is markedly different from both cognitivist and neo-Jamesian theories of emotion, both of which see emotion as a purely internal process, with the environment only acting as a stimulus to the emotion. In contrast, a situationist perspective on emotion views emotion as the product of an organism investigating its environment, and observing the responses of other organisms. Emotion stimulates the evolution of social relationships, acting as a signal to mediate the behavior of other organisms. In some contexts, the expression of emotion (both voluntary and involuntary) could be seen as strategic moves in the transactions between different organisms. The situated perspective on emotion states that conceptual thought is not an inherent part of emotion, since emotion is an action-oriented form of skillful engagement with the world. Griffiths and Scarantino suggested that this perspective on emotion could be helpful in understanding phobias, as well as the emotions of infants and animals.\nGenetics.\nEmotions can motivate social interactions and relationships and therefore are directly related with basic physiology, particularly with the stress systems. This is important because emotions are related to the anti-stress complex, with an oxytocin-attachment system, which plays a major role in bonding. Emotional phenotype temperaments affect social connectedness and fitness in complex social systems. These characteristics are shared with other species and taxa and are due to the effects of genes and their continuous transmission. Information that is encoded in the DNA sequences provides the blueprint for assembling proteins that make up our cells. Zygotes require genetic information from their parental germ cells, and at every speciation event, heritable traits that have enabled its ancestor to survive and reproduce successfully are passed down along with new traits that could be potentially beneficial to the offspring.\nIn the five million years since the lineages leading to modern humans and chimpanzees split, only about 1.2% of their genetic material has been modified. This suggests that everything that separates us from chimpanzees must be encoded in that very small amount of DNA, including our behaviors . Students that study animal behaviors have only identified intraspecific examples of gene-dependent behavioral phenotypes. In voles (Microtus spp.) minor genetic differences have been identified in a vasopressin receptor gene that corresponds to major species differences in social organization and the mating system. Another potential example with behavioral differences is the FOXP2 gene, which is involved in neural circuitry handling speech and language. Its present form in humans differed from that of the chimpanzees by only a few mutations and has been present for about 200,000 years, coinciding with the beginning of modern humans. Speech, language, and social organization are all part of the basis for emotions.\nFormation.\nNeurobiological explanation.\nBased on discoveries made through neural mapping of the limbic system, the neurobiological explanation of human emotion is that emotion is a pleasant or unpleasant mental state organized in the limbic system of the mammalian brain. If distinguished from reactive responses of reptiles, emotions would then be mammalian elaborations of general vertebrate arousal patterns, in which neurochemicals (for example, dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin) step-up or step-down the brain's activity level, as visible in body movements, gestures and postures. Emotions can likely be mediated by pheromones (see fear).\nFor example, the emotion of love is proposed to be the expression of complex neural networks of the mammalian brain, involving the ventral tegmental area, thalamus, substantia nigra, putamen, caudate nucleus, and anterior cingulate cortex.\nOther emotions like fear and anxiety long thought to be exclusively generated by the most primitive parts of the brain (stem) and more associated to the fight-or-flight responses of behavior, have also been associated as adaptive expressions of defensive behavior whenever a threat is encountered. Although defensive behaviors have been present in a wide variety of species, Blanchard et al. (2001) discovered a correlation of given stimuli and situation that resulted in a similar pattern of defensive behavior towards a threat in human and non-human mammals.\nWhenever potentially dangerous stimuli are presented, additional brain structures activate that previous thought (hippocampus, thalamus, etc.). Thus, giving the amygdala an important role in coordinating the following behavioral input based on the presented neurotransmitters that respond to threat stimuli. These biological functions of the amygdala are not only limited to the \"fear-conditioning\" and \"processing of aversive stimuli\", but also are present on other components of the amygdala. Therefore, it can referred the amygdala as a key structure to understand the potential responses of behavior in danger like situations in human and non-human mammals.\nThe motor centers of reptiles react to sensory cues of vision, sound, touch, chemical, gravity, and motion with pre-set body movements and programmed postures. With the arrival of night-active mammals, smell replaced vision as the dominant sense, and a different way of responding arose from the olfactory sense, which is proposed to have developed into mammalian emotion and emotional memory. The mammalian brain invested heavily in olfaction to succeed at night as reptiles slept \u2013 one explanation for why olfactory lobes in mammalian brains are proportionally larger than in the reptiles. These odor pathways gradually formed the neural blueprint for what was later to become our limbic brain.\nEmotions are thought to be related to certain activities in brain areas that direct our attention, motivate our behavior, and determine the significance of what is going on around us. Pioneering work by Paul Broca (1878), James Papez (1937), and Paul D. MacLean (1952) suggested that emotion is related to a group of structures in the center of the brain called the limbic system, which includes the hypothalamus, cingulate cortex, hippocampi, and other structures. More recent research has shown that some of these limbic structures are not as directly related to emotion as others are while some non-limbic structures have been found to be of greater emotional relevance.\nPrefrontal cortex.\nThere is ample evidence that the left prefrontal cortex is activated by stimuli that cause positive approach. If attractive stimuli can selectively activate a region of the brain, then logically the converse should hold, that selective activation of that region of the brain should cause a stimulus to be judged more positively. This was demonstrated for moderately attractive visual stimuli and replicated and extended to include negative stimuli.\nTwo neurobiological models of emotion in the prefrontal cortex made opposing predictions. The valence model predicted that anger, a negative emotion, would activate the right prefrontal cortex. The direction model predicted that anger, an approach emotion, would activate the left prefrontal cortex. The second model was supported.\nThis still left open the question of whether the opposite of approach in the prefrontal cortex is better described as moving away (direction model), as unmoving but with strength and resistance (movement model), or as unmoving with passive yielding (action tendency model). Support for the action tendency model (passivity related to right prefrontal activity) comes from research on shyness and research on behavioral inhibition. Research that tested the competing hypotheses generated by all four models also supported the action tendency model.\nHomeostatic/primordial emotion.\nAnother neurological approach proposed by Bud Craig in 2003 distinguishes two classes of emotion: \"classical\" emotions such as love, anger and fear that are evoked by environmental stimuli, and \"homeostatic emotions\"\u00a0\u2013 attention-demanding feelings evoked by body states, such as pain, hunger and fatigue, that motivate behavior (withdrawal, eating or resting in these examples) aimed at maintaining the body's internal milieu at its ideal state.\nDerek Denton calls the latter \"primordial emotions\" and defines them as \"the subjective element of the instincts, which are the genetically programmed behavior patterns which contrive homeostasis. They include thirst, hunger for air, hunger for food, pain and hunger for specific minerals etc. There are two constituents of a primordial emotion \u2013 the specific sensation which when severe may be imperious, and the compelling intention for gratification by a consummatory act\".\nEmergent explanation.\nEmotions are seen by some researchers to be constructed (emerge) in social and cognitive domain alone, without directly implying biologically inherited characteristics.\nJoseph LeDoux differentiates between the human's defense system, which has evolved over time, and emotions such as fear and anxiety. He has said that the amygdala may release hormones due to a trigger (such as an innate reaction to seeing a snake), but \"then we elaborate it through cognitive and conscious processes\".\nLisa Feldman Barrett highlights differences in emotions between different cultures, and says that emotions (such as anxiety) are socially constructed (see theory of constructed emotion). She says that they \"are not triggered; you create them. They emerge as a combination of the physical properties of your body, a flexible brain that wires itself to whatever environment it develops in, and your culture and upbringing, which provide that environment\". She has termed this approach the theory of constructed emotion.\nDisciplinary approaches.\nMany different disciplines have produced work on the emotions. In psychiatry, emotions are examined as part of the discipline's study and treatment of mental disorders in humans. Nursing studies emotions as part of its approach to the provision of holistic health care to humans. Psychology examines emotions from a scientific perspective by treating them as mental processes and behavior and they explore the underlying physiological and neurological processes, e.g., cognitive behavioral therapy. In neuroscience sub-fields such as social neuroscience and affective neuroscience, scientists study the neural mechanisms of emotion by combining neuroscience with the psychological study of personality, emotion, and mood. In linguistics, the expression of emotion may change to the meaning of sounds. In education, the role of emotions in relation to learning is examined.\nSocial sciences often examine emotion for the role that it plays in human culture and social interactions. In sociology, emotions are examined for the role they play in human society, social patterns and interactions, and culture. In anthropology, the study of humanity, scholars use ethnography to undertake contextual analyzes and cross-cultural comparisons of a range of human activities. Some anthropology studies examine the role of emotions in human activities. In the field of communication studies, critical organizational scholars have examined the role of emotions in organizations, from the perspectives of managers, employees, and even customers. A focus on emotions in organizations can be credited to Arlie Russell Hochschild's concept of emotional labor. The University of Queensland hosts EmoNet, an e-mail distribution list representing a network of academics that facilitates scholarly discussion of all matters relating to the study of emotion in organizational settings. The list was established in January 1997 and has over 700 members from across the globe.\nIn economics, the social science that studies the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services, emotions are analyzed in some sub-fields of microeconomics, in order to assess the role of emotions on purchase decision-making and risk perception. In criminology, a social science approach to the study of crime, scholars often draw on behavioral sciences, sociology, and psychology; emotions are examined in criminology issues such as anomie theory and studies of \"toughness\", aggressive behavior, and hooliganism. In law, which underpins civil obedience, politics, economics and society, evidence about people's emotions is often raised in tort law claims for compensation and in criminal law prosecutions against alleged lawbreakers (as evidence of the defendant's state of mind during trials, sentencing, and parole hearings). In political science, emotions are examined in a number of sub-fields, such as the analysis of voter decision-making.\nIn philosophy, emotions are studied in sub-fields such as ethics, the philosophy of art (for example, sensory\u2013emotional values, and matters of taste and sentimentality), and the philosophy of music (see also music and emotion). In history, scholars examine documents and other sources to interpret and analyze past activities; speculation on the emotional state of the authors of historical documents is one of the tools of interpretation. In literature and film-making, the expression of emotion is the cornerstone of genres such as drama, melodrama, and romance. In communication studies, scholars study the role that emotion plays in the dissemination of ideas and messages. Emotion is also studied in non-human animals in ethology, a branch of zoology which focuses on the scientific study of animal behavior. Ethology is a combination of laboratory and field science, with strong ties to ecology and evolution. Ethologists often study one type of behavior (for example, aggression) in a number of unrelated animals.\nHistory of emotions.\nThe history of emotions has become an increasingly popular topic recently, with some scholars arguing that it is an essential category of analysis, not unlike class, race, or gender. Historians, like other social scientists, assume that emotions, feelings and their expressions are regulated in different ways by both different cultures and different historical times, and the constructivist school of history claims even that some sentiments and meta-emotions, for example schadenfreude, are learnt and not only regulated by culture. Historians of emotion trace and analyze the changing norms and rules of feeling, while examining emotional regimes, codes, and lexicons from social, cultural, or political history perspectives. Others focus on the history of medicine, science, or psychology. What somebody can and may feel (and show) in a given situation, towards certain people or things, depends on social norms and rules; thus historically variable and open to change. Several research centers have opened in the past few years in Germany, England, Spain, Sweden, and Australia.\nFurthermore, research in historical trauma suggests that some traumatic emotions can be passed on from parents to offspring to second and even third generation, presented as examples of transgenerational trauma.\nSociology.\nA common way in which emotions are conceptualized in sociology is in terms of the multidimensional characteristics including cultural or emotional labels (for example, anger, pride, fear, happiness), physiological changes (for example, increased perspiration, changes in pulse rate), expressive facial and body movements (for example, smiling, frowning, baring teeth), and appraisals of situational cues. One comprehensive theory of emotional arousal in humans has been developed by Jonathan Turner (2007: 2009). Two of the key eliciting factors for the arousal of emotions within this theory are expectations states and sanctions. When people enter a situation or encounter with certain expectations for how the encounter should unfold, they will experience different emotions depending on the extent to which expectations for Self, other and situation are met or not met. People can also provide positive or negative sanctions directed at Self or other which also trigger different emotional experiences in individuals. Turner analyzed a wide range of emotion theories across different fields of research including sociology, psychology, evolutionary science, and neuroscience. Based on this analysis, he identified four emotions that all researchers consider being founded on human neurology including assertive-anger, aversion-fear, satisfaction-happiness, and disappointment-sadness. These four categories are called primary emotions and there is some agreement amongst researchers that these primary emotions become combined to produce more elaborate and complex emotional experiences. These more elaborate emotions are called first-order elaborations in Turner's theory, and they include sentiments such as pride, triumph, and awe. Emotions can also be experienced at different levels of intensity so that feelings of concern are a low-intensity variation of the primary emotion aversion-fear whereas depression is a higher intensity variant.\nAttempts are frequently made to regulate emotion according to the conventions of the society and the situation based on many (sometimes conflicting) demands and expectations which originate from various entities. The expression of anger is in many cultures discouraged in girls and women to a greater extent than in boys and men (the notion being that an angry man has a valid complaint that needs to be rectified, while an angry women is hysterical or oversensitive, and her anger is somehow invalid), while the expression of sadness or fear is discouraged in boys and men relative to girls and women (attitudes implicit in phrases like \"man up\" or \"don't be a sissy\"). Expectations attached to social roles, such as \"acting as man\" and not as a woman, and the accompanying \"feeling rules\" contribute to the differences in expression of certain emotions. Some cultures encourage or discourage happiness, sadness, or jealousy, and the free expression of the emotion of disgust is considered socially unacceptable in most cultures. Some social institutions are seen as based on certain emotion, such as love in the case of contemporary institution of marriage. In advertising, such as health campaigns and political messages, emotional appeals are commonly found. Recent examples include no-smoking health campaigns and political campaigns emphasizing the fear of terrorism.\nSociological attention to emotion has varied over time. \u00c9mile Durkheim (1915/1965) wrote about the collective effervescence or emotional energy that was experienced by members of totemic rituals in Australian Aboriginal society. He explained how the heightened state of emotional energy achieved during totemic rituals transported individuals above themselves giving them the sense that they were in the presence of a higher power, a force, that was embedded in the sacred objects that were worshipped. These feelings of exaltation, he argued, ultimately lead people to believe that there were forces that governed sacred objects.\nIn the 1990s, sociologists focused on different aspects of specific emotions and how these emotions were socially relevant. For Cooley (1992), pride and shame were the most important emotions that drive people to take various social actions. During every encounter, he proposed that we monitor ourselves through the \"looking glass\" that the gestures and reactions of others provide. Depending on these reactions, we either experience pride or shame and this results in particular paths of action. Retzinger (1991) conducted studies of married couples who experienced cycles of rage and shame. Drawing predominantly on Goffman and Cooley's work, Scheff (1990) developed a micro sociological theory of the social bond. The formation or disruption of social bonds is dependent on the emotions that people experience during interactions.\nSubsequent to these developments, Randall Collins (2004) formulated his interaction ritual theory by drawing on Durkheim's work on totemic rituals that was extended by Goffman (1964/2013; 1967) into everyday focused encounters. Based on interaction ritual theory, we experience different levels or intensities of emotional energy during face-to-face interactions. Emotional energy is considered to be a feeling of confidence to take action and a boldness that one experiences when they are charged up from the collective effervescence generated during group gatherings that reach high levels of intensity.\nThere is a growing body of research applying the sociology of emotion to understanding the learning experiences of students during classroom interactions with teachers and other students (for example, Milne &amp; Otieno, 2007; Olitsky, 2007; Tobin, et al., 2013; Zembylas, 2002). These studies show that learning subjects like science can be understood in terms of classroom interaction rituals that generate emotional energy and collective states of emotional arousal like emotional climate.\nApart from interaction ritual traditions of the sociology of emotion, other approaches have been classed into one of six other categories:\nThis list provides a general overview of different traditions in the sociology of emotion that sometimes conceptualize emotion in different ways and at other times in complementary ways. Many of these different approaches were synthesized by Turner (2007) in his sociological theory of human emotions in an attempt to produce one comprehensive sociological account that draws on developments from many of the above traditions.\nPsychotherapy and regulation.\nEmotion regulation refers to the cognitive and behavioral strategies people use to influence their own emotional experience. For example, a behavioral strategy in which one avoids a situation to avoid unwanted emotions (trying not to think about the situation, doing distracting activities, etc.). Depending on the particular school's general emphasis on either cognitive components of emotion, physical energy discharging, or on symbolic movement and facial expression components of emotion different schools of psychotherapy approach the regulation of emotion differently. Cognitively oriented schools approach them via their cognitive components, such as rational emotive behavior therapy. Yet others approach emotions via symbolic movement and facial expression components (like in contemporary Gestalt therapy).\nCross-cultural research.\nResearch on emotions reveals the strong presence of cross-cultural differences in emotional reactions and that emotional reactions are likely to be culture-specific. In strategic settings, cross-cultural research on emotions is required for understanding the psychological situation of a given population or specific actors. This implies the need to comprehend the current emotional state, mental disposition or other behavioral motivation of a target audience located in a different culture, basically founded on its national, political, social, economic, and psychological peculiarities but also subject to the influence of circumstances and events.\nComputer science.\nIn the 2000s, research in computer science, engineering, psychology and neuroscience has been aimed at developing devices that recognize human affect display and model emotions. In computer science, affective computing is a branch of the study and development of artificial intelligence that deals with the design of systems and devices that can recognize, interpret, and process human emotions. It is an interdisciplinary field spanning computer sciences, psychology, and cognitive science. While the origins of the field may be traced as far back as to early philosophical enquiries into emotion, the more modern branch of computer science originated with Rosalind Picard's 1995 paper on affective computing. Detecting emotional information begins with passive sensors which capture data about the user's physical state or behavior without interpreting the input. The data gathered is analogous to the cues humans use to perceive emotions in others. Another area within affective computing is the design of computational devices proposed to exhibit either innate emotional capabilities or that are capable of convincingly simulating emotions. Emotional speech processing recognizes the user's emotional state by analyzing speech patterns. The detection and processing of facial expression or body gestures is achieved through detectors and sensors.\nEffects on memory.\nEmotion affects the way autobiographical memories are encoded and retrieved. Emotional memories are reactivated more, they are remembered better and have more attention devoted to them. Through remembering our past achievements and failures, autobiographical memories affect how we perceive and feel about ourselves.\nNotable theorists.\nIn the late 19th century, the most influential theorists were William James (1842\u20131910) and Carl Lange (1834\u20131900). James was an American psychologist and philosopher who wrote about educational psychology, psychology of religious experience/mysticism, and the philosophy of pragmatism. Lange was a Danish physician and psychologist. Working independently, they developed the James\u2013Lange theory, a hypothesis on the origin and nature of emotions. The theory states that within human beings, as a response to experiences in the world, the autonomic nervous system creates physiological events such as muscular tension, a rise in heart rate, perspiration, and dryness of the mouth. Emotions, then, are feelings which come about as a result of these physiological changes, rather than being their cause.\nSilvan Tomkins (1911\u20131991) developed the affect theory and script theory. The affect theory introduced the concept of basic emotions, and was based on the idea that the dominance of the emotion, which he called the affected system, was the motivating force in human life.\nSome of the most influential deceased theorists on emotion from the 20th century include Magda B. Arnold (1903\u20132002), an American psychologist who developed the appraisal theory of emotions; Richard Lazarus (1922\u20132002), an American psychologist who specialized in emotion and stress, especially in relation to cognition; Herbert A. Simon (1916\u20132001), who included emotions into decision making and artificial intelligence; Robert Plutchik (1928\u20132006), an American psychologist who developed a psychoevolutionary theory of emotion; Robert Zajonc (1923\u20132008) a Polish\u2013American social psychologist who specialized in social and cognitive processes such as social facilitation; Robert C. Solomon (1942\u20132007), an American philosopher who contributed to the theories on the philosophy of emotions with books such as \"What Is An Emotion?: Classic and Contemporary Readings\" (2003); Peter Goldie (1946\u20132011), a British philosopher who specialized in ethics, aesthetics, emotion, mood and character; Nico Frijda (1927\u20132015), a Dutch psychologist who advanced the theory that human emotions serve to promote a tendency to undertake actions that are appropriate in the circumstances, detailed in his book \"The Emotions\" (1986); Jaak Panksepp (1943\u20132017), an Estonian-born American psychologist, psychobiologist, neuroscientist and pioneer in affective neuroscience; John T. Cacioppo (1951\u20132018), one of the founding fathers of social neuroscience; George Mandler (1924\u20132016), an American psychologist who wrote influential books on cognition and emotion.\nInfluential theorists who are still active include the following psychologists, neurologists, philosophers, and sociologists:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10407", "revid": "47677725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10407", "title": "Epictetus", "text": "Greek Stoic philosopher (c. 50 \u2013 c. 135)\nEpictetus (, ; , \"Ep\u00edkt\u0113tos\"; c. 50 \u2013 c. 135 AD) was a Greek Stoic philosopher. He was born into slavery at Hierapolis, Phrygia (present-day Pamukkale, in western Turkey) and lived in Rome until his banishment, after which he spent the rest of his life in Nicopolis in northwestern Greece. \nEpictetus studied Stoic philosophy under Musonius Rufus and after manumission, his formal emancipation from slavery, he began to teach philosophy. When philosophers were banished from Rome by Emperor Domitian toward the end of the first century, Epictetus founded a school of philosophy in Nicopolis. He taught that philosophy is a way of life and not simply a theoretical discipline. To Epictetus, all external events are beyond our control; he argues that we should accept whatever happens calmly and dispassionately. However, he held that individuals are responsible for their own actions, which they can examine and control through rigorous self-discipline. His teachings were written down and published by his pupil Arrian in his \"Discourses\" and \"Enchiridion\". They influenced many later thinkers, including Marcus Aurelius, Pascal, Diderot, Montesquieu, Rabelais, and Samuel Johnson.\nLife.\nHaving described himself as old in 108 AD, Epictetus is presumed to have been born around AD 50, at Hierapolis, Phrygia. The name given by his parents is unknown. The name by which he is known is derived from the word \"ep\u00edkt\u0113tos\" (\u1f10\u03c0\u03af\u03ba\u03c4\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2) that in Greek, simply means \"gained\" or \"acquired\"; the Greek philosopher Plato, in his \"Laws\", used that term to mean property that is \"added to one's hereditary property\". Epictetus spent his youth in Rome as a slave to Epaphroditus, a wealthy freedman who was secretary to Nero. Epictetus's social position was thus complicated, combining the low status of a slave with the high status of one with a personal connection to imperial power.\nEarly in life, Epictetus acquired a passion for philosophy and, with the permission of his wealthy master, he studied Stoic philosophy under Musonius Rufus. Becoming more educated in this way raised his social status. At some point, he became disabled. Celsus, quoted by Origen, wrote that this was because his leg had been deliberately broken by his master. Without citing a cause, Simplicius wrote that Epictetus had been disabled from childhood.\nEpictetus obtained his freedom sometime after the death of Nero in AD 68, and he began to teach philosophy in Rome. Around AD 93, when the Roman emperor Domitian banished all philosophers from the city, Epictetus moved to Nicopolis in Epirus, Greece, where he founded a school of philosophy.\nHis most famous pupil, Arrian, studied under him as a young man (around AD 108) and claimed to have written his famous \"Discourses\" based on the notes he took about lectures by Epictetus. Arrian argued that his Discourses should be considered comparable to the Socratic literature. Arrian described Epictetus as a powerful speaker who could \"induce his listener to feel just what Epictetus wanted him to feel\". Many eminent figures sought conversations with him. Emperor Hadrian was friendly with him, possibly having heard Epictetus speak at his school in Nicopolis.\nEpictetus lived a life of great simplicity, with few possessions. He lived alone for a long time, but in his old age, he adopted the child of a friend who otherwise would have been left to die, and raised him with the aid of a woman. It is unclear whether Epictetus and she were married. He died sometime around AD 135. After his death, according to Lucian, his oil lamp was purchased by an admirer for 3,000 drachmae.\nThought.\nEpictetus maintains that the foundation of all philosophy is self-knowledge; that is, the conviction of our ignorance and gullibility ought to be the first subject of our study. Logic provides valid reasoning and certainty in judgment, but it is subordinate to practical needs. He also maintained that the first and most necessary part of philosophy concerns the application of doctrine, for example, that people should not lie. The second concerns reasons, e.g., why people should not lie. The third, lastly, examines and establishes the reasons. This is the logical part, which finds reasons, shows what is a reason, and that a given reason is a correct one. This last part is necessary, but only on account of the second, which again is rendered necessary by the first.\nLegacy.\nNo writings by Epictetus are known. His discourses were transcribed and compiled by his pupil Arrian (c.\u200986/89\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009after 146/160 AD). The main work is \"The Discourses\", four books of which have been preserved (out of the original eight). Arrian also compiled a popular digest, entitled the \"Enchiridion\", or \"Handbook\", of Epictetus. In a preface to the \"Discourses\" that is addressed to Lucius Gellius, Arrian states that \"whatever I heard him say I used to write down, word for word, as best I could, endeavouring to preserve it as a memorial, for my own future use, of his way of thinking and the frankness of his speech\". \nThe philosophy of Epictetus influenced the Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius (AD 121 to AD 180), who cites Epictetus in his \"Meditations\". Epictetus also appears in a second or third century \"Dialogue Between the Emperor Hadrian and Epictetus the Philosopher\". This short Latin text consists of seventy-three short questions supposedly posed by Hadrian and answered by Epictetus. This dialogue was very popular in the Middle Ages with many translations and adaptations.\nEpictetus exhibited an influence on French Enlightenment philosophers, such as Voltaire, Montesquieu, Denis Diderot, and Baron d'Holbach, who all read the \"Enchiridion\" when they were students. Blaise Pascal listed Epictetus as among those philosophers he was most familiar with, describing him as a \"great mind\" who is \"among the philosophers of the world who have best understood the duties\" of an individual.\nIn the sixth century, the Neoplatonist philosopher Simplicius wrote an extant commentary on the \"Enchiridion\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10408", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10408", "title": "Edward Lear", "text": "British artist and writer (1812\u20131888)\nEdward Lear (12 May 1812 \u2013 29 January 1888) was an English artist, illustrator, musician, author and poet, who is known mostly for his literary nonsense in poetry and prose and especially his limericks, a form he popularised.\nHis principal areas of work as an artist were threefold: as a draughtsman employed to make illustrations of birds and animals, making coloured drawings during his journeys (which he reworked later, sometimes as plates for his travel books) and as a minor illustrator of Alfred, Lord Tennyson's poems.\nAs an author, he is known principally for his popular nonsense collections of poems, songs, short stories, botanical drawings, recipes and alphabets. He also composed and published twelve musical settings of Tennyson's poetry.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nLear was born into a middle-class family at Holloway, North London, the penultimate of 21 children (and youngest to survive) of Ann Clark Skerrett and Jeremiah Lear, a stockbroker formerly working for the family sugar refining business. He was raised by his eldest sister, also named Ann, 21 years his senior. Jeremiah Lear ended up defaulting to the London Stock Exchange in the economic upheaval following the Napoleonic Wars. Because of the family's now more limited finances, when he was aged four, Lear and his sister were required to leave the family home, Bowmans Lodge, and live together. Ann doted on Edward and continued to act as a mother to him until her death, when he was almost 50 years of age.\nLear had lifelong health problems. From the age of six, he had frequent \"grand mal\" epileptic seizures, bronchitis, asthma and, during later life, partial blindness. Lear experienced his first seizure at a fair near Highgate when with his father. The event scared and embarrassed him. He felt lifelong guilt and shame for his epileptic condition, and his adult diaries indicate that he always sensed the onset of a seizure in time to remove himself from public view. When Lear was about seven years old he began to show signs of depression, possibly due to the instability of his childhood. He had periods of severe melancholia which he referred to as \"the Morbids\".\nArtist.\nLear was already drawing \"for bread and cheese\" by the time he was aged 16 and soon developed into a serious \"ornithological draughtsman\" employed by the Zoological Society and from 1832 to 1836 by the Earl of Derby, who kept a private menagerie at his estate, Knowsley Hall. He was the first major bird artist to draw birds from life rather than the skins of specimens. Lear's first publication, published when he was 19 years old, was \"Illustrations of the Family of Psittacidae, or Parrots\" in 1830. One of the greatest ornithological artists of his era, he taught Elizabeth Gould whilst also contributing to John Gould's works and was compared by some to the naturalist John James Audubon. In honour of Lear's bird illustrations, \"Anodorhynchus leari\", popular name Lear's macaw, is named after him.\nAfter his eyesight deteriorated too much to work with such precision on the fine drawings and etchings of plates used in lithography, he turned to landscape painting and travel.\nAmong other travels, he visited Greece and Egypt during 1848\u201349 and toured India during 1873\u201375, including a brief detour to Ceylon. While travelling he produced large quantities of coloured wash drawings in a distinctive style, which he converted later in his studio into oil and watercolour paintings, as well as prints for his books. His landscape style often shows views with strong sunlight, with intense contrasts of colour.\nBetween 1878 and 1883, Lear spent his summers on Monte Generoso, a mountain on the border between the Swiss canton of Ticino and the Italian region of Lombardy. His oil painting \"The Plains of Lombardy from Monte Generoso\" is in the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford.\nThroughout his life, he continued to paint seriously. He had a lifelong ambition to illustrate Tennyson's poems; near the end of his life, a volume with a small number of illustrations was published.\n\"Illustrated Excursions in Italy\" (1842\u201347).\nIn 1842, Lear began a journey into the Italian peninsula, travelling through the Lazio, Rome, Abruzzo, Molise, Apulia, Basilicata, Calabria and Sicily. In personal notes, together with drawings, Lear gathered his impressions on the Italian way of life, folk traditions, and the beauty of the ancient monuments. Of particular interest to Lear was the Abruzzo, which he visited in 1843, through the Marsica (Celano, Avezzano, Alba Fucens, Trasacco) and the plateau of Cinque Miglia (Castel di Sangro and Alfedena), by an old sheep track of the shepherds.\nLear drew a sketch of the medieval village of Albe with Mount Sirente, and described the medieval village of Celano, with the castle of Piccolomini dominating the vast plain of Lago Fucino, which was drained a few years later to promote agricultural development. At Castel di Sangro, Lear described the winter stillness of the mountains and the beautiful basilica.\nMore adventurous was the voyage to the regions of southern Italy in 1847, described in Lear's \"Journals of a Landscape Painter in Southern Calabria, &amp; c\". The broad Calabria section in which Lear tells his itinerary among breathtaking landscapes and often surreal characters, is thought to be among the best in his travel literature.\nComposer and musician.\nLear primarily played the piano, but he also played the accordion, flute, and small guitar. He composed music for many Romantic and Victorian poems, but was known mostly for his many musical settings of Tennyson's poetry. He published four settings in 1853, five in 1859, and three in 1860. Lear's were the only musical settings that Tennyson approved of. Lear also composed music for many of his nonsense songs, including \"The Owl and the Pussy-Cat\", but only two of the scores have survived, the music for \"The Courtship of the Yonghy-Bonghy-B\u00f2\" and \"The Pelican Chorus\". While he never played professionally, he did perform his own nonsense songs and his settings of others' poetry at countless social gatherings, sometimes adding his own lyrics (as with the song \"The Nervous Family\"), and sometimes replacing serious lyrics with nursery rhymes.\nRelationships.\nLear's most fervent and painful friendship was with Franklin Lushington. He met the young barrister in Malta in 1849 and toured southern Greece with him. Lear developed an infatuation for him that Lushington did not wholly reciprocate. Although they remained friends for almost forty years until Lear's death, the disparity of their feelings constantly tormented Lear. Indeed, Lear's attempts at male companionship were not always successful; the very intensity of Lear's affections may have doomed these relationships.\nHe proposed twice to another writer, Augusta Bethell, whom he had known for a long time, when he was 26 years her senior. For companions, he relied instead on friends and correspondents, and especially, during later life, on his Albanian Souliote chef, Giorgis, a faithful friend and (as Lear complained) a thoroughly unsatisfactory chef. Another trusted companion in San Remo was his cat, Foss, who died in 1887 and was buried with some ceremony in a garden at Villa Tennyson.\nSan Remo and death.\nLear eventually settled in San Remo, on his beloved Mediterranean coast in the 1870s at a villa he named \"Villa Tennyson\".\nLear was known to introduce himself with a long pseudonym: \"Mr Abebika kratoponoko Prizzikalo Kattefello Ablegorabalus Ableborinto phashyph\" or \"Chakonoton the Cozovex Dossi Fossi Sini Tomentilla Coronilla Polentilla\nBattledore &amp; Shuttlecock Derry down Derry Dumps\", which he based on \"Aldiborontiphoskyphorniostikos\".\nAfter a long decline in his health, Lear died at his villa in 1888 of heart disease, which he had since at least 1870. Lear's funeral was described as a sad, lonely affair by the wife of Dr. Hassall, Lear's physician, none of Lear's many lifelong friends being able to attend.\nLear is buried in the Cemetery Foce in San Remo. On his headstone are inscribed these lines about Mount Tomohrit (in Albania) from Tennyson's poem \"To E.L. [Edward Lear], On His Travels in Greece\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe centenary of his death was marked in Britain with a set of Royal Mail stamps in 1988 and an exhibition at the Royal Academy. Lear's birthplace area is now marked with a plaque at Bowman's Mews, Islington, in London, and his bicentenary during 2012 was celebrated with a variety of events, exhibitions and lectures in venues across the world including an International Owl and Pussycat Day on his birth anniversary.\nAuthor.\nIn 1846, Lear published \"\", a volume of limericks which went through three editions and helped popularise the form and the genre of literary nonsense. In 1871, he published \"Nonsense Songs, Stories, Botany and Alphabets\", which included the nonsense song \"The Owl and the Pussy-Cat\", which he wrote for the children of his patron Edward Stanley, 13th Earl of Derby. Many other works followed.\nLear's nonsense books were quite popular during his lifetime, but a rumour developed that \"Edward Lear\" was merely a pseudonym, and the books' true author was the man to whom Lear had dedicated the works, his patron the Earl of Derby. Promoters of this rumour offered as evidence that both men were named Edward, and that \"Lear\" is an anagram of \"Earl\".\nLear's nonsense works are distinguished by a facility of verbal invention and a poet's delight in the sounds of words, both real and imaginary. A stuffed rhinoceros becomes a \"diaphanous doorscraper\". A \"blue Boss-Woss\" plunges into \"a perpendicular, spicular, orbicular, quadrangular, circular depth of soft mud\". His heroes are Quangle-Wangles, Pobbles, and Jumblies. One of his most famous verbal inventions, the phrase \"runcible spoon\", occurs in the closing lines of \"The Owl and the Pussy-Cat\" and is now found in many English dictionaries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThough known for his neologisms, Lear used a number of other devices in his works in order to defy reader expectations. For example, \"Cold Are the Crabs\" conforms to the sonnet tradition until its dramatically foreshortened last line.\nToday, limericks are invariably typeset as five lines. Lear's limericks, however, were published in a variety of formats; it appears that Lear wrote them in manuscript in as many lines as there was room for beneath the picture. For the first three editions, most are typeset as, respectively, two, five, and three lines. The cover of one edition bears an entire limerick typeset in two lines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn Lear's limericks, the first and last lines usually end with the same word rather than rhyming. For the most part they are truly nonsensical and devoid of any punch line or point. They are completely free of the bawdiness with which the verse form is now associated. A typical thematic element is the presence of a callous and critical \"they\". An example of a typical Lear limerick:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLear's self-description in verse, \"How Pleasant to know Mr. Lear,\" ends with this stanza, a reference to his own mortality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nFive of Lear's limericks from the \"Book of Nonsense\" (in the 1946 Italian translation by Carlo Izzo) were set to music for choir a cappella by Goffredo Petrassi in 1952.\nPortrayals.\nEdward Lear has been played in radio dramas by Andrew Sachs in \"The Need for Nonsense\" by Julia Blackburn (BBC Radio 4, 9 February 2009) and by Derek Jacobi in \"By the Coast of Coromandel\" by Lavinia Murray (BBC Radio 4, 21 December 2011). He was portrayed on television by Robert Lang in \"Edward Lear: On the Edge of the Sand\" a special episode of The Natural World, BBC2 14 April 1985.\nIn popular culture.\nLear's written work was used extensively in the short-lived \"The Tomfoolery Show,\" a Saturday morning cartoon that was produced by Rankin-Bass and broadcast on NBC from 1970 to 1971. \"A Beach Full of Shells\", the 20th album by musician Al Stewart pays tribute in the song \"Mr. Lear\", celebrating Foss and many events from Lear's life.\nArchival collections.\nThe largest collection by far of Edward Lear original drawings resides in the Printing and Graphic Arts Collection at Houghton Library. Additional major Lear collections may be found at the Yale Center for British Art, the Liverpool Libraries, and Gennadius Library in Athens.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10409", "revid": "45293124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10409", "title": "Eve Arden", "text": "American actress (1908\u20131990)\nEve Arden (born Eunice Mary Quedens, April 30, 1908\u00a0\u2013 November 12, 1990) was an American film, radio, stage and television actress. She performed in leading and supporting roles for nearly six decades.\nBeginning her film career in 1929 and on Broadway in the early 1930s, Arden's first major role was in the RKO Radio Pictures drama \"Stage Door\" (1937) opposite Katharine Hepburn, followed by roles in the comedies \"Having Wonderful Time\" (1938) and \"At the Circus\" (1939). She received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress for her role in \"Mildred Pierce\" (1945).\nSomewhat surprisingly for an actress of Arden's refinement and wit, she appeared to good effect in a number of films noir, some exceptionally high-profile, including \"Mildred Pierce\", \"The Unfaithful\" (1947), \"The Arnelo Affair\" (1947), \"Whiplash\" (1948), and \"Anatomy of a Murder\" (1959).\nLater in her career, Arden moved to television, playing a sardonic but engaging high school teacher in \"Our Miss Brooks\", for which she won the first Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series. She also played the maternity ward nurse in \"Bewitched\" and the school principal in the film musicals \"Grease\" (1978) and \"Grease 2\" (1982).\nEarly life.\nEve Arden was born Eunice Mary Quedens on April 30, 1908, in Mill Valley, California, to Charles Peter Quedens, the son of Charles Henry Augustus Quedens and Eunice Meta Dierks, and Lucille Frank, the daughter of Bernard Frank and Louisa Mertens. Lucille, a milliner, divorced Charles over his gambling and went into business for herself.\nAlthough not Catholic, young Eunice was sent to a Dominican convent school in San Rafael, California. She then attended Tamalpais High School, a public high school in Mill Valley, until age 16. After leaving school, she joined the stock theater company of Henry \"Terry\" Duffy.\nCareer.\nFilm.\nShe made her film debut under her real name in the backstage musical \"Song of Love\" (1929), as a wisecracking, homewrecking showgirl who becomes a rival to the film's star, singer Belle Baker. The film was one of Columbia Pictures' earliest successes. In 1933, she relocated to New York City, where she had supporting parts in several Broadway stage productions. In 1934, she was cast in the \"Ziegfeld Follies\" revue, the first role where she was credited as Eve Arden. When she was told to adopt a stage name for the show, Arden looked at her cosmetics and \"stole my first name from Evening in Paris, and the second from Elizabeth Arden\". Between 1934 and 1941, she appeared in Broadway productions of \"Parade\", \"Very Warm for May\", \"Two for the Show\", and \"Let's Face It!\".\nArden's film career began in earnest in 1937 when she signed a contract with RKO Radio Pictures and appeared in the films \"Oh Doctor\" and \"Stage Door\". Her \"Stage Door\" portrayal of a fast-talking, witty supporting character gained Arden considerable notice and was a template for many of Arden's future roles.\nIn 1938, she played a supporting part in the comedy \"Having Wonderful Time\", starring Ginger Rogers and Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. This was followed by roles in the crime film \"The Forgotten Woman\" (1939), and the Marx Brothers comedy \"At the Circus\" (1939), a role that required her to perform acrobatics.\nIn 1940, she appeared in support of Clark Gable and Hedy Lamarr in \"Comrade X\", followed by support in the drama \"Manpower\" (1941) opposite Marlene Dietrich, Edward G. Robinson and George Raft. She also had a supporting part in the Red Skelton comedy \"Whistling in the Dark\" (1941) and the romantic comedy \"Obliging Young Lady\" (1942).\nHer many memorable screen roles include a supporting role as Joan Crawford's wise-cracking friend in \"Mildred Pierce\" (1945), for which she received an Academy Award nomination as Best Supporting Actress; as a catty cousin turned peacemaker in The Unfaithful (1947); and as James Stewart's wistful but wry secretary in Otto Preminger's mystery \"Anatomy of a Murder\" (1959) (which also featured her husband, Brooks West). In 1946, exhibitors voted her the sixth-most promising \"star of tomorrow\".\nArden became familiar to a new generation of filmgoers when she played Principal McGee in \"Grease\" (1978) and \"Grease 2 (1982)\". Arden was known for her deadpan comedic delivery.\nRadio and television.\nArden's ability with witty scripts made her a natural talent for radio. She was a regular on Danny Kaye's short-lived but memorably zany comedy-variety show in 1946, which also featured swing bandleader Harry James and gravel-voiced character actor-comedian Lionel Stander.\nThe additional exposure of Arden's comic talent on Kaye's show led to her best-known role, that of Madison High School English teacher Connie Brooks in \"Our Miss Brooks\". Arden portrayed the character on radio from 1948 to 1957, in a television version of the program from 1952 to 1956, and in a 1956 feature film. Her character clashed with the school's principal, Osgood Conklin (played by Gale Gordon) and nursed an unrequited crush on fellow teacher Philip Boynton (played originally by future film star Jeff Chandler; and later on radio and TV by Robert Rockwell). Except for Chandler, the entire radio cast of Arden, Gordon, Richard Crenna (Walter Denton), Robert Rockwell (Mr. Philip Boynton), Gloria McMillan (Harriet Conklin) and Jane Morgan (landlady Margaret Davis) played the same roles on TV.\nArden's portrayal of Miss Brooks was so popular that she was made an honorary member of the National Education Association, received a 1952 award from the Teachers College of Connecticut's Alumni Association \"for humanizing the American teacher\", and even received teaching job offers. Her well-established wisecracking, deadpan character ultimately became her public persona as a comedienne.\nShe won a listeners' poll by \"Radio Mirror\" magazine as the top-ranking comedienne of 1948\u20131949, receiving her award at the end of an \"Our Miss Brooks\" broadcast that March. \"I'm certainly going to try in the coming months to merit the honor you've bestowed upon me, because I understand that if I win this (award) two years in a row, I get to keep Mr. Boynton,\" she joked. She was also a hit with the critics: A winter 1949 poll of newspaper and magazine radio editors by \"Motion Picture Daily\" named her the year's best radio comedienne.\nArden had a very brief guest appearance in a 1955 \"I Love Lucy\" episode titled \"L.A. at Last\", where she played herself. While awaiting their food at the Brown Derby, Lucy Ricardo (Lucille Ball) and Ethel Mertz (Vivian Vance) argue over whether a certain portrait on a nearby wall is Shelley Winters or Judy Holliday. Lucy urges Ethel to ask a lady occupying the next booth, who turns and replies, \"Neither. That's Eve Arden.\" As Ethel realizes she just spoke to Arden herself, Arden passes Lucy and Ethel's table to leave the restaurant while the pair gawk.\nDesilu Productions, jointly owned by Desi Arnaz and Ball during their marriage, was the production company for the \"Our Miss Brooks\" television show, filmed during the same years as \"I Love Lucy\". Ball and Arden met when they costarred in the film \"Stage Door\" in 1937. Ball, according to numerous radio historians, suggested Arden for \"Our Miss Brooks\" after Shirley Booth auditioned for but failed to land the role and Ball\u2014committed at the time to \"My Favorite Husband\"\u2014could not.\nArden tried another series for CBS in the fall of 1957, \"The Eve Arden Show\", but it was canceled in spring of 1958 after 26 episodes. In 1966, she played a pediatric nurse in an episode of \"Bewitched\" and a scientist in an episode of \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E.\". She later costarred with Kaye Ballard as her neighbor and in-law, Eve Hubbard, in the 1967\u20131969 NBC situation comedy \"The Mothers-in-Law\", produced by Arnaz after the dissolution of Desilu Productions. In her later career, Arden made appearances on such television shows as \"Maude\", \"Alice\", \"Hart to Hart\", and \"Falcon Crest\". In 1985, she appeared as the wicked stepmother in the \"Faerie Tale Theatre\" production of \"Cinderella\".\nStage.\nArden was one of many actresses to take on the title roles in \"Hello, Dolly!\" and \"Auntie Mame\" in the 1960s; in 1967, she won the Sarah Siddons Award for her work in Chicago theater. In 1983, Arden was cast as the leading lady in what was to be her Broadway comeback, \"Moose Murders\", but she withdrew and was replaced with the much younger Holland Taylor after one preview performance, citing \"artistic differences\". The show went on to open and close on the same night, becoming known a legendary flop in Broadway history.\nPersonal life.\nArden was married to Edward Grinnell \"Ned\" Bergen 1939\u201347 and reportedly had a long relationship with Danny Kaye through the 1940s (likely starting from their Broadway work on \"Let's Face It!\" in 1941). Arden was married to actor Brooks West from 1952 until his death in 1984 from a brain hemorrhage at age 67. She adopted her first child with Bergen and a second child as a single mother after her divorce from him; she adopted her third child with West and gave birth to her youngest (with West) at age 46 in 1954. All four children survived their parents.\nDeath.\nOn November 12, 1990, Arden died at home at age 82. According to her death certificate, she died of cardiac arrest and arteriosclerotic heart disease. She is buried in the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, Westwood, Los Angeles, California.\nLegacy.\nArden published an autobiography, \"The Three Phases of Eve\", in 1985. In addition to her Academy Award nomination, Arden has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: Radio and Television (see List of stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for addresses). She was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame in 1995.\nSelect stage credits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "10412", "revid": "41927601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10412", "title": "Elementary function", "text": "Type of mathematical function\nIn mathematics, an elementary function is a function of a single variable (real or complex) that is typically encountered by beginners. The basic elementary functions are polynomial functions, rational functions, the trigonometric functions, the exponential and logarithm functions, the n-th root, and the inverse trigonometric functions, as well as those functions obtained by addition, multiplication, division, and composition of these. Some functions which are encountered by beginners are \"not\" elementary, such as the absolute value function and piecewise-defined functions. More generally, in modern mathematics, elementary functions comprise the set of functions previously enumerated, all algebraic functions (not often encountered by beginners), and all functions obtained by roots of a polynomial whose coefficients are elementary. \nThis list of elementary functions was originally set forth by Joseph Liouville in 1833. A key property is that all elementary functions have derivatives of any order, which are also elementary, and can be algorithmically computed by applying the differentiation rules (or the rules for implicit differentiation in the case of roots). The Taylor series of an elementary function converges in a neighborhood of every point of its domain. More generally, they are global analytic functions, defined (possibly with multiple values, such as the elementary function formula_1 or formula_2) for every complex argument, except at isolated points. In contrast, antiderivatives of elementary functions need not be elementary and is difficult to decide whether a specific elementary function has an elementary antiderivative.\nLiouville's result is that, if an elementary function has an elementary antiderivative, then this antiderivative is a linear combination of logarithms, where the coefficients and the arguments of the logarithms are elementary functions involved, in some sense, in the definition of the function. More than 130 years later, Risch algorithm, named after Robert Henry Risch, is an algorithm to decide whether an elementary function has an elementary antiderivative, and, if it has, to compute this antiderivative. Despite dealing with elementary functions, the Risch algorithm is far from elementary; as of 2025[ [update]], it seems that no complete implementation is available.\nIn late-nineteenth-century analysis, elementary functions were often classified into successive kinds according to the number of independent integrations required for their definition. Functions expressible without any integration\u2014those generated from rational functions by algebraic operations together with exponentiation, logarithms, and circular or hyperbolic trigonometric functions\u2014were said to be elementary functions of the first kind (in the sense of Liouville). Functions defined by a single integration of an algebraic function, such as the error function and the elliptic integrals, were elementary functions of the second kind; their inverses, the elliptic functions, were considered of the same order. Higher \"kinds\" (third, fourth, etc.) corresponded to multiple integrals of algebraic functions, giving rise to hyperelliptic and more general Abelian functions.\nThe essential point of the classification was that the class of elementary functions of any given kind be closed under the elementary operations\u2014addition, multiplication, composition, and differentiation\u2014so that differentiation never leads outside the same class, while integration may ascend to the next higher kind.\nExamples.\nBasic examples.\nElementary functions of a single variable x include:\nCertain elementary functions of a single complex variable z, such as formula_11 and formula_2, may be multivalued. Additionally, certain classes of functions may be obtained by others using the final two rules. For example, the exponential function formula_13 composed with addition, subtraction, and division provides the hyperbolic functions, while initial composition with formula_14 instead provides the trigonometric functions.\nComposite examples.\nExamples of elementary functions include:\nThe last function is equal to formula_17, the inverse cosine, in the entire complex plane.\nAll monomials, polynomials, rational functions and algebraic functions are elementary.\nNon-elementary functions.\nAll elementary functions are analytic in the following sense: they can be extended to functions of a complex variable (possibly multivalued) that are analytic except at finitely many points of the complex plane. Thus nonanalytic functions such as the absolute value function are not elementary, nor are most other piecewise-defined functions.\nNot every analytic function is elementary. In fact, most special functions are not elementary. Non-elementary functions include:\nClosure.\nIt follows directly from the definition that the set of elementary functions is closed under arithmetic operations, (algebraic) root extraction and composition. The elementary functions are closed under differentiation. They are not closed under limits and infinite sums. Importantly, the elementary functions are not closed under integration, as shown by Liouville's theorem, see nonelementary integral. The Liouvillian functions are defined as the elementary functions and, recursively, the integrals of the Liouvillian functions.\nDifferential algebra.\nSome have proposed extending the set of elementary functions by extending with certain transcendental functions, to include, for example, the Lambert W function or elliptic functions, all of which are analytic. The key attribute, from the perspective of the Liouville theorem, is that as a class, they are closed under taking derivatives. For example, the Lambert function formula_19, which is defined implicitly by the equation formula_20, has a derivative which can be obtained by implicit differentiation:\nformula_21\nwhich is again \"elementary\", provided that formula_22 is.\nThe mathematical definition of an \"elementary function\" is formalized in differential algebra. A differential field is a field with an extra operation of derivation (algebraic version of differentiation). Using the derivation operation new equations can be written and their solutions used in extensions of the algebra. By starting with the field of rational functions, two special types of transcendental extensions (the logarithm and the exponential) can be added to the field building a tower containing elementary functions.\nA \"differential field\" &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a field together with a derivation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that maps &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to itself. The derivation generalizes derivative, being linear (thaat is, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) and satisfying the Leibniz product rule (that is,&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) for every two elements &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The rational functions over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; form a basic examples of differential fields, when equipped with the usual derivative. \nAn element \"h\" of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a constant if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The constants of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; form a dfferential field with zero derivative. Care must be taken that a differential field extension of a differential field may enlarge the field of constants.\nA function u of a differential extension G of a differential field F is an elementary function over F if it belongs to a finite chain (for inclusion) of differential subfields of G that starts from F and is such that each is generated over the preceding one by a function that is either\nWith this definition, the usual elementary functions are exactly the function that are elementary over the field of the rational functions. This generalized definition allows considering every transcendental function as elementary for applying Liouville's theorem.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
